Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/MLR_RootText_LTK_translPhQuarcoo_FINALDRAFT2012.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:02.571744
================================================================================

 
FPMT  BASIC PROGRAM  
STAGES OF THE PATH 
 
 
Middle Length Lam-Rim 
 
(Lam rim ‘bring ba) 
by 
Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
With additional outlines by Trijang Rinpoche 
 
 
Translated from the Tibetan 
by 
Philip Quarcoo 
 
 
 
FINAL DRAFT  
May 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© FPMT, Inc. 
May 2012 
 
All rights reserved 
 
No part of this work may be reproduc ed in any form or by any means,  
electronic or mechanical, including photoc opying, recording, or by any information 
storage and retrieval system or technolo gies now known or later developed,   
without permission in writing from FPMT, Inc. 
 
    
 
 
Note: This translation contains both the outlines from Lama Tsongkhapa’s Middle 
Length Stages of the Path  and the sub-outlines added later by Trijang Rinpoche, in 
accordance with the Tibetan text publishe d by Sera Je Computer Project, Sera Je 
Monastic University, Bylakuppe, 1999. The outlines by Trijang Rinpoche are in 
smaller print; the corrected outline numbers were added by Joan Nicell, Istituto Lama 
Tzong Khapa, Pomaia, Italy. The numbers in  square brackets [ ] correspond to the 
pages of this particular edition of the Tibetan text. 
Table of Contents 
 
CHAPTER 1 In troduction ......................................................................................................... ..1 
Homage and vow to compose.................................................................................................1 
General introduction to the instructions ta ught here.................................................................1 
Showing the greatness of the author in order to show that the teachings  have a reliable source2 
Showing the greatness of the teachings in order to generate respect for the instructions ...........7 
Explanation of how teachings possessing those two greatnesses should be  listened to and 
explained...................................................................................................................... .......11 
Explanation of the stages by which a student of the actual instructions should be guided.........18 
RELYING ON A SPIR ITUAL TEAC HER.....................................................................................18 
A PRECIOUS HUMA N REBIRT H .............................................................................................38 
 
CHAPTER 2 The Stages of the Pa th Common to Le sser Bein gs...................................................51 
DEATH-IMPERM ANENCE .......................................................................................................51 
Explanation of how to be mindful of death— that one will not stay in this world for long ..........51 
Explanation of what will become of you in future  worlds: How to contempl ate  the happiness and 
suffering of the two type s of migratin g beings .......................................................................58 
THE SUFFERINGS OF THE LOWER REALMS ...........................................................................58 
Explanation of how to rely on the meth ods for the happiness of  future worlds.........................64 
TAKING REFUGE IN TH E THREE JE WELS...............................................................................65 
KARMA AND ITS EFFECTS ....................................................................................................78 
 
CHAPTER 3 The Stages of the Path Common to Intermed iate Be ings....................................... 104 
Explanation of how to develop the mind striving fo r liberat ion .............................................. 104 
SHORTCOMINGS OF CYCLIC EXIS TENCE: TRUE SUFFERI NGS .............................................. 105 
HOW CYCLIC EXISTENCE IS EN TERED: TRUE ORIGIN S ....................................................... 115 
Explanation of how the nature of the path  leading to liberatio n is established........................ 125 
 
CHAPTER 4 How to Train the Mind in the Stages of the Path of Great Beings ........................... 131 
Demonstrating that generating the mind of enlightenment is the only gateway  to the Mah āyāna 
including an explanatio n of its be nefits................................................................................ 132 
The explanation of how to genera te the mind of enlighten ment............................................ 134 
Explanation of how to train the mind by means of the sevenfold instruction  on cause and effect
............................................................................................................................... .......... 134 
Explanation of how to train the mind through equalizing and exchanging  oneself and others.. 145 
Explanation of how to assume the mind  generation by mean s of a ri tual ............................... 149 
Explanation of how to train in the conduct ha ving generated the mind of enlightenment........ 160 
Explanation of how to train in the conduc t of the Victors’ ch ildren in ge neral ......................... 169 
 
CHAPTER 5 Calm Abiding and Special Insigh t ......................................................................... 197 
Explanation of how to train in the la st two perfections in partic ular ....................................... 197 
Explanation of how to train in calm ab iding, the entity of  concentration................................. 204 
Explanation of how to train in specia l insight, the enti ty of wisdom ....................................... 238 
Explanation of how calm abidin g and special in sight un ite .................................................... 306 
 
CHAPTER 6 Co nclusion.......................................................................................................... 3 10 
Explanation of how to train in the uncommon vehicle, the Vajray āna .................................... 310 
 
 
 
 
1 Middle Length Explanation of the Stages of the Path to 
Enlightenment to be Practiced by the Three Types of Beings 
CHAPTER 1 
Introduction 
Respectfully I prostrate at the feet of the venerable saints who are full of great 
compassion. 
[This is the middling of three texts—the great, the middling, and the small—on the stages of the path composed by the 
Gentle Protector, Dharma King, Great Tsongkhapa,  although it is also widely known as the “ Small Stages of the Path ”. 
Its explanation has three sections:] 
1 Introductory elements  
2 The actual explanation set forth 3 The conclusion of the explanation 
1 Introductory elements  
This has three points: 
A Homage 
B Vow to compose the text 
C Identification of the Dharma to be explained in the context of what the title means 
Homage and vow to compose 
1A Homage 
Bhagavan1, lord of this field of fortitude, 
The Jina’s regent2, Jamgön, Lord of the Dharma, 
Mañjugho ṣa, sole father of all the sugatas3 
Nāgārjuna and Asa ṅga, foretold by the Jina,  
Bowing to you with respect,... 
1B Vow to compose the text 
...I shall once more 
Explain here in a summary fashion 
The stages of the path of profound view and vast conduct, 
For the sake of making  it easy to access. 
General introduction to the instructions taught here 
1C Identification of the Dharma to be explained in the context of what the title means 
The teachings to be explained here consist in how the fortunate are led to the level of buddhahood through the stages of the path to enlightenment. They summarize all the 
points of the Victor’s scriptures, following the tradition of the two great trail-blazers 
Nāgārjuna and Asa ṅga; [2] they constitute the Dharma system of supreme beings who 
progress to the state of omniscience; and they contain all the stages without omission 
that the three types of beings need to practice. 
 
                                                 
1 Tib. bcom ldan ‘das , also sometimes translated as ‘Blessed One’. 
2 Tib. rgyal ba’i rgyal tshab  
3 Tib. bde gshegs , literally “gone to bliss”  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
2 2 The actual explanation set forth 
This has two points: 
A Correspondence with the manner of explanation proposed by the scholars 
Scholars of glorious Vikrama śīla Monastery considered it vital to start off with three 
preliminaries: the greatness of the author  of the teachings, the greatness of the 
teachings, and the way to explain and listen to them.  
B The actual explanation in accordance with that manner of explanation 
The guide to the stages of the path to enlightenment has four parts:  
1 Showing the greatness of the author in order to show that the teachings have a reliable source 
2 Showing the greatness of the teachings in order to generate respect for the instructions 
3 How teachings that possess those two greatnesses should be listened to and explained 
4 The stages by which a student should be guided through the actual instructions 
Showing the greatness of the author in order to show that the teachings  
have a reliable source 
2B1 Showing the greatness of the author in order to show that the teachings have a 
reliable source 
This has two points: 
2B1A The root and actual author 
Generally speaking, the present instructions are the ones that the venerable protector 
Maitreya gives in his Ornament for Clear Realization (Abhisamay ālaṃkāra). As they are 
based in particular on Lamp for the Path to Enli ghtenment (Bodhipathaprad īpa), its 
author is also the author of the present text. Other than under the name of Great Master 
Dīpaṃkaraśrījñāna, he is also widely known as the glorious Ati śa. 
2B1B Ati śa’s greatness 
This has three points: 
1 How Ati śa took birth in an excellent family 
2 How Ati śa obtained his positive qualities on that basis 
3 Having obtained them, how Ati śa performed deeds for the sake of the teachings 
2B1B-1 How Ati śa took birth in an excellent family [3] 
According to the Translator’s4 Praise : 
Due east in the excellent country of Zahor5 
Lies a city of great size, 
Namely Vikrama ṇipura. 
In its midst: the royal court,  
An extremely spacious palace  Called “the one with golden banners.”  
Its pleasures, might, and wealth resemble  
Those of Chinese emperors. King of that land is Kaly āṇaśrī  
And his queen is called Śrīprabha. 
The royal couple has three sons:  
Padmagarbha, Candragarbha, And Śrīgarbha, they are called.  
                                                 
4 Nagtso, who was among the envoys who invited Ati śa to Tibet. He acted as his tr anslator and companion for many 
years. 
5 Bengal. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
3 Again, Prince Padmagarbha has 
Five royal consorts and nine sons. 
The oldest one, named Pu ṇyaśrī, 
Is a mah āpaṇḍita 
Widely known as Dhana śrī. 
His youngest brother, called Śrīgarbha, 
Is the bhik ṣu Vīryacandra. 
The middle one is  Candragarbha; 
He is our exalted guru. 
2B1B-2 How Ati śa obtained his positive qualities  
This has two points: 
A How Ati śa obtained the qualities of comprehensive scriptural knowledge6 
B How Ati śa obtained the qualities of realization of its correct accomplishment 
2B1B-2A How Ati śa obtained the positive of comprehensive scriptural knowledge 
This has three points: 
1 How Ati śa learnt the areas of general knowledge 
By the age of twenty-one, having studied the four areas of knowledge common to 
Buddhists and non-Buddhists—language, logic, crafts, and medicine, Candragarbha had 
become an excellent scholar. In particular, the great Drolungpa relates how, at the age of fifteen, having heard 
Drop of Reasoning  (Nyāyabindupr ākaraṇa) just once, Candragarbha 
debated with a non-Buddhist intellectual reno wned for his erudition and beat him—which 
spread his fame far and wide. 
2 How Ati śa learnt Mantra 
Then Candragarbha requested a complete empowerment from the master yogi of the main temple on Black Mountain, the glorious R āhulagupta who had received direct visions 
of Hevajra and a prophecy from Vajra ḍākinī. [4] Candragarbha was given the secret name 
Jñānaguhyavajra. Up to the age of twenty-nine, he studied the Vajray āna under 
numerous highly realized gurus and thereb y became knowledgeable in all texts and 
instructions. When the thought “Only I am knowledgeable in secret mantra” occurred to 
him, ḍākinīs pointed out to him, in a dream, several volumes of mantra he had never 
seen before, whereby his pride diminished. 
3 How Ati śa was ordained and learnt the collections of inner knowledge 
Both in his dreams and directly, the gurus and protectors then made known to 
Candragarbha that vast benefit would accr ue for the teachings and many migrating 
beings if he were to take ordination7 as appropriate. Upon their encouragement he had 
himself ordained. The great upho lder of monastic discipline8, Śīlarakṣita, an elder of the 
Mahāsaṁghika tradition who had attained the medita tive stabilization in which one single-
pointedly enters ultimate reality on the path of preparation, officiated as abbot. 
Candragarbha received the name Śrī Dīpaṃkarajñāna. 
Afterwards, up to the age of thirty-one, he studied the lower and upper divisions of inner 
philosophical knowledge9; in particular, for twelve years, Great Detailed Explanation 
(Mahāvibhāṣā) under Guru Dharmarak ṣita in Odantapuri. As he was very well versed in 
the scriptures of the four original traditions, he had an infallible grasp of the tiniest 
                                                 
6 Tib. mang du mkhyen pa lung gi yon tan  
7 Tib. rab tu byung  
8 Tib. ‘ dul ba , Sans. vinaya  
9 Tib. mtshan nyid kyi theg pa’i nang rig pa’i sde snod gong og  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
4 details of the modes of behavior that should be adopted and discarded according to the 
various philosophical schools, for instance the monastic rules about accepting gifts. 
2B1B-2B How Ati śa obtained the qualities of realizat ion of its correct accomplishment 
This has two points: 
[1 How all qualities of realization are contained in the three trainings 
2 How Ati śa was accomplished in the three trainings] 
2B1B-2B1  How all qualities of realization are contained in the three trainings 
As generally speaking all the scriptural teachings10 by the Victor are contained in the 
three precious scriptural collections11, the realized teachings12 are also contained in the 
three precious trainings. 
2B1B-2B2  How Ati śa was accomplished in the three trainings 
This has three points: 
[A Atiśa’s accomplishments in the training of ethics 
B Atiśa’s accomplishments in the training of meditative stabilization13 
C Atiśa’s accomplishments in the training of wisdom] 
2B1B-2B2A Ati śa’s accomplishments in the training of ethics 
This has three points: 
[1 Transition to ethics 2 How Ati śa was actually accomplished in ethics 
3 Proper protection of ethics] 
2B1B-2B2A-1 Transition to ethics [5] 
In this regard the training in ethics is often praised in the scriptures and in the 
commentaries as the foundation of all posi tive qualities, such as the trainings in 
meditative stabilization and wisdom. Therefore it is necessary, first of all, to possess 
qualities of realization in terms of the training in ethics. 
2B1B-2B2A-2 How Ati śa was actually accomplished in ethics 
This has three points: 
A How Ati śa possessed the highest vows of individual liberation 
Having received the vows of a fully ordained monk, Ati śa guarded them the way a yak 
guards its coat. A yak is so attached to its coat that it would rather risk its life trying to 
save a strand of tail hair caught on a tree, than  to part with it, even if it sees its life is 
being threatened by a hunter. That is how Ati śa guarded every detail of the foundation of 
trainings, not to speak of the major rules of the foundation of trainings he had 
undertaken, so that he came to be called “the elder who is a great upholder of monastic discipline.” 
B How Ati śa possessed the bodhisattva vows 
Atiśa practiced numerous instructions for training in the mind of enlightenment, which is 
rooted in love and compassion. Especially, following Serlingpa,  he trained for long in the 
highest instructions passed on by the venerable Maitreya and Mañjugho ṣa through 
Asaṅga and Śāntideva. Thereby the mind of enlighte nment, which cherishes others more 
                                                 
10 Tib. lung gi bstan pa  
11 Tib. sde snod rin po che gsum . The three scriptural collections  (Sanskrit: Tripi ṭaka) often referred to more literally as 
three baskets  are the Vinaya Pi ṭaka (words of the Buddha on monastic discipline), the S ūtra Piṭaka (his teachings 
proper), and the Abhidharma Pi ṭaka (higher knowledge —a systematic, philosophical presentation of his teachings). 
12 Tib. rtogs pa’i bstan pa  
13 Tib. ting nge ‘dzin  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
5 than oneself, arose in his heart. This aspiring mind of enlightenment14 gave rise to the 
engaging mind of enlightenment15, and due to his excellent behavior—his engagement in 
the trainings following the promise to train in  the vast conduct of bodhisattvas—he never 
transgressed the rules of the buddhas’ children. 
C How Ati śa possessed vajrayana vows 
Owing to the fact that he had the meditative stabilizations of the generation stage, in 
w h i c h  o n e ’ s  o w n  b o d y  i s  s e e n  a s  t h a t  o f  a deity, and of the completion stage, the 
indestructible vajra mind, [6] he became chie f among yogis. In particular he guarded his 
tantric commitments16 properly by not transgressing the prescribed rules.17 
2B1B-2B2A-3 Proper protection of ethics 
Not only did he courageously undertake the training in ethics of the three vows, he also 
upheld them as he had promised. He kept the vows without transgressing the rules 
associated with them, and even if he transgress ed them ever so slightly, he quickly, very 
quickly purified this by means of a suitable ritual restoring the given vow. 
2B1B-2B2B Ati śa’s accomplishments in the traini ng of meditative stabilization 
This has two points: 
1 Common 
He had achieved the serviceability of the mind of calm abiding.  
2 Uncommon 
He had the extreme stability of the generation stage. Moreover, he had performed the 
modes of conduct of yogic realization disciplines18 for three or six years. 
2B1B-2B2C Ati śa’s accomplishments in the training of wisdom 
This has two points: 
1 Common 
He had obtained the meditative stabilization of  special insight, which is the union of calm 
abiding and special insight. 
2 Uncommon 
He had obtained the special meditative stabilization of the completion stage. 
2B1B-3 Having attained those positive qualities, the deeds Ati śa did for the sake of the 
teachings 
This has two points: 
1 Deeds in India 
2 Deeds in Tibet 
2B1B-3A Deeds  in India 
At the palace of great enlightenment in Bodhgay ā he defeated proponents of base non-
Buddhist doctrines by means of the Dharma three times, thus upholding the Buddha’s 
teachings. Eliminating the taints of ignorance, misconception, and doubt also with regard 
to the teachings of his own upper and lower systems, he spread the teachings, so that he was regarded as a crown jewel beyond partiality by proponents of all factions.  
                                                 
14 Tib. smon pa'i sems  
15 Tib. 'jug pa'i sems  
16 Tib. dam tshig  
17 Tib. bcas mtshams  
18 Tib. rig pa brtul zhugs kyi spyod pa  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
6 2B1B-3B Deeds in Tibet 
This has four points: 
[1 Clearing up misconceptions about the Dharma and restoring the tradition 
2 Identifying the three causes of excellence in the composition of commentaries 
3 Due to Ati śa possessing these three causes, his ability to ascertain the Vict or’s intentions  
4 The special qualities of his disciples] 
2B1B-3B1  Clearing up misconceptions about the Dharma and restoring the tradition 
Lha Lama19 [7] and his nephew sent the two great translators Gyatsön Seng and Nagtso 
Tsültrim Gyalwa to India one after the other. Due to their taking pains again and again to 
invite Ati śa, he came to Upper Ngari during the reign of Jangchub Ö20 and was requested 
to purify the Buddha’s teachings. Thereupon he spread the teachings by composing Lamp 
for the Path to Enlightenment , a text bringing together all the points of s ūtra and tantra 
and condensing them into applicable stages, as well as other texts. Specifically he spent 
three years in Ngari, nine year s in Nyetang, and five years el sewhere in Central Tibet and 
Tsang, teaching the fortunate all the scriptures and instructions of s ūtra and tantra 
without exception. Thereby he restored the tradition of teachings that had declined, 
made those that remained flourish, and corrected those that had been soiled by the errors of misconception, ensuring that the precious teachings were freed from all flaws. 
2B1B-3B2  Identifying the three causes of excellence in the composition of commentaries 
There are three causes of excellence in the composition of a text clarifying the Sage’s 
intentions:  
1. being learned in the five areas of knowledge,  
2. having received instructions for the application of their meaning that transmit the 
instructions of the perfectly complete Buddha in an unbroken line of exalted 
masters, and  
3. having received the permission to teach through the vision of a protector deity.21  
If a text can be composed with any one of these caus es of excellence, it will turn out all 
the more excellent if all three ar e complete. This great master, Ati śa, possessed all three. 
2B1B-3B3  Due to Ati śa possessing these three causes, his ability to ascertain the Vict or’s intentions  
This has three points: 
A Being cared for by protector deities [8] 
It says in the Praise : 
Of the glorious Hevajra, 
Of Samay āvyūharāja, 
Of heroic Loke śvara, 
Noble, reverend T ārā and others, 
You had visions and permissions; 
Therefore, dreaming and directly, 
You perpetually heard teachings: 
Holy teachings, profound and vast. 
B How Ati śa’s lineage is uninterrupted 
Atiśa held numerous lineages of masters such as the two lineages of the common vehicle 
and of the Mah āyāna, with regard to which there are the two—P āramitāyāna and Secret 
Mantray āna. In regard to the P āramitāyāna he held the two lineages of the view and the 
                                                 
19 Lha Lama Yeshé Ö, 10th/11th cent. King of Gugé. 
20 Lha Lama Jangchub Ö, the nephew of Lha Lama Yeshé Ö. 
21 Tib. yi dam  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
7 conduct. As the latter has a lineage stemming from Maitreya and a lineage stemming 
from Mañjugho ṣa, he held three lineages. In the Secret Mantra he had received five types 
of transmission as well as many other lineages such as the lineage of tenets, the lineage 
of blessings, and the lineage of various in structions. The gurus from whom he heard 
instructions directly are mentioned in the Praise : 
The gurus you always relied on were 
Śāntipa, Serlingpa,  
Bhadrabodhi, Jñ ānaśrī—  
Many with high accomplishments. 
In particular you held 
The profound and vast instructions 
That had been passed on  from one to another 
All the way from N āgārjuna. 
It is well known that he ha d twelve gurus who had attain ed high accomplishments, in 
addition to many others. 
C The fact that Ati śa was learned in the five areas of knowledge 
This has already been explained. For all these reasons this master was able to skillfully 
ascertain the Victor’s intentions. 
2B1B-3B4  The special qualities of his disciples 
This has two points: 
A Atiśa’ disciples in India, Ngari and Tibet [9] 
The master who was like this had an incredible number of students in India, Kashmir, 
Oḍḍiyāna, Nepal, and Tibet, however, the main ones were four great scholars in India 
who matched the master himself in  their knowledge: Pitopa, Dharm ākaramati, 
Madhyasi ṃha, and K ṣitigarbha. Some also add Mitraguhya  as the fifth. In Ngari, it was 
the great translators Rinchen Zangpo and Nagtso, as well as the ordained king Jangchub 
Ö; in the province of Tsang, Gargewa and Gokugpa Lhaytsay; in Lodrag, Chagpa Trichog 
and Gewa Kyong; in Kham, Naljorpa Chenpo, Gönpawa, Sherab Dorjé, and Chadar Tönpa; 
and in Central Tibet, the three, Khu, Ngog, and Drom.  
B Atiśa’s foremost disciple 
Among them, however, the great lineage holder who further spread the exalted activities 
of his guru was Dromtönpa Gyalwa Ju ngné, who had been prophesied by T ārā. 
This was a summary description of the author’s greatness. You should come to 
understand it more extensively by means of the great biographical texts.  
Showing the greatness of the teachings in order to generate respect for the instructions 
2B2  Showing the greatness of the teachings in order to generate respect for the 
instructions 
This has three points: 
[A Identifying the teachings 
B Presenting this text as possessing the three: being fully complete, easily applicable, and a particularly noble 
system 
C Presenting this text as possessing the four greatnesses] 
2B2A Identifying the teachings 
As for the teachings, the source text of the present instructions is Lamp for the Path to 
Enlightenment . 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
8 2B2B Presenting this text as possessing the three: being fully complete, easily applicable, and a particularly noble 
system 
Although there are numerous te xts composed by the Elder, Lamp for the Path to 
Enlightenment  is their perfect completion, being like a root. As it indicates all the points 
of both s ūtra and tantra in summary fashion, it is complete in terms of content. As it 
makes the gradual taming of the mi nd its main topic, it is easy to put into practice. As it 
is ornamented with the instru ctions of the two masters [1 0] who were skilled in the 
systems of the two trail-blazers,22 it is a particularly noble system compared to others.  
2B2C Presenting this text as possessing the four greatnesses 
The greatness of the instructions contained in this text has four points: 
[1 The greatness of recognizing all the teachings as being non-contradictory 
2 The greatness of all the Buddha’s teachings23 occurring to you as instructions 
3 The greatness of allowing you to  easily discover the Victor’s intentions 
4 The greatness of a great misdeed stopping by itself] 
2B2C-1 The greatness of recognizing all the teachings as being non-contradictory 
This has five points: 
A Identifying the teachings 
Everything the Victor said. 
B How all the teachings are recognized to not be contradictory 
They all come to be understood as a single person’s path to buddha hood. That is to say 
some are primary points of the path, others are appropriate secondary points. 
C How it is demonstrated through scripture and logic that it would be contradictory not to accept this 
In this regard it is the bodhisattva’s wish to  work for the welfare of the world. For that 
purpose it is also necessary to care for all three types of disciples24 and therefore train in 
their respective paths. This is because Venerable Maitreya explained that a knower of 
paths of the three vehicles is the method  for realizing the bodhisattvas’ goals. 
D Establishing that the teachings are not contradictory 
In the Mah āyāna path there is the common and the uncommon. The former is that which 
originates from the H īnayāna collection of scriptures—except for the uncommon thought 
of aspiring for one’s own peace and happiness alone, the uncommon prohibitions, and the 
like. Apart from that it is not that faults are partially ceased and qualities are partially 
completed in perfectly complete buddhahood, but rather all kinds of faults have been 
eliminated and all types of positive qualities have been completed. Consequently, since 
the Mah āyāna that achieves this also brings about the cessation of all faults and the 
development of all positive qualities, the path of the Mah āyāna comprises a ll the various 
aspects of qualities of abandonment and realizat ion of all other vehicles. [11] That is why 
the sections of the Mah āyāna path, which brings about buddhahood, comprise all the 
Buddha’s teachings, for there is no utterance of the Sage that does not cause the 
cessation of a few faults and the development of a few positive qualities, and because it is not the case that all of this  is not brought about by the Mah āyāna. 
E Clearing up doubts 
Opinion: That may be true for the P āramitāyāna,25 but not for those entering the 
Vajrayāna. 
                                                 
22 Nāgārjuna and Asa ṅga 
23 Tib. gsung rab , often translated as ‘scriptures’. 
24 Tib. rigs can gsum ga , literally “the three lineage-possessors.” 
25“Perfection vehicle”. Th e Sanskrit terms Mah āyāna, Hīnayāna, Pāramitāyāna, and Vajray āna are mostly used. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
9 Response: Although the way one trains in the P āramitāyāna—in countless clear 
distinctions that clarify giving and so forth—is different from that in Mantra, the basis of 
the conduct—the generation of the mind of enlightenment26—and the coarse body of the 
path which trains in the conduct—the six perfections, is nevertheless the same and 
therefore something shared by them. In the Vajra Peak  (Vajraśikharatantra)  it says: 
Not even to sustain your life, 
Should you discard the mind of enlightenment. 
And: 
The conduct of the six perfections, Must not be discarded ever. 
This is also taught in numerous other Mantra texts.  
In many authentic sources for the mandala rituals of highest yoga tantra it says that a 
set of two vows must be taken, a common  and an uncommon one, and indeed, the 
former refers to bodhisattva vows.
27 The precious Teacher28 also said: “My guru who knew 
how to accommodate all the teachings by mean s of the path as though in a square…” 
These words form the basis of a major investigation. 
2B2C-2 The greatness of all the Buddha’s teachings occurring to you as instructions 
This has three points: 
A The distinction of pure and impure manners of comprehension 
Anyone construing the great scriptures to be explanatory teachings that do not contain 
the points of practice and who, thinking that guidance indicating the meaning of the essential points of practice exists separately from them, holds that even in the holy 
Dharma the explanatory and accomplishing teachings are found in different places [12], 
will create an obstacle for the arising of deep respect for the immaculate s ūtras and 
tantras as well as for the treatises clarifying their intention. You should be aware that the 
karmic obscuration of abandoning the Dharma is accumulated by despising them, saying 
that they only outline external knowledge without presenting the inner meaning.  
Hence, for those who want liberation, the infallible, supreme instructions are indeed the 
great scriptures. Nevertheless it is possible that, due to poor intelligence and the like, 
you cannot reach certainty through relying on these scriptures only as supreme advice. 
Therefore you should seek cert ainty with respect to them thinking “I will seek certainty 
with respect to them by relying on the excell ent instructions,” but you should not think 
that the great scriptures do not contain the heart of the matter because they only outline external knowledge while the instructions are supreme because they present the inner meaning. 
B How all the Buddha’s teachings come into view as useful instructions  
The great yogi Jangchub Rinchen said: 
Someone who has reached certainty about a handy little volume, cannot be 
said to know all the topics of instru ctions; this is said about someone who 
understands all of the Buddha’s teachings as instructions. 
                                                 
26 Tib. sems skyed , literally “mind-generate,” is a very common ellipsis for byang chub mchog tu sems skyed  “generation 
of a mind (aiming) for supreme enlightenment.” 
27 The implication is that in the Vajray āna the rules of conduct binding upon bodhisattvas also apply. 
28 Dromtönpa. This could also be rendered as “the precious Tönpa,” the Tibetan word for “teacher,” tönpa , forming part 
of the name of Ati śa’s foremost disciple. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
10 We need the kind of understanding that Gompa Rinchen Lama, a disciple of the Great 
Elder, expressed saying he had ground his body, speech, and mind to dust in a single 
meditation session on Ati śa’s instructions, and that thereby the understanding had now 
arisen in him that all the scriptures are instructions.  
In the words of the precious Dromtönpa: 
If after studying the Dharma a lot you feel the need to search elsewhere for a 
way of applying the Dharma, you are mistaken. 
Likewise those who study the Dharma a lot over a long period and, completely ignorant 
as to how to set about it, develop the wish to practice Dharma, do not understand and 
therefore err in the manner described above. [13] As it says in Treasury of Manifest 
Knowledge (Abhidharmako śa): 
The Buddha’s teachings have two aspects: 
Their nature is scripture and realization. 
In accordance with this statement, there is no teaching apart from the scriptural teaching 
and the realized teaching. The scriptural teac hing is how the Dharma should be practiced 
and establishes the manner of accomplishment, while the realized teaching is what is 
thus established. Since you practice in accordance with what is to be established, these 
two act as cause and effect. To give an analogy: it is like when racing a horse, you first show the horse the course, and after showing it  the course, it races there. Just as it 
would be ridiculous to show it a course and then have the race elsewhere, similarly when 
it comes to attainments, ho w could it be appropriate to  accomplish something after 
having determined something else through listening and reflecting? That is also 
expressed in 
Stages of Meditation III (Bh āvanākrama) :  
Whatever has been realized by the wisdoms arising from listening and 
reflecting is precisely what should be cultivated by means of the wisdom 
arising from meditation, just like a hors e runs along the course it has been 
shown. 
C Indication of analytical meditation as a means of making all teachings appear as instructions 
Thus, through summarizing all the topics of th e paths set forth in the scriptures and their 
commentaries—starting from how to rely on a spiritual teacher up to calm abiding and 
special insight—they are all co ndensed into stages of practical application in terms of 
performing stabilizing meditation where stabilizing meditation is required and analyzing 
with the wisdom of individual investigation where analytical  meditation is required. 
Thereby these instructions guide you so that all the scriptures appear to you as 
instructions. Then the certainty develops that they should be understood as supreme 
advice, and the misconception that they should be understood as mere background knowledge for the Dharma rather than as actual  instructions [14] is  completely averted. 
2B2C-3 The greatness of allowing you to easily discover the Victor’s intentions 
This has two points: 
A For beginners, the Victor’s intention is not easy to find without a guru’s oral instructions 
Although the great texts, the scriptures along with their commentaries, are the best 
advice, completely uneducated beginners cannot find their intention—even though they 
delve into them—without relying on excellent oral instructions, or, even if they find it, 
they spend a lot of time and enormous effort. 
B The Victor’s intention is found through a guru’s oral instructions 
If they rely on a guru’s oral instructions and the like, it becomes easy to understand. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
11 2B2C-4 The greatness of a great misdeed stopping by itself 
This has three points: 
A Showing the abandonment of the Dharma as the biggest misdeed 
As explained in the Lotus S ūtra (Saddharmapu ṇḍarīkasūtra) and the Chapter of the 
Truthful One (Satyakaparivarta) , it amounts to abandoning the Dharma if you hold that 
some of the Buddha’s utterances are means of attaining buddhahood while others are 
obstacles to buddhahood, dividing them into good and bad, appropriate and inappropriate, or Mah āyāna and H īnayāna, and thereupon holding that a bodhisattva 
needs to train in some and not in others. This is because you fail to understand that all 
the Buddha’s words, either directly or indirectly, teach the means of attaining buddhahood. In the 
Sūtra Gathering All the Threads (Sarvavaidalyasa ṃgrahasūtra) it says 
that the karmic obscuration due to abandoning the Dharma is so subtle that it is hard to 
recognize. Concerning the very great disadvantages that ensue if you abandon the Dharma, it says in the 
King of Meditative Stabilizations S ūtra (Samādhirājasūtra): 
Someone here in Jambudv īpa 
Tears down all the st ūpas found, 
Someone abandons a class of s ūtras; 
The latter’s misdeed is far more serious. 
Someone even murders arhats 
As many as sand grains in the Ganges, 
Someone abandons a class of s ūtras; [15] 
The latter’s misdeed is far more serious. 
Although there generally appear to be ma ny ways in which the Dharma might be 
abandoned, the one described previously seems to be the most significant, which is why 
we should try hard to give it up.  
B When there is a realization along the lines of the first two greatnesses, the misdeed stops by itself 
That is to say since this is averted simply by gaining certainty about what was shown 
above, the misdeed stops by itself.  
C You should come to realize such certainty from the White Lotus Sutra  and other texts 
This certainty should be sought by studying the Chapter of the Truthful One  as well as 
the Lotus Sūtra. The other ways of abandoning the Dharma should be learnt from the 
Sūtra Gathering All the Threads . 
Explanation of how teachings possessing those two greatnesses should be  
listened to and explained 
2B3 How teachings possessing those two greatnesses should be listened to and explained 
This has three points: 
A How to listen 
B How to explain 
C  How generally to proceed at the end 
2B3A How to listen 
This has three points: 
1 Thinking about the advantages of listening29 to the Dharma  
                                                 
29 The word thos pa , often rendered as “hearing” or “listening,” refers to receiving teachings more generally, and 
encompasses reading as well. Tib. thos pa mang po , for instance, literally “having heard a lot,” means “well read” or 
“educated.” For this reason, Tib. thos pa  is sometimes rendered as “study.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
12 2 Developing respect for the Dharma and those who teach it 
3 The actual way to listen 
2B3A-1 Thinking about the advantages of listening to the Dharma  
The Verses about Listening ( Śrutivarga) says:  
Through listening you come to know the dharmas, 
Through listening misdeeds are turned away, Through listening all trivia are abandoned, 
Through listening nirv āṇa is achieved. 
These four lines say that in dependence on listening an understanding of the points that 
should be adopted and discarded gradually develops. From this knowledge arises the 
ethics that counteracts wrongdoing. Then, on ce you have turned away from meaningless 
pursuits, meditative stabilization arises and the mind stays on a virtuous object as long as you wish. Then, through training in the wisdom realizing the suchness that is 
selflessness, the root of sa ṃsāra’s
30 fetters is cut and you attain liberation.  
In Garland of Birth Stories  (Jātakamālā) it also says: 
He who through listening fills his mind with faith, [16] 
Grows firm rejoicing in that which is excellent.  
Wisdom is born and stupidity vanishes; 
This is well worth paying for with one’s own flesh. 
Listening is the lamp against stupidity, 
The greatest wealth no robber can carry away, 
The weapon destroying the enemy, mental darkness, The best of friends giving gu idance with skillful means. 
Near and dear, if you are poor or not, 
Inoffensive cure ’g ainst sorrow’s ills, 
The foremost army destroying an army of faults, 
It is the best fame and trea sure and splend or as well. 
If you meet noble beings, the best of gifts, 
And in assemblies it is the delight of the wise. 
It also says: 
After listening, make your attainment
31 the essence; 
You will be released from the stronghold of births with ease. 
Keep thinking again and again about these and other advantages of listening and 
generate resolute appreciation from the bottom of your heart. 
2B3A-2 Developing respect for the Dharma and those who teach it 
The Sūtra of Kṣitigarbha  (Kṣitigarbhas ūtra) says: 
Listen filled with one-sided faith and respect, 
Without any mockery nor disrespect for them, 
Worship the exponents of the Dharma, Producing the notion of them  as resembling buddhas. 
In accordance with this quotation you should view them as resembling buddhas, offer 
them service with things like lion throne s, worship them with gifts, and give up 
disrespect. In 
Bodhisattva Levels  (Bodhisattvabh ūmi) it says that you should be free from 
                                                 
30 Tib. ‘khor ba , usually translated here as “cyclic existence.” 
31 Tib. ‘jug sgrub  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
13 arrogance and, toward the teachings and those who expound them, free from contempt, 
and you should respect both of them. And in Garland of Birth Stories  it says: 
Sit on a seat that is very low, 
Fully develop the glory of discipline32, 
See with eyes imbued with joy 
While drinking the nectar of the words. 
Bow down in respect single pointedly, 
With a mind that is stainless and pure; As patients heed a do ctor’s words, [17] 
Respectfully listen to the Dharma. 
2B3A-3 The actual way to listen 
This has three points: 
[A Indication of how to listen in general 
B The way in which, having related this to your mind, it is necessary to listen C How to keep in mind the purpose of attainments] 
2B3A-3A Indication of how to listen in general 
This has two points: 
1 Giving up the three faults of a vessel 
2 Relying on the six discriminations  
2B3A-3A1 Giving up the three faults of a vessel 
If a vessel is turned upside down, or held facing upwards but is unclean, or is clean but 
with the bottom leaking, then ev en if rain is made to fall on it by the gods, the rain 
cannot go in, or even if it goes in, it will be polluted by the dirt  and therefore will not 
fulfill the purpose of being drunk  and the like, or even if it is not spoiled by dirt, it will 
not stay but leak out. In the same way there is no great need to hear the Dharma if you 
sit in a place where it is being explained but do not listen well, or listen, but take it 
wrong—with a faulty motivation and the like—or if, even in case these faults are not 
present, the words and the meaning you grasped at the time of hearing are not 
consolidated and get lost through forgetfulness and so forth. Therefore one should be 
free from these faults. The antidotes to these three are set forth in three phrases33 in the 
sūtras: “Listen well—intently—and keep it in mind!” And in Bodhisattva Levels  we are told 
to listen with the desire to know everythi ng, single-pointedness, attention, a humble 
mind, and the thought of all sentient beings.  
2B3A-3A2 Relying on the six discriminations 
This has six points: 
A Contemplating the discrimination of oneself as a patient 
B Contemplating the discrimination of the one expounding the Dharma as a doctor 
C Generating the discrimination of the instructions as medicine 
D Generating the discrimination of persistent practice as the cure  
E Contemplating the discrimination of the tath āgatas as exalted beings 
F Generating the wish for the Dharma tradition to last long 
2B3A-3A2A Contemplating the discrimination of oneself as a patient 
In Engaging in the Bodhisattva Conduct (Bodhicary āvatāra) it says: 
Even when stricken with  ordinary illness, [18] 
One has to follow the words of a doctor; 
                                                 
32 Tib. dul ba  
33 Tib. legs par rab tu nyon la yid la zungs shig —the division into three is not quite clear. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
14 How much more so if a hundred 
Ills like lust afflict you perpetually! 
As is mentioned here, owing to mental afflictions such as attachment we always suffer 
from ills causing long-lasting and severe suffe ring that is difficult to cure. Therefore we 
first need to diagnose them as such. Kamawa said:  
If it is not in accord with the actual si tuation, our meditation goes off in the 
wrong direction. We have been stricken  with a serious illness due to the three 
poisons, the illness is very serious, bu t we do not know we are ill at all. 
2B3A-3A2B Contemplating the discrimination of the one expounding the Dharma as a 
doctor 
If we are stricken with a seri ous illness such as a wind or bile disease, we look for a 
specialist in medicine, and meeting one we ar e extremely happy, listen to what he says, 
treat him with respect, and acknowledge him. In the same way look for a spiritual guide 
teaching the Dharma, and, having found one, accomplish what he says, taking it not as a 
burden but as an ornament, acting with respect and reverence toward him. 
2B3A-3A2C Generating the discrimination of the instructions as medicine 
Just as a patient greatly appreciates the medicine put together by the doctor, you should 
regard the instructions and precepts taught by someone expounding the Dharma as the most important thing, and then make an effort to hold them in respect rather than 
wasting them through forg etfulness and the like. 
2B3A-3A2D Generating the discrimination of persistent practice as the cure 
This has three points: 
1 The contempt of striving for words without practicing them 
An ill person sees that his illness cannot be alleviated unless he takes the medicine the 
doctor has put together, and takes it. Likewis e, once you see that attachment and so 
forth cannot be eliminated without practicing the advice taught by your Dharma teacher, 
you should practice with pers istence and not strive after the vain terms of numerous 
classifications without putting them into practice. As a matter of fact, what good would it 
be to a leper whose hands and legs are coming off to resort to a dose of medicine once 
or twice? [19] Likewise for us who have be en stricken since begi nningless time with the 
wicked basis of illness that is the mental affl ictions, it is not sufficient to practice the 
meaning of the instructions only a couple of times. This is why we should examine all the 
complete parts of the path with the wisdom of individual investigation and be as diligent 
as a flowing river. It is like it says in Praise of Confession (De śanastava) : 
…That is to say our minds are always obscured, 
For long we have served the causes of our ills. 
How can a leper lacking hands and feet, Who sometimes takes his medi cine, derive any benefit? 
2 The importance of the discrimi nation of oneself as someone ill 
That being so, the discriminati on of oneself as someone ill is very important. If it is 
present, the other ones will also arise. Howe ver if this remains me rely words without the 
meaning of the instructions being accomplished for the sake of eliminating the mental 
afflictions, you will only be a listener. In the King of Meditative Stabilizations S ūtra it says 
that you will resemble a pati ent who, having sought a do ctor, only strives after the 
medicinal composition rather than taking the medicine, and does not get rid of his illness. It also says: 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
15 If, after I have explained the excellent Dharma, 
You do not apply it well although you’ve heard it, 
You’ll be like patients whose pouches are full of medicine 
But who still cannot cure their own diseases. 
And Engaging in the Bodhisattva Conduct  says: 
These should be put into practice physically. 
What would be gained by uttering just the words? 
Would it be beneficial to patients If they just read how the medicine is meant to be used? 
3 The instruction to act accordingly, having identified the meaning of “persistence” 
Therefore the discrimination that persistence eliminates the disease should be developed. 
“Persistence” in this statement signifies puttin g into practice the topics of adopting and 
discarding modes of conduct from the spiritual teacher’s instructions. [20] Now, to put 
them into practice you need to know them and for that you need to hear them. Again, after hearing and knowing them, you need to practice them and therefore it is crucial for you to engage in the meaning of what you have heard to the best of your abilities. 
Otherwise, at the time of death, you will have regrets about what you failed to 
accomplish. You will resemble an actor imitat ing others or someone interested in sugar 
who eats only the cane. In 
Exhortation to the Extraordinary Attitude  
(Adhyāśayasaṃcodana-s ūtra) it says: 
“I failed in my attainments, now what should I do?” 
That is how the childish wail while dying. They have not delved deep and suffer greatly; 
Note that these are the faults of delighting in words. 
And: 
Like someone amid the crowd observing a play, 
Discussing the virtues of another hero, 
But failing with regard to his own persistence; Note that these are the faults of delighting in words. 
And: 
In the bark of sugarcane there is no essence,  
The delightful flavor is inside. Someone eating the bark is unable to find 
The delicious flavor of molasses. 
Similarly, words are like the bark; 
Like the taste, the meaning is inside. Consequently abandon delighting in words; 
Always be conscientious, reflect on their meaning! 
2B3A-3A2E Contemplating the discrimination of the tath āgatas as exalted beings 
Having brought to mind the teacher of th e Dharma, the Bhagavan, develop respect. 
2B3A-3A2F Generating the wish for the Dharma tradition to last long 
Think: “How nice it would be if, based on listening to such a Dharma, the Victor’s 
teachings were to remain in the world for a long time.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
16 2B3A-3B The way in which, having related this to your mind, it is necessary to listen 
Apart from that, if you keep your own mind to one side while explaining or listening to 
the Dharma, the Dharma remainin g separate from it, then this will result in whatever is 
being explained missing the point. Therefore it is necessary to listen in order for your 
own continuum to reach certainty. To illustrate this: [21] when you want to examine 
whether or not there is dirt or some other impurity on your face, you look at yourself in a 
mirror and, understanding that there is, remo ve it. Likewise, when you hear the Dharma, 
your faulty behavior appears in the mirror of the Dharma, whereupon you feel anguish 
thinking: “This is what my mind has come to.” Then, as you engage in eliminating faults 
and attaining qualities, you necessarily train in accordance with the Dharma. It is like in 
Garland of Birth Stories  where the son of Sutasa asks Prince Candra for Dharma 
teachings in these terms: 
Beholding the forms of my bad behavior, 
In the dazzling mi rror of Dharma, 
Anguish arises strongly in me, 
And I turn towa rd the Dharma. 
Knowing this to be the thinking of a suitable vessel for hearing the Dharma, the 
Bodhisattva gave him teachings. 
2B3A-3C How to keep in mind the purpose of attainments 
In short, thinking “I shall attain buddhahood fo r the sake of all sentient beings. To attain 
that, I need to train in its causes. Since, apparently, it is necessary to listen to the 
Dharma for that, I shall listen to the Dhar ma,” you should generate the mind of 
enlightenment, consider the benefits of lis tening, and listen with joy, abandoning the 
faults of a vessel. 
2B3B How to explain 
This has four points: 
1 Considering the benefits of explaining the Dharma 
2 Generating respect for the teacher and the teachings 
3 The attitude and activities to explain with 
4 The distinction between whom the explanations should and should not be given to 
2B3B-1 Considering the benefits of explaining the Dharma 
In Treasury of Manifest Knowledge it says: 
Giving Dharma, free of mental afflictions, 
Teach according to s ūtra and other true texts. 
In its auto-commentary it says: 
Therefore those who explain the Dharma incorrectly and with an afflicted mind 
that craves for material gain, respect, and fame, [22] corrupt their own great 
merits.  
Therefore a pure motivation to teach the Dharma is extremely important, and in 
accordance with Ngargompa  who said: “I have never explained the Dharma without 
meditating upon impermanence before the session ,” it is crucial to review it beforehand.  
In Exhortation to the Extraordinary Attitude  two groups of twenty advantages of giving 
the gift of Dharma in the absence of material things and concern for gain, respect, and 
the like are set forth. Also, in the Questions of Householder Ugra S ūtra 
(Gŗhapatyugraparip ŗcchā) it says that the merit of a householder giving immeasurable 
material things is exceeded by an ordained person giving a single verse of Dharma. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
17 2B3B-2 Generating respect for the teacher and the teachings 
When uttering the Mother of the Buddhas34 the Teacher himself arranged the seat and so 
on. Accordingly, since the Dharma is a field of veneration even for buddhas, one should 
bring to mind the positive qualities and kindness of the Dharma and its Teacher, and 
generate respect. 
2B3B-3 The attitude and activities to explain with 
This has two points: 
A Attitude 
B Activities 
2B3B-3A Attitude 
The Sūtra Requested by S āgaramati (S āgaramatiparip ŗcchā) puts forward five 
discriminations:  
1. generating the discrimination  of oneself as a doctor,  
2. of the Dharma as medicine,  
3. of the one listening to the Dharma as a patient,  
4. of the Tath āgata as a holy being, and  
5. of the mode of the Dharma as abiding for a long time— 
as well as the development of loving kindness toward the people around. 
The envy born from anxiety that others are superior, the laziness of putting things off, 
the discouragement of fatigue due to explaining things over and over again, praising oneself and chit-chatting about other people’s faults, the reluctance to lend out texts, as 
well as concern for material things such as food and clothing should be abandoned, 
thinking: “Those very merits from teaching for the sake of my own and others’ enlightenment are the provisions of my happiness.” 
2B3B-3B Activities [23] 
Having washed and dressed in immaculately clean clothes, in a clean and pleasant place 
you should sit on a cushion on a Dharma throne. If you then chant a mantra for 
subjugating demons, the demons and gods of the demonic category will not come closer 
to you than a perimeter of 100 yojanas35 and even if they do co me, they will not be able 
to create any obstacles, as it says in the Sūtra Requested by S āgaramati.  Therefore you 
should chant that mantra and, with an extremely radiant facial complexion, give your 
explanations conjoined with the conditions for ascertaining their meaning—examples, proofs, and quotations. 
2B3B-4 The distinction between whom the explanations should and should not be given to 
In Guṇaprabha’s Sūtra on the Discipline  (Vinayas ūtra) it says: “Do not act without being 
asked to.” Accordingly, you should not teach without having been asked, and even when 
someone asks, you should examine the vessel. However, knowing someone to be a 
suitable vessel, it is acceptable to teach even without having been asked, as it says in the 
King of Meditative Stabilizations S ūtra. Further modes of conduct are set forth in the 
Sūtra on the Discipline . 
2B3C How generally to proceed at the end 
This has four points: 
                                                 
34 Common epithet of the Perfection of Wisdom S ūtras. 
35 One yojana (Tib. dpag tshad ) is equivalent to 4.5 miles (7.4 km). 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
18 1 What to do afterwards—the actual things to do 
The roots of virtue of teaching and listening in this way should be sealed36 by means of 
pure aspirational prayers such as the Prayer of Good Conduct 
(Samantabhadracary āpraṇidhāna).  
2 The benefits of this 
There is no doubt that if the Dharma is explained and listened to in this manner, in just 
one session the advantages stated above will arise. Due to the act of listening and explaining the Dharma hitting home, all the karmic obscurations accumulated previously 
by not respecting the Dharma and those who expound it and so forth are purified, and all 
the ones being newly accumulated are nipped in the bud.
37 
3 The general mode of behavior of saints 
Due to the manner of listening hitting home, the instructions set forth bring about benefit in the mind. Seeing this, all th e earlier saints in general [24]  were diligent about this, and 
especially the former gurus of this instructio n persevered in it wi th utmost diligence. 
4 The advice to cherish them, since it is a great fault to turn away from them 
These are evidently great instructions. If you do not reach certainty about this and your attitude does not change, as is often the case, no matter how much the profound and 
vast Dharma is explained, you will become like  a god fallen to the ra nk of a demon, and 
that very Dharma will become an aid to the afflictions. Therefore,  since it is like the 
saying: “If you err on the first of the month,  you will do so until th e fifteenth,” the wise 
strive for this method of tr ansforming what has been heard and explained into the path, 
and make every opportunity to explain and listen into something worthwhile, for this is 
the best preparation for teaching the instructions. 
Explanation of the stages by which a student of the actual instructions should be guided 
2B4 The stages by which a student should be guided through the actual instructions 
This has two points: 
A The root of the path: relying on a spiritual teacher 
B The stages of training the mind once you have relied 
RELYING ON A SPIRITUAL TEACHER 
2B4A The root of the path: relying on a spiritual teacher 
This has two points: 
1 The somewhat elaborate explanation for generating certainty 
2 The condensed presentation of how to sustain meditation 
2B4A-1 The somewhat elaborate explanation for generating certainty 
This has two points: 
[A The need to rely on a spiritual teacher since all positive qualities depend on him 
B The actual way to rely on a spiritual teacher] 
2B4A-1A The need to rely on a spiritual teacher since all positive qualities depend on him 
As all goodness, starting from the development of a single positive quality and the 
decrease of a single fault in the mind of the disciple, has its root in the sublime friend, right from the beginning the way to rely on him is important.  
                                                 
36 Tib. rgyas gdab par bya’o , literally “planted (to) thrive.” 
37 Tib. ‘ phrod ‘chad , literally, “are stopped from increasing.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
19 2B4A-1B The actual way to rely on a spiritual teacher 
This has six points: 
1 Characteristics of the one to be relied on, the virtuous spiritual friend 
2 Characteristics of the one who relies, the student 
3 The way the student relies on the virtuous spiritual friend 
4 The benefits of reliance 
5 The drawbacks of not relying 
6 A summary of the meaning of these points 
2B4A-1B1 Characteristics of the one to be relied on, the virtuous spiritual friend 
This has two points: 
A Identification of a guru 
B The characteristics of a guru 
2B4A-1B1A Identification of a guru 
Although, generally speaking, in terms of the in dividual vehicles, a lo t is said about this 
in the scriptures along with their commentaries, here only a virtuous spiritual friend who 
guides students on the path to buddhahood, the Mah āyāna, by gradually guiding them on 
the path of the three types of beings, will be presented. 
2B4A-1B1B The characteristics of a guru 
This has three points: 
1 Highest characteristics 
2 Middling characteristics 
3 Minimum characteristics 
2B4A-1B1B-1 Highest characteristics 
This has two points: 
A Positive qualities that the guru himself needs 
In Ornament for the Mah āyāna Sūtras (Mah āyānasūtrālaṁkāra) it says that students need 
to rely on a spiritual teache r endowed with ten properties: 
A spiritual teacher with discip line, calm, complete peace, 
More qualities, with effo rt, rich in scriptures 
Who has thoroughly realized suchness, is eloquent, 
Loving, and never disheartened—on that one rely! 
Furthermore it says that someone who has not disciplined himself is consequently not in 
a position to discipline someone else. A spir itual master disciplining others has to be 
someone who has first disciplined his own mind. You may wonder: “Well then, in what 
way does it require disciplining ?” To accomplish whatever occu rs to you and then label it 
a quality of realization because it exists in the mind is of no benefit. This is why a system 
of mental discipline compatible with the general teachings of the Victors is necessary. That has been ascertained as the three precious trainings, and therefore the three, ethics 
a n d  s o  o n ,  h a v e  b e e n  s e t  f o r t h .  I n  t h i s  r e g a r d  “ d i s c i p l i n e d ”  r e f e r s  t o  t h e  t r a i n i n g  i n  ethics. In the 
Sūtra on the Vows of Individual Liberation (Pr ātimokṣasūtra) it says:  
In accord with the unruly horse of the mind 
Always willfully straying away, 
A bridle strutted with a hundred sharp nails— That’s individual liberation. 
Someone skilled at breaking wild horses tames them by means of a good bridle. The 
sense powers pursue wrong objects like wild horses. [26] Ethics subjugates them as one 
engages in inappropriate activities, and make s one engage with much effort in what 
ought to be done. Someone trained in it has likewise tamed the horse of the mind. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
20 “Calm” means having developed the training of  meditative stabilization in which, based 
on mindfulness and introspection with regard to engaging in good and counteracting 
faulty behavior, the mind abides in a state of inner calm. “Complete peace” means that, 
based on the calm abiding of a serviceable mind, the training of wisdom has been developed through individual analysis of the correct meaning of reality. However, it is not 
enough merely to have developed, by means of the three trainings in this manner, the 
qualities of realization that act to tame the mind. As the quality of scriptural knowledge is also needed, the text says “rich in script ures,” meaning that the three scriptural 
collections and so forth have been studied extensively. According to Geshe Dromtönpa: 
For someone to be called a Mah āyāna guru, he must generate boundless 
understanding when he explains, and when he practices, he must show what is 
of benefit and direct significance in the last days of the teachings. 
“Having realized suchness” refers to the special training in wisdom—the realization of the 
selflessness of phenomena. Alternatively, it is mainly held to be manifest suchness. 
However, even if this is not present, it is said that this criterion is also fulfilled by a realization through scriptures and reasonings. 
That being so, even if he has scriptural knowledge and realizations, it is not enough for 
them to be inferior or equal to those of the disciple. Therefore someone with more qualities is needed because in 
Collection of Indicative  Verses (Ud ānavarga)  it says: 
People relying on someone inferior wither, 
Those relying on one of their peers stay the same, 
Those relying on leaders attain to sanctity. Therefore rely on those ahead of you 
Endowed with discipline, complete peace, 
And even more superior wisdom. 
If you rely on any such lords, [27] 
You’ll even end up ahead of them. 
Puchungwa said: “As I listen to the accounts of  the saints, I look up to them,” and Tazhi 
said: “I take the old men of Reting
38 as models.”39 Accordingly, we need someone with 
more qualities as a model to look up to. That being so, those six properties are positive 
qualities you yourself attain. 
B Positive qualities necessary for others’ welfare 
The remaining ones are qualities for ta king care of others. As they say: 
The Sages do not wash away evil with water, 
They do not remove the su ffering of beings by hand, 
They do not graft their realizations onto others; 
They liberate, teaching the truth of reality’s nature. 
As is expressed here, apart from teaching others the path in an unmistaken manner and 
taking care of them, nothing can be done such as washing away negativities with water. Among the four characteristics related to this , “eloquent” means experienced with regard 
to the stages of guidance and skilled at pu tting the meaning across to the minds of those 
to be tamed. “Loving” means having a pure motivation to teach the Dharma and teaching 
motivated by compassion without regard for material gain or respect. 
                                                 
38 Tib. ra sbreng ba  
39 Tib. mig rten , literally “eye support”, i.e., something to rest one’s eyes on. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
21 We need someone like Potowa who said to  Chenngawa: “Son of Lima, however many 
explanations of the Dharma I have given, not once have I claimed the applause as my 
own. There is no migrating being that is not pitiable.”  
“With effort” means that he constantly delights in the welfare of others. “Never 
disheartened” means that he does not become weary due to explaining things over and over again, but rather willingly bears the hardships of explaining.  
2B4A-1B1B-2 Middling characteristics 
Potowa said: 
The three trainings, realization of suchness, and a loving heart—these five are 
the main thing. My master  Zhangtsün is not very [28] learned in everything, 
and since he cannot bear disenchantment either, he does not impress on his 
mind the kindness he received. However, since he has the above-mentioned 
five, whoever is in his presence benefits. Nyentön is by no means eloquent and 
each time he makes a dedication the only thing he knows is that, again, 
nobody understands anything, but since he has those five, people near him 
benefit. 
2B4A-1B1B-3 Minimum characteristics 
This has two points: 
A The actual minimum of characteristics 
Even if it is difficult, due to the times, to find someone who has the complete set of 
characteristics like that, it is said that you should not rely on anyone whose faults are greater or whose faults and positive qualities are equal but on someone whose positive 
qualities exceed his faults. 
B The expediency of association with the characteristics 
Such a guru bringing about complete liberation is a perpetual root of aspiration. 
Therefore those wishing to rely on a guru should be aware of them and make an effort to 
look for someone who possesses the characteristics. Those wishing to have students rely 
on them should also strive to acquire these characteristics. 
2B4A-1B2 Explaining the characteristics of the one who relies, the student 
This has four points: 
A The faults of someone who does not have the five ch aracteristics and the benefits of someone who does 
have them  
Four Hundred Stanzas (Catu ḥśataka) says: 
Impartial, intelligent,  full of endeavor— 
Thus is explained a vessel for teachings. 
Otherwise qualities of the teacher, 
Have no effect—there’s no change in the listener. 
As it says in the commentaries, someone endowed with the three characteristics is a 
suitable vessel for listening. If all three are complete, the positive qualities of the one 
expounding the Dharma appear as positive qualities and do not appear as faults. Not only that, the positive qualities of the listeners also  appear as positive qualities to that person 
and do not appear as faults. If the characteristics of a vessel are not complete, the 
listener, under the power of his faults, will classify even a gr eat, perfectly pure spiritual 
teacher who expounds the Dharma among those who have faults and perceive an 
exponent’s faults as qualities. 
B Explaining the specifics of the various characteristics in detail [29] 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
22 In this regard “impartial” means without bias. If you have a bias, it will make you 
obscured, you will not perceive positive qualities, and therefore you will fail to find the 
meaning of excellent explanations . It is just as it says in Essence of the Middle Way 
(Madhyamakah ŗdaya) :  
With a biased—thus anguished—mind,40  
Peace can never be realized. 
To be biased means to be attached to one’s own approach and to hate others’ approach. 
Having examined something like this in yo ur own continuum, you should discard it. Is 
that by itself sufficient? If someone does not have the intelligence to distinguish between 
good ways of explaining and faulty ways of explaining that seem the same, he is not a 
suitable vessel, even though impartial. Theref ore one needs to have the intelligence that 
understands those two.  
Are those two sufficient? Even if one has the two, impartiality and intelligence, someone 
who is just like the listener to  the Dharma in a lifeless pict ure is not a suitable vessel. 
Therefore one also needs to have great endeav or. The commentary st ates that the two, 
respect for the Dharma and the expounder of the Dharma as well as an attentive mind, are added, so that five characteristics are set forth. 
C Specifics of achieving the conducive conditions and eliminating the adverse conditions to having the four 
characteristics 
That being so there are four: great endeavor with regard to the Dharma, a completely 
attentive mind while listening, great respect for the Dharma and the expounder of Dharma, and holding to good explanations havi ng rejected faulty on es. Intelligence is a 
conducive circumstance for those four, and impartiality is what eliminates adverse 
circumstances.  
D The need to strive for those characteristics 
You should examine whether or not all the attributes that would make you suitable to be 
guided by a guru are complete, and cultivate joy if they are. If they are not complete, 
you should strive henceforth and in future lives  after the causes for making them 
complete. 
2B4A-1B3 The way the student relies on the virtuous spiritual friend 
This has two points: 
[A Explaining the need to rely on someone with the characteristics 
B The actual manner of relying on someone who has the characteristics] 
2B4A-1B3A Explaining the need to rely on someone with the characteristics [30] 
Thus someone endowed with the characteristics of a vessel should examine in the way 
explained above whether or not a teacher has the characteristics, and if he does have 
them, obtain the kindness of the Dharma from him. 
2B4A-1B3B The actual manner of relying on someone who has the characteristics 
With regard to the manner of relying on a spiritual teacher from whom in general you 
obtain the kindness of the Dharma and who, in particular, guides your mind well by means of perfectly complete instructions, there are two points: 
1 The manner of relying in thought 
2 The manner of relying through actions 
                                                 
40 Tib. phyogs su lhung bas sems gdungs pas , literally: “with a mind in anguish due to bias.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
23 2B4A-1B3B-1 The manner of relying in thought 
This has two points: 
A The root, training in faith  
B Remembering his kindness so as to generate respect 
2B4A-1B3B-1A The root, training in faith 
This has five points: 
1 Explaining faith as the basis of all qualities 
In Jewels' Blaze Dh āraṇī (Ratnolkadh āraṇī) it says: 
Faith, a preparatory practice, gives birth, like a mother, 
To all good qualities, guards them, and makes them increase. 
This says that faith gives birth to positive qualities that have not yet arisen, and once 
they have come into existence, it sustains and increases them. In the Sūtra of the Ten 
Dharmas  (Daśadharmakas ūtra) it also says: 
That which leads to definite emergence41, 
Faith, is the foremost of vehicles. 
For that reason the intelligent 
Rely on the pursuit of faith. 
In those who are lacking faith, 
Wholesome qualities do not arise; 
Likewise, in seeds that were burnt by fire, 
No green sprout can germinate. 
In terms of the forward and reverse pervasions, faith is said to be the foundation of all 
positive qualities. 
2 Identification of faith 
Generally speaking there are many types of faith: in the Three Jewels, in actions and 
their effects, and in the four noble truths, however, here it is faith in the spiritual master. 
3 The need to discriminate the spiritual master as a buddha  
Furthermore, as for the way to see th e spiritual master, it says in the Tantra Bestowing 
the Initiation of Vajrap āṇi (Vajrap āṇyabhiśekamahātantra) : 
Oh Lord of Secrets, how should a stud ent see his master? Just like he would 
see the Buddha Bhagavan. [31] 
Similar statements can be found in the collection of Mah āyāna sūtras and in the Vinaya. 
Their meaning is this: If you understand that someone is like a buddha, instead of a mind 
conceiving faults in him, a mind thinking ab out his positive qualities will arise. Likewise, 
with regard to a spiritual master, you should purposely abandon any co ncepts of faults in 
every respect while training in the mind  that conceives po sitive qualities. 
4 The disadvantages of conceiving faults 
In addition, the above tantra says: 
Apprehend your master’s  positive qualities, 
Do not ever apprehend his faults, 
                                                 
41 Tib. nges ‘byung , also often translated as ‘renunciation’  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
24 Apprehending his qualitie s you will gain siddhis, 42 
Apprehending his faults they cannot be gained. 
You should act accordingly. Thus if positive qualities predominate in a spiritual master 
but you think about him in terms of the few faults  he has, this will become an obstacle to 
your own spiritual accomplishments. Even if faults predominate, if you train in faith from 
the perspective of his positive qualities without  thinking about him in terms of his faults, 
this will become a cause for accomplishments to come about. Therefore, when it comes 
to your own spiritual master, whether his faults are great or small, contemplate the 
disadvantages of thinking about him from that perspective, and repeatedly generating a 
mind abandoning this, put a stop to it. 
5 The way of restraining concepts of faults 
If concepts of faults arise due to non-conscientiousness43, a lot of afflictions, and so 
forth, you should apply yourself to confession and restraint. If you familiarize yourself 
with them in this manner, you may still see that there are a few faults, but since your mind holds on to the side of positive qualities, it will not become an obstacle to your faith. For instance, the Great Elder upheld the view of the Madhyamaka, while Serlingpa 
upheld the view of the True Aspectarian Cittam ātra which is why, in terms of view, one 
was higher than the other. However, as he discovered the ge neral stages of the 
Mahāyāna path and the mind of enlightenment by relying on him, he regarded Serlingpa 
as unequalled among spiritual teachers. 
2B4A-1B3B-1B Remembering his kindness so as to generate respect [32] 
In the Sūtra of the Ten Dharmas  it says: 
He looks for me who has roamed in cyclic existence for a long time; he 
awakens me from a long time of obscuration and torpor due to ignorance; he 
pulls me out as I sink in the ocean of existence; he shows good paths to me 
who has entered bad ones; he frees me who has been bound in the prison of existence; he is a doctor to me who has long been tormented by illness; I 
should generate the notion of him as rain-clouds, pacifying me who has been 
ablaze with the fire of attachment and the like. 
The 
Array of Stalks S ūtra (Gaṇḍavyūhasūtra) also says: 
“These are my spiritual friends, expounders of Dharma, 
Exhaustively teaching the qualities of all dharmas, 
Thoroughly teaching the conduct of bodhisattvas,” 
With these thoughts in mind, I have come here. 
“As they give birth to all that, they are like my mother, 
They give me the milk of virtues, so they are like nurses, 
They cleanse me completely by me ans of enlightenment’s branches; 
These spiritual friends completely exorcize harm. 
They are like doctors releasing from death and old age, 
Showering a rain of nectar they are like Lord Indra, 
Like the full moon they fl ourish with white qualities, 
They show the direction of peace, just like bright sunlight, 
Regarding friends and foes they are like mountains, 
They have minds as undisturbed as the sea, 
                                                 
42 Tib. dngos grub is usually translated here as "(spir itual) accomplishment", "attainment." Siddhi  is the Sanskrit 
equivalent. 
43 Tib. bag med pa , this can also be translated as ‘carelessness.’ 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
25 They give perfect support, some say: ‘like boatmen’”; 
With this in mind, Sudhana, I’ve come here. 
“Bodhisattvas bring forth my understanding, 
The buddhas’ children cause enlightenment, 
These beings, these friends of mine, are praised by the Buddha”; 
With such virtuous thoughts, I have come here. 
“As they save the world, they are like heroes, 
They have become the captains, protectors, and refuge, They are the eye bestowing happiness on me”; [33] 
With thoughts like these, honor your spiritual friends. 
The thoughts expressed here should be remembered through a tune to go with the 
verses, substituting oneself for “Sudhana.” 
2B4A-1B3B-2 The manner of relying through actions 
This has three points: 
[A The need for reliance through actions 
B A condensed explanation of the three means of pleasing the spiritual teacher 
C The extensive explanation of those three means] 
2B4A-1B3B-2A The need for reliance through actions 
In Fifty Verses on the Guru  (Gurupañc āśikā) it says: 
What need is there to say a lot of words here? 
Do everything to make your guru happy. 
Give up anything that displeases him. 
Apply yourself to that, examine that! 
This was said by Vajradhara himself: 
“Spiritual attainments follow the guru.” 
Aware of this, use anything there is, 
And make your guru absolutely happy. 
In brief, try hard to please him and to give up whatever he does not like. 
2B4A-1B3B-2B A condensed explanation of the three means of pleasing the spiritual teacher 
The three means of pleasing the guru are: of fering him material things, serving him and 
paying him respect with body and speech, and practicing in accordance with his advice.  
In this regard it says in Ornament for the Mah āyāna Sūtras: 
Through homage, offerings purely obtained, and service 
And practice you should rely on a spiritual friend. 
2B4A-1B3B-2C The extensive explanation of those three means 
This has three points: 
1 Offering the guru material things 
It says in Fifty Verses on the Guru : 
If with things rarely give n—your wife and children — 
And with your life, you should always rely on 
The Master who gave you your commitments;44 
Needless to say do so with  your fickle possessions. 
And: 
                                                 
44 Tib dam tshig , the Tibetan equivalent of the Sanskrit word samaya . 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
26 Giving that, amounts to always 
Offering gifts to all the buddhas. 
Offering that, accumulates merit, 
Which turns into the highest attainments.45 
2 Serving and paying respect to him  
This involves bathing him, anointing him, massaging him, wrapping him up, cleaning him, 
nursing him when he is ill, and so forth, and talking about his positive qualities. 
3 Practicing in accordance with his advice 
This consists in practicing [34] without going against the instructions, this being the main means of pleasing the guru. In 
Garland of Birth Stories  it says: 
The offering to be made in return for his help 
Is to practice according to his instructions. 
2B4A-1B4 The benefits of reliance 
This has two points: 
A Benefits such as approaching the state of a buddha 
It says in the scriptures that you will approach  the state of a buddha, that the Victors will 
rejoice, that you will not be de prived of virtuous spiritual fr iends, that you will not fall to 
the lower realms, and that you will not easily succumb to bad karma and afflictions. Since 
you will not transgress the cond uct of bodhisattvas and will remain mindful of it, your 
accumulation of positive qualities will grow hi gher and higher and a ll your temporary and 
ultimate goals will be accomplished. 
B Bad karma is exhausted and the benefit exceeds even that of making offerings to numerous buddhas 
Furthermore, through serving and paying respect to the spiritual teacher, the karma for 
experiencing the lower realms is exhausted directly in this lifetime through only slight harm to body and mind or else through experiences in dreams. It is said that there are 
enormous benefits that outshine  the roots of virtue of maki ng offerings and the like to 
innumerable buddhas.  
2B4A-1B5 The drawbacks of not relying 
This has three points: 
A The way it ruins this  life and future ones 
If you make someone your spiritual teacher and then back off in your reliance on him, a 
lot of illnesses and negative fo rces will harm you in this life, and in future lives you will 
have to experience the immeasurable  sufferings of the lower realms. In Fifty Verses on 
the Guru  it says:  
Never agitate the minds 
Of your masters—not at all. 
If you do so out of delusions, 
You will surely roast in hell. 
It was explained authentically 
That all those who disparage their masters 
Will dwell in the horrific hells 
That were taught—like Without Respite. [35] 
In a passage from the Commentary on the Difficult Points of the “Black Opponent of 
Yama” (K ŗṣṇayamāripañjikā) it also says: 
                                                 
45 Tib. tshogs las dngos grub mchog tu 'gyur , literally “from the accumulation th ere will be highest attainments.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
27 Whoever hears a single verse, 
But does not perceive him a spiritual teacher,46 
A hundred times will be born among dogs  
And then as someone of low caste. 
B No positive qualities are attained and earlier ones deteriorate 
Apart from that, the positive qualities that have not yet arisen do not arise, and those 
that have arisen deteriorate and vanish. 
C The disadvantages of relying on non-virtuous spiritual friends and bad companions 
If you rely on non-virtuous spiritual friends and bad companions, your positive qualities will also diminish, your faults will increase, and there will be un desirable results. 
Therefore it was taught that this should be avoided in every way. 
2B4A-1B6 Summary of the meaning of these points 
This has three points: 
A The importance of proper reliance as the root of perpetual striving 
That being so, the instructio ns widely known as guru yoga should also be understood 
according to what has been explained before. However, it is not enough to do the 
visualization in just one meditation session. When you do one Dharma practice from the bottom of your heart, you should long rely on a spiritual teacher who guides you 
unmistakenly.  
As Chekawa also said about that time: “When you rely on a guru, there will be doubtful 
questions whether to give up.” Accordingly, si nce there will only be loss without profit if 
you do not know how to rely on him, it becomes evident that the cycles of teachings 
about relying on a spiritual teacher are more important than any other ones and the root of perpetual striving. 
B The need for confession and a vow because, if that proper reliance does not come about, it is a great fault 
With our coarse mental afflictions—not knowing how to rely or knowing how to but not 
doing so—we have often allowed many misdeeds of reliance on a spiritual teacher to occur in regard to listening to the Dharma. Sinc e it is difficult for an awareness of that to 
develop through confession and  restraint, having understo od the advantages and [36] 
disadvantages as explained earlier, you should sincerely confess any occurrences that are 
not in accordance with proper reliance and develop many strong resolves. 
C How, if you act in that manner, the realization of reliance is not far away 
If you act in that manner, before long you will become like the bodh isattva Sadaprarudita 
and the youthful Sudhana who was insatiable in his quest for a spiritual teacher.  
2B4A-2 The condensed presentation of how to sustain meditation 
This has two points: 
A The actual way to sustain meditation 
B The reason why meditation needs to be sustained by means of two modes of sustaining 
2B4A-2A The actual way to sustain meditation 
This has two points: 
1 What to do during the meditation session itself 2 What to do during the periods between sessions 
                                                 
46 Tib. gang gis bla mar mi ‘dzin pa , literally “and does not apprehend as spiritual teacher.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
28 2B4A-2A1 What to do during the meditation session itself 
This has three points: 
A What to do in preparation 
B What to do during the actual meditation session 
C What to do at the end of the meditation session 
2B4A-2A1A What to do in preparation 
Perform the six preparatory practices: 
[1 Cleaning your dwe lling and arranging representations of the exalted body, speech, and mind 
2 Laying out offerings 
3 Sitting posture and mental attitude 
4 Visualization of the merit field 
5 Accumulation of merit and purification of negativities 
6 Mandala offering and request for blessings] 
2B4A-2A1A-1 [Cleaning your dwelling and arranging representations of th e exalted body, sp eech, and mind] 
Following the life story of Serlingpa, you should clean your dwelling and arrange 
representations of the exal ted body, speech, and mind. 
2B4A-2A1A-2 [Laying out offerings] 
Beautifully lay out an arrangement of offerings that were honestly acquired. 
2B4A-2A1A-3 [Sitting posture and mental attitude] 
On a comfortable seat straighten up your body. Assume a suitable position in cross-
legged or half cross-legged posture, making su re that your mind is suffused with taking 
refuge and bodhichitta.  
2B4A-2A1A-4 [Visualization of the merit field] 
In the space in front of you imagine that there abide the lineage gurus of vast conduct 
and profound view and countless buddhas, bodhisattvas, arhats, ārya hearers, and 
solitary realizers along with their attendants. Thus you should visualize the merit field. 
2B4A-2A1A-5 [Accumulation of merit and purification of negativities] 
This has three points: 
A The reason why it is necessary to accumulate merit and purify negativities 
B Explanation of accumulation and purification in detail C Categorization of the individual elements 
2B4A-2A1A-5A The reason why it is necessary to accumulate merit and purify negativities 
It is exceedingly difficult for paths to arise in your continuum if the favorable conditions 
for their arising, the collections, have not been accumulated, and their adverse 
conditions, the obscurations, have not been purified. Therefore you need to purify the 
mind by means of the seven-limb practice, which brings together the key points of 
accumulation and purification. 
2B4A-2A1A-5B Explanation of accumulation and purification in detail 
This has two points: 
1 The actual detailed explanation 
2 The need to take the meaning of the words to heart 
2B4A-2A1A-5B1 The actual detailed explanation 
This has seven points: 
[A Prostration 
B Offerings 
C Confession of negativities 
D Rejoicing 
E Requesting the wheel of Dharma to be turned 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
29 F Supplication 
G Dedication] 
2B4A-2A1A-5B1A Prostration 
This has two points: 
[1 Prostration combining the three doors 
2 Prostrations of the three individual doors] 
2B4A-2A1A-5B1A-1 Prostration combining the three doors [37] 
With regard to the limb of prostration, pros tration combining the three doors is set out in 
the Prayer of Good Conduct  in the single stanza:  
To you lions amongst humans, 
Who come in the three times  To the worlds of ten directions, 
I prostrate with my body, speech, and mind. 
This is not prostration to the world spheres of one direction and to the buddhas of one 
time, rather, focusing on all the Victors residi ng in the ten directions and three times, you 
should prostrate your body, speech, and mind to them with respect and from the bottom 
of your heart. 
2B4A-2A1A-5B1A-2 Prostrations of the three individual doors 
This has three points: 
A Physical prostration 
Physical prostration is set out in the single stanza: 
With the powerful prayer of good conduct,  
Directly perceiving all the Victors with my mind, 
Bowing deeply with as many bodies as the atoms of the worlds, To all you Victors, I completely prostrate. 
You focus on all the Victors belonging to the directions and times as the objects of your 
mind, as though you directly perceive them. Emanating your own body in manifestations 
as numerous as the tiny atoms, you should prostrate yourself. Furthermore, having generated the power of faith in  the good conduct of the obje cts, you should be motivated 
by that. 
B Mental prostration 
Mental prostration is set forth in the single stanza: 
On top of each atom are buddhas equaling all the atoms, 
Residing amidst the buddhas’ children. 
I visualize the entire sphere of phenomena As being completely filled with Victors in this way. 
On top of each minute atom, buddhas as innumerable as the tiny atoms reside encircled by bodhisattvas. You should generate the appreciation
47 that recollects their positive 
qualities. 
C Verbal prostration 
Verbal prostration is set forth in the single stanza: 
With oceans of inexhaustible eulogies for you, A great roar from oceans of melody-emitting organs, 
I express the marvelous qualities of all the Victors, 
                                                 
47 Tib. mos pa  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
30 And praise all of you gone to bliss. 
From each of the bodies innumerable heads emanate, and from each of the heads again 
innumerable tongues that sing inexhaustible eulogies of the objects’ positive qualities to 
sweet melodies. Here “melody” is praise and their “organs,” that is, their causes, are the tongues. The word “oceans” refers to a lot. 
2B4A-2A1A-5B1B Offerings 
This has two points: 
[1 Surpassable offerings 
2 Unsurpassable offerings] 
2B4A-2A1A-5B1B-1 Surpassable offerings 
Surpassable offerings are set forth in the two stanzas: 
Delightful flowers and heavenly garlands, 
Musical instruments, scented unguents, and sublime parasols, 
Radiant lights and sublime incense, I offer to you, the Victors. 
Finest garments and supreme scents, 
Vessels of powder eq ualing Mount Meru, 
All wondrous offerings in spectacular array, 
I offer to you, the Victors. 
“Delightful flowers” [38] are marvelous specimens of divine and human flowers. 
“Garlands” are many different kinds of flower s mixed and strung together. Together they 
are all actual and imaginary flowers.  
“Musical instruments” are the sounds of traditional instruments and the like. “Scented 
unguents” are a mixture of fragrant perfumes. “Sublime parasols” are the finest of 
parasols. “Radiant lights” are fragrant radian t lights from things like incense or butter as 
well as radiant jewel lights. “Incense” refers to combinations of fragrant substances and 
to a single one.  
“Finest garments” are the best of clothes.  “Supreme scents” are water and the like 
pervaded by scents that fill the billion world systems with fr agrance. “Vessels of powder” 
are packaged powders of fragrant incense suitable for scattering and burning, or the 
colored sand powder of a mandala, in multiple  layers as wide and as high as Mount Meru. 
“Array,” joined at the end to all the above,  means a lot, decorated, and variegated.  
2B4A-2A1A-5B1B-2 Unsurpassable offerings 
This has two points: 
A Actual topic 
B The motivation for prostrations and offerings 
2B4A-2A1A-5B1B-2A Actual topic 
Unsurpassable offerings are set forth in the single stanza: 
Offerings, unsurpassable and vast, 
Visualized for all the Victors, 
By the power of my faith in good conduct, I prostrate and offer them to all the Victors. 
Since the surpassable ones are the offerings of worldly beings, this here is everything 
good that is emanated by powerful beings such as bodhisattvas.  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
31 2B4A-2A1A-5B1B-2B The motivation for prostrations and offerings 
The last two lines are to be joined to all th e previous sets of two in order to complete 
them. They indicate the motivation for the prostrations and offerings as well as their 
objects. 
2B4A-2A1A-5B1C Confession of negativities 
The confession of negativities is set forth in the single stanza: 
Whatever negativity I have done With my body, my speech, and likewise my mind Overwhelmed by attachment, anger, and ignorance, 
All these I confess one by one before you. 
In dependence on the cause, the three poisons, and by means of the three bases, the 
body and so forth, their nature is that I have done them (that is, that I have actually 
created them), that I have made others crea te them, and that I [39] rejoiced in those 
created by others, all of which are generall y subsumed under “whatever … I have done.” 
If through recollecting their faults, you regret those done previously and sincerely 
confess them with a mind intending to refrai n from them in the future, the increase of 
deeds done earlier and the continuity of future occurrences will be severed. 
2B4A-2A1A-5B1D Rejoicing 
Rejoicing is set forth in the single stanza: 
In all the merit of all the Victors of the ten directions, 
The buddhas’ children and the solitary realizers,  
The learners and no-more-learners, and  Of each and every migrating being, I rejoice. 
As you recall the benefits of the virtue of th ese five types of people, you should cultivate 
joy. 
2B4A-2A1A-5B1E Requesting the wheel of Dharma to be turned 
Requesting the wheel of Dharma to be turned is set forth in the single stanza: 
You who are lights for the worlds in the ten directions, 
Who, by means of the stages of enlightenment, attained unimpeded 
buddhahood 
I exhort all of you, my saviors, To turn the unsurpassable wheel. 
You should exhort those who have awoken to complete buddhahood in the worlds of the 
ten directions, who attained unimpeded and unobstructed exalted knowledge, to emanate 
the same number of bodies for a long time and to teach the Dharma. 
2B4A-2A1A-5B1F  Supplication 
Supplication is set forth in the single stanza: 
Those who intend to show how to pass beyond sorrow, 
With folded hands I supplicate you to remain For eons equaling the pa rticles of the universes, 
For the benefit and happiness of all migrating beings. 
You should supplicate those who, in the worlds of the ten directions, are about to show 
how to pass beyond so rrow to stay, withou t passing into nirv āṇa for as many eons as 
there are particles of dust in the universes, in order to bring about the benefit and happiness of migrating beings. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
32 2B4A-2A1A-5B1G Dedication 
The limb of dedication is set forth in the single stanza: 
Whatever slight virtue I have accumulated 
By prostrating, offering, and confessing, 
Rejoicing, exhorting, and supplicating, I dedicate all of it to the great enlightenment. 
All the roots of virtue represented by the previous six limbs are made common property 
of all sentient beings and never come to an end, by dedicating them with strong 
determination to complete enlightenment. 
2B4A-2A1A-5B2 The need to take the meaning of the words to heart 
If you thus develop an understanding of the meaning of these words and gently do as 
was taught without allowing your mind to wander, you will hold immeasurable heaps of 
merit. 
2B4A-2A1A-5C Categorization of the individual elements 
Accordingly five limbs, prostrating, offering, requesting, [40] supplic ating, and rejoicing, 
constitute the accumulation of the collection of merit.48 Confessing purifies obscurations. 
One aspect of rejoicing, the cultivation of joy in one’s own virtue, mult iplies the virtue. By 
means of dedicating, the virtues of accumulating, purifying, and multiplying, however 
small, are multiplied manifold, and what would come to an end after producing a 
temporary effect is made inexhaustible. In  brief, there are the three: accumulation, 
purification, as well as multiplication and ma king inexhaustible.  
2B4A-2A1A-6 [Mandala offering and request for blessings] 
Then, with a clear visualization of the objects, offer a mandala, and with strong aspiration supplicate many times: “I pray that all mistaken attitudes toward the spiritual 
teacher such as disrespect may cease and that all the non-mistaken attitudes toward him may come about with ease, and I request ble ssings for a complete pacification of all 
outer and inner obstacles.” 
2B4A-2A1B What to do during the actual meditation session  
This has two points: 
1 How to sustain meditation  in general 
2 How to sustain the meditation of this context 
2B4A-2A1B-1 How to sustain meditation in general 
This has three points: 
A Identification of and need for meditation 
Meditation on the path as it will be explained here serves to make you fit to utilize any 
virtuous object you wish.  
B The faults of bad meditation 
Moreover, if you attend to this and that observed object with the thought to take merely this number of virtuous observed objects in  any order you wish, nothing will come of it, 
and having gone wrong from the beginning, your spiritual practice will continue to be 
faulty throughout your life.  
C How to sustain good meditation 
                                                 
48 Tib. tshogs bsag  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
33 Therefore you should first of all ascertain th e number and order of the observed objects 
to be sustained. Then you should unleash [41] a strong driving force that does not allow 
thoughts to arise other than in accordance with what has been ascertained, and you 
should sustain with mindfulness and introspection49 what has been ascertained without 
addition or omission. 
2B4A-2A1B-2 How to sustain the meditation of this context 
This has three points: 
A Thinking about the benefits of reliance and about the faults of non-reliance 
You should first think about the benefits of reliance and about the faults of non-reliance. 
B How to train in faith by means of thinking about the guru’s positive qualities 
Then repeatedly resolve never to allow your mind to get lost in conceiving faults in the 
guru and think of the qualities like ethics and meditative stabilization that you yourself 
have perceived in him, cultivating the confidence that is a mind having the aspect of faith until it arises.  
C Training in the respect that remembers the kindness 
Then you should consider, in accordance with the above quotations from the S ūtra 
Collection, the instances of beneficial kindness that you received and are still receiving, and sincerely cultivate respect until it arises. 
2B4A-2A1C What to do at the end of the meditation session 
This has two points: 
[1 What should actually be done at the end 
2 Time and duration of meditation] 
2B4A-2A1C-1 What should actually be done at the end 
By means of the Prayer of Good Conduct  and Aspiration in  Seventy Verses 
(Praṇidhānasaptatin āmagātha) the accumulated virtue should be dedicated with strong 
determination to the temporary and ultimate aspirations. 
2B4A-2A1C-2 Time and duration of meditation 
This has three points: 
A Indication of the time of meditation 
Thus you should meditate in four sessions—at dawn, in the morning, in the afternoon, 
and in the evening.  
B How to meditate in the beginning 
Moreover, if your sessions are long in the begi nning, it is easy to fall under the power of 
laxity and excitement50. Since it is difficult to correct this state of mind once you have got 
used to it, you should do many short sessions. If you cut the session short when there is 
still a desire to meditate, you will also really want to enter meditation the next time. They 
say that otherwise you will be overcome by naus ea at the sight of your meditation seat. 
C How to sustain the meditation once it has stabilized a bit and advice on how to avoid exhaustion 
When it has stabilized a bit, you should prolong the sessions , sustaining them all [42] 
free from the faults of being either excessively tense or excessively relaxed. Thereby 
small obstacles, over-exhaustion, and drowsiness will be pacified. 
                                                 
49 Tib. dran shes  
50 Tib. bying rgod  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
34 2B4A-2A2 What to do during the periods between sessions 
This has two points: 
[A General practices enhancing the object of meditation 
B The causes of calm abiding and special insight] 
2B4A-2A2A General practices enhancing the object of meditation 
Generally speaking there are numerous practices enhancing the object such as 
prostrations, circumambulation, and recitation . However, the main point is that if you 
make an effort at the essence of the session, and then during the intervals in which you 
leave the session you let go carelessly without relying on mindfulness and introspection 
regarding the observed object and aspect which are the causes of sustaining the 
meditation, the outcome will be very little. Therefore, in between sessions, you should 
also be concerned with the Dharma texts teaching that object and recall it again and 
again. By various means you should accumulate  the collection of conditions favorable to 
the arising of positive qualities, and by va rious means purify the adverse conditions, the 
obscurations. Your determination with respect to the ethics you have accepted, the basis 
of everything, should be reaffirmed a lot. 
2B4A-2A2B The causes of calm abiding and special insight 
Apart from that, train in the collection of the four causes for an easy arising of the paths 
of calm abiding and special insight. In this regard, the four causes are: 
[1 Controlling the sense doors 
2 Introspective behavior51 
3 Knowing the right measure of food 
4 Exerting yourself in yoga without sleeping, and what to do when lying down to sleep] 
2B4A-2A2B-1 Controlling the sense doors 
In this regard, when the six consciousnesses arise in depend ence upon their objects and 
sense powers, attachment and aversion end up arising toward the six pleasant and the 
six unpleasant objects of mental consciousness. Controlling the sense doors guards against their arising. 
2B4A-2A2B-2 Introspective behavior 
In Engaging in the Bodhisattva Conduct it says: 
To examine again and again, 
The situation of mind and body, 
That is the sign, exactly that, Of protective introspection. 
Following this, whenever the body and so forth engage in such and such an action, you 
come to understand whether or not it sh ould be done and behave accordingly. 
2B4A-2A2B-3 Knowing the right measure of food 
Knowing the right measure of food means to give up eating too much or too little and to 
eat only the amount that does not do damage to one’s virtuous activities. Furthermore, having meditated upon the drawbacks of craving for food, you should also remember 
what is said in the scriptures about eating, thinking that it should be without mental 
afflictions, that it should be of benefit to the giver, [43] that while you now bring 
together the micro-organisms of your body
52 by means of material things, in the future 
you will bring them together by means of th e Dharma, and that you will bring about the 
welfare of all sentient beings. In Friendly  Letter (Suh ŗllekha)  it also says: 
                                                 
51 Tib. shes bzhin du spyod pa  
52 Tib. lus kyi srin bu  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
35 Reasoning that foodstuffs are like medicine, 
Depend on them without attachment or hatred.  
They are not meant for you to be sated or proud  
Or fat, but just to keep your body going. 
2B4A-2A2B-4 Exerting yourself in yoga without sleeping, and what to do when lying down 
to sleep 
This has two points: 
[A What to do when lying down to sleep 
B How to apply this to the intervals between all meditations] 
2B4A-2A2B-4A What to do when lying down to sleep 
This has five points: 
1 The time to lie down 
In Friendly Letter (Suh ŗllekha)  it says:  
Lord of reasoning, afte r all the day’s sessions, 
As well as the first and last ones of the night, 
When sleeping, in order not to lose the fruit,  Also sleep with mindfulness in between sessions. 
This explains the essence of the sessions of both the entire day and the first and last part 
of the night as well as what should be done in between. Therefore, having walked about 
and sat down, you should comple tely purify your mind of the five obscurations and thus 
make whatever yo u do meaningful. 
2 The behavior of sleep 
The behavior of sleep occurs between sessions and therefore it too should not be wasted 
meaninglessly. In this regard, during the middle part of the three parts of the night, the 
conduct of the body consists in lying down on your right side, placing your left leg on top 
of the right one, and sleeping like a lion. 
3 Mindfulness 
Until you fall asleep you should rely on mind fulness to pursue the predominant virtuous 
action that you have cultivated during the da y. Thereby you will be able to sustain your 
spiritual practice53, such as meditative stabilization, even while asleep, similar to when 
you are not asleep. 
4 Introspection  
If any mental affliction arises while you cultivate mindfulness, [44] you should become 
aware of it and eagerly abandon it rather than  accepting it. 
5 The discrimination of getting up 
The discrimination of getting up consists in pr ojecting the thought: “I will get up at this 
and that time.” 
2B4A-2A2B-4B How to apply this to the intervals between all meditations 
That being so, apart from the uncommon ways of sustaining meditation during the actual 
meditation, these indications as to what should be done in preparation, during the actual 
meditation, at the end, and in between sessions should be applied to all observed objects 
and aspects sustaine d from here up to special insight. 
                                                 
53 Tib. dge sbyor  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
36 2B4A-2B The reason why meditation needs to be sustained by means of two modes of 
sustaining 
This has four points: 
[1 The two modes of sustaining 
2 Refutation of the misconcep tion that although there ar e both analytical and st abilization meditations, one 
single person does not practice them 
3 Refutation of the misconception that asserts that all conceptions apprehend signs 
4 Refutation of the misconception that asserts that if a lot of analytical meditation is done prior to the arisal of 
meditative stabilization it  becomes an obstacle] 
2B4A-2B1  [The two modes of sustaining] 
This has two points: 
A The reason why both a nalysis and stabilization are necessary for meditation 
B Identification of a nalysis and stabilization 
2B4A-2B1A The reason why both  analysis and stabilization are necessary for meditation 
In Ornament for the Mah āyāna Sūtras it says:  
Here, first of all, proper mental attention54 arises in dependence on study,55 
and from proper mental attention, again, the exalted wisdom with the meaning 
of perfect reality as its object arises. 
That is to say that from proper mental attention, through the wisdom arisen from 
reflecting upon the meaning of what has been studied, the wisdom arisen from 
meditation that directly realizes the meaning of perfect reality arises. In Ornament for 
Clear Realization  it also says:  
For definite discrimination, the path  
Of seeing, and that of meditation,  
Repeated reflection, assessment, and certainty Are the path of meditation. 
That is to say there exists repeated refl ection, assessment, and certain understanding 
that constitute the path of meditation of Mah āyāna āryas. In the 
Compendium of 
Trainings ( Śikṣasamuccaya)  it also says: 
Thus you should practice meditation, continuously giving away, guarding, 
purifying, and increasing your bodies, possessions, and merit in all kinds of 
ways. 
With regard to the meditations that, according to this statement, should be done on all 
four activities—giving away, guarding, purifying, and increasing—with respect to each of 
the three: body, possessions, and roots of virtue—there are both analytical meditations sustained through analysis by means of the wisdom of individual investigation, and stabilizing meditations in whic h the mind is placed single -pointedly without analysis. 
2B4A-2B1B Identification of a nalysis and stabilization [45] 
Now what are the paths of analytical medita tion and what are the paths of stabilizing 
meditation? For meditations such as the cultiv ation of faith in the spiritual teacher, the 
preciousness of the freedoms and endowments and how difficult it is to find them, death 
and impermanence, actions and their effects, the faults of cyclic existence, and the 
cultivation of bodhicit ta, analytical meditation is necessary. For each of them, minds of 
great strength and the ability to subdue the mind for a long time are necessary because 
if they are absent, their counterparts, disrespect and the like, cannot be prevented, and 
                                                 
54 Tib. yid la byed pa  
55 Cf. previous note: The word thos pa , often rendered as “hearing” or “listening,” refers to receiving teachings more 
generally, and encompasses reading as well. Tib. thos pa mang po , for instance, literally “h aving heard a lot,” means 
“well read” or “educated.” For this reason, Tib. thos pa  is sometimes rendered as “study.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
37 because the generation of these minds depends on nothing but the meditation repeatedly 
analyzing them through individual investigation. For example, just as intense attachment 
arises when you meditate on an object of attachment a lot, exaggerating its pleasant 
features, in the same  way intense hatred56 arises when you think of many unpleasant 
features with regard to an enemy. Hence, with regard to cultivating these paths, no 
matter whether or not the aspect of the object appears clearly, the mind’s mode of 
apprehension must be intense and long-lasting, which is why you should do analytical 
meditation. In the context of practicing calm abiding, which enables you to place the 
mind on whatever single object you wish, since someone whose mind cannot stay on a 
single object will not be fit for quiescence57 if he analyses again and again, it is necessary 
to practice stabilizin g meditation for that. 
2B4A-2B2  Refutation of the misconception that although there are both analytical and stabilizatio n meditations, 
one single person does not practice them 
Although some who do not know this approach claim that if you are a scholar, you should 
only do analytical meditation while s ādhus should only do stabilizing meditation, this is 
not so because it is necessary to do both one by one, given that the learned also need to 
achieve calm abiding and s ādhus also need to achieve strong faith in the spiritual teacher 
[46] and the like. Therefore th e understanding that repeated analysis with the wisdom of 
individual investigation belongs to the context of hearing and reflecting, rather than the context of practice, is inadmissible. 
2B4A-2B3  Refutation of the misconception that asserts that all conceptions apprehend signs 
The understanding that all conceptions apprehend signs and therefore create obstacles to 
enlightenment has the fault of not discriminating between improper mental attention, the 
conception of true existence, and proper mental attention, the conception of reality.58 
2B4A-2B4  Refutation of the misconception that asserts that if a lot of analytical meditation is done prior to the 
arisal of meditative stabiliz ation it becomes an obstacle 
The idea “It is necessary to achieve a non-conceptual meditative stabilization that allows 
you to place the mind on a single object in whatever way at will, and if you do a lot of 
analytical meditation beforehand, it will become an obstacle to the arising of that 
meditative stabilization,” is not upheld in the present instructions. Thus, by way of 
analogy, when a smith burns gold or silver in the fire and washes it in water again and again, all the impurities are removed, and it  becomes very supple and workable, whereby 
it can subsequently be made into any jewelry, such as earrings, at will. Likewise, just as 
at first the mental afflictions, the secondary afflictions, and faulty conduct emerge on the 
occasion of meditating on unwholesome actions and their effects and the disadvantages 
of cyclic existence, by meditating on such disadvantages again and again with the 
wisdom of individual investig ation, the mind will become  completely tormented or 
disenchanted; whereby it is like  burning gold in a fire. Similarly, just as the mind turning 
away from the unwholesome side emerges cleansed of defilements
59 on the occasion of 
meditating on the positive qualities of the spiritual friend, the preciousness of the 
freedoms and endowments, the positive qualities of the Three Jewels, wholesome actions 
and their effects, and [47] the benefits of bodhicitta, by meditating on these positive qualities again and again with the wisdom of individual investigation, the mental 
attention of the mind becomes moistened or si ncere, whereby it is like washing gold with 
water. Through the mind approaching the whol esome side and delighting in it, the mind 
is moistened by virtuous qualities. When it has been transformed in that way, whatever 
                                                 
56 Tib. zhe sdang  
57 Tib, sems gnas , also translated as ‘mental abiding.’ 
58 Tib. yang dag pa’i rtog pa  
59 Tib. dri ma  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
38 you wish to achieve, whether calm abiding or special insight, will be achieved without 
difficulty when the mind is focused on it. Th at is why such analytic al meditation is the 
best means of achieving a non-conceptual meditative stabilization.  
This is how Ārya Asaṅga also put it: 
By way of analogy, when a smith or his sk illful apprentice burns gold or silver 
in a fire and washes it with water a co uple of times in order to discard all 
impurities and slag, it becomes supple and workable for this and that 
ornament. Their method makes it very vivid. In this regard, through their know-how, that of a smith or a skillful apprentice, any manner of ornament 
desired is then made with their smith’s tools. Likewise, when a yogi does not 
turn toward impurities and slag such as covetousness, he thereby becomes 
disenchanted, turns away from unhappy afflicted states of mind, and approaches manifest joy on the virtuous side, thereby becoming manifestly 
joyful. In that case, that yogi definitely  trains his mind in either the side of 
calm abiding or the side of special insight,  such that it is th oroughly applied to 
this and that, rests in its natural state, is immovable and unwavering, and [48] also moves for the sake of perfectly achieving whatever purpose he 
contemplates. 
Furthermore, the main adverse condition to the mind abiding on an object continuously is 
twofold: laxity and excitement.
60 If you have a strong and constant awareness that sees 
the positive qualities of the Three Jewels, and so forth, it is quite easy to overcome 
laxity, for many valid sources say that its antidote is to uplift the mind by looking at positive qualities. If you have a strong and constant awareness that sees the 
d i s a d v a n t a g e s  o f  i m p e r m a n e n c e ,  s u f f e r i n g ,  a n d  s o  f o r t h ,  i t  i s  q u i t e  e a s y  t o  o v e r c o m e  
excitement, because, since excitement is a distracted mind belonging to the category of attachment, many texts praise di sillusionment as its antidote.  
2B4B The stages of training the mind once you have relied on a spiritual teacher 
This has two points: 
1 With regard to the basis of leisure, an exhortation to take its essence 
2 How to take the essence 
A PRECIOUS HUMAN REBIRTH 
2B4B-1 With regard to the basis of leisure, an exhortation to take its essence 
This has three points: 
A Identification of the leisures and endowments61 
B Considering the great value of the leisures and endowments 
C Considering the difficulty in finding the leisures and endowments 
2B4B-1A Identification of the leisures and endowments 
This has two points: 
1 Leisures 
2 Endowments 
2B4B-1A1 Leisures 
This has two points: 
A Identification of the leisures 
                                                 
60 Tib. bying ba dang rgod pa  
61 Tib. dal ‘byor  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
39 In the Summary  it says: 
Through rules, the essence of the many worlds of animals 
And eight unfree states are abandoned; you win; constant leisure. 
Accordingly, the leisures consist in fr eedom from the eight unfree states.  
B The eight unfree states: 
The four unfree states of humans are: 
1. living in a rough border land where the four types of followers of the Buddha do 
not roam,  
2. being stupid, being dumb, or having incomplete faculties—missing a limb, an ear 
and so forth,  
3. holding wrong views that regard past and future lives, actions and their effects, 
and the Three Jewels as non-existent,  
4. being without the word of a Victor, with no buddha having appeared in the world. 
[49] 
The non-human unfree states are: 
1-3. the three lower realms and  
4. being a long-lived god. 
As for the long-lived gods, the Commentary on the “Friendly Letter” 
(Vyaktapad āsuhŗllekațīkā) discusses two types:  
1. discriminationless ones and  
2. formless ones.  
The former live in one region of the fourth co ncentration, Great Result, as if in a solitary 
place far away from a village. The latter are ordinary beings born in the formless realms. 
In Discourse on the Eight Unfree States (A ṣtākṣaṇakathā), the gods of the desire realm 
who are constantly distracted by activities of desire are explained to be long-lived gods. 
2B4B-1A2 Endowments 
This has two points: 
A The five personal endowments 
The five personal endowments are said to be: 
Human birth in the center, unimpaired senses,  
No perverted deeds and faith in the basis.  
Here “birth in the center” is to be born in a place where the four types of followers roam. 
“Unimpaired senses” consist in not being stupid or dumb and having complete limbs, 
minor body parts, and eyes, ears, and so forth. “No perverted deeds” implies not having committed or caused to commit an action of immediate retribution. “Faith in the basis” is 
faith in the foundation from which all the mundane and supramundane wholesome 
qualities arise—discipline.
62 Here discipline should be ap plied to all three scriptural 
collections. 
As those five are brought together in one’s own mental continuum and constitute 
circumstances for the accomplishment of the Dharma, they are called “personal 
endowments.” 
                                                 
62 Tib. dul ba  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
40 B The five endowments conditioned by others 
The five endowments conditioned by others are said to be: 
A buddha arrived and taught the holy Dharma,  
The teachings are abiding and being followed,  
There are hearts with loving concern for others. 
Here “A buddha arrived or emerged” mean s that after accumulating the collections 
throughout three countless eons, he has manifestly attained complete buddhahood. “Taught the holy Dharma” means that the Buddha or his hearers have taught the Dharma. “The Dharma teachings are abiding” means that—from teaching the Dharma in a 
buddha field up to not passing into nirv āṇa—the Dharma that is accomplished by means 
of actualizing the ultimate Dharma has [50] not degenerated. “The Dharma teachings are 
abiding and being followed” means that through that very realization of the Dharma, 
there are those who see that beings have the power to directly perceive the holy Dharma, 
and who then follow the teachings in accordance with that realization. “Hearts with loving concern for others” means that there are alms-givers and benefactors who grant monastic robes and the like.  
As these five are present in the mental cont inua of others and constitute circumstances 
for the accomplishment of the Dharma, they  are endowments conditioned by others. 
2B4B-1B Considering the great value of the leisures and endowments 
This has four points: 
1 Considering the inappropriateness of someone with this special base acting like an animal 
If no practice of the completely pure Dhar m a  f o r  t h e  s a k e  o f  lasting happiness comes 
about at all, you would be like an animal despite your birth in a higher realm, since 
animals also endeavor merely to attain happiness and eliminate suffering until they die. 
2 How a body of leisures and endowments is the best 
For the accomplishment of the Mah āyāna path, a basis like the one explained earlier is 
necessary. In Letter to a Student ( Śiṣyalekha)  it says: 
The base of the path of those gone to bliss, the tool for leading beings, 
That very strength of mind, a strength that human beings have gained, 
That path has not been found by gods or n āgas, nor by asuras, 
Not by garu ḍas, vidyādharas, kinnaras, or mahoragas. 
Furthermore, some gods of the desire realm with strong predispositions63 from having 
previously trained in the path on a human basis, are suitable as a basis for seeing the 
truth for the first time, but it is impossible to attain the ārya path for the first time on an 
upper realm64 basis.65 However, as explained before, the majority of desire realm gods are 
said to be in an unfree state, and therefor e they are not the best basis for attaining the 
path for the first time. Again, inhabitants of the continent of Uttarakuru are unsuitable as 
a basis for vows, which is why the bases of the other three continents are praised; and among them, especially the inhabitants of Jambudv īpa. 
3 How to train in the wish to take the essence, having brought to mind those two objectives  
“Consequently, why would I act in such a way that an excellent base like the one that I 
have gained [51] does not have a result? If I do not make it meaningful, could there be a 
greater self-betrayal and a bigger stupidity? Having passed through many perilous places 
of unfreedom such as the lower realms, again and again, if I were to go back to those 
                                                 
63 Tib. bag chags  
64 Tib. khams gong , the realms of form and formlessness as opposed to the happy realms in general (Tib. bde ‘gro ). 
65 Tib. rten, also translated as ‘support,’ it usually refers to  the body of the being, unless otherwise specified. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
41 places, forsaking this one-off liberation as meaningless, it would be like turning mindless 
as though stupefied by a magic spell.” By way of thoughts like these you should meditate 
again and again. In Engaging in the Bodhisattva Conduct it says: 
Having found this kind of leisure, 
Not to cultivate what’s virtuous, No betrayal could be greater, 
Nothing is more deluded than that. 
And: 
Having found this place so rare, 
Hard to find and beneficial, 
If I, well aware of it, Were to be led to that hell again 
As though deluded by magic spells— 
Has my mind here wasted away? 
Through what delusion I do not know either. Goodness! What has become of my mind? 
4 The inappropriateness of returning empty-handed given that not only ultimate but also temporary objectives 
are easily accomplished 
Thus you should also consider the method that allows you to easily accomplish, by means 
of this basis, the causes—giving, ethics, patience, and so on—of an excellent body of 
high status, excellent resource s, and an excellent retinue, which are greatly meaningful 
not only from an ultimate but also from a temporary point of view. If you do not apply 
yourself day and night to the causes of the two objectives, by means of this greatly 
meaningful basis, it would seem like returning empty-handed from an island of precious 
jewels. 
2B4B-1C Considering the difficulty of finding the leisures and endowments 
This has six points: 
[1 Illustration of the difficulty in finding the leisures and endowments 
2 Reasons why it is difficult to find the leisures and endowments 
3 The rarity of those obtaining the causes of leisure and endowments 
4 The result of sustaining those objectives 5 The method of meditation with four special features 
6 Differentiating the ways of sustaining the meditation] 
2B4B-1C1  Illustration of the difficulty of finding the leisures and endowments 
In Basis of Scriptur al Transmission  (Āgamavastu) it says that beings who die and migrate 
from the lower realms and the happy realms66 to the lower realms are like the dust of the 
great earth, and that the beings who are born from there into the happy realms are like 
the dust taken up with the tip of a fingernail. [52] Therefore precious human rebirths are difficult to find from both the happy and the lower realms. 
2B4B-1C2  Reasons why it is difficult to find the leisures and endowments 
If you wonder just why they are so difficult to find, it says in Four Hundred Stanzas : 
For the most part people fully 
Embrace the side that is unholy. 
Consequently common beings  
Mostly go to the lower realms. 
                                                 
66 Tib. bde ‘gro  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
42 Accordingly, there are many humans and other beings who mostly hold on to the side of 
the ten non-virtues and that is also why, consequently, they go to the lower realms. 
Furthermore, if for each moment of anger an d the like toward a bodhisattva you have to 
spend one eon in the hell Without Respite, the negativities accumulated over many 
lifetimes which have not come to fruition nor been overcome by antidotes, and which are 
present in your own continuum, will doubtles sly cause you to spend many eons in the 
lower realms.  
2B4B-1C3  The rarity of those obtaining the causes of the leisures and endowments 
If you thus make sure to clear away and purify the causes of the lower realms 
accumulated earlier and close the door to new engagement in them, the happy realms 
should not be hard to reach but in fact they are very hard to reach indeed. If you fail to do so, you go to the lower realms, and once you have gone there, you do not create 
virtue but always commit negativities and therefore do not even hear the name “happy 
realms” for many eons, as it says in 
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Conduct. 
2B4B-1C4  The result of sustaining those objectives 
Potowa said:  
In the region of Pen there was a solid fort by the name of Ma’i Chakar that had 
been seized by an enemy. For a long time the people had been their poor 
servants. One old man used to be in anguish about this fort and when, one 
day, he heard people saying that it had been won back, he grabbed his spear 
and, not being able to walk, dragged himself along saying: “If only the capture of Ma’i Chakar were not a dream.” In the same way, having won the leisures 
and endowments, you must also derive such joy from it and practice the 
Dharma. [53] 
In accordance with this statement, you should  meditate in order to gain this kind of 
attitude. 
2B4B-1C5  The method of meditation with four special features 
Thus four thoughts regarding the Dharma are necessary for the generation of a fully 
qualified wish to take the esse nce of this basis of leisure: 
1. The need to accomplish the Dharma—because all sentient beings only want 
happiness and do not want suffering, and attaining happiness and eliminating 
suffering only depends on the holy Dharma. 
2. The ability to accomplish the Dharma—because you have the external condition, a 
spiritual teacher, and the internal condition, the leisures and endowments. 
3. The need, also, to accomplish the Dharma  in this life—because if you do not 
accomplish it within this life, it will be di fficult to find the le isures and endowments 
in many future lives. 
4. The need to accomplish the Dharma right now—because the time of death is 
uncertain. 
The third counteracts the laziness of setting it  aside, thinking “I will practice the Dharma 
in later lives”, and the fourth counteracts the laziness of not engaging in it thinking “It 
needs to be accomplished in this life, but although it was not accomplished in earlier years, months, and days, it is enough to accomplish it much later on.” It is admissible to 
make them into three, subsum ing those two under “The need to accomplish it quickly.” 
Like that, remembering death can also be linked in here. In any case, since this is a 
lengthy topic, it will be explained below. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
43 2B4B-1C6  Differentiating the ways of sustaining the meditation 
This has two points: 
[A How to contemplate the leisures and endowments from various points of view 
B How to contemplate the leisures and endowments in particular] 
2B4B-1C6A How to contemplate the leisures and endowments from various points of view 
As the mind will be more significantly su bdued if you contemplate the leisures and 
endowments from various points of view, you should contemplate them as explained 
above. If you cannot do that, you should subsume them under the three67: 
1. what the essence of the leis ures and endowments is,  
2. the manner in which they are greatly meaningful from a temporary and ultimate 
point of view, and  
3. how difficult they are to find from the point of view of cause and effect.  
You should take up each of the points explained above as they suit you and meditate. 
2B4B-1C6B How to contemplate the leisures and endowments in particular 
This has two points: 
1 The difficulty in finding the leisures and endowments from the point of view of their cause 
Generally speaking, [54] even for the attainment of a mere happy realm it is necessary to 
perform one of the pure virtues such as ethics. In particular, for the attainment of the 
complete leisures and endowments, you need many roots of virtue such as taking hold of 
a basis through pure ethics, reinforcing it through giving and the like, and making a 
connection by means of stainless prayers. In that case it becomes apparent that those who accomplish such causes  are very few, which is why you should think that, 
proportionately, the effect—the general an d specific basis of the happy realms—is 
difficult to find. 
2 The difficulty in finding the leisures and endowments from the point of view of the result 
You meditate on the fact that, from the point of view of the beings in the lower realms, 
those different in rank from us, even the mere happy realms seem hard to attain, and from the point of view of the beings in happy realms, those of the same rank, also those 
with the distinguished leisures
68 are extremely rare. Geshe Dölpa laid great emphasis on 
this. He said that all other teachings come abou t brought on by this. As it is like this, you 
should strive accordingly. 
2B4B-2 How to take the essence 
This has two points: 
A The way in which the three types of beings practice the path 
B Brief summary of the topics of the general path 
2B4B-2A The way in which the three types of beings practice the path 
This has two points: 
1 Generating certainty with regard to the general presentation of the path 
2 The actual way of taking its essence 
2B4B-2A1 Generating certainty with regard to the general presentation of the path 
This has two points: 
A How all the Buddha’s teachings are contained in the paths of the three types of beings B Giving reasons for gradual guidance from the point of view of the three types of beings  
                                                 
67 “Three” is an insertion by Trijang Rinpoche. 
68 That is the leisures complemented by the endowments. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
44 2B4B-2A1A How all the Buddha’s teachings are contained in the paths of the three types 
of beings 
This has six points: 
1 How the meaning of all the Buddha’s teachings is subsumed under the accomplishment of two objectives 
As everything the Buddha did, in the beginning the generation of the mind of 
enlightenment, in the middle the accumulation  of the collections, and at the end the 
manifestation of complete buddhahood, was done for the welfare of sentient beings only, 
all his Dharma teachings also only accomplish the welfare of sentient  beings. That being 
so, the goal to be accomplished, the welfare of sentient beings, is twofold: temporarily 
high status69 and ultimately certain goodness70.  
2 How lesser beings71 attain high status [55] 
As for the undertaking to attain the former: everything that has been set forth is included 
in the actual cycle of teachings for lesser beings or in the cycle of teachings common to 
lesser beings. Special lesser beings do not mo stly act for the sake of this life, pursuing 
instead the excellence of high status in future lives and engaging in achieving the causes 
for that. In Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment : 
Whoever pursues by any means, 
The happiness of sa ṃsāra only, 
Just for his own benefit, 
Should be known as the least of beings. 
3 How intermediate beings achieve the certain goodness of liberation 
There are two kinds of certain goodness: 
1. the liberation that is merely release from sa ṃsāra and  
2. omniscience.  
In this regard everything that has been set forth starting from the vehicles of hearers and 
solitary realizers is included in  the actual cycle of teachings for intermediate beings or in 
the cycle of teachings common to intermed iate beings. Intermediate beings develop 
disenchantment with existence as a whole, and having made the liberation that is release 
from existence for their own welfare their object of attainment, they engage in its 
method, the three trainings. In Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment  it says: 
Indifferent72 to the pleasures of existence 
One desists from evil deeds; 
Whoever pursues only personal peace 
Is called an “intermediate being.” 
4 How great beings attain omniscience 
There are two means of attaining omniscience: the great vehicles (Mah āyāna) of Secret 
Mantra and the Perfections. These two are contained in the cycle of teachings of great 
beings.73 Since great beings are under the powe r of great compassion, having made 
enlightenment their object of attainment in order to bring all the suffering of sentient 
beings to an end, they train in the six pe rfections, the two stages, and so forth. In Lamp 
for the Path to Enlightenment  it says: 
He whose own mind is affected by suffering, 
                                                 
69 Tib. mngon mtho  
70 Tib. nges legs , also translated as ‘definite goodness’. 
71 Tib. bskyes bu chung , also translated as ‘beings of small scope.’ 
72 Tib. srid pa’i bde la rgyab phyogs shing , literally “having turned one’s ba ck on the happiness of existence.” 
73 Tib. skyes bu chen po , also translated as ‘beings of great scope.’ 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
45 Who thus yearns to bring to an end 
All the suffering of others completely, [56] 
Such a one is a superior being. 
As for the means by which these beings attain enlightenment, they are set forth under 
two headings: the Perfections and Mantra. 
5 Elucidating the sources of the term “three types of beings” 
The term “three types of beings”74 is mentioned in many texts such as the Compendium 
of Determinations  (Viniścayasaṃgrahaṇī) and the Treasury of Manife st Knowledge Auto-
commentary  (Abhidharmako śabhāṣya). 
6 Clearing up doubt 
Although with regard to lesser beings, there are both those who devote themselves to 
this life and those who devote themselves to future lives, this is about the latter. One 
should consider them as engaging in the unmistaken means to high status. 
2B4B-2A1B Giving reasons for gradual guidance from the point of view of the three types 
of beings 
This has two points: 
1 What the purpose is of guiding someone by way of the paths of the three types of beings 
2 Giving reasons for such gradual guidance 
2B4B-2A1B-1 What the purpose is of guiding someone by means of the paths of the three 
beings 
Thus, although it is explained in terms of the three beings, the path of great beings 
contains within it the paths of the two other beings, which is why Master A śvaghoṣa says 
that these two are branches of the Mah āyāna path. So this here is not guidance on the 
path of lesser beings who make only the happiness of existence their object of 
attainment, nor is it guidance on the path  of intermediate beings who make only 
liberation from sa ṃsāra for their own benefit their object of attainment. Rather, some 
paths common to those two are considered to be preparatory practices leading to the 
path of great beings and are taken to be branches for training in the path of great 
beings.  
2B4B-2A1B-2 Giving reasons for such gradual guidance 
This has two points: 
A The actual reasons 
B The purpose 
2B4B-2A1B-2A The actual reasons 
This has fourteen points: 
[1 The entry gate to the Mah āyāna 
2 The need to consider its benefits and allow one’s delight to increase before generating the mind of 
enlightenment, along with the relevant sources 
3 The benefits of striving for this mind 
4 How the lesser and intermediate branches of the path are necessary for laying the basis of those benefits 
5 How the lesser and intermediate branches of the path are necessary when training in the actual mind 
6 How the lesser and intermediate branches of the path are also necessary for the ritual accumulation and 
purification of this mental attitude 
7 Advice to cherish the way that the teaching cycles of lesser and intermediate beings become branches of 
great beings 
8 The order 
9 All paths are contained in the three trainings 
10 For the sake of skill in classification, a ll paths are contained in  the two collections 
11 The need to enter the Mantrayana 
                                                 
74 Tib. skyes bu gsum  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
46 12 How to pursue the Perfection path alone 
13 The stages of engagement in Mantra 
14 Explanation that the intention of the Lamp for the Path  and so forth is engagement in both sutra and mantra] 
2B4B-2A1B-2A1 The entry gate to the Mah āyāna 
The entry gate for entering the Mah āyāna consists in generating the mind set on supreme 
enlightenment. Once it has aris en in the mind, according to Engaging in the Bodhisattva 
Conduct : 
When bodhicitta has arisen, at once 
The wretched bound in the prison of cyclic existence 
Are to be called “the children of those gone to bliss.” [57] 
For in accordance with this statement, individuals who have obtained the name 
“bodhisattva” are admitted among Mah āyāna beings. If their mind of enlightenment 
deteriorates, they leave the midst of Mah āyānists.  
2B4B-2A1B-2A2 The need to consider its benefits and allow one’s delight to increase before generating the mind of 
enlightenment, along with the relevant sources 
This being the case, those who wish to enter the Mah āyāna need to exert themselves in 
m a n y  w a y s  t o  a r o u s e  t h a t  m i n d .  H o w e v e r ,  i n  o r d e r  t o  a r o u s e  i t ,  t h e y  f i r s t  n e e d  t o  
meditate on the benefits of arousing that mind and allow delight with regard to those benefits to increase, do the seven-limb practi ce, and take refuge. That has been set out 
in the 
Compendium of Trainings  and in Engaging in the Bodhisattva Conduct . 
2B4B-2A1B-2A3 The benefits of striving for this mind 
If we summarize the benefits set forth in this  way, there are two: temporary and ultimate 
benefits. The former, again, are twofold: not falling to the lower realms and being born in the happy realms. Once this mind has arisen, the causes of miserable existences
75 
accumulated previously are purified and the continuity of those accumulated later on is 
cut. The causes of happy realms accumulate d previously, due to be ing conjoined with it, 
increase extensively, and the ones newly created, due to being motivated by it, become 
unlimited. When it comes to attaining th e ultimate objectives  of liberation and 
omniscience with ease through relying on this mind, if an uncontrived wish to achieve the 
temporary or ultimate benefits is not present, one may say “Since those benefits arise 
from generating that mind, I will endeavor to generate that mind ,” but it will only be 
words. This will become very clear if we examine our own mind.  
2B4B-2A1B-2A4 How the lesser and intermediate branches of the path are necessary for laying the basis of those 
benefits 
In order to develop the wish to attain th ose two benefits, high status and certain 
goodness, it is necessary to develop the attitudes common to lesser and intermediate 
beings. [58] 
2B4B-2A1B-2A5 How the lesser and intermediate branches of the path are necessary when training in the actual mind 
Having thus developed the wish to achieve the two benefits, when you cultivate the 
beneficial mind, it is necessary to develop the root of that mind, love and compassion. In 
this regard, if your body hair does not shiver and quiver as you think about the way you yourself wander in cyclic existence, depr ived of happiness and oppressed by suffering, 
there is no way the inability to bear how other sentient beings are deprived of happiness 
and oppressed by suffering can come about. In 
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Conduct it 
says: 
In beings to whom up to now, 
Such thoughts for even their own sake have not 
                                                 
75 Tib. ngan song  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
47 Occurred—not even in their dreams— 
How could it ar ise for others? 
For that reason, once you have thought about how, in the context of lesser beings, the 
harm of the suffering of the lower realms befalls you and how, in the context of intermediate beings, even in rebirths of high  status there is suffering and no peace or 
happiness, meditation—in accord with your own experience—on sentient beings who have 
become dear to you becomes the cause for love and compassion to arise. Since the mind 
of enlightenment is born from love and comp assion, training in the thoughts shared with 
lesser and intermediate beings is the means of generating the uncontrived mind of 
enlightenment. 
2B4B-2A1B-2A6 How the lesser and intermediate branches of the path are also necessary for the ritual accumulation 
and purification of this mental attitude 
Efforts to purify and accumulate by many means through contemplating the taking of 
refuge, actions and their effects, and so forth in the context of the two paths also constitute methods for training the mental continuum, that is, they are preliminary 
practices for the generation of the mind of enlightenment. Since they are part of the 
seven-limb practice along with taking refuge, they should also be understood as methods 
for generating the mind of enlightenment. 
2B4B-2A1B-2A7 Advice to cherish the way that the teaching cycles of lesser and intermediate beings become 
branches of great beings 
Here the spiritual mast er indicates how the te aching cycles of lesser and intermediate 
beings become branches for the arising of the mind of enlightenment, [59] and the 
disciple also gains certainty in this regard. Through recalling those points with each 
practice, you should thoroughly cherish this training. If you fail to do this, the path of 
great beings and the individual paths will become disconnected. As you would not gain certainty with regard to the mind of enlightenment until you reach the actual path of 
great beings, this would become an obstacle to the arising of that mind or, meanwhile, 
the deterioration of that great objective.  Therefore you should persevere in this. 
2B4B-2A1B-2A8 The order 
This has two points: 
A The order of the two minds and so forth and how to train in them 
B The order of the trainings 
2B4B-2A1B-2A8A The order of the two minds and so forth and how to train in them 
Having trained in this manner, you should make the uncontrived mind of enlightenment 
arise in your continuum as much  as possible. Then, in order to make it stable, first there 
is the uncommon way of taking refuge and then the performing of the ritual of the 
aspiring mind of enlightenment. Having taken the aspiring mind of enlightenment by 
means of the ritual, practice its trainings. Then, time and again develop the wish to train 
in the conduct—the six perfections, the four ways of gathering disciples, and so forth. 
Once the wish to train in it has come forth, from the bottom of your heart take the pure 
vow of the engaging mind of enlightenment. 
2B4B-2A1B-2A8B The order of the trainings 
Then even risk your life in order not to be  tainted by a root downfall. Strive not to be 
tainted by small and medium contaminations or infractions either. However, if you still get tainted by one, purify it well by means of what has been expounded with regard to 
countermeasures for downfalls. Then, train in th e six perfections in general and especially 
in concentration,
76 the entity of calm abiding, in orde r to make the mind serviceable with 
                                                 
76 Tib. bsam gtan  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
48 respect to whatever virtuous ob ject you wish. The statement in Lamp for the Path  to 
Enlightenment  that you train in calm abiding in or der to develop clairvoyance is only an 
example. Ati śa himself stated on other occasions that  it also serves to develop special 
insight. Therefore you should develop calm ab iding also for that purpose. Then, [60] in 
order to cut the bonds of apprehending th e two selves, decide on the meaning of 
emptiness by means of the view, sustain this mode of meditation flawlessly, and 
accomplish the entity of wisdom, special insight. 
2B4B-2A1B-2A9 All paths are contained in the three trainings 
Accordingly, except for the accomplishmen t of calm abiding and special insight, 
everything up to and including the trainings of the vow of the engaging mind of 
enlightenment constitutes the training in ethics. Calm abiding is the training in the mind, and special insight is t h e  t r a i n i n g  i n  w i s d o m .  S o  i t  s a y s  i n  t h e  
Commentary on the 
Difficult Points of the “Lamp for the Path”  (Bodhim ārgaprad īpapañjik ā). 
2B4B-2A1B-2A10  For the sa ke of skill in classification, all path s are contained in the two collections 
Furthermore,  everything up to and including calm abiding is method, the collection of 
merit, the path based on conventional truths , and the stages of the vast path, while the 
generation of the three special wisdoms is wis dom, the collection of wisdom, that which 
is based on ultimate truths, and the stages of the profound path. Therefore you should generate great certainty with respect to thei r order and definite number, as well as the 
fact that enlightenment cannot be attained by means of method and wisdom separate from one another. 
2B4B-2A1B-2A11  The need to enter the Mantrayana 
Having thus trained your continuum by means of the common paths, you must enter the 
Mantray āna, for once you have entered it, you will quickly complete the two collections. 
2B4B-2A1B-2A12  How to pursue the path of the Perfections alone 
If you cannot manage more than the path of th e Perfections or if, due to the small power 
of your lineage, you do not want to, you should  just expand on these very stages of the 
path more and more.  
2B4B-2A1B-2A13  The stages of engagement in Mantra 
As for engagement in Mantra, since proper reliance on a spiritual teacher is generally 
given great emphasis in all the vehicles and particularly in Mantra, you should make it 
even more pre-eminent in this context than before. Then, having ripened your continuum by means of an empowerment that comes from a pure tantra class, you should risk your 
life for, that is, guard, the commitments and vows you obtained at that time. [61]. 
Especially since, if a root downfall occurs, even though you take the vow again, it will spoil your mind and it will be difficult for positive qualities to develop, do not be tainted 
by one. You should not become tainted even by a secondary downfall and, if you do, you 
should not be unconcerned about it but should purify it through confession and restraint.  
Then you should be guided as appropriate in the yoga with signs in accordance with the 
lower tantra classes or in the yoga of the generation stage in accordance with the higher 
tantra classes. On that basis you should train as appropriate in the yoga without signs in 
accordance with the lower tantra classes or the yoga of the completion stage according 
to the higher tantra classes.  
2B4B-2A1B-2A14  Explanation that the intention of the Lamp for the Path  and so forth is engagement in both 
sutra and mantra 
Such is the structure of the presen tation of the path set forth in Lamp for the Path to 
Enlightenment , and the Stages of the Path also guides students in the same way.  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
49 2B4B-2A1B-2B The purpose 
This has two points: 
1 The actual purpose 
2 The sources 
2B4B-2A1B-2B1 The actual purpose 
This has two points: 
A Question 
B Answer 
2B4B-2A1B-2B1A Question 
If the teaching cycles of lesser and intermediate beings are the preparatory practices of 
great beings, it should indeed be all right to consider them the stages of the path of 
great beings, so what is the use of the phrase “the stages of the path in common to 
lesser and intermediate beings?” 
2B4B-2A1B-2B1B Answer 
There are two great purposes for classifyin g and guiding the three types of beings: 
1. in this way the conceit of claiming oneself to be a great being, while the mental 
attitudes common to lesser and intermed iate beings have not even arisen, is 
overcome, and  
2. all three—the highest, intermediate, and least mental attitudes—have great 
benefits.  
The way in which these two purposes are great is that since the two more advanced 
beings also need to strive for high status and liberation, there is no fault in teaching 
great or intermediate individuals who are to be guided how to train in the thoughts of those two because positive qualities are develo ped. However, if a lesser person trains 
beginning with the more advanced ones, the more advanced thoughts will not arise and 
the lesser ones will be cast away, [62] so no thing at all will develop. Moreover, through 
being taught the common path and through trai ning in it, those with the good fortune of 
superior capacity will soon develop positive qualities th at had or had not arisen before, 
whereby they can be guided to higher and higher levels once the lower ones have arisen. Thereby their path will not be prolonged. 
2B4B-2A1B-2B2 The sources 
The need to develop the mind gradually is proclaimed in the Sūtra Requested by the King 
Lord of Dh āraṇīs (Dhāraṇīśvararājaparipŗcchā) through applying the analogy of a skilled 
jeweler gradually cleaning precious stones to the meaning. The protector N āgārjuna also 
taught to gradually lead beings in the path of high status and certain goodness:  
First the teachings of high status, Then those of certain goodness come forth. Therefore, once you achieve high status, 
Certain goodness will come by stages. 
Ārya Asaṅga also said: 
Also, in order that the side of virtue be gradually accomplished properly, the 
bodhisattva initially teaches those who have the wisdom of childish sentient 
beings easy Dharma and causes them to follow easy directions and instructions. Realizing that they have  developed intermediate wisdom, he 
causes them to follow intermediate Dharma teachings and intermediate 
directions and instructions. Realizing that they have developed vast wisdom, 
he teaches them the profound Dharma and causes them to follow subtle 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
50 directions and instructions. His beneficial activities fall on those sentient 
beings progressively. 
Āryadeva, in his Lamp of Summarized Conduct (Cary āmelāpakaprad īpa), establishes that 
first the training in the contemplations of the Perfection Vehicle and after that the mode 
of engagement in Mantra [63] needs to be gradual. Summarizing the meaning of this he says: 
In order for beings who are like
 beginners 
To get involved in ultimate truths, 
The means the perfect Buddha expounded 
Resemble the steps of a flight of stairs. 
2B4B-2A2 The actual way of taking its essence 
This has three points: 
A Training the mind in the stages of the path common to lesser beings 
B Training the mind in the stages of the path common to intermediate beings 
C Training the mind in the stages of the path of great beings 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
51 CHAPTER 2 
The Stages of the Path Common to Lesser Beings 
2B4B-2A2A Training the mind in the stages of the path common to lesser beings 
This has three points: 
1 The actual training in the attitude of lesser beings  
2 The measure of that attitude of lesser beings having arisen 
3 Clearing up misconceptions about the attitude of lesser beings 
2B4B-2A2A-1 The actual training in th e attitude of lesser beings [63] 
This has two points: 
A Generating a mental attitude of interest in future worlds 
B Relying on the methods for the happiness of future worlds 
2B4B-2A2A-1A Developing a mental attit ude of interest in future worlds 
This has two points: 
1 Being mindful of death: contemplating that one will not stay in this world for long 2 What will become of you in future existences: contemplating the happiness and suffering of the 
two types of migrating beings 
DEATH-IMPERMANENCE 
Explanation of how to be mindful of death — that one will not stay in this world for long 
2B4B-2A2A-1A1 Being mindful of death: cont emplating that one will not stay in this 
world for long  
This has four points: 
A The disadvantages of not cultivating mindfulness of death B The advantages of cultivating mindfulness of death 
C What kind of mind that is mindful of death is generated 
D How to cultivate mindfulness of death  
2B4B-2A2A-1A1A The disadvantages of not cultivating mindfulness of death 
This has five points: 
1 Demonstration that the mind’s bias towards the idea that one is not going to die is the gateway of harm 
Although in all of us there is the thought that at the en d of our days death will come, 
every day we think “I will not die today,” “Also today I will not die.” That way, even right 
until we are about to die, the mind holds on to the idea that we are not going to die.  
2 How this prevents us from even taking an interest in future lives [64] 
If you do not take to heart an antidote to this, if you are stupefied by such an idea and 
think that you will remain in this life, yo u will keep thinking about ways of achieving 
happiness and eliminating suffering in this life only, thinking: “I need this and I need 
that…” A mind investigating meaningful goals such as future lives, liberation, and 
omniscience will not arise, whereby no allowances are made for engaging in Dharma.  
3 How this results in meaningful endeavors also having little power 
Even if you engage in hearing, thinking, an d meditating for a hundred years, whatever 
virtue you do will have little power because it is  done for the sake of this life alone. Since 
you will engage in them linked wi th faulty behavior, negativiti es, and downfalls, it will be 
rare for them not to be mixed wi th causes of the lower realms.  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
52 4 How this results in long-term goals also being postponed 
Even if you aim at future worlds and allow for their attainment, you will not be able to 
cease the laziness of postpone ment that thinks: “I will do it later.” A major effort at 
practicing properly will not come about, as you while away your time with sleepiness, 
pointless chatter, and distractions of food, drink, and the like.  
5 How holding to permanence induces attachment, aversion, and so forth and how they induce faulty behavior 
Not only that, through putting great effort into the excellences of this life, the mental 
afflictions and faulty behavior induced by them increase, and then you turn your back on the nectar of Dharma. Since that leads to the lower realms, what could be more 
inappropriate than that? From
 Four Hundred Stanzas :  
When someone sleeps as though at ease, 
As though the ruler of the three worlds, 
The Lord of Death, does not exist, 
What else could be more awful than that?  
And in Engaging in the Bodhisattva Conduct it says: 
Everything has to be abandoned, 
But unaware that this is so, 
I did negativities of all sorts, For the sake of friends and foes. 
2B4B-2A2A-1A1B The advantages of cultivating mindfulness of death 
This has three points: 
1 The great value of being mindful of death [65] 
Once a genuine awareness mindful of death has developed, for instance if you are 
convinced you will die tomorrow and have just a little understanding of the Dharma, you will see that henceforth you will be without th e company of relatives and friends, and you 
will stop craving for them. In the majority of people the wish to take the essence of this 
life by means of giving things away and the li ke will naturally arise. In that way, seeing 
that all effort for the sake of  worldly goals such as fame and gain are futile, you will turn 
away from faulty behavior, accumulate the good karma of taking refuge, ethics, and the 
like. What could be more meaningful than ascending to sublime states oneself by those 
means and guiding migrating beings there too? That is why being mindful of death is also praised with many analogies. In the 
Great Final Nirv āṇa Sūtra (Mah āparinirvāṇasūtra) it 
says: 
Among all plowing of fields, that in autumn is the best. Among all footprints, 
that of the elephant is the best. Among all discriminations, those of 
impermanence and death are the best: they  eliminate all the desire, ignorance, 
and pride of the three realms. 
Similarly mindfulness of death is praised, among other things, as a hammer that instantly 
destroys all mental afflictions and all faulty behaviors, and as a gateway to the 
simultaneous accomplishment of all that is virtuous and excellent. 
2 Mindfulness of death is the door to all excellence 
In brief, the time for achieving the goals of beings is only this time that we have gained 
the special basis. We mostly remain in the lower realms and even if we make it to the 
happy realms just once, they are predominantly places of unfreedom, so that we do not find an opportunity to accomplish the Dharma. If we gain a basis suited to accomplishing 
the Dharma and still do not accomplish it proper ly, it is due to the thought “I’m not going 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
53 to die yet.” Therefore, this mind that holds to the position of not dying [66] is the door to 
all manner of degeneration, whereas mindfulnes s of death is the door to all excellence.  
3 How it is necessary to give up misunderstandings and meditate from the bottom of one’s heart  
Therefore you should not think: “This is a practice for those who do not have other 
profound Dharma to meditate on” and “Although it is something to meditate on, it should be meditated on a bit in the beginning but it is not suitable to be practiced continuously.” 
Rather you should meditate on it until you gain certainty from the bottom of your heart 
that it is necessary in the beginning, in the middle, and at the end.  
2B4B-2A2A-1A1C What kind of mind th at is mindful of death is generated 
The fear born from worries about separation from relatives and the like is the kind of fear 
of death of those who are not trained in the path. So here this is not what is to be 
generated. Well then, what kind of fear is to be generated? All bodies taken under the 
power of karma and mental afflictions do no t pass beyond death, which is why—even 
though this may give rise to fear—death cannot be prevented for the time being. 
However, without putting a stop to the causes of the lower realms and without 
accomplishing the causes for high status an d certain goodness, you will fear death. In 
this regard, if you think about the resulting fear, these two can be accomplished, 
whereby you will not be afraid when on the verge of dying. If you do not achieve that 
objective, for fear of not being liberated from the cycle of existence in general and of 
falling to the lower realms in particular yo u will be tormented by remorse at the time of 
death.  
2B4B-2A2A-1A1D How to cultivate mindfulness of death 
You should meditate on this by way of: 
1. the three root thoughts, 
2. the nine reasons, and 
3. the three decisions. 
In this regard, the three root thoughts are: 
1 It is certain that we will die 
2 It is uncertain when we will die  
3 At the time of death nothing except the Dharma will be of benefit 
2B4B-2A2A-1A1D-1  It is certain that we will die 
This has two points: 
A Actual reasons 
B The decision 
2B4B-2A2A-1A1D-1A Actual reasons 
This has three points: 
1 The Lord of Death will certainly come and there are no conditions for warding him off  
2 Your lifespan cannot be increased and diminishes incessantly 
3 You die without having had time to practice the Dharma while alive  
2B4B-2A2A-1A1D-1A1 The Lord of Death will certainly come and there are no conditions 
for warding him off [67] 
In Collection of Indicative Verses  it says that whatever body you have taken, whatever 
country you reside in, and whatever the time, you will be defeated by death. It will come 
to pass that way and cannot be turned back by fleeing swiftly away or by force, wealth, 
material substances, mantras, or medicine, as it says in the Advice to the King S ūtra 
(Rājāvavādaka) . Kamawa said: “Now some fear of death is necessary. At the moment of 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
54 death you must not be apprehensive. But we do it the other way round: now we are not 
afraid but at the moment of death we dig our fingernails into our chests.” 
2B4B-2A2A-1A1D-1A2 Your lifespan cannot be increased and diminishes incessantly 
As it says in Descent into the Womb S ūtra (Garbh āvakrāntisūtra), attaining a lifespan of a 
hundred years seems to be the limit of what is possible. However, even if you reach that, 
meanwhile, the years until then waste away with the passage of month after month, day after day, and day and night. As they too waste away with the passage of morning and so on, it seems that the entire lifespan has already been wasted a lot in the past, and the 
remainder also diminishes incessan tly without anything being added.  
In 
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Conduct it says: 
This life decreases constantly, Day and night, without respite. 
If from nowhere there is increase Either, how could I not die? 
Furthermore, you should consider this by way of numerous analogies such as a weaver 
weaving cloth, animals to be slaughtered approaching with each  step the place of 
slaughter, cattle being led without any control to their place by a herder, and so forth. 
This is also taught in 
Sūtra of Extensive Play  (Lalitavistaras ūtra) by means of many 
analogies: 
The three existences are impermanent, like autumn clouds; 
The birth and death of migrators77 resemble a show; 
The passage of life of migrators is li ke a flash of lightning in the sky; 
It passes fast like water cascading down a steep mountain. 
For someone with the resolve of inner contemplation [68] there are no external objects 
that do not point out impermanence to him. Since this is taught, certainty arises if you 
consider it often from many angles. There is no benefit in considering it once in a while 
as certainty will not arise. As Kamawa said : “You say nothing has come about through 
contemplation, but when did you contemplate? During the day you indulge in distractions, 
at night you sleep. Don’t lie!”  
It is not just at the end of our lives when death overcomes us that we proceed toward 
another world, for up until then there is not a moment in which our lifespan is not diminishing. Therefore, ever since we entered the womb, we have been going straight 
toward a future life without remaining still even for a mere instant. This being so, our 
intervening life also wastes away as we go  toward death led by its harbingers, disease 
and aging. Therefore do not rejoice in the view that you abide during your life without 
approaching future worlds. It is like the analogy that when falling off a high cliff, the time 
of falling through the sky before crashing to the ground is not worthy of joy. In 
Commentary on the “Four Hundred Stanzas” (Catu ḥśatakațīka) it says:  
Hero of men, in that night, at the very beginning 
When someone comes to dwell in a womb in the world, 
Starting from that point he moves with each day, Without the pause of a step, toward the Lord of Death. 
2B4B-2A2A-1A1D-1A3 You die without having had time to practice the Dharma while alive 
Even if you may indeed live fo r so long, it is inappropriat e to think you have time. As 
stated in the Descent into the Womb S ūtra, initially, during the first ten years of 
childhood, it does not occur to you to practice the Dharma, and at the end, during the 
                                                 
77 Tib. ‘gro ba , usually translated here as “migrating being.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
55 twenty years of old age, you do not have the power to practice the Dharma. Of the time 
in between, sleep snatches away one half, illness and the like also waste much time, and 
no more than a few opportunities remain to accomplish the Dharma.  
2B4B-2A2A-1A1D-1B The decision that it is necessary to practice the Dharma [69] 
Since it is like this, at the time of death all the excellences of this life will only be an 
object of recollection—like the recollection of a happy experience in a dream after you have woken up. Why delight in being beguiled by this life, if the enemy who is death will 
certainly come? With this thought in mind you should make the decision that you must 
definitely practice the Dharma and reiterate this innermost feeling many times. From 
Garland of Birth Stories :  
Alas, afflicted worldly beings, Your stay is not stable, there is no joy. 
Even this water lily’s splendor 
Will soon be but a memory. 
2B4B-2A2A-1A1D-2 It is uncertain when we will die 
This has three points: 
[A The need to generate a mental state mindful of death every day 
B Explanation of the actual reasons 
C The decision that it is necessary to practice the Dharma from now on] 
2B4B-2A2A-1A1D-2A The need to generate a mental state mindful of death every day 
It is certain that death will come between now and 100 years from now and it is not 
certain on which day in between it will come. Th erefore it is not definite on any day like 
today whether you will die or not. Nonethele ss the mind should lean toward the idea of 
death, and you should generate  the awareness that thinks: “I  will die today,” for if the 
mind leans toward the idea of not dying with  the thought: “I will not die today,” you will 
constantly prepare for staying in this life and will not prepare for future lives. Due to this, 
if in the meantime you are seized by the Lord of Death, you will have to die in anguish. 
On the other hand, if you prepare to die ev ery day, you will acco mplish much that is 
meaningful for the future, such that even if you do not die, it will be good to have done 
it, and if you do die, it will have  been all the more necessary.  
2B4B-2A2A-1A1D-2B Explanation of the actual reasons 
This has three points: 
1 The contemplation that there is no certainty with regard to the lifespan in Jambudvipa, which is 
why the time of death is uncertain  
2 The contemplation that there are many conditions that lead to death and few conditions that 
promote life  
3 The contemplation that the body is extremely vulnerable and the time of death therefore uncertain  
2B4B-2A2A-1A1D-2B1 The contemplation that there is no certainty with regard to the 
lifespan in Jambudvipa which is why the time of death is uncertain 
In general the lifespan of the beings of Uttarakuru is defini te, and for most of the beings 
of the other continents there is more certainty, even though it may not be sure that the 
full extent of the lifespan of each indivi dual will be reached. But for the beings of 
Jambudv īpa the lifespan is extremely uncertain. In the beginning they even reached 
immeasurable years, [70] whereas later on ten years will be the maximum duration to be 
reckoned with, and even nowadays it does not seem certain whether they will die in their 
old age, in their youth, or in between. In Treasury of Manifest Knowledge  it says:  
Here it’s uncertain: in the end, 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
56 Ten years; initially, infinite.78 
You should take to heart the fact that your  gurus or friends and so forth have died 
through sudden internal or external conditions for death before reaching the end of their 
lives, and you should think over and over again: “I too have a similar quality.” 
2B4B-2A2A-1A1D-2B2 The contemplation that there are many conditions that lead to 
death and few conditions that promote life  
There are various harmful influences—animate as well as inanimate—on this life, so you 
should thoroughly consider how it is threatened by human beings and non-human 
malevolent influences, how there are types of animals that endanger your body and life through manifold harm, and likewise how both internal illnesses and external elements 
cause harm. Furthermore, since your body is necessarily formed from the four elements 
and they also harm each other, if their domains expand or diminish out of balance, they will cause illnesses and ravish your life. Sinc e they exist simultaneous with you, even 
though your body and life appear to be stable, they cannot be relied on. In the 
Great 
Final Nirv āṇa Sūtra it says:  
The discrimination of death is that this life, constantly surrounded by hostile 
enemies, weakens in each moment and that there is nothing that increases it. 
And in Precious Garland (Ratn āvalī): 
We live amid conditions for Yama, Like a butter lamp in a gale. 
Apart from that, life itself is involved in the reality of death so that many conditions for 
life are unreliable. From 
Precious Garland : 
There are many conditions for death; 
Those for living are only few. 
Even they may well be deadly, 
Therefore always practice the Dharma. 
2B4B-2A2A-1A1D-2B3 The contemplation that the body is extremely vulnerable and the 
time of death therefore uncertain [71] 
The body is as vulnerable as a water bubble, therefore this and that, such as a thorn 
piercing it, may be to blame and destroy life without the need for major harm. Hence, it is very easily overcome by  conditions for death. In 
Friendly  Letter (Suh ŗllekha)  it says:  
If physical things—the ground, Mount Meru, and oceans— 
Are burnt up by the seven blazing suns 
And even ashes are not left behind,79 
What need to mention exceedingly feeble humans? 
2B4B-2A2A-1A1D-2C The decision that it is necessary to practice the Dharma from now on 
After thoughts like these, you should reiterate many times the innermost decision to 
practice the Dharma from this very moment on, for it is uncertain when your body and life will be overcome by the Lord  of Death, and you should not assume that there is still 
time. As Śrī Jāgatamitra said: 
Earth Lord, as long as this borrowed body 
Abides in pleasure—not ill, not decayed, 
                                                 
78 There is a negative particle missing in the Tibetan text which should read: ‘di na ma nges tha mar ni / lo bcu dang po 
dpag tu med . 
79 According to the cosmogony alluded to he re, everything physical will be destroyed by fire at the end of a cycle of 
eons. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
57 In that time frame, take its essence 
Fearless of illness, death, and decay. 
In times of illness, old age, and decay, 
You may be concerned but what is the use? 
Among the three root thoughts, the thought about the uncertainty of the time of death is 
the most important one, which is why you should put effort into it.  
2B4B-2A2A-1A1D-3  At the time of death nothing except the Dharma will be of 
benefit 
This has two points: 
A The actual reasons 
B The decision 
2B4B-2A2A-1A1D-3A The actual reasons 
This has three points: 
1 [You cannot take your friends and relatives along] 
Thus when you see that you have to go to another world, even if at that time you are 
surrounded by loving and very distressed frie nds or relatives, you cannot take even one 
of them along.  
2 [You cannot take your possessions along] 
Whatever heaps of attractive riches you have obtained, you cannot take along even a small particle of them.  
3 [You cannot take your body along] 
If you have to give up even the flesh and bones you were born with, what need is there to talk of anything else?  
2B4B-2A2A-1A1D-3B The decision to practice nothing but the Dharma  
This has three points: 
1 The actual decision 
Then think: “At that time it will certainly come  to pass that all the excellences of this life 
leave me, just as I leave th em, and I will proceed to an other world. This will happen 
today.” [72] You should make the decision many times to practice the Dharma without 
submitting to conditions of the body, friends, possessions, and so forth.  
2 The need to try hard since it is the foundation of the path  
Although this arises only with difficulty, you should try hard since it is the foundation of 
the path. In the words of Potowa: 
My elimination of appearances  consists in this very meditation on 
impermanence. Eliminating all the phenomena of this life—close relationships, 
possessions, and the like— and aware that I will go he re and there to another 
life alone without anything I think: “There is nothing to do other than to 
practice the Dharma,” and non-attachment to this life first arises. As long as 
this attitude has not arisen in my mi nd, I will sit with the paths to all the 
Dharma blocked. 
And Dölpa said: 
Incidentally, if you accumulate the collections and purify obscurations, make 
request to the deities and your guru, and contemplate insistently with perseverance, even that which you th ink will not come about for a hundred 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
58 years, will come about effortlessly, fo r compounded phenomena do not remain 
static as they are. 
When someone asked Kamawa about moving on to another object of meditation he said: 
“Repeat the previous one!” Wh en asked about the remaining ones, he said: “There is 
nothing beyond it.” 
3 How to carry out the practice of all the excellent scriptures 
Thus, if you understand how to practice relian ce on a spiritual teacher, the leisures and 
endowments, as well as impermanence in this and that context of the scriptures and their 
commentaries, and if you then sustain that  understanding, you will easily find the 
intention of the Victor. In this way you will also understand it in other contexts. 
Explanation of what will become of you in future worlds: How to contemplate  
the happiness and suffering of the two types of migrating beings 
2B4B-2A2A-1A2 What will become of you in future existences: contemplating the 
happiness and suffering of the two types of migrating beings 
This has two points: 
[A Thinking about what will become of you in future worlds 
B From among the happiness and suffering of the two types of migrating beings, considerations about 
suffering] 
2B4B-2B1A-1A2A Thinking about what will become of you in future worlds 
That being so, [73] since it is certain that yo u will die soon, there is no time to relax in 
this life and, after death, it is not that you become non-existent; you must take rebirth. 
Since apart from the two realms there is no other place of birt h, you will be born in either 
the happy realms or the lower realms. In addition, since you are not under your own 
control but under the contro l of other—karma, you will be  reborn according to the 
wholesome and unwholesome karma that impels you.  
THE SUFFERINGS OF THE LOWER REALMS 
2B4B-2B1A-1A2B From among the happiness and suffering of two types of migrating beings, considerations 
about suffering 
This has three points: 
[1 The need to think about suffering 
2 How thinking about suffering is a vital point 
3 Contemplating the sufferings of the lower realms] 
2B4B-2B1A-1A2B-1 The need to think about suffering 
You should think about the suffering of the lower realms considering: “What will become 
of me if I am reborn in the lower realms?” N āgārjuna said: 
Every day remember the hells  
Which are fiercely hot and cold. 
Also remember the hungry ghosts, Emaciated by hunger and thirst. 
Look at animals and remember: 
They are beset with the sufferings of dullness. 
Give up their causes, create causes of happiness. Once you have gained what is hard to gain, 
A human body in Jambudv īpa, 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
59 Endeavor to cut the cause of bad births.80 
2B4B-2B1A-1A2B-2 How thinking about suffering is a vital point 
Meditation on the sufferings of cyclic existence in general and of the lower realms in 
particular is a very vital point, for if you thus consider how you yourself fall into the 
ocean of suffering, despair will repel pride and arrogance. Having seen  that suffering is a 
result of non-virtue, you will be very carefu l to avoid negativities and downfalls. Since 
you do not want suffering but want happiness, once you realize that it is the result of 
virtue, you will also enjoy accomplishing virt ue. In proportion to your own experience, 
compassion for others will arise, and out of av ersion to cyclic exis tence you will strive for 
liberation. For fear of suffering you will take refuge forcefully.  
These positive qualities of suffering that comprise many important points of practice [74] 
are stated in Engaging in the Bodhisattva Conduct in terms of suffering already arisen in 
one’s own continuum, however, they are equally applicable to suffering one is yet to 
experience.  
2B4B-2B1A-1A2B-3 Contemplating the sufferings of the lower realms 
This has two points: 
A The actual sufferings of the lower realms 
B How it is necessary to meditate on the sufferings of the lower realms until the experience occurs  
2B4B-2B1A-1A2B-3A The actual sufferings of the lower realms 
This has three points: 
1 Contemplating the sufferings of hell beings 
2 Contemplating the sufferings of animals 
3 Contemplating the sufferings of hungry ghosts 
2B4B-2B1A-1A2B-3A1 Contemplating the sufferings of hell beings 
This has two points: 
A The actual sufferings of the hell beings 
B The need for fear at the thought that you have already accumulated numerous causes for being born there 
2B4B-2B1A-1A2B-3A1A The actual sufferings of the hell beings 
This has four points: 
1 The great hells of sentient beings 
2 The neighboring hells 
3 The cold hells 
4 The occasional hells 
2B4B-2B1A-1A2B-3A1A-1 The great hells of sentient beings 
32,000 yojanas81 below here there is Continual Reviva l, and below it are seven more hells 
each separated by 4,000 yojanas. 
In the first of those eight, Continual Revival, the sentient beings come together and stab 
each other with various weapons that arise by the power of their karma. Whenever they faint and collapse on the ground, a voice rings out from the sky, commanding “Come 
back to life!” Upon that they stand up again and start stabbing as before, experiencing 
immeasurable suffering as a result. 
In Black Line, the hell guardians put black lines in the shape of numerous squares and 
the like on the bodies of the sentient beings born there, and then the latter experience 
the pain of being cut into pieces with weapons along those lines.  
                                                 
80 Tib. ngan song , usually translated here as “lower realms,” literally means “gone bad.” 
81 Cf. previous note: One yojana (Tib. dpag tshad ) is equivalent to 4.5 miles (7.4 km). 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
60 In Crushing Hell,82 once the guardians have rounded up the sentient beings, they pack 
them between two goat-faced or similar iron mountains. Then they are immediately 
crushed by the two, whereupon rivers of bl ood spurt out from all their orifices.  
In Howling Hell, the sentient beings in search of an abode enter an iron house. [75] As 
soon as they enter, fires blaze up all around them, and they burn.  
Great Howling Hell is like the previous one, the difference being that the iron house has 
two layers.  
In Hot Hell, the hell guardians put the sentient beings into very hot and blazing iron 
cauldrons of several yojanas and fry them like fish. They are impaled through their 
buttocks on blazing iron stakes that emerge through the crown of their heads. Fire blazes 
out of their mouths, their eye so ckets, nostrils, and ears as well as all their pores. They 
are laid out, on their backs or face down, on the blazing iron foundation and pounded and tormented with blazing iron hammers.  
In Very Hot Hell, an iron trident is stuck in to their buttocks so th at the right and left 
prongs emerge from their two shoulders and the middle one from the crown of their 
head. Owing to that, tongues of fire blaze from their orifices, such as the mouth. Their 
bodies are wrapped in blazing hot iron sheets and placed headlong into an iron cauldron 
full of boiling liquid, whereupon they are to ssed up, down, and about as they boil. Then, 
once their skin, flesh, and blood have been destroyed and nothing but the skeleton is 
left, they are pulled out again and spread out on the iron foundation. After that, when 
the skin, flesh, and blood have developed again, they are put in again. Apart from that it 
is like Hot Hell.  
In Without Respite the foundation is completely ablaze for hundreds of yojanas from the 
eastern direction. As it spreads, the force of the fire increases, gradually destroying the 
skin, flesh, sinews, and bones of the sentient beings to the marrow. Like the wick of a 
butter lamp, their whole bodies are pervaded by blazing tongues of fire. [76] In the other 
three directions it is similar.  
As the fire coming from the four directions mingles there, these beings experience 
incessant sufferings and only by their pathetic howling are they understood to be sentient beings. In iron baskets they are made to jump about on blazing metal. They are made to 
fall down on the iron foundation and to climb up huge iron mountains. Their tongues are 
pulled out from their mouths, then stretched out with a hundred pegs, and made to be without folds or creases, as though preparing cow hides. Then again they are placed on 
the iron foundation on their backs, their mouths are opened with iron tongs, and blazing 
lumps of iron are inserted into their mouths. Boiling copper is poured into their mouths and burns their mouths, throats, and entrails before issuing forth from their lower bodies. 
Apart from that it is like Very Hot Hell.  
How long those sufferings are ex perienced is as stated in 
Friendly  Letter (Suh ŗllekha) :  
Even if, for billions of years, you experience 
Completely unbearable sufferings in that way, 
As long as the non-virtue has not been exhausted, 
Equally long you will not be rid of your life. 
Moreover, in Treasury of Manifest Knowledge and Actuality of the Stages  (Bhūmivastu) it 
is stated that 50 human years are one day in the god realm of the Four Great Kings, 
thirty of those are one month, and twelve of those are one year. 500 such years is the 
lifespan of the beings of the Four Great Kings.  All of that is one single day in Continual 
Revival, 30 of those is a month, twelve of those is a year and 500 of those is the lifespan 
                                                 
82 Tib. bsdus ‘joms , literally “bringing together (and) destroying.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
61 there. Likewise 100, 200, 400, 800, and 1,600 human years respectively form a day in 
the other five desire realm gods ranging from  the Thirty-Three up to Controlling Others’ 
Emanations, and their lifespans can be 1,000, 2,000, 4,000, [77] 8,000, and 16,000 god 
years. These respectively form a day in Blac k Line through Hot Hell, and they can reach 
f r o m  1 , 0 0 0  t o  1 6 , 0 0 0  o f  t h e i r  o w n  y e a r s .  I n  V e r y  H o t  H e l l  t h e y  c a n  r e a c h  h a l f  a n  
intermediate eon and in Without Respite, one intermediate eon.  
2B4B-2B1A-1A2B-3A1A-2 The neighboring hells 
Each one of the eight hells has four side walls and four gates. Outside they are 
surrounded by an iron fence, and that fence also has four gates. By each gate there are 
the four remaining hells of sentient beings:  
1. the Pit of Burning Embers,  
2. the Bog of Putrid Corpses or the Bog of Excrement Reeking of Corpses,  
3. the Razor Road and the like, and  
4. the River Without a Ford.  
In the first there are hot embers up to the knees and when sentient beings go to look for 
a place to stand, as they set their feet down, their skin, flesh, and blood are destroyed, 
and as they lift them up, they regenerate. 
Nearby there is the second one, the Bog of Excrement Reeking of Corpses. As they cross 
it in search of an abode, sentie nt beings fall into it and sink up to their heads. In this bog 
there are worms called “sharp-beaked” that pi erce the skin, flesh, sinews, and bones and 
dig through them all the way to the marrow.  
Near the bog there is the third one, a path fitted with razorblade teeth. When sentient 
beings walk along it in search of an abode, as they put their feet down, their skin, flesh, 
and blood are cut, and as they lift them up, they grow back again.  Nearby there is the Forest of Sword-Leaves. As  sentient beings walk around in search of 
an abode, making use of its shade and sitting down, [78] swords emerge from the trees 
and chop up their limbs and other body parts.  When they faint there, reddish-brown dogs 
come, grab them from behind, and eat them. 
Nearby there is the Forest of Iron-Spiked Tree s. Sentient beings walking around there in 
search of an abode set about climbing up the trees. As they climb up, the tips of the 
thorns point downward, and as they climb down, they point upward chopping up their limbs and other body parts. Since there are birds with iron beaks in that place, they come 
and alight on their shoulders or heads, peck out their eyeballs, and eat them.  
These places should be considered as one because they are similar in that there is harm 
by weapons.  
Near the Forest of Iron-Spiked Trees there is the fourth, the so-called River Without a 
Ford filled with seething boiling  water. Sentient beings in se arch of an abode fall into it 
and are cooked as they bob up and down like peas thrown in a cauldron filled with water 
over a great fire. On either bank of the river there are guardians holding sticks, hooks, 
and nets in their hands who do not allow anyone to get out. Having pulled them out with 
the hooks or nets, the guardians place them face upward on the blazing great foundation and ask them what they want. When the say: “I don’t know and cannot see anything, 
however I am hungry and thirsty,” the guardians put fiercely blazing lumps of iron into 
their mouths and pour boiling copper into their mouths. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
62 Actuality of the Stages  explains that the lifespan in the neighboring and occasional hells 
is uncertain. However, the sufferings will be experienced as long as  the potency of the 
karma for experiencing those sufferings has not been exhausted. 
2B4B-2B1A-1A2B-3A1A-3 The cold hells 
The cold hells are directly opposite the eight great hells of sentient beings each at a 
distance of 10,000 yojanas. [79] 32,000 yojanas below here there is Blisters and from there, separated by 2, 000 yojanas each, the other seven he lls. Among those eight, in the 
one of Blisters you are hit by strong icy wind and your body shrivels, while blisters 
appear on it everywhere. In Bursting Bliste rs, you shrivel as the blisters burst open. 
Chattering Teeth, Lamentation, and “Brrr” are named after the sounds uttered in them. 
In Splitting Apart Like an Utpala Flower,
83 as you are hit by strong icy wind, you turn blue 
in color and split apart into five or six pieces. In Splitting Apart Like a Lotus, you pass 
beyond blue and turn red, splitting apart into ten or more pieces. In Great Splitting Apart Like a Lotus, your skin turns deep red and you split apart into 100 or even more pieces. All this is explained in 
Actuality of the Stages .  
As for the lifespan, it is stated that if you were to fill a storage co ntainer up to the brim 
with fifty bushels84 of sesame from Magadha and ta ke out one sesame seed every 
hundred years, the lifespan in the hell of Blisters would last far longer than it would take 
for the sesame to be completely exhausted, and the lifespan in each hell below it is 
twenty times that of the previous one. 
2B4B-2B1A-1A2B-3A1A-4 The occasional hells 
These exist in the vicinity of the hot and cold hells. In Actuality of the Stages  it says that 
they also exist in the places of humans, and in Basis of Vinaya Scriptures  it is stated that 
they exist near the shores of great lakes, as it appears in Expression of the Realizations 
of Saṃgharakṣita (Saṃgharakṣitavadana).   
2B4B-2B1A-1A2B-3A1B The need for fear at the thought that you have already accumulated numerous causes for 
being born there 
Since it is very easy, as will be explained be low, for the causes of birth there to come 
about, whereby even every day you accumulate many of them, and since those that you 
accumulated before are also immeasurable, it is inappropriate to sit around happily. [80] Therefore you should think about them and be afraid, for nothing other than this 
unsteady respiration separates you from them. From 
Engaging in the Bodhisattva 
Conduct : 
How can you sit there happily, 
Having created the karma for hell? 
And in Friendly  Letter  it also says: 
Evildoers separated only  
By the time it takes for their breathing to stop, 
Hearing about the boundless torments of hell 
And not scared in a thousand respects, are like vajras. 
If seeing, hearing, remembering, and reading 
Descriptions of hell as well as their depictions, 
Generates fear, no question about the experience 
                                                 
83 Blue lotus ( Nymphaea caerulea ). In Tibetan the transliterated Sanskrit name of the flower, utpala , which actually 
means “burst open,” is used. 
84 Tib. khal brgyad cu pa , literally “80 khals”; khal is a standard Tibetan measure of volume equal to about thirty pounds 
of barley (about 22 liters). 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
63 Of the unbearable fully ripened effects. 
The intense suffering is also stated in Friendly  Letter : 
Just as the bliss of extinguishment of craving 
Is supreme among all kinds of bliss, 
Likewise among all kinds of sufferings, those Of Without Respite are most unbearable. 
Here, even if in one day three hundred spears 
Were to hit you brutally, the suffering 
Would be small compared to the sufferings of hell; 
It would not even be a fraction of them. 
You should come to understand that the cause giving rise to such suffering is only your 
own faulty behavior and strive with all your might not to be tainted even by minor faulty 
behavior. From the same text: 
The seed of these non-virtuous effects 
Is faulty behavior of body, speech, and mind. Strive with such resour cefulness that nothing, 
No speck at all, be perpetrated by you. 
2B4B-2B1A-1A2B-3A2 Contemplating the sufferings of animals 
The weaker animals are killed by more powerful ones. Having become the chattels of 
gods and humans, they are under the control of others and lack freedom, which is why they are killed, beaten, and harmed. It is explained in 
Actuality of the Stages  that since 
they accompany[81] humans and gods, they do not have another abode. The auto-
commentary to Treasury of Manifest Knowledge explains that their main abode is the 
great ocean and that the others spread out from there. Furthermore, they are born in 
darkness and in water, age there, and die. They are worn out by heavy burdens, put to 
the plow, shorn, driven, and killed miserably by means of many different killing methods. 
They are tormented by hunger, thirst, sun, and wind. They are persecuted by hunters 
and the like in many ways and are always terrified. Therefore you should feel saddened 
and disquieted thinking of the many ways in which they suffer.  
With respect to their lifespan it says in Treasury  of Manifest Knowledge  that “the longest 
animal lifespan is one eon,” and it is explai ned that the long-lived ones reach about an 
eon while the short lived ones are unspecified.  
2B4B-2B1A-1A2B-3A3 Contemplating the sufferings of hungry ghosts 
Those who predominantly rely on  miserliness will be born as hungry ghosts. They too are 
hungry and thirsty. Since their skin, flesh, and blood are dried up, they are like burnt 
logs. Their faces are covered with hair, their mouths are exceedingly dry, and they lick them with their tongues.  
There are the three types: 
A Those with external obstructions to food and drink 
B Those with internal obstructions to food and drink 
C Those with obstructions to food and drink itself  
2B4B-2B1A-1A2B-3A3A Those with external obstructions to food and drink  
If they wander toward springs, lakes, and ponds, they are hindered externally by sentient 
beings holding swords, spears, and lances. They also see the water as pus and blood and do not want to drink it.  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
64 2B4B-2B1A-1A2B-3A3B Those with internal  obstructions to food and drink  
They have mouths like the mere eye of a needle. Their mouths blaze with fire, and they 
have goiters and big bellies. Even if they end up finding food and drink without others creating obstructions, they  themselves are not able to eat and drink them. 
2B4B-2B1A-1A2B-3A3C Those with obstructions to food and drink itself 
Those called “fire-garlanded ones” get burned due to [82] everything they eat and drink 
catching fire. Those called “filth-eaters” eat excrement and drink urine. They only eat and 
drink that which is unclean, smelly, harmful, and despicable. Some cut their own flesh 
and eat it. They cannot make use of clean and good food or drink.  
Their abode, as explained in the auto-commentary  to Treasury , is below the city of 
Rājagṛha here in Jambudv īpa, separated by a distance of 500 yojanas, and from there the 
other hungry ghosts spread out. As for their lifespan, it says in Actuality of the Stages  
that one human month is a day for them and that they reach 500 of their years. In 
Friendly  Letter it says: 
Attending to suffering uninterruptedly, 
Fettered by the incorruptible sling 
Of karma of faulty behavior, some beings with bodies 
Do not die for five or even ten thousand years. 
The commentary explains that the lifespan  of some hungry ghosts is 5,000 years and 
some, 10,000 years. 
In all three lower realms the body size is indefinite. In Actuality of the Stages  it says that 
through the power of non-virtue there are all kinds of sizes. 
2B4B-2B1A-1A2B-3B How it is necessary to meditate on the sufferings of the lower realms until the experience 
occurs 
In accordance with that, when you think about the sufferings of the lower realms, reflect: 
“If it would be difficult for me to sit for one day with my hands stuck in embers, or just stay in a freezing cave during a winter storm without clothes, or to be without food and 
drink for a few days, or for my body to be bitten by something like a gadfly, how could I 
bear the sufferings of the hot hells, the cold  hells, the hungry ghosts, and the animals 
who devour one another alive? You should meditate, evaluating such experiences, until a 
change in the mind of intense [83] fear and terror occurs.  
As you think about this now with your good basis, what has been accumulated previously 
is purified and what you will en gage in later on lessens. By means of intense aspirational 
prayers direct the virtue that has been accumulated previously and thereby increase it 
manifold. Since this opens up many avenues for engaging in them afresh, every day you 
will act to make your leisures meaningful. If you do not thin k about this now, once you 
have fallen into the lower re alms, you will not find a refuge that protects you from those 
fears even if you look for it. At that time you will lack the power of mind to adopt what 
should be done and reject what should not be done. This is mentioned in 
Engaging in the 
Bodhisattva Conduct . 
Explanation of how to rely on the methods for the happiness of future worlds 
2B4B-2A2A-1B Explanation of how to rely on the methods for the happiness of future 
worlds 
This has two points: 
1 The holy gateway for entering the teachings: training in taking refuge 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
65 2 The root of all well-being:85 generating the faith of conviction in actions and their effects. 
TAKING REFUGE IN THE THREE JEWELS 
2B4B-2A2A-1B1 The holy gateway for entering the teachings: training in taking refuge 
This has four points: 
A The causes on which taking refuge depends 
B Depending on those causes, the objects in which to take refuge 
C The way in which to take refuge as much as one can 
D The stages of training after having taken refuge 
2B4B-2A2A-1B1A The causes on which taking refuge depends  
Although, in general, there are many causes for taking refuge, here it is the fact that, as 
explained above, we do not stay in this life but soon die, and that after death we do not 
have control over where we w ill be reborn and are under th e control of our karma. Karma 
is also set forth in Engaging in the Bodhisattva Conduct : 
As a flash at night amid the clouds 
Illuminates the darkness for a moment, 
Likewise on the road, through the power of the buddhas, A rare understanding of merit comes forth in the worldly. 
Therefore, that which is virtuous is always weak, 
While evil is extremely strong and unbearable. [84] 
By thinking thus about how you will fall in to the lower realms because the power of 
wholesome karma is small and the power of unwholesome karma is extremely strong, the 
two arise: fear of the lower realms and the conviction that that which is rare and precious,
86 the Jewels, can protect you from them. Consequently, if these two remain but 
words, taking refuge will be si milar. However, if they are present intense and firm, your 
taking of refuge will also come to tame the mind. Therefore you shou ld strive in those 
two causes. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B1B Depending on those causes, the objects in which to take refuge 
This has two points: 
1 Identifying the objects of refuge 
2 The reasons why they are worthy to be refuges 
2B4B-2A2A-1B1B-1 Identifying the objects of refuge 
In Praise in One Hundred and Fifty Verses  (Śatapañca śatakastotra)  it says:  
To one in whom perpetually 
All faults are definitely absent, 
To one in whom in every manner, 
All positive qualities abide; 
In case someone like that exists, 
It’s right to take refuge in him, 
To praise him, to attend on him, To abide in what he teaches. 
                                                 
85 The Tibetan expression, which is consistently translated he re as “well-being,” consists of a combination of the two 
syllables bde and legs, bde referring to the happiness of happy, i.e., higher, realms and legs referring to “certain 
goodness,” i.e., liberation from cyclic existence or enlightenm ent. Thus “well-being” implies both temporary and ultimate 
happiness. 
86 Tib. dkon mchog , “rare (and) precious” is the word used for Jewel  in the context of taking refuge. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
66 Thus if someone has the intel ligence to differentiate between  what is a refuge and what 
is not a refuge, it is appropriate for him to take refuge in the undeceiving protector, the 
Buddha Bhagavan. This also characterizes the Dharma Jewel and the Sa ṅgha Jewel. From 
Seventy Verses on Taking Refuge (Tri śaraṇagamana) :  
Buddha, Dharma, Sa ṅgha are 
The refuge of those who want liberation. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B1B-2 The reasons why they are worthy to be refuges 
This has two points: 
A The actual reasons  
Someone who is free from all fear, skilled in  the means of liberating others from fear, 
steeped in great compassion toward everyone without closeness and distance, and who works for the welfare of all those who help him or do not help him, such a one is worthy 
to be a refuge. As only the Buddha has those qualifications, while Īśvara and the like do 
not, he is a refuge. For that reason, the Dharma taught by him, as well as the Sa ṅgha of 
hearers, are also [85] worthy to be refuges. 
B Advice to be persistent in conviction, the principal cause  
That being so, once you have derived certainty with regard to the objects of refuge set 
forth in the Compendium , when you are able to rely on them with a single-pointed mind, 
it is impossible for you not to  be protected. Therefore you should generate certainty from 
the bottom of your heart. Of the two causes for being protected, there is no 
incompleteness in the external one, since our Teacher has already accomplished it. 
However, due to the internal cause—taking hold of that refuge trustingly—not having 
come about, we suffer.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B1C The way in which to take refuge as much as you can 
This has four points: 
1 Taking refuge understanding their positive qualities 
2 Taking refuge understanding their distinctions 
3 An assertion 
4 Taking refuge without advocating other ones 
2B4B-2A2A-1B1C-1 Taking refuge understanding their positive qualities 
The need to be mindful of the positive qualities of the refuges has three points: 
A The positive qualities of the Buddha B The positive qualities of the Dharma 
C The positive qualities of the Sangha 
2B4B-2A2A-1B1C-1A The positi ve qualities of the Buddha 
This has two points: 
1 The actual qualities 
2 Supplementary points 
2B4B-2A2A-1B1C-1A1 The actual qualities 
This has four points: 
A The positive qualities of a buddha’s exalted body 
B The positive qualities of a buddha’s exalted speech 
C The positive qualities of a buddha’s exalted mind 
D The positive qualities of a buddha’s exalted activities  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
67 2B4B-2A2A-1B1C-1A1A The positive qualities of a buddha’s exalted body 
Recollect the major marks and minor characteristics87 of a buddha. In Praise in Analogies  
(Upamastava)  it says:  
Your body is adorned with the marks, 
Beautiful, nectar for the eyes, 
Like a cloudless sky in autumn Ornamented with clusters of stars. 
O Sage, endowed with the color of gold, 
Beautiful, dressed in monastic robes, 
Like a golden mountain top Wrapped in clouds at dusk or dawn. 
Protector, your facial circle’s splendor,  
Although unadorned by jewelry, Is beyond that of the moon disc, Although vast and clear of clouds. 
If the lotus of your mouth 
And a lotus in bloom in the sun  Are beheld by a bee, the bee 
Will have its doubts about the lotus. 
Your face endowed with the color of gold, 
White teeth make it more beautiful, [86]  Like immaculate autumn moonbeams 
Filtering through golden mountains. 
Venerable one, your right hand 
Embellished by the mark of the wheel 
Gives breath to people terrified By the cycle of existence. 
O Sage, as you walk, your feet 
Draw what looks like lotuses of 
Glory on the earth you tread; 
With lotuses how could it be lovelier? 
Recollect the major marks and minor characteristics in accordance with this statement. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B1C-1A1B The positive qualities of a buddha’s exalted speech 
You should think about the very marvelous wa y in which any number of sentient beings 
in the world realms ask different questions a ll at once, yet he still apprehends them with 
the wisdom that possesses a single instant of mind and answers all the questions with a 
single utterance understood in their respective languages. In Chapter of the Truthful One  
it says:  
If thus all beings, in  one single moment, 
Ask a question in many definitive words,  
His mind comprehends them in a single moment 
And answers them all with one melodious statement. 
Thus know that the melodious Brahma voice 
Of him who gives instructions rings forth in this world. He thoroughly set in motion the wheel of Dharma, 
                                                 
87 Tib. mtshan dang dpe byad  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
68 Eradicating the suffering of gods and men. 
You should reflect along the lines of this statement. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B1C-1A1C The positive qualities of a buddha’s exalted mind 
This has two points: 
1 The positive qualities of knowledge  
2 The positive qualities of mercy 
2B4B-2A2A-1B1C-1A1C-1 The positive qualities of knowledge 
Since all knowable objects—modes and varieties—are engaged by the Sage’s 
unobstructed knowledge like an amalaki  fruit88 placed on the palm of his hand, the 
diverse knowable objects are encompassed by the Sage’s knowledge. However, they are 
not pervaded by others’ knowledge since knowable objects are vast whereas their consciousnesses are narrow. In this regard it says in 
Praise of the One Worthy of Praise 
(Varṇāhavarṇestotra) :  
Only your exalted wisdom, [87] Encompasses all the knowable objects; For all others apart from you 
Some knowable objects remain to be known. 
And: 
Bhagavan, the phenomena of all times, 
All aspects, all places of origin, 
Are spheres of activity of your mind, Like an 
amalaki  fruit in your palm. 
As regards phenomena, static or mobile, 
Single or various and distinct, 
There’s nothing your mind is obstructed from, Like wind moving to and fro in space. 
You should reflect in accord ance with these statements. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B1C-1A1C-2 The positive qualities of mercy 
Just as sentient beings are bound by the afflictions without any control, the Sage is 
bound by great compassion without control, and therefore great compassion continuously arises in him when he perceives suffering migrating beings. In the 
One Hundred and Fifty 
Verses  it says: 
All of these migrating beings Are equally bound by the afflictions. 
In order to untie their afflictions, 
You have long been bound by compassion. 
Should I first prostrate to you 
Or to that which causes you  
To stay long in sa ṃsāra, aware 
Of its faults—gre at compassion? 
In 
Chapter of the Truthful One  it also says: 
When he sees the many beings perpetually 
Obscured by stupidity, mental darkness, gloom, and 
                                                 
88 A fruit with a somewhat transparen t skin that allows for the veins, seeds, and pulp to shine through. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
69 Imprisoned in the prison  of cyclic existence, 
Great compassion is born in the holy sage. 
Remember his mercy in accord ance with these statements. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B1C-1A1D The positive qualit ies of a buddha’s exalted activities 
By means of both the spontaneous and the uninterrupted exalted activities of his exalted 
body, exalted speech, and exalted mind, he benefits all sentient beings. In fact insofar as a disciple is fit for guidance, it is impossible  for a Sage not to give that trainee what is 
excellent and pull him out of his degeneration. Th at is why it is stated that he definitely 
performs all the approp riate actions. [88]  
2B4B-2A2A-1B1C-1A2 Supplementary points 
This has three points: 
A Gaining certainty in your conviction: the cause of taking refuge purely 
Potowa said this: “If you keep contemplating again and again, the firmer your conviction and the purer your mental continuum becomes,  the more blessings will arise. Since you 
gain certain knowledge in this regard, you will take refuge from the bottom of your heart 
and then, if you merely train in the training s, everything you do will become an instance 
of practicing the Buddha’s teachings.” 
B Not gaining conviction 
We do not value the Buddha’s exalted knowledge even as much as we would a keen 
female fortuneteller.  If a keen fortuneteller were to tell  you, ‘I know there will be no bad 
luck for you this year,’ you would walk away happy and comfortable. If she were to say, 
‘This year there will be great misfortune. Do this. Don’t do that!’ you would try hard to 
accomplish it, and if you did not accomplish it, you would think, ‘I did not accomplish 
what she told me to do’ and your mind would be anxious. But if the Buddha says, ‘Do this 
and that. Accomplish this and that,’ do you take it on? If you do not accomplish it, does 
your mind become anxious? To say: ‘From th e point of view of Dharma, those words may 
be explained as follows: due to place and time that would be inconvenient now. I must 
do this,’ is to ignore the Buddha’s statements and proceed on the basis of your own 
understanding.”  
If you turn your mind inward and investigate this in detail rather than being 
unquestioningly happy, befuddled by the mere words, it will strike you as very true.  
C Insistent advice to achieve certainty 
Therefore think about the Buddha’s positive qualities again and again, and strive to 
achieve as much certainty in them as possible. If it develops, you will have reached the main point of taking refuge because a sim ilar certainty will come co ncerning the Dharma 
that you have received from him and the Sa ṅgha of those who have accomplished that 
Dharma. Without it, there is no way that taking refuge or taming the mind, let alone 
other paths, will occur either.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B1C-1B The positive qualities of the Dharma 
On account of your respect for the Buddha, you should be mindful thinking: “The fact 
that the Buddha has [89] limitless positive qualities arose from his manifesting and 
meditating on the Dharma of scriptures and realization, true cessations and true paths, 
the epitome of the abandonment of faults and the achievement of positive qualities.” 
That is the intention of the Compendium of the Teachings (Dharmasa ṃgīti).  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
70 2B4B-2A2A-1B1C-1C The positi ve qualities of the Sangha 
This refers mainly to persons who are āryas. Recalling the positi ve qualities of the 
Dharma, you will be mindful of those who accompli sh it correctly. That is the intention of 
the Compendium of the Teachings . 
2B4B-2A2A-1B1C-2 Taking refuge understanding their distinctions 
As is apparent from Compendium of Determination  (Viniścayasaṃgraha ), you should take 
refuge aware of the distinctions between the Three Jewels.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B1C-3 An assertion 
As is apparent from the Commentary on the “S ūtra on the Discipline” (Vinayas ūtrațīkā), 
you should take refuge in terms of consider ing the Buddha to be the one who teaches the 
refuge; the Dharma to be nirv āṇa, which is the actual refuge; and the Sa ṅgha to be the 
companions who accomplish refuge.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B1C-4 Taking refuge without advocating other ones  
Having understood the superiority and inferiority of, respectively, Buddhist and non-
Buddhist teachers, teachings, and students, consider the Three Jewels alone to be a 
refuge and do not consider teachers and so forth who are incompatible with them to be a 
refuge. With respect to the difference betw een the two sets, the difference between the 
teachers is that the Buddha is without faults and has completed the positive qualities 
while other teachers are the opposite to that. In Praise of the Exalted  One (Viśeṣastava)  
it says:  
Having abandoned the other teachers, 
Bhagavan, I take refuge in you. 
If you ask me why—because You have no faults, only positive qualities. 
And: 
The more I’ve thought  About the scriptures
89 of others,  
The tīrthikas,90 the more 
My faith in you, Protector, has grown. 
 Those whose minds are wasted through the Faulty tenets of non-omniscience, 
Whose thinking is wasted, do not see [90] 
Faultless teachers—not even you.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B1D The stages of training after having taken refuge 
This has two points: 
1 The actual precepts  
2 Eliminating inaccuracies with respect to the precepts of taking refuge 
2B4B-2A2A-1B1D-1 The actual precepts  
This has two points: 
A Specific precepts for the individual objects of refuge 
B Common precepts for all three objects of refuge 
                                                 
89 Tib. gzhung lugs , literally “scriptural traditions.” 
90 Tib. mu stegs , usually translated here as “Forders.” According to one etymology, the proponents of six principal Indian 
tenet systems at the time of the Buddha were referred to as Forders  because they claimed to point out fords for crossing 
the river of suffering—paths to liberation. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
71 2B4B-2A2A-1B1D-1A Specific precepts for the individual objects of refuge 
This has two points: 
1 Precepts of prohibition91 
2 Precepts of accomplishment92 
2B4B-2A2A-1B1D-1A1 Precepts of prohibition 
From the Great Final Nirv āṇa Sūtra: 
One who takes refuge in the three  
Is a perfect approacher to virtue.93 
He will never ever take 
Refuge in some other gods. 
One who takes refuge in the Dharma94  
Is free from the mind to harm or kill. 
One who takes refuge in the Sa ṅgha 
Does not mingle with the Forders. 
In accordance with this statemen t there are the three precepts:  
1. not to take refuge in other gods,  
2. to abandon causing harm or difficulty to sentient beings, and  
3. not to associate with the Forders.  
A Not to take refuge in other gods 
If one does not even regard powerful worldly gods, Rudra, Vi ṣṇu, and the like as long-
term refuges, there is no need to speak of n āgas and local spirits who belong to the 
hungry ghosts. In this regard, while it is inappropriate to re ly on them out of a lack of 
conviction in the three objects of refuge, it is not inappropriate to seek their assistance 
for some action of temporary character. By wa y of example, it is like seeking assistance 
from a benefactor for one’s livelihood or like relying on a doctor in hope of being cured 
from an illness.  
B To give up causing harm or difficulty to sentient beings 
You should abandon causing harm or difficulty  to humans, animals, and so forth through 
thought or actions like beating them, binding them, ensnaring them, piercing their noses, 
and loading them unbearably.  
C Not to associate with non-Buddhists 
You should not conform to those who are un convinced by the prot ection of the Three 
Jewels and who denigrate them. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B1D-1A2 Precepts of accomplishment 
This has three points: 
A How to train with respect to representations of the Buddha 
B How to train with respect to representations of the Dharma C How to train with respect to representations of the Sangha 
2B4B-2A2A-1B1D-1A2A How to train with respect to representations of the Buddha 
This has two points: 
                                                 
91 Tib. dgag pa’i bslab bya , precepts regarding what one should stop or cease doing. 
92 Tib. bsgrub pa’i bslab bya , precepts regarding what is to be practiced or accomplished. 
93 Tib. dge bsnyen , rendered here as “approacher to virtue” is the equivalent of the Sanskrit term upāsaka. 
94 Tib. dam pa’i chos , literally “the holy Dharma.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
72 1 The actual way to train with respect to representations of the Buddha [91] 
However excellent or flawed painted pictures of the Buddha’s body may be, do not 
disparage them and do not put them on the ground when inconvenienced. Having given 
up the irreverence of pawning them and so forth and defaming them, regard them as fields of respect like the Teacher himself. In 
Friendly  Letter  it says:  
...The way the learned honor any form 
Of the Sugata, even one made from wood. 
2 Examples of the fully ripened effects of past irreverence 
In Exegesis of the Discipline  (Vinayaviba ṅgha) it is stated that M ānavakapila abused 
members of the Sa ṅgha who were learners and non-learners in eighteen different ways, 
saying things like: “You elephant heads! How do you know what is Dharma and what is 
not?” Because of that, he was born as a sea monster, a species of fish with eighteen 
different heads, and remained an animal from the time of the Teacher K āśyapa to that of 
the Śākya King. 
In Minor Precepts  of the Vinaya (Vinayak ṣudrakavastu)  it says that after the teacher 
Krakucchanda had passed into nirv āṇa, when King C ārumat had a big st ūpa built, a hired 
workman twice scoffed at it saying : “Who knows when such a huge st ūpa will ever be 
finished.” Later on when the st ūpa had been finished nicely, he felt sorry and so had a 
golden bell made with his wages and tied it to the st ūpa. Due to that he was born as 
“The Well-Sounding One” with an ugly complexion and a small body but a very pleasant 
voice. Therefore do not talk about representa tions saying “This is like that.” It is 
inappropriate to disparage the accomplishme nt of a great representation from good 
materials and to dissuade others from it through disruptive remarks. 
The Great Yogi Jangchub Rinchen gave Ati śa a statue of Mañju śrī to look at and asked: 
“What is the quality like? If it is good, I’ll take it and donate the four gold coins Rongpa 
Gargé has given me.” [92] Ati śa said: “There is nothing that is not excellent about the 
Venerable One’s body. As for the sculptor, he is average.” Having said this, he placed the 
statue on the crown of his head.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B1D-1A2B Precepts associated with the Dharma  
This has two points: 
1 The actual precepts 
2 How the masters of former times acted 
2B4B-2A2A-1B1D-1A2B-1 The actual precepts 
Abandon irreverence to as little as four words of Dharma. Abandon pawning volumes of 
scripture, trading them, putting them on the bare ground or in inconvenient places, carrying them around together with shoes, stepping over them and so forth. Instead treat 
them with respect as if th ey were the Dharma Jewel. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B1D-1A2B-2 How the masters of former times acted 
It is said that Geshe Chenngawa used to put his palms together and rise up when he saw 
scriptures of the Buddha’s teachings being brought to him. Later on, when he could not 
get up any more, he used to simply put his palms together. 
It is said that when Ati śa came to Ngari, one tantric practi tioner did not listen to Dharma 
teachings from him. However, when a scribe smeared residue from hi s teeth on a Dharma 
text, and Ati śa saw it and, unable to bear it, said: “Alas! That’s no good. That’s no 
good!,” the tantrika gained faith and listened to his teachings.  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
73 Sharawa said: “We play around with the Dharma in all sorts of ways. Irreverence for the 
Dharma and the expounders of the Dharma is a cause for distorted wisdom. We are 
already confused enough now. What will we do if we become even more confused?”  
2B4B-2A2A-1B1D-1A2C Precepts with regard to the Sangha  
This has two points: 
1 The actual precepts 
2 How the masters of former times acted and the benefits of that 
2B4B-2A2A-1B1D-1A2C-1 The actual precepts 
You should not abuse or despise the Sa ṅgha or even those who merely bear the signs of 
ordination. Nor should you look at them as opponents in any way, having made arbitrary 
divisions in terms of “your group and my group.” Instead you should treat them with respect as if they were the Sa ṅgha Jewel. In 
Exhortation to the Extraordinary Attitude  it 
says: 
Those who, dwelling in fore sts, wish for qualities,  
Should not look for faults in other people. 
They should not produce the attitude: 
“I’m especially noble, I’m the best.” 
All carelessness grows out of this complacence.95 [93] 
Don’t let contempt for lesser monks arise. 
You won’t reach liberation for one eon. 
This is the succession of this teaching.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B1D-1A2C-2 How the masters of former times acted and the benefits of that 
Geshe Dromtönpa and the Great Yogi, instead of  stepping over a piece of yellow material 
on the ground, would shake it and carry it to a clean place. You should train in 
accordance with their practice, for others will respect you as much  as you respect the 
Three Jewels. In the King of Meditative Stabilizations S ūtra it says:  
What kind of actions you have done, 
That kind of effects you will obtain. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B1D-1B Common precepts for all three objects of refuge 
This has six points: 
1 Remembering the differences and positive qualities of the Three Jewels and, due to that, taking 
refuge in them again and again 
2 Remembering their great kindness and, due to that, exerting yourself at all times to make 
offerings to them and offering them even the first portion of your food and drink 
3 Remembering their great compassion and, due to that, establishing other migrating beings in such 
a mode of behavior 
4 Whatever you do and whatever you need, worshipping the Three Jewels, supplicating them, and 
abandoning all other worldly methods 
5 Aware of the benefits, taking refuge three times a day and three times at night  
6 Not giving up the Three Jewels even for the sake of your life or a laugh and guarding against this 
2B4B-2A2A-1B1D-1B1 Remembering the differences and positive qualities of the Three 
Jewels and, due to that, taking refuge in them again and again 
As explained above, think about the differences between non-Buddhists and Buddhists as 
well as between the Three Jewels, and think about their positive qualities.  
                                                 
95 Tib. rgyags ‘di bag med kun gyi rtsa ba ste , literally “This complacence is the root of all carelessness.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
74 2B4B-2A2A-1B1D-1B2 Remembering their great kindness and, due to that, exerting 
yourself at all times to make offerings to them and offering  them even the first portion 
of your food and drink 
This has ten points: 
A Constant offerings 
You should understand all the well-being you experience as being the kindness of the 
Three Jewels and make offerings to them by acknowledging that. 
B The peculiarity that the collections are completed with little trouble  
Since you constantly need to eat and drink,  [94] you will complete a great amount of 
collection of merit with little trouble if you k eep on offering the first portion of food and 
drink each time. Therefore you should offer the first portion of whatever you enjoy, 
including water, from the bottom of your heart. 
C Impure offerings  
Moreover Sharawa said: “You shouldn’t make offerings of the blue mold on coagulated milk and yellow leaves. Instead you should make them of something good. Worship 
comes about each time through offering the first portion of tea but not through 
something like cleaning out the dust.” 
D The manner of respect when offering 
In a sūtra it says:  
For instance, if at the time of planting seeds in a fertile field something 
remains unplanted, it cannot just be left. Likewise, may the field of merit, that 
sublime field from which all future well-being springs and which can be planted 
with the seed of well-being throughout all four seasons, be tilled with the plow 
of faith.  
If that which needs to be do ne does not ha ppen, it will be an extremely heavy loss. 
E The need to exert yourself in making offerings 
Not to have even as much regard for the best of fields as for an ordinary field is not a 
good attitude, therefore strive at all times to make offerings to the Three Jewels.  
F High status, paths, etc. are attained through making offerings in that way 
If you do that, through the power of the roots of virtue that grow in the most excellent field, the power of your intelligence with re gard to the stages of  the path will increase. 
As long as your intelligence is very feeble , such that you do not retain the words while 
listening, do not understand the meaning while reflecting, and nothing arises in your 
mind during meditation, the quintessential instruction is to rely on the power of the field.  
G How the size of the offerings and so forth is a distinction to do with the mind 
Also the offering is not confined by the thing o ffered, it is confined by your faith. As is 
stated in the scriptures, if you have faith, it is enough to offer mandalas, water, and 
offerings that no one owns, therefore you should act accordingly even if you do not have 
any material things to offer. [95] Not to be able to give, even though you have 
something, saying: “I am a wretched pauper without any merits, I do not have any other 
possessions to offer,”96 would be, in the words of Potowa, like a blind person putting 
some cheap aromatic plant into a fragrant conch-shell container and trying to fool 
someone with eye-sight by calling it “sandalwood and camphor perfume.”  
H How to train in uprightness with regard to offering substances, following the masters of former times  
                                                 
96 This verse from Bodhicary āvatāra (chapter 2, verse 7) is commonly re cited during offering ceremonies.  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
75 Puchungwa said: “At first I used to offer a pungent aromatic plant. Then I had the means 
to offer sweet incense prepared from four substances. Now I offer the most exquisitely 
fragrant aloe wood, Chinese cypress, and so forth.” In accordance with this statement, if 
you do not give anything out of contempt for small offerings, you will go on like that throughout your entire life. However, if you develop perseverance from a lesser stage, 
you will get better and better. Therefore you sh ould train following Puchungwa’s practice. 
It is said that he once prepared in cense worth twenty-two gold coins.  
I Refutation of the manner of speaking to the effect that the way bodhisattvas make offerings, having gained 
control over material things, is impure 
If great bodhisattvas, having gained control over the necessities of life, emanate many 
hundreds of thousands of bodies and for each body, again, emanate hundreds of thousands of hands and so forth, and if they appear in all the fields making offerings to 
the Victors for many eons, the statement by those who know only the fallacious 
appearance of positive qualities that “As for me, I do not hope to reach enlightenment in 
that way,” is the idle talk of people who ha ve very little familiarity with the Dharma.  
J How to make offerings with other vast things  
In the Cloud  of Jewels of S ūtra (Ratnameghas ūtra) it says:  
In the s ūtra collections you should study w hat are very vast offerings and 
honors and from the bottom of your heart dedicate them with the supreme 
extraordinary attitude to the buddhas and bodhisattvas. 
You should do it like that. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B1D-1B3 Remembering their great compassion and, due to that, establishing 
other migrating beings in such a mode of behavior 
Out of mercy you should establish other sentient beings in taking refuge as much as you 
can. [96] 
2B4B-2A2A-1B1D-1B4 Whatever you do and whatever you need, worshipping the Three 
Jewels, supplicating them, and abandoning all other worldly methods 
Whatever you do and whatever requirements you see, rely on the Three Jewels and do what is in agreement with them, such as ma king offerings to them. However, it is 
inappropriate to rely in every way on that which is not in agreement with them such as 
Bön. Consequently you should trust the Three Jewels at all times.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B1D-1B5 Aware of the benefits, taking refuge three times a day and three 
times at night 
This has eight points: 
A Taking refuge is the measure of being a Buddhist 
B Taking refuge is the basis of all vows  
C The karmic obscurations accumulated previously are reduced and exhausted 
D You accumulate vast merit 
E You will not fall into the lower realms 
F You will not be harmed by human and non-human obstacles 
G You will attain everything you wish H You will swiftly attain buddhahood 
2B4B-2A2A-1B1D-1B5A Taking refuge is the measure of being a Buddhist 
Although, generally speaking, there appear to be many ways of positing what constitutes 
non-Buddhists and Buddhists, it is widely known that the Elder and Śāntipa distinguished 
them by their taking of refuge. Therefore, Buddhists should be understood to be those 
who have achieved the taking of refuge and have not given it up. Hence, as for the 
measure of being a Buddhist, it is necessary to consider the Three Jewels to be one’s 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
76 teacher and so forth from the bottom of one’s heart. Without that, even though you do 
virtuous deeds, you will not be included among Buddhists.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B1D-1B5B Taking refuge is the basis of all vows 
In the auto-commentary to the Treasury  of Manifest Knowledge it says:  
Those who take refuge gain access to taking all the vows correctly. 
And in Seventy Verses on Taking Refuge  it also says: 
Upāsakas take refuge in the three; 
That is the root of the eight vows. 
The intention is that, through taking refuge, the thought of passing beyond sorrow97 is 
stabilized and that the vows spring from that.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B1D-1B5C The karmic obscurations accumulated previously are reduced and 
exhausted 
In the Compendium of Trainings  it says: 
Here, in the context of showing that nega tivities are purified by taking refuge, 
the story of the pig should be presented as an illustration. 
For instance, a son of a god who was going to be reborn as a pig, [97] through taking 
refuge was not born as one. It is stated that: 
Those who have taken refuge in the Buddha, 
Will not go to the lower realms. 
They give up their human body 
And obtain that of a god. 
It is stated similarly with respect to the Dharma and Sa ṅgha.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B1D-1B5D You accumulate vast merit 
In the Compendium of the Perfections  (Pāramitāsamāsa) it says:  
If the merit of refuge were to take shape, even 
These three realms would be small as a vessel. 
The great oceans, foremost bodies of water, Could not ever measure it. 
That is how vast it is. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B1D-1B5E You will not fall into the bad migrations 
You should understand this from the above.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B1D-1B5F You will not be harmed by human and non-human obstacles 
This is easy to understand. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B1D-1B5G You will attain everything you wish  
Whatever Dharma activity you do, if at th e beginning you make offerings to the Three 
Jewels, take refuge in them, and supplicate  them, it will easily be accomplished.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B1D-1B5H You will swiftly attain buddhahood 
In the Sūtra Requested by a Lion (Si ṃhaparipŗcchā) it says:  
                                                 
97 Tib. myang ‘das kyi bsam pa . The literal meaning of myang ‘das , a contraction of mya ngan las ‘das pa , is “passing 
beyond sorrow.” It is the Tibetan rendering of the Sanskrit term nirvāṇa. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
77 Through faith unfreedom is abandoned. 
In accordance with that, you ob tain the distinguished leisures  and, having found refuge, 
train in the special path, wher eby you will become a buddha without a long delay. Mindful 
of these kinds of benefits, you should take refuge three times a day and three times at 
night. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B1D-1B6 Not giving up the Three Jewels even for the sake of your life or a 
laugh and guarding against this 
There is no doubt that we wil l be separated from this body, life, and possessions. If we 
give up the Three Jewels for their sake, there will be continuous suffering in all 
successive lives to come. Therefore we should vow not to abandon our refuge, come 
what may, and not even utter words about giving up our refuge for a laugh. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B1D-2 Eliminating inaccuracies with respect to the precepts of taking refuge 
This has four points: 
A Refutation of that which is not a precept 
B The sources of the specific precepts C The difference between degenerating and relinquishing the precepts 
D The advice not to transgress the precepts because of how great the benefits are, such as being the entry 
gate to the teachings and so forth 
2B4B-2A2A-1B1D-2A Refutation of that which is not a precept 
Former masters stated a precept to the effect  that, in whatever direction you are going, 
you should train in taki ng refuge in the tath āgata of that direction, but I have not seen a 
source for that.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B1D-2B The sources of the specific precepts 
Thus the six common precepts for all the object s of refuge are just like they appear in 
the Commentary on the Difficult Points of the “Lamp for the Path .” [98] The first three 
specific precepts are explained in the S ūtra Collection, whereas the latter three appear in 
Six Aspects of Taking Refuge ( Ṣaḍaṅgaśaraṇa). 
2B4B-2A2A-1B1D-2C The difference between degenerating and relinquishing the precepts 
As for the way in which a transgression of these precepts becomes a cause for 
degenerating or relinquishing them, a transgression of the rule not to give up your refuge 
even for the sake of your life actually constitu tes the relinquishing of it. Similarly, even if 
you do not give up the Three Jewels but dualistically uphold teachers and so forth that 
are incompatible with them, you will transgress the precept of not advocating another 
refuge, and, by not having faith in the refuges,  you will also relinquish it. I think that if 
these do not occur, it is a mere transgression of the precepts but not a cause for 
relinquishing them. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B1D-2D The advice not to transgress the precepts because of how great the benefits are, such as 
being the entry gate to the teachings and so forth 
Thus, taking refuge is the great entry gate to  the Buddha’s teachings. If your taking of 
refuge is not just words, you will be relyin g on a superior power, whereby you will not be 
thwarted by external or internal obstacles, and the various qualities will come about 
easily and it will be unlikely that they will deteriorate, whereby they will increase more 
and more. So it is vital that you uphold your refuge by means of being mindful of the fear 
and the positive qualities explained above, an d that you put effort into not transgressing 
its precepts.  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
78 KARMA AND ITS EFFECTS 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2 Generating the faith of conviction in karma and its effects 
This has three points: 
A Considering karma and its effects in general 
B Considering karma and its effects in particular 
C Having considered karma and its effects, how to engage in virtue and counteract non-virtue 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A Considering karma98 and its effects in general 
This has two points: 
1 The actual way to consider karma and its effects in general 
2 Considering the specific divisions 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-1 The actual way to cons ider karma and its effects in general 
This has four points: 
A How karma is certain 
B The great increase of karma 
C You do not meet with karma you have not created 
D Karma you have created does not dissipate 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-1 How karma is certain 
This has two points: 
A The actual way in which karma is certain 
All happiness having the aspect of pleasant feeling, whether in ordinary beings or āryas—
even as little as that which is generated in a sentient being born in hell in dependence on 
a cool wind springing up—arises from virtuous karma accumulated previously. [99] There 
is no way for happiness to arise from non-virtuous karma. All suffering having the aspect 
of painful feeling—even as little as that which is generated in the mind of an arhat—
arises from non-virtuous karma accumulated previously. There is no way for suffering to 
arise from virtuous karma. In Precious Garland  it says:  
From non-virtue, every suffering; 
Likewise, all the lower realms. 
From virtue, all the happy realms and 
Happiness in all rebirths. 
B Explanations of this as the basis of all wholesome qualities 
Therefore, happiness and suffering do not arise without cause or from an incongruous 
cause such as a primal matter and Īśvara. In general, happiness and suffering arise from 
virtuous and non-virtuous karma, and the various specifics of happiness and suffering 
also arise individually from the various specifics of the two types of karma without any 
inconsistency. To gain certainty with regard to actions and their effects being certain and 
infallible is said to be the correct view of a ll Buddhists and is praised as the foundation of 
all wholesome qualities. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-1B The great increase of karma 
There is nothing among external causes and effects that resembles the increase of 
internal causes and effects, for even from a small virtuous karma there arises the effect 
of enormous happiness, while even from a small non-virtuous karma there arises the 
effect of enormous suffering. In Collection of Indicative Verses it says:  
                                                 
98 In Tibetan, the word for “act ion” and “karma” is the same (las). It will be useful to keep this in mind throughout the 
following explanations on karma. The word karma  has been chosen in cases where the word action  failed to put across 
the implied relation with an effect, e.g. “karma th at is certainly experienced” or “accumulate karma.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
79 Even committing a small negativity, 
Will result in great anxiety  
And great disasters in future worlds, 
Like poison seeping to the core. 
Even committing a little merit, 
In future worlds brings great happiness, 
Causing greatly meaningful things, 
Like grains that ripen to perfection. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-1C You do not meet with karma you have not created [100] 
If you have not accumulated karma that will become th e cause for experiencing 
happiness or suffering, you wi ll never experience the happines s or suffering that is its 
effect. Also, those who enjoy the effects of the Teacher’s accumulation of an incalculable 
collection of merit do not need to accumulate all its causes, however, they do need to 
accumulate one part of them. 99  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-1D Karma you have created does not dissipate 
The virtuous and non-virtuous actions that have been done issue forth pleasant and 
unpleasant effects. In Praise of the Exalted One  it says:  
Brahmins say they can transfer Virtues and negativities 
As though giving and taking them. 
You said what is done won’t vanish, 
What is not will not be met. 
And from the 
King of Meditative Stabilizations S ūtra: 
Plus you cannot but touch your deeds, 
What others did you will not feel. 
And from Basis of Script ural Transmission : 
Karmas do not go to waste Even in a hundred eons. 
When they find the time and prerequisites, They will bring effects for embodied beings.
100 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2 Considering the specific divisions 
This has two points: 
A Indicating that there are mainly ten paths of action 
B Settling actions and their effects 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2A Indicating that there are mainly ten paths of action  
This has three points: 
1 Explanation that there are ten in the sutras and treatises 
Thus, first generate certainty concerning the ways of actions and their effects through 
realizing that effects, happiness and suffering,  are certain to have their individual causes, 
that karma increases greatly, that you do no t meet with anything you have not created, 
                                                 
99 Geshe Thubten Ngawang (Tibetan Center Hamburg) offe red the following explanation for this passage: Buddha 
Śākyamuni, apart from accumulating the collections of merit necessary for attaining buddhahood, also spent some time 
accumulating further merit which he dedicated to the goal  that his followers may meet with the necessary living 
conditions. However, according to the laws of karma, they  can only experience the corresponding results if they 
themselves accumulate part of the causes. 
100 Tib. lus can rnams , “those endowed with bodies.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
80 and that karma does not dissipate. Now, what actions should be adopted and rejected? In 
general, the doors for engaging in good conduct and faulty conduct are determined to be 
three. Although not all virtues and non-virtues of the three doors are included in the ten 
paths of action, the Bhagavan, summing up the essential points, has stated the more obvious or coarser virtues and non-virtues, the great foundations of misdeeds, as the ten 
unwholesome paths of action. Having seen that when they are abandoned, the most 
significant points are also included in ten, he taught them to be the ten wholesome paths 
of action.[101] In 
Treasury  of Manifest Knowledge  it says:  
He subsumed the most obvious among them. The various virtues and non-virtues 
Were stated as ten paths of action. 
Also, in 
Exegesis of the  Discipline  it says:  
Guarding your speech and comple tely restraining your mind, 
Refraining from non-virtuous deeds with your body, Once you have purified these three paths of action, You will attain the path that was taught by the Seer.  
2 Explanation of cherishing the adoption and abandonment of the ten paths of action 
Therefore the meaning of the praise to the ethics of abandoning the ten non-virtues from 
the Sūtra on the Ten Grounds  (Daśabhūmikasūtra) is summarized in the  Supplement to 
the “Middle Way” (Madhyamak āvatāra):  
For high status certain goodness101  
Of ordinary beings, those born from his speech,102 
Those with the nature of self-enlightenment, 103 and 
Victors’ children104, the cause is none other than ethics. 
3 Giving up hypocrisy 
That being so, it would be quite disgraceful if someone who does not rely on the mind of 
restraint again and again and guard even a bit of ethics, were to say: “As for me, I am a 
Mahāyānist.” In the Sūtra of Kṣitigarbha (K ṣitigarbhas ūtra) it says:  
By means of these ten virtuous paths of actions you become a buddha. On the 
other hand, if one who does not guard even a single virtuous path of action 
throughout his life nevertheless says: “I am a Mah āyānist. I seek unsurpassed, 
perfectly complete enlightenment,” that person is an utter hypocrite and a 
great liar, deceiving the world before the eyes of all the buddha bhagavans 
and propounding nihilism. At the time of  death, he will be deluded and go to 
the wrongly fallen. 
“Wrongly fallen” should be understood as a synonym for the miserable lower realms. 
[102] 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B Settling actions and their effects 
This has three points: 
1 Negative actions and their effects 
2 Positive actions and their effects 
3 Indication of other divisions of actions 
                                                 
101 Literally “for certain goodness and high status.” 
102 Synonym for hearers.  
103 Synonym for solitary realizers. 
104 Synonym for bodhisattva. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
81 2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1 Negative actions and their effects 
This has three points: 
A The actual negative paths of action 
B Differences in weight 
C Indication of their effects 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A The actual negative paths of action 
This has two points: 
1 The actual paths of action 
2 The distinction between actions and paths of actions 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1 The actual paths of action 
This has ten points: 
[A Killing 
B Stealing C Sexual misconduct 
D Lying 
E Divisive speech F Harsh words 
G Idle talk 
H Covetousness I Harmful intent J Wrong views] 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1A Killing 
This has four points: 
1 Basis  
2 Attitude 
3 Performance  
4 Completion 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1A1 Basis 
The basis105 of killing is anot her sentient being. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1A2 Attitude 
This has three points: 
A Discrimination 
With regard to the basis there are: 
1. the discrimination of a sentient being as a sentient being,  
2. the discrimination of a sentient being as not a sentient being, 
3. the discrimination of what is not a sentient being as not a sentient being, and  
4. the discrimination of what is not a sentient being as a sentient being. 
The first and third discriminations are unmistaken, while the second and fourth are 
mistaken. That is, if you have  the motivation, for instance,  of intending to kill only 
Devadatta but then, when it comes to the performance, you mistakenly kill Yajñadatta, 
there is no negativity to do with the actual basis. For that, an unmistaken discrimination 
would be necessary. However, if at the time of the performance, you have the general 
motivation to kill whoever is at hand, an unmistaken discri mination is not necessary. You 
should be aware of this rule also with regard to the remaining nine as appropriate.  
B Mental affliction 
The mental affliction is any of the three poisons.  
                                                 
105 In this context the term “basis” ( gzhi) refers to the object of the action. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
82 C Motivation 
The motivation consists in the wish to kill. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1A3 Performance 
This has two points: 
A The performer 
It is the same whether you yourself perfor m the killing or whether you cause someone 
else to do it.  
B The entity of the performance 
The entity of the performance is doing it by means of a weapon, poison, mantra, or 
whatever it is.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1A4 Completion 
The completion consists in the death of the other being, due to the condition of the performance, at that time or at another time before you yourself die.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1B Stealing 
This has four points: 
[1 Basis 
2 Attitude 3 Performance 
4 Completion] 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1B1 Basis 
The basis of stealing is anything that someone else has obtained.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1B2 Attitude 
As for the attitude, among the three, the discrimination and the mental affliction are as 
above106. [103] The motivation consists in the wish to take it away from the other person 
without it having been given. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1B3 Performance 
This has two points: 
A The performer 
As regards the performance, the pe rformer is as explained above.  
B The entity of the performance 
As for the entity of the performance, it is the same whether you take something by force 
or steal it sneakily. In addition, being deceitful with respect to a debt or a trust and using 
other fraudulent methods also constitutes stealing. Also, whether it is done for one’s own 
or someone else’s sake or to harm someone and the like, it is stealing. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1B4 Completion 
The completion consists in the arising of the thought that you have obtained it. Or, if you 
have caused someone else to rob or steal, it is enough for that thou ght to arise in him. 
This is like when someone kills someone else due to an order. When the latter dies, the 
negativity of the actual path of action befalls the one who gave the order even if he does 
not know the person is dead. 
                                                 
106 As regards the discrimination, the basis is correctly perceive d as what it is. As regards the mental affliction, one or 
several of the three poisons may be present. This is ho w the following references (“as above”) should also be 
understood. (Oral explanation by Geshe Soepa) 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
83 2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1C Sexual misconduct 
This has four points: 
 [1 Basis 
2 Attitude 3 Performance 
4 Completion] 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1C1 Basis 
The basis of sexual misc onduct has four points: 
A Those you should not have intercourse with  
Those who you should not have intercourse with are your mother and so forth,107 women 
under the care of their mothers and so forth,108 all men109, hermaphrodites, and ordained 
women.  
B Inappropriate body parts 
Inappropriate body parts are those other than the entrance to the womb, such as the 
mouth.  
C Inappropriate places 
Inappropriate places are in the vicinity of gurus, places with st ūpas, and the like.  
D Inappropriate times 
Inappropriate times are pregnancy, when you abide in one-day vows, and so forth.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1C2 Attitude 
This has three points: 
A Discrimination 
The three positions of scholars are110: 
1. The Compendium  states “The discrimination of that as that”—a non-mistaken 
discrimination is necessary. 
2. The Vinaya states that with regard to the defeat of impure conduct, it is the same 
whether the discrimination is mistaken or non-mistaken. 
3. The auto-commentary to the Treasury of Manifest Knowledge explains that if you 
approach someone else’s wife111 discriminating her to be yours, this will not 
constitute the path of action under discussion, and that there are two ways in 
which getting involved with someone else’s wife, discriminating her to be the wife 
of yet someone else, may or may not constitute such a path.  
B Mental affliction [104] 
The mental affliction can be any of the three poisons.  
C Motivation 
The motivation is the wish for intercourse in a manner that constitutes impure conduct.  
                                                 
107 Your mother or other close relatives. 
108 In the corresponding passage of his Great Exposition of the Stages  of the Path to Enlightenment , Je Tsongkhapa also 
mentions women under the care of their families in general as well as the wives of other men. 
109 Following common practice at the time, the text addresse s male readers. Contemporary Tibetan scholars point out 
that to women, the opposites apply.  
110 This phrase has been inserted by Trijang Rinpoche. 
111 Tib. chung ma , “wife”, “mate”, “consort”, “partner.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
84 2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1C3 Performance 
The performance consists in endeavoring for the sake of that. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1C4 Completion 
The completion consists in the two coming together by the two.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1D Lying 
This has four points: 
 [1 Basis 
2 Attitude 3 Performance 
4 Completion] 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1D1 Basis 
The basis of lying has two points: 
A The basis of expression 
The basis of expression is th e four—that which one has seen , heard, distinguished, or 
become fully aware of—as well as their four opposites.  
B An object that comprehends 
That the object comprehends is that the other person understands the meaning.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1D2 Attitude 
This has three points: 
A Discrimination 
The discrimination consists in making something one has seen into something one has 
not seen and the like.  
B Mental affliction 
The mental affliction is any of the three poisons.  
C Motivation 
The motivation is the wish to express it, changing the discrimination. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1D3 Performance 
This has two points: 
A The actual performance 
B Clearing up doubts 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1D3A The actual performance 
The performance consists in indicating something by saying it, by making sure not to say 
anything, or through body language. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1D3B Clearing up doubts 
This has two points: 
[1 Clearing up the doubt that it depends on the purpose 
2 Three approaches concerning the distinction between the actual path of action being incomplete if you enjoin 
someone else to do it] 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1D3B-1 Clearing up the doubt that it depends on the purpose 
Moreover, in the scriptures it says that it is the same whether you say it for your own or 
someone else’s sake. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
85 2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1D3B-2 Three approaches concerning the distinction between the actual path of action 
being incomplete if you enjoin someone else to do it 
This has three points: 
A The approach of the Treatise on the Grounds (Yogacary ābhūmi) 
Here it is stated that with  respect to lying, divisive speech, and harsh words, even 
through your requiring someone else to perform them, these three will come about.  
B Vasubandhu’s approach 
In Treasury of Mani fest Knowledge , the root text and its commentary, it is explained that 
all four associated with speech become path s of action through your requiring someone 
else to perform them.  
C The approach of the Vinaya is to apply them to a downfall 
In the Vinaya it is stated that in order to produce a complete downfall, you yourself must 
speak.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1D4 Completion 
This has two points: 
A The actual completion 
B Clearing up doubts 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1D4A The actual completion 
It is understood by the other person. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1D4B Clearing up doubts 
The auto-commentary to the Treasury of Mani fest Knowledge explains that if it is not 
understood, it becomes merely idle talk. It is also the same for divisive speech and harsh 
words.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1E Divisive speech 
This has four points: 
1 Basis 
The basis of divisive speech ar e sentient beings who are in agreement or in disagreement 
with each other.  
2 Attitude 
Among the three, the discrimination and affliction are as above, [105] whereas the 
motivation consists in the wish to divide sentient beings in agreement and the wish for those in disagreement not to be reconciled. 
3 Performance 
The performance consists in expressing either  pleasant or unpleasa nt subject matter with 
either true or untrue words and saying them fo r either your own or someone else’s sake.  
4 Completion 
The completion consists in the divisive words that were expressed being understood.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1F Harsh words 
This has four points: 
1 Basis 
The basis of harsh words is a sentient being who has become the basis for the arising of 
a hostile attitude.  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
86 2 Attitude 
The discrimination and the mental affliction are as above. The motivation is the wish to 
speak with harsh speech.  
3 Performance  
The performance consists in speaking unpleasant ly, either truthfully or falsely, about the 
person’s faults associated with his lineage, body, ethics, or behavior.  
4 Completion 
The completion consists in the one to whom it was said understanding the meaning.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1G Idle talk 
This has four points: 
1 Basis 
The basis of idle talk is a meaningless topic.  
2 Attitude 
Among the three, although with regard to the discrimination, nothing has been stated 
other than “It is the discrimination of that as that,” here it is to talk having discriminated the very topic one wishes to express as that, because in the case of idle talk there is no 
need for someone to  understand it.  
The mental affliction is any of the poisons.  
The motivation is the wish to talk disconnectedly and randomly.  
3 Performance 
The performance consists in setti ng about uttering idle talk. 
4 Completion 
The completion is to finish uttering idle talk.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1H Covetousness 
This has four points: 
1 Basis 
The basis of covetousness is a possessi on or provision of someone else.  
2 Attitude 
Among the three, the discrimination consists in the discrimination of that basis as that.  
The mental affliction is any of the three poisons.  
The motivation is the wish to make it one’s own.  
3 Performance 
The performance consists in making an effort for the object of that thought.  
4 Completion 
The completion is the thought: “May this possession and so forth be mine!” 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1I Harmful intent 
This has four points: 
1/2 Basis and attitude 
The basis, the discrimination, and the mental affliction of harmful intent are the same as 
with harsh words.  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
87 The motivation is the wish to hit someone and the like: [106] the thought “How nice it 
would be if this person were to be killed or bound, or if his resources were to decline by 
themselves or through someone else” and the like.  
3 Performance 
The performance consists in applyi ng yourself to this thought.  
4 Completion 
The completion consists in the decision to hit and the like.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1J Wrong views 
This has four points: 
 [1 Basis 
2 Attitude 3 Performance 
4 Completion] 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1J1 Basis 
The basis of wrong views is an object that exists.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1J2 Attitude 
Among the three with regard to the attitude, the discrimination consists in discriminating 
the object that is denied as true.  
The mental affliction is any of the three poisons.  
The motivation consists in the wish to deny that object.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1J3 Performance 
This has two points: 
[A The actual performance 
B Divisions] 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1J3A The actual performance 
The performance consists in setting about applying yourself to such a thought.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1J3B Divisions 
This has four points: 
1 Denying causes 
Denying causes consists in the view: “Excellent conduct and faulty conduct do not exist.” 
2 Denying effects 
Denying effects consists in th e view: “Fully ripened effects of those two do not exist.”  
3 Denying activities 
Denying activities has three points:  
1. Denying the activity of planting and retaining the seed: “There is no planting of a 
seed by the father and no retaining of a seed by the mother.”112  
2. Denying the activity of coming and going: “There is no coming from a former 
existence to this one and no going from this one to a future one.”  
                                                 
112 In this regard, Geshe Thubten Soepa explains that all th ese aspects of denying existent phenomena are associated 
with the problem of nihilism, the refusal to accept certain conventional truths. In this context each of them has its 
special significance. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
88 3. Denying the activity of being born: “There is no intermediate state into which 
sentient beings are miraculously born.”  
4 Denying existing things 
This consists in the view: “Arhat s and the like do not exist.”  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-1J4 Completion 
The completion is certainty with respect to your denial.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1A-2 The distinction between actions and paths of action  
Among them, the intentions in the mind are actions but not paths of action. The seven 
actions of body and speech are actions, yet they are also paths of action since they are 
also the basis of operation for the intentions. The three, covetousness and so on, are 
paths of action but not actions.113  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1B Differences in weight 
This has two points: 
1 The weight of the ten paths of action 
2 Incidentally, a summarized indication of the gateways of strong karma [107] 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1B-1 The weight of the ten paths of action  
In Actuality of the Stages  six ways of their being weighty are stated: 
A Strong compounding 
Strong compounding is actions motivated by the strong presence or absence of the three 
poisons.  
B Familiarity 
Familiarity is to have resorted to virtuous and non-virtuous actions for a long time and to have familiarized yourself with them many times.  
C Entity 
As for their entity, in the case of the seve n actions of body and speech, each preceding 
one is weightier than the subsequent one, whereas in the case of the three actions of 
mind, a subsequent one is weightier than the preceding one. 
D Basis 
The basis is benefit or harm to, for instance, the Buddha, the Dharma, the Sa ṅgha, and 
the gurus. 
E One-sided devotion to the discordant side  
One-sided devotion to the discordant side consists in spending your whole life adopting 
non-virtuous actions with one-sided determination and not even doing one single virtue.  
F Elimination of the discordant side 
To eliminate the discordant side is to give up  the side of non-virtue, to become free from 
attachment, and to train in virtuous actions. In Friendly  Letter  it also says: 
Persistence, strong adherence, no antidote,  
A basis with foremost qualities—actions that spring from them 
                                                 
113 Despite the precise distinction drawn here, the general term ten non-virtuous actions  has become common in English. 
Tibetan texts also frequently refer to actions  in less specific contexts although, according to the definition proposed 
here, the last three of the ten non-virtues do not constitute actions. Thus action  should often be understood more 
loosely as a term that only requires  specification in certain contexts. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
89 Are the five great types of non-virtue and virtue. 
Among them, endeavor in virtuous behavior! 
Moreover, there are five because of the divisi on of the basis into two: a basis endowed 
with positive qualities,  such as the Three Jewels, and a basis of benefit, such as one’s 
parents. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1B-2 Incidentally, a su mmarized indication of the gateways of 
strong karma 
This has four points: 
A Great strength by way of the field 
B Great strength by way of the support 
C Great strength by way of the thing 
D Great strength by way of the attitude 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1B-2A Great strength by way of the field 
This has three points: 
1 The field of the Three Jewels  
2 The field of the Sangha 
3 The field of bodhisattvas 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1B-2A1 The field of the Three Jewels  
The Three Jewels, gurus, those who are like gurus, parents, and so forth are gateways of 
strong karma because even if the thoughts toward them ar e not intense and the benefit 
or harm done to them is small, the merit [108] and misdeed are great. In this regard it 
says in Mindfulness  of the Excellent Teaching (Saddharm ānusmŗtyupasth āna) that the 
karma of stealing even a little thing from the Three Jewels is purified—in the case of the 
Buddha and the Dharma—if it is returned. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1B-2A2 The field of the Sangha 
However, in the case of the Sa ṅgha, it is not purified until the feeling is experienced. 
Moreover it is stated that in case it wa s a means of providing sustenance for the Sa ṅgha, 
one will be born in the great hells and, other wise, one will be born in the great darkness 
surrounding Without Respite.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1B-2A3 The field of bodhisattvas 
Bodhisattvas are an extremely powerful field of virtue and non-virtue. In the Seal of 
Engaging in Developing the Power of Faith S ūtra (Śraddhābalādhānāvatāramūdrasūtra) it 
says that compared to someone who, out of anger, puts all the sentient beings of the ten 
directions into a dark prison, if someone else, out of anger, turns his back on a 
bodhisattva, saying “I will not look upon this horrible person again,” he generates 
incalculably greater negativity. Also compared to someone who has destroyed and burnt 
down st ūpas as numerous as the sand grains of the river Ganges, if someone else 
generates anger and harmful intent toward a bodhisattva and says unpleasant things to 
him, it is like before. In the Seal of Engaging in Certain and Uncertain Destinies S ūtra 
(Niyatāniyatamudr āvatārasūtra) it says that compared to someone who through a mind of 
love makes eyes develop again in the sentient beings of the ten directions whose eyes 
were plucked out, and who after releasing the aforementioned sentient beings from prison, establishes them in the happiness of a universal monarch
114 or Brahma, if 
someone else with clear fait h looks at or wishes to look at a bodhisattva who has 
appreciation for the Mah āyāna and sings his praises, he generates incalculably greater 
merit. Also, in the Sūtra of the Magic of the Complete Certainty of Total Peace  
                                                 
114 Tib. ‘khor sgyur  (‘khor los sgyur ba’i rgyal po ), literally “wheel-turning (king);” le gendary universal monarchs ruling by 
means of a wheel made of gold, silver, copper, or iron. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
90 (Praśantavini ścayaprātihāryasūtra) it says that compared to killing all the sentient beings 
of Jambudv īpa or seizing all their possessions, someone who obstructs even as little as 
the virtue of a bodhisattva’s giving a handful of food to an animal generates incalculably 
greater negativity. [109] Therefore you should be very careful with respect to these objects.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1B-2B Great strength by way of the support 
This has three points: 
1 The difference betwe en the skillful and the unskillful  
Even a small lump of iron sinks to the bottom  whereas a container made from it floats on 
the surface. It has been set out that, similarly, the negativities committed by the unskillful and skillful are heavy and light. In fact , it is said that for the skillful who regret 
previous negativities, restrain themselves in  the future, do not keep them secret, and 
apply their virtuous antidotes, they are ligh t, whereas for those who arrogantly assume 
they are skillful and do not do this but out of contempt delibe rately engage in them, they 
are heavy.  
2 The actual strength of the support 
In the Heap of Jewels S ūtra (Ratnar āśisūtra) it also says that if a ll the sentient beings of 
the billion universes, having entered the Mah āyāna, were to possess the kingdom of 
universal monarchs and each of them were to offer butter lamps in ve ssels the size of an 
ocean and with wicks the size of Mount Meru to a st ūpa of a buddha, this would not 
match even the hundredth part of the merit of a bodhisattva who has left his home and 
who holds up a little bit of wick sm eared with butter in front of a st ūpa. This makes clear 
the strength of the support even if there is no difference in the atti tude and the field and 
even if the object offered is very different. This reasoning also makes clear that 
depending on whether or not the support has vows and, if so, whether he has one, two, 
or three, the cultivation of th e path will be the more effectiv e the more he has. There is a 
great difference in the strength of the roots of virtue whether, for instance, a 
householder at the time of giving donations and the like acts on the basis of keeping 
vows, such as one-day vows, or whether he acts without any vows.  
3 The faults of discipline being adulterated 
In the Sūtra on Overcoming Faulty Ethics  (Duḥśīlanigrahas ūtra) it says that [110] 
compared to a human being possessing the ten non-virtues who, for a hundred years, 
continuously and uninterruptedly accumulates negativity, a fully-ordained monk who has 
completely rent his ethics and who for one day, dressed in the victory banner of sages,115 
enjoys that which has been offered to him with faith, accumulates far more negativity. 
Again by way of the support, the negativity has greater strength. In Exegesis of the 
Discipline  it also says: 
It is better to eat lumps Of iron blazing with  tongues of fire 
Than for the unrestrained and undisciplined 
To eat the alms-food of the area. 
This has been stated with regard to both adulterated discipline and slackness in training. 
The Teacher’s statements that compared to negativities depending on the Dharma, the 
negativities of the ten non-virtues are small, appear to be true.  
                                                 
115 Synonym for monastic robes. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
91 2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1B-2C Great strength by way of the thing 
With regard to giving gifts to sentient beings, giving the Dharma is far more excellent, 
and with regard to making offerings to the bu ddhas, offering one’s realizations is far 
more excellent than gifts and offerings of material things. From that example you should 
also understand the differing strength of other things.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1B-2D Great strength by way of the attitude  
This has two points: 
1 Greatness by way of the intensity of the attitude, its duration, etc.  
2 How anger is particularly strong 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1B-2D1 Greatness by way of the intensity of the attitude, its duration, etc.  
In the Heap of Jewels S ūtra it says that compared to each one of the sentient beings of 
the billion universes creating a buddha st ūpa as massive as Moun t Meru and all those 
who are objects of respect pa ying respect to th em for ten million eons, a bodhisattva 
undivorced from the mind of omniscience who throws one single flower generates more 
merit. That being so, you should understand  this in terms of the differences in the 
attitude—whether the object to be attained is superior or inferior, whether you observe 
your own benefit or that of others, and so forth—and the effect of intensity and duration. 
When it comes to faulty conduct, a strong afflicted attitude [111] and long duration also 
have more strength.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1B-2D2 How anger is particularly strong 
Also among the mental afflictions, anger is particularly strong. I n  E n g a g i n g  i n  t h e  
Bodhisattva Conduct  it says:  
Whatever good conduct has been amassed 
Over a thousand eons by giving to and worshipping 
Those who have gone to  bliss and the like, 
All is destroyed by one flash of anger. 
In this regard, anger toward those who perfec tly observe their rules of ordination weighs 
very heavily, and anger toward the Vi ctors’ children mo re heavily still.  
In the King of Meditative Stabilizations S ūtra it says:  
If you have harbored harmful intent for another, 
Ethics and study cannot save you, 
Nor can concentration or a retreat place, Nor can gifts or worship of the Buddha. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1C Indication of their effects 
This has three points: 
1 The fully ripened effect  
2 The effect in conformity with the cause  
3 The conditioning or empowering effect  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1C-1 The fully ripened effect 
Since each of the ten paths of action depends on the basis, the three poisons, and 
whether it is great, intermedia te, or small, the fully ripened effect is also threefold. In 
Actuality of the Stages  it says that through each of the ten, a great act of killing and so 
on, you are reborn as a hell being, through each of the ten intermediate ones you are reborn as a hungry ghost, and through each of the ten small ones you are reborn as an 
animal. In the 
Sūtra on the Ten Grounds  the effects of small and  intermediate ones are 
said to be the other way round.  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
92 2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1C-2 The effect in conformity with the cause 
The effects in conformity with the cause are that even when you have left the lower 
realms and taken rebirth as a human being, respectively: 
1. your life will be short,  
2. you will be lacking in possessions,  
3. you will not keep your partner,  
4. there will be a lot of slander,  
5. you will be separated from loved ones,  
6. you will hear unpleasant sounds,  
7. others will not listen to your words, and  
 8-10. the three, attachment, hatred , and delusion will predominate.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B1C-3 The conditioning or empowering effect 
The conditioning effects: 
1. of killing are that in future worlds, food and drink, medicine, harvests, and the like 
will have little power;  
2. of stealing are great droughts, rains, [112] poor harvests, and so forth;  
3. of sexual misconduct are swamps, much filth, unpleasant experiences, and so forth;  
4. of lying are that field work and work to do with boats will not succeed and the 
like;  
5. of divisive speech are that the location  where you live will be bumpy and uneven, 
it will be difficult to travel, and so on;  
6. of harsh words are that the location where you live will be full of logs, brambles, 
rocks, pebbles, potsherds, and so forth; 
7. of idle talk are that fruit trees will not be ar fruit, will bear fr uit out of season, and 
so forth;  
8. of covetousness are that everything exce llent will deteriorate year by year, month 
by month, and day by day, and so forth; 
9. of harmful intent are a lot of epidemics, injuries, infections, disputes, wars with enemy troops, and so forth; and  
10. of wrong views are that in the world you live in the best resources will decline and 
so forth.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B2 Positive actions and their effects 
This has two points: 
A Positive actions 
B The effects of positive actions 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B2A Positive actions 
This has two points: 
1 Brief indication by means of scripture 
They are the actions of the body of correctly abstaining from killing, stealing, and sexual 
misconduct due to possessing a virtuous mind having thought about their disadvantages, 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
93 and of carrying this abstention to its conclusion . Similarly, this is to be applied to the four 
of speech and the three of mind, the difference being that they are called “actions of 
speech” and “actions of the mind.”  This is how it is stated in Actuality of the Stages .  
2 Extensive explanation 
They should therefore be related to the basi s, attitude, performance, and completion as 
appropriate. When applied to the path of action of abandoning killing, the basis is another sentient being. The atti tude is the wish to give up k illing due to having seen its 
disadvantages. The performance is to put effort  into completely abstaining from killing. 
[113] The completion is the action of body of  correct abstention having been completed. 
The other paths of action should also be understood in this manner.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B2B The effects of positive actions 
From among the three effects of virtuous paths of action, the fully ripened effect is to be 
born as a human, a desire realm god, or a god of the two upper realms due to small, 
intermediate, or great virtuous actions.  
As for the effect in conformity with the cause and the conditioning effect, the opposites 
of the respective effects of non-virtuous actions apply.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B3 Indication of other classifications of actions 
This has two points: 
[A Throwing and completing actions  
B What will definitely be experienced and what will not] 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B3A Throwing and completing actions 
This has five points: 
1 [The classification of throwing and completing actions]116 
Throwing actions for rebirth in the happy realms are virtuous actions and throwing 
actions for rebirth in the lower realms are non-virtuous actions. The completing ones are uncertain, however, even in  the happy realms, incomplete  limbs, minor body parts or 
sense powers, hideous looks, a short lifespan, many illnesses,  poverty, and so forth are 
caused by non-virtue. Also, perfect prosperity  in animals and hungry ghosts is caused by 
virtue.  
2 The four possible alternatives for virtuous a nd non-virtuous throwing and completing actions  
Thus there are four alternatives:  
1. projected by a virtuous throwing action and completed by a virtuous completing action, 
2. projected by a virtuous throwing action and completed by a non-virtuous 
completing action, 
3. projected by a non-virtuous throwing action and completed by a non-virtuous 
completing action, 
4. projected by a non-virtuous throwing action and completed by a virtuous completing action.  
                                                 
116 Trijang Rinpoche proposes an additional classification of Je  Tsongkhapa’s first item into five sections some of which, 
however, overlap with Je Tsongkhapa’s second item. Trijang Rinpoche’s points three to five belong to Je Tsongkhapa’s 
second item and thus do not form a sub-division of the first one. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
94 2B4B-2A2A-1B2A-2B3B What will definitely be experienced and what will not 
3 [The classification of what  will definitely be exper ienced and wh at will not] 
With respect to what will definitely be experi enced and what will not,  what will definitely 
be experienced is what has been done in tentionally and accumulated. What will not 
definitely be experienced is what has not been done intentionally and has not been 
accumulated. 
4 Classification of what has been done and what has been accumulated 
The difference between what has been done  and what has been accumulated is as 
follows. What has been done is what has been intended or what has manifested itself through the body or speech after having been  intended. What has been accumulated are 
actions apart from the ten, such as those done in a dream. What has not been 
accumulated are the ten types su ch as those done in a dream.
117  
5 [Further classification of that which will definitely be experienced] [114] 
That which will definitely be ex perienced has three categories in terms of the time when 
the effect will be experienced:  
1. That which will be experienced as a visible phenomenon is an action whose effect 
will be experienced in this life. 
2. That which will be experienced after taking rebirth is an action whose effect will be 
experienced in the following118 life.  
3. That which will be experienced at another time is that which will be experienced 
from the next but one life onwards. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2B Considering karma and its effects in particular  
This has two points: 
[1 The way in which it is necessary to achieve a fully qualified basis  
2 Divisions] 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2B-1 The way in which it is necessary to achieve a fully qualified basis  
Through abandoning the ten non-virtues you do indeed obtain a good basis. However, if 
you achieve a fully qualified basis for accomplis hing omniscience, it will be quite unlike 
others with respect to covering ground in your meditations on the path. Therefore you 
should attain that basis.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2B-2 [Divisions] 
This has two points: 
A The fully ripened positive qualities and their functions 
B The causes of the fully ripened effects 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2B-2A The fully ripened positive qualities and their functions 
This has eight points: 
1 Excellent life span 2 Excellent complexion 
3 Excellent extraction 
4 Excellent power 
5 Respectable words 
6 Renown as being very powerful  
                                                 
117 The ten exceptions are set out in Je Tsongkhapa's Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment : Actions 
carried out (1) in a dream, (2) unknowingly, (3) unconsciously, (4) without intensity or long duration, (5) mistakenly, (6) 
forgetfully, (7) unintentionally, (8) actions that are naturally ne utral, (9) that have been purified through regret, or (10) 
through antidotes. 
118 Tib. tshe gnyis pa , literally “second” life. The “third life” is rendered as “next but one life” below. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
95 7 Being male  
8 Possessing strength 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2B-2A1 Excellent life span 
Due to an earlier throwing action, a long life has been thrown and one lives accordingly. 
Due to this you undertake actions for the purpose of yourself and others, accumulating a lot of virtue over a long period of time.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2B-2A2 Excellent complexion 
This refers to a good complexion and shape, complete sense powers, and balanced proportions. Due to this disciples gather, delighted at your very sight, and listen to your 
words.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2B-2A3 Excellent extraction 
This is to be born into an exalted and well-known family respected by the world. Due to 
this your commands are accomplished and not transgressed.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2B-2A4 Excellent power  
This consists in massive resources, friends, an d followers. Due to this you gather a lot of 
sentient beings and ripen them. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2B-2A5 Respectable words 
Since you do not deceive others through your body or speech, sentient beings uphold 
your words. Due to this you gather sentient beings with the four ways of gathering 
disciples and ripen them.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2B-2A6 Renown as being very powerful  
Due to possessing positive qualities such as diligence in generosity and so forth, you 
become an object of veneration of great beings. [115] Due to this they help you with all activities, whereby they acknowledge your deeds and quickly heed your commands.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2B-2A7 Being male  
This is to possess a male organ. Thereby you become a vessel119 for all positive qualities 
and, through aspiration and endeavor, a vessel for expanding wisdom. You are not afraid 
among people, and nobody prevents you from going together with any and all sentient 
beings or living in seclusion. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2B-2A8 Possessing strength 
By the power of previous actions, there are naturally only few harms and no diseases, 
whereupon great enthusiasm arises from the cond itions of this life. Due to it, you do not 
get discouraged by whatever goals you or others may have, and in dependence on 
intense enthusiasm you attain the power of individual investigation whereupon 
clairvoyance will quickly develop.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2B-2B The causes of the fully ripened effects 
This has two points: 
1 Division of the causes in eight 
2 Threefold division 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2B-2B1 Division of the causes in eight 
This has eight points: 
                                                 
119 As has been noted above in the context of the te acher disciple relationship, the term vessel (Tib. snod) refers to 
someone fit for receiving instructions and so forth. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
96 1. To not harm any sentient being and to cultivate an attitude of non-harm.  
Furthermore it says: 
Through freeing those caught in places of slaughter 
And likewise helping through giving life, Through stopping harm to animals You will gain longevity. 
From a doctor’s respect for the ill, 
From the administration of medicine, From not harming crea tures with sticks 
Or lumps of earth, you will be without illness. 
2. To offer light, such as butter lamps, and new clothing.  
Moreover:  
From the absence of anger as a basis 
And offering jewelry—a good physique. 
From lack of envy you will gain Good fortune as fruit, it is explained. 
3. To overcome your pride and respect gurus and others like a servant. 
4. To give food, clothing, and so forth to those who ask for it and to also benefit others without being asked, giving to the suffering and to those who are fields of positive qualities but lack necessities. [116] 
5. The habit of abandoning the four non-virtues of speech.  
6. To make aspirational prayers to accomplish  all kinds of positive qualities in the 
future and to make offerings to the Three Jewels, your parents, hearers and 
solitary realizers, abbots, masters, and gurus. 
7. To rejoice in the positive qualities of men and, with regard to women, to see their 
disadvantages without rejoicing, to oppose the inclinations of those who wish for a female body, and to liberate those whose male organs are to be cut. 
8. To carry out yourself what others cannot do at all, to help them with what they 
can do together with you, and to give food and drink to others.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2B-2B2 Threefold division of causes 
If those eight causes are conjoined with three more causes, their fully ripened effects will 
be outstanding. The three causes are: 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2B-2B2A The first cause: a perfectly pure mind 
This has two points: 
1 In relation to oneself 
A perfectly pure mind in relation to oneself is: 
1. to dedicate the virtues of accomplishing those causes to unsurpassed 
enlightenment without hoping for a fully ripened effect, and 
2. to accomplish the causes intensely from the bottom of one’s heart.  
2 In relations to others 
A perfectly pure mind in relation to others is: 
1. to give up envy, competitiveness, and scorn at the sight of the highest, 
intermediate, and least practitioners in ag reement with the Dharma and to rejoice; 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
97 2. even if you are not capable of that, to think of it, many times a day, as the way to 
act. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2B-2B2B The second cause: pure performance 
This has two points: 
1 In relation to oneself 
Pure performance in relation to oneself implies a long duration, continuity, and intensity. 
2 In relation to others 
Pure performance in relation to others consists in causing someone who has not correctly adopted the rules of ethics to do so, praising those who have adopted them so that they 
generate delight, making them do so continuously, and preventing them from abandoning 
them. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2B-2B2C The third cause: a pure field 
Just the two—attitude and performance—prod uce plenty of good fruit whereby they 
resemble a field. [117] 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2C Having considered karma and its effects, how to engage in virtue and 
counteract non-virtue 
This has two points: 
1 General presentation 
2 Specifically how to purify by means of the four powers  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2C-1 General presentation 
This has six points: 
A How to bring forth a mind cultivating this perpetually, day and night  
In Engaging in the Bodhisattva Conduct it says:  
Suffering springs from what is non-virtuous. 
“How to reach certain freedom from it?” 
It is appropriate, day and night, Always to think abou t nothing but this. 
And: 
The root of everything that’s virtuous 
Is aspiration, the Buddha
120 said. 
Again, the root of that is always 
To meditate on fully ripened effects. 
In accordance with this statement you should come to understand positive and negative 
actions and their effects and then meditate on  them over and over again, for the karmic 
process is a very hidden phenomenon, which is why it is extremely difficult to gain 
certainty about it.  
B The vital importance of gaining conviction concerning the Buddha’s statements about how actions bring 
about effects 
In this regard the King of Meditative Stabilizations S ūtra says:  
Even if the moon and stars were to fall down, The earth were to collapse with its mountains and towns, 
And if the heaven’s aspect were transform— 
Still no word you say would be untrue. 
                                                 
120 Tib. thub pa , usually translated here as “Sage.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
98 You should thus develop conviction in the words of the Tath āgata and sustain it. Unless 
you have gained uncontrived ce rtainty with regard to this, you will not gain, with regard 
to any Dharma , the certainty that gladdens the Victor.  
C Meditation on emptiness becomes helpful for gaining certainty with respect to actions and their effects  
Some profess to have gained certainty with respect to emptiness but do not have 
certainty with respect to actions and their effects nor care about it. They have arrived at 
a mistaken understanding of emptiness, for if you understand emptiness, you see it to be 
the meaning of interdependence121, and it becomes helpful fo r gaining certainty with 
respect to actions and their effects. From the same s ūtra:  
Like an illusion, a bubble, a mirage, or lightning, 
All phenomena are like the moon in water. Humans, descendants of Manu, who after death 
Pass to other worlds do not perceive this: [118] 
Actions once they are done do not disappear, 
White or black they precisely cause effects to ripen. The logical approach is good but the subtle 
And hard to see is the Victor’s object of thought. 
D The uselessness of mere knowledge if you do not think about actions and their results 
Therefore you should generate certainty about the two types of karma, as well as causes 
along with their effects, and continuously, da y and night, cut yourself off from the lower 
realms by means of examining your three door s. Not to be proficient at first in the 
distinctions of cause and effect and to know a bit but still act carefree with regard to the 
three doors only opens the gate to the lower realms. In Questions of the N āga Kings of 
the Ocean (S āgaranāgarājaparipŗcchā) it says:  
Lord of N āgas, one Dharma of bodhisattvas cuts right through falling back 
down and being born in the lower realms. What is that one Dharma? It is like 
this: the individual investigation regarding virtuous phenomena thinking: “How 
am I doing? Am I straying away from th em or abiding in them night and day?” 
E How to turn away from faulty conduct through such considerations  
As for how to turn away from faulty conduct, having thought about it in this manner, it 
says in Chapter of the Truthful One :  
O king, do not commit the act of killing. 
For every being life is a great loss, 
Therefore we all wish to keep it long. 
Even deep down don’ t consider killing. 
Like this you should make a habit of relying on the mind of restraint a lot without your motivation ever moving toward misdeeds such as the ten non-virtues. 
F The principle of action in accordance with statements of the former Kadampas  
Khamlungpa said to Puchungwa: “Geshe Dromtönpa taught that only actions and their 
effects were of vital importance, however nowadays, explaining this, listening to it, and 
meditating on it are said to be worthless. I wonder is this just because it is difficult to 
practice?” and Puchungwa said: [119] “It is just so.” 
Dromtönpa said: “Followers of the Elder,  audacity is totally inappropriate, 
interdependence is subtle.” Puchungwa said: “In my old age I am at last getting on with 
                                                 
121 Tib. rten ‘brel  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
99 the Sūtra of the Wise and the Foolish (Damam ūkosūtra).”122 And Sharawa said: “The 
Buddha taught that whatever errors and faults come about, they should not be blamed on 
an inauspicious direction or a bricklayer’s work; it is simply that ‘This action having been 
done, this is produced.’” 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2C-2 Specifically how to purify non-virtues by means of the four powers 
This has six points: 
[A How negativities and downfalls need to be purified by various means in accordance with the statements of 
the Teacher Buddha 
B How to redress downfalls  
C How to redress negativities D How all the antidotes to negativities are complete within the four powers  
E The manner of purifying 
F How it is necessary to make an effort from the start not to be tainted by faults] 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2C-2A How negativities and downfalls need to be purified by various means in accordance with the 
statements of the Teacher Buddha 
If despite your effort not to be tainted by such faulty conduct, some fault occurs under 
the influence of non-conscientiousness or th e multitude of mental afflictions, it is 
inappropriate to let the matter rest without giving it any consideration. It is therefore 
necessary to make an effort at the means for redressing123 it taught by the compassionate 
Teacher.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2C-2B How to redress downfalls  
More specifically, as regards redressing downfalls, this should be done as explained 
according to the three individual types of vows. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2C-2C How to redress negativities 
Negativities should be redressed by means of the four powers: 
1 The power of remorse  
2 The power of thorough application of antidotes 
3 The power of preventing faults in future 
4 The power of the support 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2C-2C1 The power of remorse 
The first power is the power of remorse, which is much regret for the non-virtuous deeds 
one has done since beginningless time. For it to arise, it is necessary to meditate on how the three types of effects, such as the fully ripened ones, are produced. When applying 
this power, you should make use of tw o confessions, the confession in the 
Sūtra of 
Golden Light (Suvar ṇaprabhāsasūtra) and the confession to the thirty-five buddhas. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2C-2C2 The power of the thorough application of antidotes  
This has six points: 
A Based on the profound sets of s ūtras 
B Aspiration for emptiness 
C Based on recitation 
D Based on images 
E Based on making offerings 
F Based on names 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2C-2C2A Based on the profound sets of s ūtras 
This antidote is to absorb the words of sets of s ūtras like the Perfection of Wisdom 
Sūtras, retain them, read them, and so forth.  
                                                 
122 This sūtra consists of numerous life stories illustrating the karmic consequences of actions. 
123 Tib. phyir bcos  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
100 2B4B-2A2A-1B2C-2C2B Aspiration for emptiness 
This antidote is to engage in the reality th at is selflessness and clear light [120] and to 
be convinced about primordial purity.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2C-2C2C Based on recitation 
This has two points: 
1 The need to make an effort at recitation until signs appear that the negativities have been purified  
This is the recitation of special dharanis li ke the hundred-syllable one in accordance with 
the appropriate rituals. In the Tantra  Requested by Sub āhu (Sub āhuparipŗcchātantra)  it 
says: 
Just as the flames of forest fires in spring, 
Uncontained, burn all the underbrush, 
Ethics’ wind fans fires of recitation, 
Burning evil124 with flames of great joyous effort.  
Just as the sun strikes snow with rays of light, 
Which, overwhelmed, does not withstand its brilliance, 
When ethics’ sun rays, recitation, strike The snow of negativities, it is exhausted. 
Just as taking out a butter lamp in darkness, 
Dispels the darkness so there’s nothing left, 
The darkness of evil collec ted in a thousand lives 
Is quickly dispelled by the lamp of recitation. 
Moreover you should continue this recitation practice until you see signs that negativities have been purified.  
2 The signs 
In Dhāraṇī of Exhortation  (Cundadh āraṇī) the signs are said to be dreaming of vomiting 
bad food, drinking and vomiting things like yoghurt or milk, seeing the sun and moon, 
travelling in the sky, burning fire, withstanding buffalo and black people, seeing a sa ṅgha 
of fully-ordained monks and nuns, climbing a tree from which milk emerges, an elephant, 
a bull, a mountain, a lion throne or a fine house, and hearing the Dharma in your 
dreams.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2C-2C2D Based on images 
This antidote is to create images of the Buddha, having gained faith in him. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2C-2C2E Based on making offerings 
This antidote is to make various types of offerings to the Buddha and his st ūpas. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2C-2C2F Based on names 
This antidote is to listen to and retain the names of the buddhas and the great sons of 
the Victors.  
These are the ones [121] that are explicitly mentioned in the Compendium of Trainings  
but there are many others.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2C-2C3 The power of preventing faults in the future 
This has two points: 
A The actual power and its benefits  
                                                 
124 Tib. sdig pa , usually translated here as “negativities.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
101 The power of counteracting faults in the future is to completely restrain yourself from the 
ten non-virtues. In the Sun Essence S ūtra (Sūryagarbha)  it says that thereby the karma 
of the three doors accumulated by means of killing and so on , as well as the afflictive 
obscurations and obscurations to the Dharma125 are destroyed—everything you have 
done, caused others to do, or rejoiced in before. 
B The importance of sincere restraint 
The Commentary  on the “S ūtra on the Discipline”  explains that the intention of the 
question “Is there restraint henceforth?” asked in the scriptural passage is that a 
confession without a sincere mind of restraint is nothing but words. Therefore, the mind 
of restraint of not doing it henceforth is im portant. Its development also depends on the 
first power.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2C-2C4 The power of the support 
This is to take refuge and cultiv ate the mind of enlightenment.  
2B4B-2A2A-1B2C-2D How all the antidotes to negativities are complete within the four powers  
The Victor said that in general there are vari ous ways for beginners to purify negativities, 
however, the thoroughly complete antidote is the four powers in their entirety. 
2B4B-2A2A-1B2C-2E The manner of purifying 
This has three points: 
1 How karma is not categorically definite in dependence on whether the antidotes are complete or incomplete 
etc. in the one doing the purification  
The manner in which negativities are purified is as follows. Whether the causes for the arising of great suffering in the lower real ms become causes for the arising of minor 
suffering, or whether despite one’s rebirth in the lower realms their sufferings are not 
experienced or, having been purified, become a mere headache in one’s present form, 
and likewise whether something that would need to be experienced for a long time 
becomes something short or does not need to be experienced at all, is not categorically 
definite because it also depends on the po wer of the one doing the purification being 
great or small, as well as the antidote—the four powers—being complete or incomplete, 
intense or not intense, the duration being long or short, and so on.  
2 How even karma that is definite to be experienced is purified from the root  
The statement in s ūtras and the vinaya “Actions are not lost even in a hundred eons” 
[122] implies without cultivating the antidote of the four powers. However, in the 
Commentary  on the Sūtra of the Perfection of Wisdom in  Eight Thousand  Verses 
(Aṣțasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitāsūtravŗtti) it says that through the antidote of the four 
powers, if purified in accordance with the expl anations, even karma that is definite to be 
experienced is purified.  
3 Even if the one doing the purification does not completely purify karma of little strength, its effect will not 
come forth due to the full ripening having been weakened  
In Blaze of Reasoning (Tarkajv ālā) i t  s a y s  t h a t  o n c e  y o u  h a v e  t h u s  w e a k e n e d  t h e  
potential to bring forth a fully ripened effe ct by means of confession, the resolve to 
exercise restraint, and the like, the fully ripe ned effect will not come about even if other 
conditions are met. Likewise, the destruction of roots of virtue by wrong views and anger is also similar.  
                                                 
125 The unusual term chos kyi sgrib pa  is not clear. According to Geshe Soepa’s oral commentary it is either a synonym 
for shes sgrib , “obscurations to knowledge,” or chos spong gi sgrib pa , “obscurations caused by abandoning the 
Dharma.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
102 2B4B-2A2A-1B2C-2F How it is necessary to make an effort from the start not to be tainted by faults 
Although through confession and the resolve to exercise restraint you may be able to 
purify karma so that nothing at all remains,  there is still a big difference between the 
purity of not being tainted by faults from the beginning and the purity after confession. 
For example, in Bodhisattva Levels  i t  s a y s  t h a t  i n  t h e  c a s e  that a root downfall has 
occurred, it can be restored by taking the bodhisattva vow again, however, it will be 
impossible to reach the first grou nd in this life. Also in the Sūtra Gathering All the 
Threads  it says that once the negativity of abandoning the Dharma, which is explained in 
that sūtra, has occurred, if one confesses it three times every day over seven years, the 
negativity will be purified, but still it will take ten eons even at the quickest to attain the 
level of tolerance/forbearance on  the path of preparation.  
Therefore purification without  remainder  means that the production of unpleasant effects 
is purified without any remainder. However, since the arising of the realizations of the 
path and so forth will be much delayed, you should endeavor not to be tainted from the 
beginning. Also for that reason it says that āryas do not knowingly engage even in subtle 
negativities or downfalls even for the sake of their lives. If there was no difference 
between purifying them through confession and their not arising from the beginning, 
there would be no need to act like that. In the world, too, [123] if a wounded arm, leg, 
and so forth heals again, it still will not be as it would have been if from the start it had 
never been wounded.  
2B4B-2A2A-2 The measure of the attitude of lesser beings having arisen  
Previously you had an uncontrived interest in this world only, and your interest in future 
worlds was just a vague understanding fascinated with the words. When future worlds 
have become the main interest and this world nothing but a by-product, their ranking having been switched, the attitude of lesser  beings has developed. As it nevertheless 
needs to be made stable, you should strive, that is, train in it, even after it have arisen.  
2B4B-2A2A-3 Clearing up misconceptions about the attitude of lesser beings  
This has two points: 
A Setting out the assertion 
B Its refutation 
2B4B-2A2A-3A Setting out the assertion 
I n  t h e  s c r i p t u r e s  i t  s a y s  t h a t  i t  i s  n e c e s s a r y  t o  t u r n  t h e  m i n d  a w a y  f r o m  a l l  t h e  
excellences of cyclic existence, which can be a basis for confusion: Some people think it 
is inappropriate to develop interest in the hi gh status of an excellent body, possessions, 
and so forth because they are part of cyclic existence.  
2B4B-2A2A-3B Its refutation 
This has two points: 
1 How a continuous succession of excellent bodies is necessary 
With respect to that which is to be strive n for, there are both temporary and ultimate 
goals to strive for. Even those who strive fo r liberation from the excellences of a body 
and so forth associated with cyclic existenc e need to temporarily strive for them since 
certain goodness is to be gained in the end from a continuous succession of such 
supports.126  
2 Refutation in relation to ultimate high status  
Not all that is the high status of an ex cellent body, ex cellent possessions, and an 
excellent retinue is included in cyclic existence, for the culmination of an excellent body 
                                                 
126 Tib. rten 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
103 and so forth is the form body of a buddha, the wealth of his field, and his retinue. It is 
with this intention that Ornament for the Mah āyāna Sūtras says the first four perfections 
accomplish the high status of an excellent body, excell ent possessions, an excellent 
retinue, and excellent undertakings, [124] and many other scriptures state that they 
accomplish the form body. 
 
This concludes the explanation of training the mind in the stages of the path common to 
lesser beings. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
104  
CHAPTER 3  
The Stages of the Path Common to Intermediate Beings 
2B4B-2A2B Training the mind in the stages of the path common to intermediate beings 
This has two points: 
[1 Transition 
2 The actual training] 
2B4B-2A2B-1 Transition 
Thus, having become mindful of death and refl ected on the way in which you will fall into 
the lower realms after death, you turn your mind away from this world, and develop a 
striving for the happy migrations. Then, through the common way of taking refuge and 
certainty regarding wholesome and unwholesome karma127 and its effects, you give up 
negativities, and by putting effort into accomplishing virtue you will indeed attain the state of the happy migrations. However, that is not held to be sufficient here. Rather, once the attitude common to lesser beings has been developed, you need to develop the 
attitude common to intermediate beings which counteracts adherence to cyclic existence 
as a whole, and then, based on that, you need  to develop the mind of enlightenment and 
be led into the path of great beings.  
Hence it is necessary to train in the atti tude common to intermediate beings. Even 
though you attain the state of a god or a human being in this manner, you will not pass 
beyond compounding suffering. Therefore, holding to those states as happy by nature is 
mistaken since in reality they are devoid of happiness, and in the end they are bad 
because you are certain to fall once again into the lower realms. 
2B4B-2A2B-2 The actual [training] 
Therefore the training of the mind in the stages of the path common to intermediate 
beings has four points:  
A The actual training in the attitude common to intermediate beings 
B The measure of the attitude common to intermediate beings having been developed 
C Eliminating misconceptions about the attitude common to intermediate beings D Determining the nature of the path leading to liberation [125] 
Explanation of how to develop the mind striving for liberation  
2B4B-2A2B-2A The actual training in the a ttitude common to in termediate beings 
This has two points: 
1 Identification of the mind striving for liberation 
2 The methods for generating the mind striving for liberation 
2B4B-2A2B-2A1 Identification of the mind striving for liberation 
This has two points: 
A Identification of liberation 
B The mind striving for liberation  
2B4B-2A2B-2A1A Identification of liberation 
Liberation is freedom from bondage. Specif ically, there are two things binding one in 
cyclic existence: karma and mental afflictions. Through the power of these two, the 
aggregates join. From the point of view of th e realms, they do so in the three realms, the 
                                                 
127 JN: Tib. dkar nag gi las , also literally translated as  ‘white and black actions.’ 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
105 desire realm and so forth, when divided by way of migrating beings, as the five or six128 
gods and so forth, and in terms of birthplaces, a womb and so on. This is the entity of 
bondage, therefore freedom from this is liberation. 
2B4B-2A2B-2A1B The mind striving for liberation  
The desire to attain that liberation is the mind striving for liberation. 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2 The methods for generating the mind striving for liberation  
This has two points: 
A Transition 
B The actual methods 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2A Transition 
The development of the desire to obtain the pacification of the suffering of thirst, for 
instance, depends on seeing the torment of thirst as undesi rable. Likewise the 
development of the desire to attain the liberat ion that is the thorough pacification of the 
suffering of the appropriated aggregates also depends on seeing the shortcomings of the appropriated aggregates, their having the nature  of suffering. Therefore, if you meditate 
on the shortcomings of cyclic existence, and the mind that wants to reject them does not 
arise, the desire to attain the pacification of suffering will not arise either because in 
Four 
Hundred Stanzas  it says:  
Who is not disenchanted here, 
How could he have respect for peace? 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B The actual methods 
This has two points: 
1 Thinking about the shortcomings of cyclic existence—true sufferings 
2 Thinking about the stages of entering cyclic existence—origins 
SHORTCOMINGS OF CYCLIC EXISTENCE: TRUE SUFFERINGS 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1 Thinking about the shor tcomings of cyclic existence—true 
sufferings 
This has two points: 
A Indicating the intention of stating true sufferings as the first of the four truths  
B The actual meditation on suffering 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1A Indicating the intention of stating true sufferings as the first of the 
four truths  
This has two points: 
1 Setting out a doubt 
2 Reply 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1A1 Setting out a doubt 
If you ask: “If origins are earlier and sufferings later since the origins are causes and the 
truth of suffering is [126] their effect, wh y is that the Bhagavan, contrary to this 
sequence, taught: ‘Monks, these are the sufferings that are true for aryas. These are the 
origins that are true for aryas’?” 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1A2  Reply 
This has two points: 
                                                 
128 Depending on whether gods and demigods are listed separately or grouped together. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
106 A Summarized indication in reply 
B Extensive explanation 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1A2A Summarized indication in reply 
There is no fault in that since the fact that the Teacher stated the cause and the effect in 
reverse order has great significance for practice. 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1A2B Extensive explanation 
This has three points: 
1 The need to teach true sufferings, origins, cessations, and paths one after the other in accordance with the 
scriptures 
If you go on to ask: “How so?”, it is like this: If the unerring wis h for liberation from 
cyclic existence has not initially arisen in the disciple himself, how should he be guided to 
liberation while lacking its root? In fact, initially disciples are shrouded by the darkness of 
ignorance and deceived by the misconception that apprehends the excellences of cyclic 
existence—suffering—a s happiness. In Four Hundred Stanzas  it says:  
If the ocean of this suffering 
Has no limits in any respect, 
Child, you who are sinking in it, Why are you not gripped with fear? 
Thus, many aspects of suffering having been taught saying “This, in reality, is not 
happiness but rather suffering,” it is necessary to develop disenchantment, which is why 
the truth of suffering was stated first. Then, having seen that you yourself have fallen into the ocean of suffering, if you want to be liberated from it, you see the need to ward 
off suffering. Having come to understand that  unless you ward off its cause, you will not 
avert it, thinking “What is the cause?” you come to understand the truth of the origins. 
That is why the truth of the origins was stated next. Then, once an understanding of the truth of the origins has arisen—that the suffe ring of cyclic existence is produced by 
contaminated actions, that those actions are produced by mental afflictions, and that the root of the latter is the apprehension of a self—[127] and you see that the apprehension of a self can be opposed, you vow to actualize the cessation that puts a stop to suffering. 
Therefore the truth of cessation was taught next. 
2 Giving up objections to presenting the truths in this order 
You may wonder: “Well then, as the wish for liberation arises when the truth of suffering 
is presented, it would make sense to present the truth of cessation after the truth of 
suffering.” However, there is no fault, fo r ,  e v e n  t h o u g h  a t  t h a t  p o i n t  t h e  w i s h  f o r  
liberation thinking “If only I ac hieved the cessation that pacifies suffering” is present, 
since you have not identified the cause of suffering and do not see that the cause can be 
averted, you do not apprehend liberation as something to be attained thinking “I should 
actualize cessation.” In that manner, once yo u apprehend liberation, thinking “I should 
actualize cessation,” you will en gage in true paths, thinking  “What is the path leading 
there?” That is why the truth of the path was stated at the end.  
3 Establishing by means of logic that such an order is necessary 
The four truths are taught many times in this manner throughout the Mah āyāna and 
Hīnayāna. Since the Buddha condensed in them th e crucial points of entry into cyclic 
existence and reversal from it, they are extremely important for achieving complete 
liberation. Since it is a major threshold129 for practice, students need  to be guided in this 
order. If you lack any genuine revulsion at cyclic existence, which is due to reflecting on 
                                                 
129 Geshe Thubten Ngawang’s explanation of the phrase ‘gag bsdoms , literally “stop-bind”: imagine a central station 
where all the various tracks come together and where they can be connected or disconnected by means of switches. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
107 the truth of suffering, the wish to achieve liberation will become mere words because 
whatever you do will become an origin of new suffering. If you do not come to a good 
understanding of the root of cyclic existence—karma and the afflictions—by reflecting on 
the origins, you will be like someone shooting  an arrow who does not see the target, for 
you will miss the crucial point of the path. Yo u will hold that which is not the path to 
freedom from existence to be that path, whereupon your hard ships will be fruitless. And, 
if you do not know what shou ld be abandoned, suffering al ong with its origins, you will 
not even identify the liberation that is their thorough pacification, whereby your striving 
for liberation [128] will also end up as  nothing but an arrogant presumption. 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1B The actual meditation on suffering  
This has two points: 
1 Considering the suffering of cyclic existence in general 
2 Considering the suffering of the individual realms 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1B1 Considering the suffering of cyclic existence in general  
This has two points: 
A Considering the eight types of suffering 
B Considering the six types of suffering 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1B1A Considering the eight types of suffering 
This has five points: 
[1 How to meditate by the level of the faculty 
2 How it is necessary to be free from laxity and excitement  
3 How all the qualities of the three vehicles are accomplished through such meditation 
4 The eight types of suffering] 
5 Advice to cherish this manner of meditating on the essence ] 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1B1A-1 How to meditate by the level of the faculty 
With regard to sustaining the entire cycle of meditations common to intermediate beings, 
here you should also take up the common points explained in the context of lesser 
beings. With regard to sustaining the ones that are not common to both, if you have the 
mental strength, you should sustain them in meditation as explained here, whereas if your mental strength is small, you should di scard the scriptural citations and sustain only 
the essential meaning of whatever it  is when the opportunity arises. 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1B1A-2 How it is necessary to be free from laxity and excitement 
Although these are analytical meditations, you should cease all excitement and so forth, 
focusing the mind on the objects of meditation without allowing it to go to virtuous, non-
virtuous, or unspecified objects other than them. Not allowing your mind to fall under the influence of sleepy drowsiness or laxity, you should meditate continuously from a state of 
extreme clarity and lucidity, for it was taught that the results of all spiritual practice in 
which the mind is distracted to other things are small. In 
Engaging in the Bodhisattva 
Conduct it says:  
Reciting, austerit ies, and things, 
Even though engaged in long, 
If done with the mind distracted elsewhere Are meaningless, the Seer taught. 
And in the 
Sūtra of Cultivating Faith in the Mah āyāna (Mah āyānaprasāda-
prabhāvanāsūtra) it says: 
Child of the lineage, from this enumeration it should be understood that, in this manner, faith in the Mah āyāna of bodhisattvas and anything that springs 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
108 from the Mah āyāna springs from thinking correctly about the meaning and the 
Dharma with a mind that is utterly undistracted. 
In this regard [129] “a mind that is utterly undistracted” is a mind that does not stray 
away from a virtuous object to something else; “the meaning and the Dharma” refers to the meaning and the words; and “thinking correctly” is to think having analyzed with an awareness of individual investigation. That shows that for every accomplishment of the 
Dharma of positive qualities both non-distraction and investigation are necessary. 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1B1A-3 How all the qualities of the three vehicles are accomplished through such meditation 
This being so, it was taught that for every accomplishment of the positive qualities of the three vehicles, two things are necessary:  
1. actual calm abiding—a single-pointed mind that abides on a virtuous observed 
object without being distracted—or a similitude of that, and  
2. actual special insight which individually analyzes a virtuous observed object and 
differentiates modes and varietie s, or a similitude of that.  
In accordance with that it also says in the 
Sūtra Unraveling the Intended Meaning 
(Saṃdhinirmocanas ūtra):  
Maitreya, you should understand that all virtuous qualities, whether mundane 
or supramundane, of hearers, bodhisattvas, or tath āgatas are the result of 
calm abiding and special insight. 
If calm abiding and special insight were not divided into the two—the actual and a 
similitude of it—it would be not be certain that  all positive qualities of the three vehicles 
come forth as effects of actual calm abiding and special insight. 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1B1A-4 The eight types of suffering 
This has eight points: 
[A Considering the suffering of birth 
B Considering the suffering of aging 
C Considering the suffering of illness 
D Considering the suffering of death 
E Considering the suffering of meeting with the unpleasant 
F Considering the suffering of separation from the pleasant 
G Considering the suffering of seeking what you desire and not getting it 
H Considering the meaning of the statement “In brief, the five appropriated aggregates are 
suffering”] 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1B1A-4A Considering the suffering of birth 
This has five points: 
1. Birth is suffering because it is associ ated with suffering. When the four—hell 
beings, perpetually suffering hungry ghost, beings born from wombs, and beings 
born from eggs—are born, they are born with a lot of violent sensations of pain.130  
2. Birth is associated with taking on bad states. Therefore, since it is connected with 
the seed for the arising, abiding, and increasing of mental afflictions, [130] it is 
unsuited to action that makes extensiv e use of virtue and unsuited to being 
controlled at will.  
3. Birth is the basis of sufferi ng. Therefore, in dependence  on having taken birth in 
the three realms, the suffering of aging, illness, death, and so forth increases.  
                                                 
130 Tib. sdug bsngal gyi tshor ba , literally “suffering feelings.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
109 4. Birth is the basis of the mental afflictions.  Therefore, once you have been born in 
cyclic existence, the three poisons of at tachment, hatred, and ignorance arise with 
regard to objects. Again, due to that, bo dy and mind being thoroughly unpacified, 
they suffer and consequently do not abide in happiness. Thus body and mind are 
tormented in various ways by the mental afflictions. 
5. Birth is suffering because it is the reality of involuntary separation. It does not 
pass beyond death, the end of everything born, and that is undesirable. It also 
only makes you experience suffering.  
You should think about these points again and again. 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1B1A-4B Considering the suffering of aging  
This has two points: 
1 Extensive explanation 
2 Summary of the essence  
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1B1A-4B1 Extensive explanation 
This has five points:  
1. The complete deterioration of your fine body is such that your spine becomes 
curved like a bow, your head becomes white like moss flowers, your forehead becomes covered in wrinkles like a cuttin g board, and so on, whereby the splendor 
of youth deteriorates and you turn ugly. 
2. The deterioration of power and strength is such that when you sit down you 
resemble a sack of soil cut off its rope; when you get up, you resemble tree roots 
being pulled up; when you speak, you babble unintelligibly; when you walk, you 
are completely bent over and so on. 
3. The deterioration of the senses is such that your eyes and so forth do not clearly 
perceive forms and so forth any more, and your mindfulness and so forth diminish 
as you grow forgetful and so forth.  
4. The enjoyment of sense objects declines. Food and drink become difficult to 
digest, and you can no longer enjoy other pleasures [131]. 
5. The suffering of the lifespan having deteriorated completely is that, due to your lifespan having been largely spent, you face death.  
You should think about these points again and again. 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1B1A-4B2 Summary of the essence  
Chenngawa said: “The suffering of death is vicious but brief. This aging process is vicious 
indeed.” Kamawa said: “It’s g ood that old age comes gradually. If it came in a single 
moment, it would be unbearable.” 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1B1A-4C Considering the suffering of illness 
This has five points:  
1. The nature of the body changes in that the flesh becomes loose, the skin dries up, 
and so forth. 
2. Suffering and mental unhappiness increase  and you predominantly dwell in them. 
The bodily constituents, water and so forth, become disturbed in strength as they 
lose their proportional balance, producing pain in the body. That in turn causes 
mental unhappiness lasting day and night.  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
110 3. You lack the desire to enjoy pleasant things. Having been told that pleasant things 
are harmful when you are ill, you do not have the power to indulge in them as you 
wish; thus you cannot do whatever you want.  
4. You need to undergo the unpl easant against your will. Yo u have to use unpleasant 
medicine, food, drink, and so forth. Likewise, you need to rely on rough means of 
examination such as being burnt with fire, pierced with sharp instruments, and the 
like.  
5. You will be separated from your life. Having  seen that the illness is incurable, you 
suffer. 
You should consider these points in detail. 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1B1A-4D Considering the suffering of death [132] 
This has five points:  
1. You are separated from your  excellent possessions,  
2. relatives, and  
3. companions,  
4. as well as your lovely body,131 and  
5. at the time of death you experience suffering and intense mental unhappiness.  
As long as you have not become distressed at these types of suff ering you should think 
them over again and again. The way in which the first four become suffering is that, 
having seen that you will be sepa rated from those four, you suffer. 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1B1A-4E Considering the suffering of meeting with the unpleasant 
This has five points:  
1. As soon as you meet, for example, an enemy, suffering and mental unhappiness 
arise, 
2. you are beset with fear of being punished by him, 
3. fear of bad talk, 
4. fear of dying miserably, and 
5. you suspect and fear going to a lower re alm after death because of transgressing 
the Dharma.  
You should think about these types of suffering. 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1B1A-4F Considering the su ffering of separation from the pleasant 
This has five points. When you are separated from close ones who are dear to you and so 
on: 
1. sorrow thereby arises in your mind, 
2. in your speech there is lamentation, 
3. in your body harm is caused,  
4. through remembering the positive qualities of the object and longing for it there is 
mental torment, and 
                                                 
131 Tib. longs spyod rtsa ‘jing ‘khor lus sdug pa phun sum tshogs . It is not quite clear whethe r the two qualifiers (“lovely” 
and “excellent”) at the end of the phrase refer to the noun they follow, “body,” or indeed to all four nouns. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
111 5. you miss the pleasure of it.  
You should think about these types of suffering. 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1B1A-4G Considering the suffering of seeking what you desire and not 
getting it 
This has five points simila r to those associated with se paration from the pleasant. 
Seeking what you desire but not getting it is the depressing suffering of not getting what 
you have been hoping for despite your efforts in seeking it, such as doing farm work but 
not reaping a harvest and doing business but not accruing a profit. 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1B1A-4H Considering the mean ing of the statement “In brief, the five 
appropriated aggregates are suffering” 
This has two points: 
1 Brief presentation 
2 Extensive explanation  
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1B1A-4H1 Brief presentation  
This has five points:  
1. the five appropriated aggregates are a vessel of suffering that will become 
manifest, 
2. they are a vessel of suffering based on what has already become manifest, 
3. they are a vessel for the suffering of suffering, 
4. they are a vessel for the suffering of change, and 
5. they are in the nature of  compounding suffering.  
You should think about these points again and again. 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1B1A-4H2 Extensive explanation [133] 
1. In dependence on taking these appropriated aggregates, the sufferings of the next 
rebirth onward are induced.  
2. The aggregates that have already been established become the basis of illness, 
aging, and so forth which depend on them.  
3-4. The aggregates give rise to these two types of suffering due to their relationship 
with the negative tendencies132 of the two.  
5. Due to the mere establishment of the appropriated aggregates, they arise in the 
nature of compounding suffering, fo r all compounded phenomena under the 
control of other—previous karma and mental afflictions—are compounding 
suffering.  
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1B1A-5 Advice to cherish this manner of meditating on the essence 
If no genuine disenchantment develops toward cyclic existence, which is of the nature of 
the appropriated aggregates, there is no way a genuine mind striving for liberation will develop, and great compassion with the sentient beings wandering in cyclic existence cannot develop either. Therefore these considerations are extremely important whichever 
vehicle you enter, the Mah āyāna or Hīnayāna. 
                                                 
132 According to Geshe Thubten Ngawang, the term implies th at the elements of one’s present existence have arisen 
under the power of karma and mental afflictions and are th erefore tainted by corresponding tendencies (Systematic 
Study of Buddhism, semester XII, transcript 4/5, p. 8). See also the fourth aspect of the suffering of birth. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
112 2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1B1B Considering the six types of suffering 
This has three points: 
1 Summarized presentation of the six types of suffering 
2 Presentation of the six types of sufferings condensed in three 
3 How there is nothing in contaminated feelings that is of the entity of happiness  
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1B1B-1 Summarized presentation of the six [types of] suffering 
Friendly  Letter states the faults of cyclic existence: 
1. lack of certainty, 
2. insatiability, 
3. discarding one’s body again and again, 
4. being reborn again and again, 
5. changing from high to low again and again, and 
6. lacking companions. 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1B1B-2 Presentation of the six types of sufferings condensed in three  
To reduce them to three: 
1. in cyclic existence there is nothing reliable, 
2. no matter how much of it s happiness you enjoy, there is no final point of 
satisfaction, and 
3. you have been in it since beginningless time. 
The first has four points: 
1. the inappropriateness of relying on the body you have attained—you will discard 
your body again and again; 
2. the inappropriateness of relying on benefit and harm done to you—there is no 
certainty as to whethe r your father will become your son, your mother your wife, 
an enemy someone very dear to you, and the like; 
3. the inappropriateness of relying on the excellences you have achieved—[134] you fall from high places to low ones; and 
4. the inappropriateness of re lying on companions—you have  to go on without them 
in the end. 
The third one is that you are reborn again and again; an end to the continuity of births is 
not evident.  
You should reflect in this manner again and again. 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1B1B-3 How there is nothing in contaminated feelings that is of the entity of happiness 
Furthermore, at present most of the happy feelings that increase our attachment are 
minds of happiness that aris e with respect to a relief of suffering. Yet there is no 
happiness by way of its own entity that is unr elated to suffering. For instance, if you 
suffer because you have walked too much, the mind of happiness that arises due to 
sitting down appears to be happiness that arises gradually while the great previous 
suffering gradually ceases. However, it is no t happiness by way of its own entity, for if 
you sit too much, again, that will produce su ffering as before. If they were causes of 
happiness by way of their own entity, just as suffering increases to the same extent as 
you are subject to the causes of suffering, so  too should walking, si tting, lying, eating 
and drinking, as well as sun and shade, and the like increase your happiness to the same 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
113 extent that you indulge in them. However, it appears that in the long term only more 
suffering is produced.  
These points are also set forth in the Descent into the Womb  Sūtra and the root text of 
Four Hundred  Stanzas  and its commentary.  
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1B2 Considering the suffering of the individual realms 
This has four points: 
A The suffering of the three lower realms 
B The suffering of humans 
C The suffering of demigods 
D The suffering of gods 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1B2A The suffering of the three lower realms 
This has already been explained. 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1B2B The suffering of humans 
This consists in the sufferings of hunger and thirst, the unpleasant contact with heat and 
cold, frantic activity, and fatigue. In addition, you should understand the seven types of suffering, birth, aging, illness, death, and so forth
133 by means of the previous 
explanations. Furthermore, in Discourse of the Collections  (Sambhāraparikath ā) it says:  
All the sufferings of lower realms 
Also appear to exist for humans. [135]  Troubled by suffering like beings in hell, 
Subjects of Yama by their poverty, 
They also have the suffering of animals: 
Powerful ones oppress the weak 
By force, inflicting harm on them. 
They are rivers as it were. 
And in 
Four Hundred Stanzas : 
Higher ones have mental suffering, 
Lower ones have physical pain. 
This world is overwhelmed by these  Two types of suffering every day. 
You should reflect in accord ance with these statements. 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1B2C The suffering of demigods 
It is said that the demigods are mentally to rmented by envy that cannot bear the wealth 
of the gods. When based on that they fight with the gods, they experience many 
sufferings of having their bodies chopped up, split, and the like. Although they possess 
intelligence134, they have fully-ripened obscurations and consequently cannot see the 
truth on that basis. 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1B2D The suffering of gods 
This has two points: 
1 The suffering of the desire realm gods 
2 The suffering of the gods of the uppermost realms 
                                                 
133 The suffering of meeting with the unple asant, the separation from what is pl easant, and seeking what you desire and 
not getting it could be added here. 
134 Tib. shes rab , usually translated here as “wisdom” (in the context of the six perfections). 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
114 2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1B2D-1 The suffering of the desire realm gods 
This has three points: 
A The suffering of dying, transmigrating, and falling 
B The suffering of envy 
C The sufferings of being chopped up, split, killed, and banished 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1B2D-1A The suffering of dying, transmigrating, and falling 
This has two points: 
1 The suffering of dying and transmigrating 
2 The suffering of falling to a lower place 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1B2D-1A1 The suffering of dying and transmigrating 
At the time of dying and transmigrating, when a god has seen the five signs of death, the 
suffering that springs from this is far greater than the happiness that previously arose 
from indulging in the desirable objects of the gods. The five signs of death are:  
1. a hideous body complexion,  
2. a dislike for one’s seat,  
3. the wilting of one’s flower garlands,  
4. one’s clothes becoming smelly, and  
5. sweat, which did not exist before, appearing on one’s body. 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1B2D-1A2 The suffering of falling to a lower place 
This is just like it says in Friendly Letter :  
As they transmigrate from the world of the gods 
In case there is no remainder of anything virtuous [136]  
They change without control into situations  Of animals, hungry ghosts, and beings of hell. 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1B2D-1B The suffering of envy 
For the gods with very extensive heaps of merit the most exquisite sense pleasures arise. 
When the sons of the gods with small merit see that, they envy them and experience 
great suffering and mental unhappiness on that basis.  
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1B2D-1C The suffering of being chopped up, split, killed, and banished  
When the gods fight with the demigods, they experience the suffering of having their limbs and other body parts chopped off, the suffering of their bodies being split, and the suffering of being killed. If their heads are chopped off, they die but limbs and minor 
body parts that are chopped off or split grow  back, and they surviv e. As for banishment, 
when there is conflict, the more powerful gods drive the weaker sons of the gods out of 
their abodes. 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-1B2D-2 The suffering of the gods of the uppermost realms 
This has two points: 
A [Lack of power to avoid future suffering] 
Although gods in the two uppermost realms do  not have the suffering of suffering, they 
have mental afflictions, they have obscurations, and they lack control over their death, 
transmigration, and next state, which is why they suffer through taking on bad states. 
B How they have the suffering of fa lling to lower realms once again  
Furthermore it says in Discourse of the Collections :  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
115 One in the form or formless realms, 
Having transcended the su ffering of suffering, 
Master of the bliss of sam ādhi135 
Who stays immovable for eons, 
Is still not certainly freed at all; 
He will still fall from there again. 
If he has emerged somewhere 
Beyond the whirlpool of pain of bad realms, 
Even with effort he won’t last long there. 
Like a bird in flight up high, 
Like an arrow shot by a child, That one also ends up falling— 
Like butter lamps that blaze for long [137] 
While actually perishing moment by moment, 
He is completely oppr essed by the suffering 
Called “compounding, thoroughly changing.” 
HOW CYCLIC EXISTENCE IS ENTERED: TRUE ORIGINS 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-2 Thinking about the stages of entering cyclic existence—origins 
This has three points: 
A How the mental afflictions arise 
B How karma is accumulated by the mental afflictions 
C How you die, transmigrate, and take rebirth 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-2A How the mental afflictions arise 
This has two points: 
1 How the mental afflictions are chief  
2 Identifying the mental afflictions  
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-2A1 How the mental afflictions are chief  
Although both karma and mental afflictions ar e necessary as causes that establish cyclic 
existence, the mental afflictions are chief. This is because if there are no mental 
afflictions, even though there is karma be yond counting accumulated previously, since 
the cooperative conditions for karma are absent, the sprout of suffering is not 
established—just like a sprout is not establ ished from a seed that  lacks humi dity, soil, 
and so forth. It is also because if there are mental afflictions, even without any karma 
accumulated previously, it is immediately a ccumulated anew, and future aggregates will 
be taken. That is also how it is set forth in the Commentary  on the “Compendium of Valid 
Cognition” (Pram āṇavārttika) : 
The karma of those who have fully transcended 
The thirst for existence cannot throw another one, 
For that which cooperates has been exhausted. 
And about the thirst: 
For if it’s present,  they will recur. 
Therefore it is of great importance to rely on the antidotes to the mental afflictions, and 
that again depends on knowing the mental af flictions, which is why you should become 
skilled in them.  
                                                 
135 Tib. ting nge ‘dzin , usually translated here as “meditative stabilization.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
116 2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-2A2 Identifying the mental afflictions 
This has three points: 
A The actual identification of the mental afflictions 
B The stages by which the mental afflictions arise 
C The faults of the mental afflictions 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-2A2A The actual identi fication of the mental afflictions 
This has ten points: 
1 Attachment 
Attachment observes an attractive, pleasant, external or internal object and is 
subsequently attached to it. To illustrate: just as oil that has penetrated into cloth is hard 
to remove, desirous attachment, clinging to its object and pervading it, also separates 
from that object with difficulty. 
2 Anger 
Anger is [138] a hostile attitude upon observing a basis of suffering such as sentient beings, suffering, weapons, thorns, and so forth, a rough mind intending to inflict harm on those objects. 
3 Pride 
Based on the view of the transitory collection, pride is a puffed up mind upon observing one’s external or internal level or qualities. It engages in them with an aspect of 
superiority. 
4 Ignorance 
Ignorance is afflicted un-knowing due to a mind  that is unclear with regard to the nature 
of the four truths, actions and thei r effects, and the Three Jewels.  
5 Doubt 
Upon observing those three objects, the four truths and so forth, doubt thinks: “Do they 
exist or do they not exist? Are they… or are they not…?”136  
6 The view of the transitory collection 
The view of the transitory collection: an afflicted intelligence  that obse rves the 
appropriated aggregates and views them as a self or belonging to a self thinking “I” or 
“mine.” Here transitory  means impermanent and collection  many, so the base that it 
views is a mere impermanent and manifold phenomenon. In order to indicate “There is 
no permanent unitary person,” it is given the name view of the transitory collection. 
7 View holding to an extreme  
The view holding to extremes: an afflicted intelligence which, observing that self apprehended by the view of the transitory collection, views it as permanent and eternal or views it as something that ceases withou t transmigrating from this existence to a 
future one.  
8 The view holding a bad view to be best 
The view holding a bad view to be best is an afflicted intelligence that observes and holds 
to be best any of the three—the view of the transitory collection, the view holding to 
extremes, or a wrong view—and the aggregates of the person holding the view that arises in dependence on any of them. 
                                                 
136 Tib. yod dam med yin nam min snyam pa’o . The first question uses “to be” in th e existential sense, while the second 
question uses “to be” as a copula. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
117 9 The view holding a bad ethics and ascetic practice to be best 
The view holding a bad ethics and ascetic practice to be best is an afflicted intelligence 
that observes an ethics of gi ving up immorality, an ascetic practice that sets a dress 
code, manners, and bodily and verbal behavior as definite, and [139] the aggregates in 
dependence on which they arise.  It views them as purifying negativities, liberating from 
the mental afflictions, and definitely releasing one from cyclic existence. 
10 Wrong view 
A wrong view is an afflicted intelligence that deprecates, saying that past and future 
lives, actions and their effects, and the like do not exist, or superimposes the concept of 
Īśvara, a primal matter, and the like as the cause of migrating beings. 
These are the mental afflictions as identified from the common perspective of the higher 
and lower tenet systems. The Pr āsaṅgika Mādhyamika system will be explained below.  
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-2A2B The stages by which the mental afflictions arise 
This has three points: 
1 The system of the Treatise on the Levels  asserts that the view of the transitory collection and ignorance are 
in opposition to each other 
If the view of the transitory collection and ignorance are held to be distinct the stages of 
how the mental afflictions arise must be under stood in the following manner. For instance 
with regard to a coiled rope, once darkness has fallen to some extent, if the mode of 
subsistence of the rope is not clear, a mind that apprehends a snake arises. Likewise, through the darkness of ignorance obscuring the clear mode of subsistence of the 
aggregates, the deception regarding the aggregates as a self arises, and from that the 
other mental afflictions arise.  
2 The system of the Madhyamikas and Dharmakirti assert that the view of the transitory collection itself is 
ignorance  
If those two are asserted to be the same, the view of the transitory collection itself is the 
root of mental afflictions. 
3 How the remaining root mental afflictions arise according to the two systems  
Furthermore, when the view of the transitory collection apprehends a self, an arbitrary distinction is made between self and other. Once that is made, attachment to one’s own side and hatred for the other side arise. Also conceit arises upon observing that self; that 
very self is held to be permanent or annihilated and is viewed as the self and so forth, 
and the bad activities connected with it are held to be the best. Likewise, wrong views 
that think “The Teacher who taught selflessness, the actions and effects he taught, the four truths, the Three Jewels, and so forth do not exist” are generated, [140] or, 
alternatively, the doubt that thinks “Do they exist or not? Are they… or are they not…?” is 
generated. In the 
Commentary  on the “Compendium of Valid Cognition”  it says:  
When there’s a self, there’s awareness of other. 
Dividing between them brin gs grasping and anger. 
Closely connected with those two, 
All the faults come into being. 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-2A2C The faults of the mental afflictions 
This has two points: 
1 How to see the mental afflictions as enemies due to their great shortcomings  
In Ornament for the Mah āyāna Sūtras it says:  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
118 The mental afflictions destroy you, destroy sentient beings, destroy your 
ethics. 
Once that is debased, you become inferior in gain and guardians and teachers 
revile you. There will be nasty disputes, you’ll take  rebirth elsewhere in unfree states. 
Through the debasement of what you’ve attained or not yet attained there is 
great mental suffering. 
And in 
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Conduct : 
Enemies such as hatred and craving, Do not have arms, legs, and so on, 
They have no valor either, so why is it That they have reduced me to servitude? 
While residing in my mind 
They inflict harm on me who am satisfied. 
The patience that does not get angry at them 
Is unsuitable blame-worthy patience. 
Even if the gods and demigods 
Were all to rise as enemies against me, They could not lead or put me into  The fires of the Incessant Hell. 
The mental afflictions, these powerful foes, 
Throw me in there within one moment, Where nothing met with, not even Mount Meru, 
Is left behind—not even ashes. 
Compared to my foes, the mental afflictions— 
Protracted, without beginning nor end— 
None of all the other enemies 
Would be able to last so long. 
While everyone helps yo u and makes you happy, 
When you act in accord and with reverence, 
If you attend to mental afflictions, 
They inflict suffering and harm in return. 
You should reflect on the shortcomings stated here. [141] 
2 Applying the cultivation of antidotes to the words of former saints  
Gönpawa said:  
In order to abandon the mental afflictions it is necessary to know their 
shortcomings, their characteristics, their antidotes, and the causes for their 
arising. Once you have understood thei r shortcomings, you should see them as 
drawbacks, apprehend them as enemies. If you do not understand their 
shortcomings, you will not understand them as enemies. Therefore you should 
consider them along the lines of the statements from Ornament for the 
Mahāyāna Sūtras and Engaging in the Bodhisattva Conduct . 
And:  
In order to know the characteristics of the mental afflictions, you should also 
study the Abhidharma, at least Explanation of the Five Aggregates 
(Pañcaskandhaprakara ṇa). Once you have got acquainted with the root and 
secondary afflictions, you will identi fy attachment, hatred, and so forth, 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
119 whatever it is, as soon as they arise in your continuum, thinking “This is that. 
Oh no! It has arisen,” and you will fight the mental afflictions. 
This kind of understa nding is necessary.  
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-2B How karma is accumulated by the mental afflictions 
This has two points: 
1 Identifying the karma that is accumulated  
2 How karma is accumulated 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-2B1 Identifying the karma that is accumulated 
This has two points: 
A Action that is intention 
B Intended actions 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-2B1A Action that is intention 
The action that is intention, the mental factor that makes its concomitant mind move and 
urges it toward objects, is action of mind.  
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-2B1B  Intended actions 
This has three points: 
1 The actions that have actually been intended 
2 Their entity 
3 Identifying three kinds of action  
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-2B1B-1 The actions that have actually been intended 
The actions of body and speech that are motivated by that intention. 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-2B1B-2 Their entity 
The actions of body and speech are divided into the revelatory and non-revelatory and 
posited as only having form by the Vaibh āṣikas. Master Vasuband hu refutes that and 
maintains that actions of body  and speech are the intentions that operate together with 
the revelatory physical and verbal actions,  whereby he explains both actions to be 
intention.137  
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-2B1B-3 Identifying three kinds of action  
In this regard non-virtuous actions are non-meritorious actions. Meritorious actions are virtuous actions included in the level of the desire realm. [142] Immovable actions are contaminated virtuous actions included in the levels of the form and formless realms. 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-2B2 How karma is accumulated 
This has two points: 
A Explaining who accumulates the karma to be thrown into cyclic existence 
B How karma is accumulated by that [person] 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-2B2A Explaining who accumulates the karma to be thrown into cyclic existence 
Once you have directly realized selflessness, you can still be reborn in cyclic existence 
under the power of karma and mental afflicti ons, however, you do not newly accumulate 
any throwing karma. Therefore those who accumu late the karma to be thrown into cyclic 
                                                 
137 He thereby emphasizes that the karmic ac tion itself which is decisive for its e ffect consists in the intention. Cf. see 
previous note for the exceptions of accumulated karma:  The ten exceptions are set out in Je Tsongkhapa's Great Treatise 
on the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment : Actions carried out (1) in a dream, (2) unknowingly, (3) unconsciously, (4) 
without intensity or long duration, (5) mistakenly, (6) forgetfully, (7) unintentionally, (8) actions that are naturally 
neutral, (9) that have been purified through regret, or (10) through antidotes. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
120 existence are all ordinary beings up to and including those abiding on the great level of 
highest mundane qualities on the Mah āyāna path of preparation. 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-2B2B How karma is accumulated by that [person] 
If, with that basis, you create non-virtuous actions by means of the three doors, for 
instance killing, you will accumulate non-meri torious karma. If you create virtuous 
actions, such as giving gifts and guarding ethics, you will accumulate meritorious karma. 
If you cultivate the calm abiding and the like included in the levels of the concentrations 
and formlessness, you will a ccumulate immovable karma. 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-2C How you die, transmigrate, and take rebirth 
This has five points: 
1 Conditions for death  
2 The mind of death 
3 From where the heat withdraws 
4 How the intermediate state is accomplished after death 
5 How you take rebirth in a birth-existence 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-2C1 Conditions for death 
This has three points: 
A Death following the exhaustion of one’s lifespan 
B Death following the exhaustion of one’s merit C Death due to dangers not being avoided  
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-2C1A  Death following the exhaustion of one’s lifespan 
To die due to the exhaustion of one’s lifespan is to die when the time has come when 
one’s entire lifespan projected by previous karma is exhausted. 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-2C1B  Death following the exhaustion of one’s merit 
To die following the exhaustion of one’s merit is the same as dying from a lack of basic requirements.  
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-2C1C  Death due to dangers not being avoided  
To die due to dangers not being avoided is the same as the nine causes and conditions for death, such as due to overeating, set forth in the s ūtras.  
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-2C2 The minds of death 
This has three points: 
A The minds of death 
B The appearances of those minds of death 
C For all three minds of death there is joining due to craving  
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-2C2A The minds of death 
This has three points: 
1. Both virtuous minds such as faith and  
2. non-virtuous minds such as attachment, [143]  
arise in the mind in dependence on one’s ow n actions or being made to recall them by 
others as long as gross compositional factors operate.  
3. To die with an unspecified mind implies that one did not recall virtuous or non-
virtuous minds by oneself nor was one reminded of them by others. 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-2C2B The appearances of those minds of death 
This has three points: 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
121 [1 The appearance due to a virtuous mind 
2 The appearance due to a non-virtuous mind 
3 The appearance due to an unspecified mind] 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-2C2B-1 The appearance due to a virtuous mind 
For those who have created virtue it is like  going from thick darkness into light. At the 
time of death various pleasant dream-like forms appear to them, they die happily, and 
even the interruption of life is of very minor severity.  
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-2C2B-2 The appearance due to a non-virtuous mind 
This has two points: 
A The actual [appearance] 
B Clearing up doubts concerning the interruption of life 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-2C2B-2A The actual [appearance] 
For those who have created non-virtue it is like going from light into thick darkness. At 
the time of death various dream-like repulsive forms appear to them, intense feelings of 
pain arise, and the interruption  of life is also very severe. 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-2C2B-2B Clearing up doubts concerning the interruption of life 
In all birth-places except for the divine realms and hells there is an interruption of life. 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-2C2B-3 The appearance due to an unspecified mind 
This has three points: 
A The actual [appearance] 
In those who have an unspecified mind, the two, happiness and suffering, that were explained above do not arise. 
B What mind becomes manifest at death  
At the time of death, whichever mind, virtuo us or non-virtuous, is most familiar becomes 
manifest, whereas other minds do  not subsequently operate. If  they are equally familiar, 
that which is recalled first will become ma nifest, whereas others do no subsequently 
operate.  
C All the subtle minds of death are unspecified 
At the time when the mind moves into its subtle part, virtuous and non-virtuous minds come to a stop and become unspecified minds. 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-2C2C  For all three minds of death there is joining due to craving 
At the time of death, as long as the state of unclear discrimination has not been reached, 
the attachment to a self that they have long been familiar with befalls all three. [144] 
After that, under the influence of attachment to a self, with the thought “I am becoming non-existent,” delight in a body arises. It is  the cause for the intermediate state to come 
about. While attachment to a self also arises in stream-enterers and once-returners, they 
investigate it with wisdom and abandon it, rather than acquiescing in it; just like, for 
instance, a strong person beating someone weak. In non-returners that attachment to a self does not arise. 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-2C3 From where the heat withdraws  
In those who have created non-virtue the heat first withdraws from the upper part of the 
corpse and dissipates down to the heart. In those who have created virtue the heat first 
withdraws from the lower part of the corpse and dissipates up to the heart. In both cases the consciousness transf ers from the heart. That which the consciousness first enters into 
in the middle of the mixture of semen and blood transforms into the heart, and where it eventually transfers from is that very place it first entered into. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
122 2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-2C4 How the intermediate state is accomplished after death 
This has nine points: 
A From where the bardo is accomplished 
From the place the consciousness transfers from as explained above, death and the 
intermediate state are accomplis hed without a break, just lik e the swing on the armature 
of a scale.  
B The shape of the intermediate state being and so forth 
The intermediate state being also has complete sense powers, such as eyes, and has the aspect of the body of whatever migrating being it  will be born as. As long as it does not 
take rebirth, its eye is unobstructed like the divine eye,
138 and its body is also 
unobstructed as though possessed of magical powers. It is seen by intermediate state 
beings of similar type and by the flawless divine eye arisen from meditation. While it is 
set forth in Treasury of Mani fest Knowledge  that once the intermediate state of any 
migrating being has been accomplished, there is no diverting it into some other rebirth, 
the Compendium of Manifest Knowledge  (Abhidharmasamuccaya)  also explains reversals. 
C How the appearance of the intermediate existence appears to those who have created virtue and non-virtue 
The intermediate existence of those who have created non-virtue appears like black cloth or like a dark night, and the intermediate existence of those who have created virtue 
appears like a white blanket [145] or a moonlit night. 
D How it sees  
It sees intermediate state beings of similar type as well as their and its own birth-places. 
E The color 
In the Descent into the Womb  Sūtra it says that the intermediate state of hell beings is 
like the color of a burnt log, the intermedia te state of animals is like smoke, the 
intermediate state of hungry gh osts is like water, the interm ediate state of desire realm 
gods and humans is like gold, and the intermediate state of form realm gods is white.139 
F Distinction of whether there is or is not an intermediate state 
If you are reborn from the formless realm into the two lower realms, there is an 
intermediate state. However, if you are born  from those two realms into the formless 
realm, the aggregates of the formless realm are accomplished wherever you die, and 
there is no intermediate state  
G How it travels 
It is taught that the intermediate state being of a god travels upward, that of a human 
travels straight ahead, and that of someone who has done faulty actions travels downward with the eyes cast downward. For the three lower realms the same meaning is 
intended. 
H The lifespan 
As for its lifespan, if it does not find the conditions for rebirth, it abides for as many as 
seven days. If it finds them, the number of days  is uncertain. Yet if it does not find them, 
it exchanges bodies and abides up to seven times seven days. However, it does not abide 
any longer than that since it  will definitely find the conditions for rebirth by then.  
I The manner of changing into another intermediate state  
                                                 
138 The special ability to see through matter an d over long distances without obstruction. 
139 The colors refer to the complexion of beings in a gi ven intermediate state (Oral explanation by Geshe Soepa). 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
123 Having died and transferred after seven days in the intermediate state of a god, for 
example, the intermediate state of a god, or  alternatively the intermediate state of a 
human being and so forth, is accomplished because through the changing activity of 
other karma, the seed of the intermediate state is changed. It is the same for other intermediate states. 
2B4B-2A2B-2A2B-2C5 How you take rebirth in a birth-existence 
This has five points: 
A How you transfer into an intermediate existence through a mind of attachment and so forth 
In Many Level140s it is taught that, when you are born in a womb, a mistaken perception 
arises with regard to the semen and blood of your father and mother: in that moment, like an illusion, you see your parents having intercourse even though they are not, and 
you develop attachment to them. [146] However, the auto-commentary
 on Treasury  of 
Manifest Knowledge explains that you see your parents actually having intercourse. 
Furthermore, if you are born as a female, you want to be rid of the woman, become attached to the man, and want to sleep with him. If you are born as a male you want to 
be rid of the man, become attached to the woman, and want to sleep with her. Once this 
kind of desire has arisen, the closer you approach, other body parts of that man and woman no longer appear, and you only see th e male and female sexual characteristics. 
Getting angry at that, the intermediate existence being dies, transfers, and is reborn.
141 
B What object the consciousness connects with and how  
Furthermore, when there is a situation of in tense attachment between father and mother, 
at the very end thick fluid emerges. After that, two drops of semen and blood doubtlessly 
emerge from the two. Once the two have mixed in the birth-place of the mother, they turn into something like, for instance, boiled milk that has cooled down and set. At the same time that the intermediate existence terminates, by the power of the consciousness 
that transmigrates, the subtle parts of the great elements of the sense powers, which are 
other than that mixture, and the combination of semen and blood that accords with that 
mixture arise as other along with the sense powers.
142 The consciousness that enters at 
that time is posited as the basis-of -all by those who accept a basis-of-all. Those who do 
not accept a basis-of-all assert that it is the mental consciousness that transmigrates. 
C You are not born in bad birth-sources unless the bardo being wishes to go there  
If it has no desire to go to a birth-place, the intermediate state being will not go there, 
and if it has not gone there, it will not be bo rn there. Therefore, the intermediate state 
being of someone possessing non-vows143 who created and accumulated an action for 
rebirth in hell, such as killing sheep or tradin g in poultry or pigs and the like, sees, as if 
in a dream, sheep and so forth at his birth-place and rushes there with the delight of 
previous familiarity. [147] Then he becomes angry at the form of his birth-place, the intermediate existence ends, and he is born in the birth-existence. Likewise, rebirth as a 
hell being, a hungry ghost with a goiter, and so forth is similar to this.  
D How you are reborn in the bad as an animal etc. 
In Actuality of the Stages  it says that if you are born as an animal, hungry ghost, human 
being, or as a god in the desire and form realms, you see delightful beings of similar type 
                                                 
140 Tib. sa mang po las . 
141 According to the Tibetan understanding, birth signifies one’s entry into the mother’s  womb rather than one’s exit from 
it. 
142 A c c o r d i n g  t o  a n  o r a l  c o m m e n t a r y  b y  G e s h e  S o e p a ,  t h e consciousness at that point connects with two subtle 
aggregations contained in the mixture of paternal and matern al substances: one that develops into the sense faculties 
and another one that becomes the seat of the mental consciousness. 
143 The opposites of the vows (sdom min)  whereby killing, harming, and so forth are given up. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
124 to yourself at your birth-place. Then, having generated delight in and desire for that, you 
go there. As you get angry at your birth-plac e, the intermediate existence ceases and you 
are born in the birth-existence. The way in  which someone who has non-vows who does 
not trade in poultry, pigs, and the like is born in hell is similar to this. 
E From among the four birth-sources, how you are born from heat and moisture and miraculously born 
In Treasury  of Manifest Knowledge  “Others strongly desire odors and an abode” are 
mentioned saying that if you are born from heat and moisture, you are born upon 
desiring odors, and if you are born miraculously, you are born upon desiring an abode. Moreover, the commentary explains that if you are born in the hot hells, you go to the 
intermediate existence upon desiring heat, whereas if you are born in the cold hells, you 
go to the intermediate existence upon desiring cooling. The auto-commentary
 on 
Treasury  of Manifest Knowledge explains rebirth from an egg to be similar to birth from a 
womb.  
2B4B-2A2B-2B The measure of the attitude having been developed 
This has two points: 
1 Indicating the measure of the attitude having arisen purely 
When you have come to understand the charac teristics of cyclic existence in detail from 
the point of view of the two, sufferings and their origins, just the desire to abandon them 
and the desire that arises to attain their co mplete pacification is indeed the thought to 
definitely emerge. However, that alone is no t sufficient. Therefore you should generate 
that mind to the same extent as the mind of someone who does not want to be stuck in a 
house ablaze with fire or stay locked up in prison and to the same extent that it desires 
liberation from them. Then it will still be necessary to increase it. 
2 The development of nothing but an appearance of striving for liberation if nothing but a mediocre thought to 
definitely emerge has developed [148] 
If this thought, as taught by Sharawa, is no  more than mediocre, like flour thrown into 
sour milk, also the view that does not want the causes of cyclic existence—the origins—
will not become more than that. Accordingly, one’s striving for liberation, the cessation 
that is the ceasing of sufferings and origins, will be the same. Because of that, the desire 
to accomplish the path of lib eration will be mere words, and also, there will be no basis 
for the compassion that cannot bear the suffering of other beings who wander in cyclic 
existence. Since the uncontrived mind of unsurpassed enlightenment that has the power 
to arouse the mind will not arise, you become a Mah āyānist only in your understanding 
that follows words. For that reason you should cultivate that thought again and again.  
2B4B-2A2B-2C Eliminating misconceptions about it 
This has two points: 
1 How it is misconceived 
2 The elimination of misconceptions 
2B4B-2A2B-2C1 How it is misconceived 
You may think: “If you cultivate extreme revulsion and disenchantment with cyclic 
existence, you will fall into the extreme of pe ace like the hearers be cause of your dislike 
for reentering cyclic existence. Therefore it is becoming for H īnayānists to cultivate 
disenchantment but it is inappropriate for bodhisattvas. That is how it is explained in the 
Sūtra of Showing the Tath āgata's Inconceivable Secret 
(Tathāgatācintyaguhyanirde śasūtra).”  
2B4B-2A2B-2C2 The elimination of misconceptions 
This has four points: 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
125 A The meaning of statements in scriptures that bodhisattvas are not terrified by cyclic existence 
The meaning of the statement “Thus a bodhisattva should not be terrified by cyclic 
existence” is not to point out that he should not be repulsed by the sufferings of birth, 
aging, illness, death, and so on of wandering in existence under the power of karma and the mental afflictions. Rather, it is that, due to his mind of enlightenment, he should not 
be afraid to take rebirth in existence for th e benefit of sentient beings under the power 
of aspirational prayers and compassion. 
B How it is necessary to enjoy being reborn in cyclic existence due to compassion but to be terrified of rebirth 
in cyclic existence due to karma and the afflictions 
In fact as we wander in existence under the power of karma and the mental afflictions, 
we are oppressed by many sufferings and cannot even bring about our own welfare, let alone anyone else’s. [149] Since that is the door to all degeneration, there is a need to 
block it, having developed extreme disenchantment, more than the H īnayānists, while it is 
necessary to enjoy taking rebirth in existenc e under the power of aspirational prayers and 
compassion. In accordance with that it also says in the same s ūtra: 
Bodhisattvas, having taken care of ri pening sentient beings, view cyclic 
existence to be beneficial—unlike the great passage to peace. 
C For those with vows of engagement who express themselves in this manner without differentiating between 
rebirths due to karma and mental afflictions and rebirt hs due to aspirational prayers and so forth infractions 
occur 
In Bodhisattva Levels  it is set forth that if someone who expresses himself in the above 
manner without differentiatin g between them has bodhisattva vows, he commits an 
afflicted infraction.  
D Cherishing the way of conduct without falling into the extreme of peace despite great revulsion for cyclic 
existence 
Having developed revulsion for cyclic existenc e, to see those sentient beings as one’s 
relatives and thus generate the mind of enli ghtenment for their sake is the intention of 
Four Hundred Stanzas  and is clearly set forth by  the great master Candrak īrti in his 
commentary on that text. 
Explanation of how the nature of the path leading to liberation is established  
2B4B-2A2B-2D Establishment of the nature  of the path leading to liberation  
This has two points: 
 [1 Transition 
2 The actual establishment of the nature of the path] 
2B4B-2A2B-2D1 Transition 
Through meditation on the shor tcomings of existence as explained earlier, an intense 
desire to definitely emerge from cyclic exis tence has arisen and due to that there is a 
need to reverse cyclic existence.  
2B4B-2A2B-2D2 The actual establishment of the nature of the path  
This has two points: 
A By what kind of basis is cyclic existence averted 
B By cultivating what kind of path is it averted 
2B4B-2A2B-2D2A By what kind of basis is cyclic existence averted 
This has four points: 
1 The need to avert it at this time when you have obtained a basis of leisures and endowments 
From Friendly  Letter : 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
126 Having obtained a birth of leisure that’s free 
From the so-called defective eight unfree states [150] 
Make an effort to avert rebirth. 
As is set forth here, you need to avert it at this time when you have the leisures and 
endowments, for it has already been explained that in the unfree states there is no opportunity to avert it.  
2 The need to make an effort now 
The Great Yogi Jangchup Rinchen said: “Now is the time to distinguish ourselves from 
cattle.” Potowa also said: “Since it did not stop by itself when we were roaming about so 
long previously, it will also not stop by itself now. Therefore we must avert it. Yet the 
time to avert it is this time when we have obtained the leisur es and endowments.” 
3 How on that basis it is good to take ordination 
Even more than that, lay people have many obstacles to the accomplishment of the 
Dharma and have the drawback of numerous faults. Since those who are ordained turn 
away from them, the ordained ha ve the best basis for averting cyclic existence. That is 
why the discerning should de light in ordination. In the Questions of Householder Ugra  
Sūtra it says that lay bodhisattvas should aspire to ordination. This mainly refers to 
aspiring to full ordination. In Ornament for the Mah āyāna Sūtras it also says:  
Those on the side of the ordained  
Have limitless positive qualities. 
Thus those exerting themselves in vows 
Excel over householder bodhisattvas. 
4 How it is necessary to respect the vows of individual liberation since ordination is also praised by both sutra 
and tantra for the accomplishment of omniscience 
Thus ordination is not only praised for the attainment of the complete release that is 
liberation from cyclic existence but also presented as the best basis for the 
accomplishment of omniscience by the perfection and tantra vehicles. The vows of 
ordination, among the three vows, are those of individual liberation. That is why you 
should respect the vows of individual li beration, the root of the teachings.  
2B4B-2A2B-2D2B By cultivating what ki nd of path is cyclic existence averted 
This has three points: 
1 Identification of the path—the transition 
2 Indication that the other trainings  will be explained further on  
3 In particular how to train in ethics 
2B4B-2A2B-2D2B-1 Identification of the path—the transition [151] 
In Friendly  Letter it says: 
Even if your head or clothes caught fire 
Give up preventing it; simply make an effort 
To destroy the occurrence of future rebirths 
There is nothing else that would be better. 
Through pure discipline,144 wisdom, and concentration 
Attain the immaculate state of peace and taming— 
Nirvāṇa—that’s ageless, deathless, and limitless, 
Free of earth, water, fire, wind, sun, and moon. 
                                                 
144 Tib. tshul khrims , usually translated here as “ethics.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
127 You need to practice the three types of precious trainings of the path as set forth in this 
statement. 
2B4B-2A2B-2D2B-2 Indication th at the other trainings will be explained further on  
If I were commenting on the path of intermediate beings for my own enjoyment, an 
extensive commentary on the three trainings would be necessary here. However, since this is not the case, the training in wisdom, special insight, and the training of the mind, 
the way to generate calm abiding, will be explained in the context of great beings. 
Therefore here I will on ly briefly state the wa y to train in ethics. 
2B4B-2A2B-2D2B-3 In particular how to train in ethics 
This has four points: 
[A The benefits of guarding ethics 
B The shortcomings of not guarding ethics 
C How the benefits of generating ethics are great these days  
D The manner of training in ethics] 
2B4B-2A2B-2D2B-3A The benefits of guarding ethics 
In this regard you should initially consider the benefits of ethics again and again, and 
increase your heartfelt enthusiasm for it. In Friendly Letter it says: 
Rules are the base and foundation of all good qualities145, 
So it says—like the earth for what moves and what doesn’t. 
And in the Tantra Requested by Sub āhu: 
Just as crops grow faultlessly in dependence 
On the ground, depending on ethics, 
Moistened by the water of compassion, 
The most superior wholesome qualities grow. 
You should think about it according to these statements. 
2B4B-2A2B-2D2B-3B The shortcomings of not guarding ethics 
Just as guarding the ethics you have adop ted brings enormous be nefits, likewise there 
are great disadvantages to not to guarding it. You should consider the shortcomings of 
not guarding it again and again as taught in the scriptures. [152] In the Sūtra on 
Cherishing Monks  (Bhikṣuparejus ūtra) it says: 
Ethics is happiness for some; 
For others ethics is suffering. 
For those who have it, it is happiness; 
For those who breach it, it is suffering. 
In the Root Tantra  of Mañju śrī (Ārya-Mañju śrimūlatantra)  it says: 
If discipline146 declines in those who recite, 
There will be no highest attainments, 
Nor will there be midd ling attainments, 
Even the least ones will remain absent. 
The King of Sages did not teach  
Mantra attainments for those of loose discipline147, 
Nor is that the place or direction 
To go to the city of nirv āṇa. 
                                                 
145 Tib. yon tan , usually translated here as “positive qualities.” 
146 JN: Tib. tshul khrims , usually translated here as “ethics.” 
147 JN: Tib. tshul khrims , usually translated here as “ethics.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
128 How could there be in such bad children  
Any attainments of mantra at all? 
For those who disregard ethics 
How could there be happy realms? 
If they do not become higher beings, 
Nor beings bound for highest bliss, 
What need to mention their accomplishing 
The mantras that the Victor taught? 
2B4B-2A2B-2D2B-3C How there are great benefits of generating ethics nowadays  
In the King of Meditative Stabilizations S ūtra it says: 
The trainings that I taught to those Who wear the laity’s grey apparel— 
Even monks who ar e fully ordained 
Will not have those trainings at that time.  
At that time when, according to the statement, the altogether complete guarding of the 
five bases of training taught to lay vow-ho lders is not present even in fully-ordained 
monks, striving in the trainings is specia l and has more effect. Therefore you should 
make an effort. From the same s ūtra: 
Those who, at the time when the Dharma decays 
And the Sugata’s teachings come to an end,  
Practice a single training day and night, Their merit will extraordinarily exceed  
That of one who for eons like Ganga’s
148 sand grains [153] 
And with a mind of faith honors billions of buddhas 
With food, drink, parasols,  
Banners and garlands of light. 
2B4B-2A2B-2D2B-3D The manner of training in ethics 
This has six points: 
1 Instructions on the four antidotes for abandoning downfalls 
Among the four causes of the occurrence of do wnfalls, the antidote to not knowing is to 
study the trainings and know them. 
The antidote to non-conscientiousness is  
1. the mindfulness that does not forget the observed objects and aspects of what to 
adopt and what to abandon;  
2. the introspection that individually invest igates the three doors at every moment 
and brings to mind the good or faulty actions you engage in;  
3. the shame that shuns faults from the perspective of oneself or the Dharma;  
4. the embarrassment that shuns fa ults, thinking that others will criticize you; and  
5. the intimidation that fears the fully ripened effects of faulty conduct. You should 
train in these and others. 
As an antidote to a lack of respect you sh ould be respectful toward the Teacher, his 
formulated rules, and those who perfectly observe them. 
                                                 
148 The river Ganges. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
129 As an antidote to many mental afflictions you should examine your continuum and 
endeavor to apply the antidote to whatever mental affliction predominates. 
2 Relating this to past events: how it is inappropriate to be careless with respect even to small formulated 
rules 
If without putting effort into this you commit even a minor transgression and think: “It is 
a small mistake,” this engagement in carele ssness with respect to the formulated rules 
will only obtain suffering fo r you because it says in Exegesis of the Discipline : 
Those who are unconcerned with regard to the teachings 
Of the compassionate Teacher and slightly transgress them 
Will hence come under the influence of suffering, 
Like mango groves that are spoile d through cutting bamboo groves. 
Though some here transgress the royal decrees of the king 
And, if it’s not often, do not get punished at all, 
If they transgressed the Buddha’s149 words improperly, 
They would migrate to the beasts150 like the n āga Elapatra. 
3 How there is a need for quick confession if you are stained by faults and downfalls [154] 
Therefore you should put effort into not being stained by faults and downfalls. If you are 
nevertheless stained by them, you should not leave it at that indifferently but put effort 
into undoing the transgression or negativity as has been taught. 
4 The need not just for ordained mantric practitioners but also for lay practitioners of mantra to guard the 
majority of vows  
If such guarding of morality is for those who ho ld the vows of individual liberation, it is 
also similar in the case of mantra because it says in the Tantra Requested by Sub āhu: 
Of all pure ethics of pratimok ṣa 
That I, the Victor, taught, all vinaya, 
Lay practitioners of mantra should abandon 
The signs and rituals bu t practice the rest. 
If it is necessary for lay practitioners of mantra to behave as set forth in the vinaya, 
except for that which pertains to the signs of ordination, the ritual actions, and some 
parts of the prescribed formulated rules, what need is there to mention ordained 
practitioners of mantra? 
5 It is the position of holy former masters to make ethics and all other practices mutually supportive of each 
other 
Khamlungpa also said: “When a famine breaks out, everything depends on barley. 
Likewise everything hinges on ethics; therefore earnestly apply yourself to it. Pure ethics also does not come about in someone who has not reflected on actions and their effects. 
Therefore it is an essential instruction to reflect on that.” Sharawa also said: “Generally, 
whatever happens, good or bad, depends on th e Dharma. Out of that, again, if you rely 
on what is suggested in th e vinaya, you need not chan ge anything. You will become 
sincere, withstand investigation, enjoy practice, and have a good end.” And Geshe 
Dromtönpa also said: “Many people rely on the vinaya and miss out mantra or rely on 
mantra and miss out the vinaya. [155] Only in my teacher’s tradition does the vinaya become the companion of mantra and mantra the companion of the vinaya.” 
6 How the great beings in the Land of Aryas put into the practice the requirement that all activities accord with 
the three scriptu ral collections 
                                                 
149 Tib. thub pa , usually translated here as “Sage.” 
150 Tib. dud 'gro , usually translated here as “animal.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
130 The Elder said:  
With us in India, whenever  an important matter or new activity arose, those 
who upheld the scriptural collections convened and established whether it was 
not repudiated by the three scriptural collections or in contradiction to them, and upon that it was decided. We from Vikrama śīla then had the task to 
examine whether it was rejected by bodhisattva behavior or in contradiction to 
it, and the decision was upheld by the entire ordained community.  
That concludes the explanation of training the mind in the stages of the path common to 
intermediate beings. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
131 CHAPTER 4 
How to Train the Mind in  the Stages of the Pa th of Great Beings  
2B4B-2A2C Training the mind in the path of great beings 
This has two points: 
1 The transition  
2 The actual path 
2B4B-2A2C-1 The transition 
This has four points: 
A Even for the achievement of one's own entire welfare it is inappropriate to disregard the welfare of others, 
therefore it is necessary to enter the Mah āyāna from the start 
Through meditating in this manner on the disa dvantages of cyclic existence from different 
perspectives over a long time, you will see all existence as a pit of blazing fire, and your 
mind will be thoroughly overcome by the wish to attain the liberation that completely 
pacifies suffering. If, due to that, you tr ain in the three trainings, you will attain 
liberation from cyclic existence and, moreover, you will not indeed turn back again even 
to look at the glory of high status. Nonetheless, since extinguishing one’s own faults and 
achieving positive qualities is limited, your  own welfare will not be complete. For that 
very reason, the welfare of others will also be temporarily neglected, and in the end, 
having been urged to do so by the buddhas, you will have  to enter the Mah āyāna. 
Therefore it is appropriate for the intelligent to enter the Mah āyāna from the start. [156] 
In the Compendium of the Perfections  it says: 
Having abandoned forever those two vehicles  
Which are without power to bring about all the world’s aims, 
Those whose nature tastes  of benefiting others151 
Enter the Victor’s vehicl e teaching compassion. 
B Since accomplishing the welfare of others is worthy of great beings, it is to be accomplished  
It is the happiness and magnificence of great beings152 and the capacity of a great being: 
it is appropriate to take responsibility for the welfare of others because to observe only 
one’s own welfare is something we also share with animals. Therefore the natural 
disposition of great beings153 is to categorically strive fo r the benefit and happiness of 
others. In Letter to a Student  it says: 
When cattle see a mouthful of grass that is easy to get they eat it themselves; When they are greatly tormented by thirst and find some water they drink it 
wish relish. Here, the effort they make to brin g about the welfare of other beings, 
That is their magnificence and the noble potential of great happy beings. 
Travelling, riding across the sky, the powerful sun illuminates all; 
Regardless of the burden, the earth supports the world with everything in it. Those without the least self-interest, equal in nature to the great, 
Totally strive for that singular taste of benefit and of joy for the world. 
C It is worthy of beings and the wise to toil and strive for the sake of protecting others from suffering  
                                                 
151 Tib. gzhan phan ro gcig rang bzhin de dag , literally: “those (with a) nature (that is of) one taste (with) benefiting 
others.” 
152 Tib. skyes bu rnams. skyes bu  is the equivalent of the Sanskrit word puruṣa. 
153 Tib. chen po rnams . 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
132 That being so, those who see how migrating beings everywhere are tormented by 
suffering and who toil for their welfare are called great beings  or the wise . In the same 
text it says:  
Those who have seen migrators, confused by dense grey clouds of worldly 
ignorance,  As they fall without control into  the blazing fire of suffering,  
And who mentally toil and exert themse lves for them as if blazing fire  
Was spreading overhead, now they are great beings; they also are the wise. 
[157] 
D Having generated delight that there exists an entrance to the path that accomplishes all one's own and 
others’ welfare, it is necessary to enter it 
There exists an entrance to the Mah āyāna—the source of all your own and others’ 
excellence, the medicine removing all problems, the great path traveled by all wise 
beings that nurtures and nourishes all beings through seeing, hearing, remembering, and touching—that possesses the great skillful means that by working for the welfare of others, by the way, you accomplish your own welfare without any incompleteness. 
Thinking “Oh, I have found exactly what I was looking for!” you should engage in this 
best of vehicles with whatever ability of a great being you have. 
2B4B-2A2C-2 The actual path 
Training the mind in the stages of the path of great beings has three points: 
A Demonstrating that generating the mind of enlightenment is the only gateway to the Mah āyāna 
B How to generate this mind 
C Having generated the mind of enlightenment how to train in the conduct 
Demonstrating that generating the mind of enlightenment is the only gateway  
to the Mah āyāna including an explanation of its benefits 
2B4B-2A2C-2A Demonstrating that generating  the mind of enlightenment is the only 
gateway to the Mah āyāna 
This has eight points: 
1 Ascertaining the Mah āyāna as the two—the sutra and mantra vehicles—and generating the mind of 
enlightenment is the only gateway to it 
Therefore, as it is necessary to enter the Mah āyāna, you come to think about how it is to 
be entered. There is no Mah āyāna apart from the two—the Perfection and Mantra 
Vehicles—taught by the Victor. Whichever of the two one may enter, the only gateway is 
the mind of enlightenment. 
2 Being posited as a practitioner of the Mah āyāna also depends only on this mind 
Whenever it has arisen in the continuum, even though nothing else has arisen, one is 
posited as a Mah āyānist, whereas whenever one is separated from it, whatever positive 
qualities one has, such as the realization of  emptiness and so fort h, one will fall to the 
level of hearer and the like [158]  and fall away from the Mah āyāna. This is taught in 
numerous texts of the Mah āyāna and is also establishe d by reasonings. Therefore, 
whether one is a Mah āyānist is determined by whether one has this mind or not. 
3 Only those who have generated the mind become a son of the conquerors and outshine the hearers and 
solitary realizers 
Thus, in Engaging in the Bodhisattva Conduct i t  s a y s  t h a t  a s  s o o n  a s  t h i s  m i n d  h a s  
arisen, you become a child of  the Victors. Likewise, in Life of Maitreya  (Maitreyavimok ṣa) 
it says: 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
133 Child of the lineage, it is like this . For example, a diamond, even broken, 
outshines all gold jewelry, however refined; it does not lose its name 
“diamond” and averts all po verty. Child of the lineage, likewise the diamond 
that is the mind generated in the omniscient, even without effort, outshines all 
the gold jewelry that is the positive qualities of the hearers and solitary 
realizers; the name “bodhisattva” is not lost and all the misfortunes of cyclic 
existence are averted. 
If that mind exists even in someone untrained in conduct, he is said to be a bodhisattva.  
4 It is not sufficient for the Dharma that is entered to be Mah āyāna and it is necessary to generate the mind 
that is more than mere words  
Therefore, it is not sufficient for the Dharma to be Mah āyāna, rather it is important that 
the person has entered the Mah āyāna. Whether you become a Mah āyānist depends on 
the mind of enlightenment itself. If that mind is no more than an intellectual 
understanding, your being a Mah āyānist is the same. On the other hand, if you have a 
fully qualified mind of enlightenment, yo u will also become a completely pure Mah āyānist. 
Therefore you should strive for that. 
5 [The mind of enlightenment] is like a seed since it only gives birth to a buddha  
With respect to this it says in the Array of Stalks S ūtra:  
Child of the lineage, the mind of enlightenment is like the seed of all the Dharma of the Buddha. [159] 
Since you need to gain certainty about this, it will be explained. 
6 The way in which generating the mind [of enlightenment ] is even more fundamental than the view of 
emptiness, etc. for giving birth to a buddha alone 
Since water, manure, heat, soil, and so forth act as causes for a rice sprout when 
combined with a rice grain and act as causes for sprouts of wheat, pulses, and so forth when combined with their respective seeds, they are common causes. Since a barley seed 
is not suitable as a cause of a rice sprout and so forth even if the conditions are gathered 
together, it is the uncommon cause of a barley sprout, while the water, manure, and so forth that cooperate with it are the common causes of the barley sprout. Similarly, among 
the causes for a buddha sprout, the mind of unsurpassed enlightenment, like the seed, is 
the uncommon cause, whereas the wisdom realizing emptiness, like the water, manure 
and so forth, is the common cause of the three enlightenments. That is why the statement in 
Sublime Continuum  (Uttaratantra) : 
Dedication to the supreme vehicle is the seed; wisdom is the mother that gives 
birth to the Buddha Dharma. 
says that dedication to the supreme vehicle is like the father’s seed and the wisdom 
realizing selflessness is like the mother. For instance, since a Tibetan father cannot have 
a child who is Indian or Mongolian, the father  is the cause that determines the lineage. 
On the other hand, a Tibetan mother is like the common cause since she can give birth to 
different children. 
7 The Mah āyāna and H īnayāna are also distinguished in terms of conduct, the generation of the mind and the 
like, and are not distinguished in terms of the view 
In his Praise to the Perfection of Wisdom (Prajñ āpāramitāstotra) , Nāgārjuna also says 
that hearers and solitary realizers equally rely on it: 
Buddhas, pratyekabuddhas,154 and hearers 
Definitely rely on you, 
                                                 
154 Tib. rang sangs rgyas , usually translated here as “solitary realizer.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
134 Singular path to liberation, 
It’s true to say there is no other. 
That is why the perfection of wi sdom is also said to be the mother. Since it is the mother 
of the sons of both the Mah āyāna and the H īnayāna, it is not the wisdom realizing 
emptiness that dist inguishes the Mah āyāna and the H īnayāna. [160] Rather it is the mind 
of enlightenment and the vast conduct that distinguishes them. In Precious Garland  they 
are also taught to be differentiated not by the view but by the conduct: 
The Hearers’ Vehicle does not explain 
The bodhisattvas’ aspiration155 
Nor their conduct of full dedication. 
How could bodhisattvas emerge from it? 
8 The inappropriateness of not familiarizing oneself mainly with the mind of enlightenment, but rather 
familiarizing oneself with secondary factors other than it 
Therefore, if even the wisdom realizing emptiness is not an uncommon path of the 
Mahāyāna, what need is there to mention other paths? For that reason it is necessary to 
train in the mind of enlightenment, having made instructions on it one’s main concern. 
The explanation of how to generate the mind of enlightenment 
2B4B-2A2C-2B How to generate this mind 
This has three points:  
1 The stages of training the mind of enlightenment 
2 The measure of the mind of enlightenment having arisen 
3 The way to assume the mind of enlightenment by means of a ritual 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1 The stages of training the mind of enlightenment 
This has two manifestations: 
A The sevenfold instruction on cause and effect transmitted from the Great Elder 
B The training based on that which occurs in the texts by Śāntideva, a son of the Victors 
Explanation of how to train the mind by means of the sevenfold instruction  
on cause and effect 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1A The sevenfold instruction on cause and effect transmitted from the 
Great Elder 
This has two points: 
1 Short presentation 
2 Extensive explanation 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1A-1 Short presentation 
The sevenfold cause and effect is the seven: a complete buddha is born from the mind of 
enlightenment; this mind from the extraordin ary attitude; this attitude from compassion; 
compassion from love; love from the wish to repay the kindness; the wish to repay the 
kindness from remembering the kindness; and remembering the kindness from seeing 
beings as one’s mother. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1A-2 Extensive explanation 
This has two points: 
A Generating certainty concerning the stages  
B The actual gradual training [161] 
                                                 
155 Tib. smon lam , usually translated here as “aspirational prayer.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
135 2B4B-2A2C-2B1A-2A Generating certainty concerning the stages  
This has two points:  
1 Demonstrating that compassion is the root of the Mah āyāna 
2 The way in which the other causes and effects become causes and effects of that compassion  
2B4B-2A2C-2B1A-2A1 Demonstrating that compassion is the root of the Mah āyāna 
This has three points:  
A The importance of compassion at the beginning 
B The importance of compassion in the middle 
C The importance of compassion at the end 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1A-2A1A The importance of compassion at the beginning 
This has three points: 
1 The responsibility for liberating migrating beings depends on compassion 
If your mind is moved by great compassion, you will definitely resolve to get all sentient 
beings out of cyclic existence. However, if yo ur compassion is inferi or, deeds that accord 
with that will not come about. Th erefore, whether you take resp onsibility for liberating all 
migrating beings without exception depends on that, and if you do not take that 
responsibility, you do not enter the Mah āyāna. That is why compa ssion is important at 
the beginning. 
2 Compassion is the preliminary of all the paths of the Mah āyāna 
In the Teachings of Ak ṣayamati S ūtra (Akṣayamatinirde śa Sūtra) it says: 
Venerable son of Śaradvatī, moreover the great compassion of the 
bodhisattvas is inexhaustible. Why is t hat? It is because it  is a preliminary. 
Venerable son of Śaradvatī, it is like this. By way of  analogy, just as the inward 
and outward flow of the breath is a preliminary for our human life force 
faculty, likewise the great compassion of the bodhisattvas is a preliminary for 
perfectly accomplishing the Mah āyāna. 
3 Compassion is the beginning of the conduct of bodhisattvas 
In the Foremost of Gay ā Sūtra (Gayāśīrṣasūtra) it says:  
“Mañjuśrī, what is the beginning of the conduct of bodhisattvas? What is its 
locale?” Mañju śrī replied: “Son of the gods, the beginning of the conduct of 
bodhisattvas is great compassion. Its locale is sentient beings.” 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1A-2A1B The importance of compassion in the middle 
This has two points: 
1 If you do not cultivate compassion again and again, you will fall into the H īnayāna  
Although you enter the Mah āyāna when a mind like this has arisen once, if you become 
discouraged upon seeing the great number of sentient beings and their bad actions, 
[162] the great difficulty of the trainings, their boundlessness, and also need to do them 
for a limitless time scale, you will fall into the H īnayāna.  
2 One does not despair with respect to others’ welfare and easily completes the collections 
Due to having familiarized yourself increasingly with great compassion rather than 
generating it just once, you will not look at your own happiness and suffering and you will not despair with respect to the welfare of  others. That way you easily complete all 
the collections. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1A-2A1C The importance of compassion at the end 
This has two points: 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
136 1 The actual importance at the end 
2 In particular, the advice to make the mind of enlightenment the focus of the instructions 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1A-2A1C-1 The actual importance at the end 
This has two points: 
A The difference between buddhas and hearers  
The fact that, even when the buddhas have achieved their result, they do not dwell in 
peace like the H īnayānists but bring about the welfare of however many sentient beings 
there are throughout space, is also due to the power of their compassion, for without it, 
they would become like hearers. 
B All three external analogies symbolize compassion only  
Glorious Candrak īrti said: “For a harvest, what is im portant in the beginning is the seed, 
in the middle the water, and in the end the maturation. Likewise, for the harvest of 
buddhahood, what is important in the be ginning, the end, and in the middle is 
compassion.”  
2B4B-2A2C-2B1A-2A1C-2 In particular, the advice to make the mind of enlightenment the focus of the instructions 
This has two points: 
A The need to make it the essence of one’s practice 
Zhang Nachung Tönpa said: “Although I asked the Elder for instructions, nothing came of 
it other than: ‘Abandon worldly thought. Cu ltivate the mind of en lightenment!’” Geshe 
Tönpa laughed at him and said: “You got the ce ntral point of the Elde r’s instructions! He 
knew the key point of the teachings, the Dharma”.  
B Since it is difficult to gain certainty about this, it is necessary to rely on accumulation, purification, and the 
scriptures 
Since it is also difficult to gain certainty about this, you must accumulate and purify again and again, study the scriptures such as the 
Array of Stalks S ūtra as well as their 
commentaries, and seek firm certainty. It is as Glorious A śvaghoṣa says referring to the 
Buddha: 
Your mind, Heroic One, is precious, 
The seed of complete enlightenment; 
Only you know it as the essence, [163] 
Other beings do not guess that. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1A-2A2 The way in which the other causes and effects become causes and 
effects of that compassion  
This has two points:  
A The way in which from understanding as mothers  through love are causes 
B The way in which the extraordinary attitude and the generation of the mind of enlightenment are 
effects 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1A-2A2A The way in which from understanding as mothers  through love  are 
causes 
This has five points: 
1 How to develop the intensive wish for all sentient beings to be free from suffering  
If you think again and again about the suffering of a sent ient being, this will generally 
give rise to the mere wish that it be free from suffering. However, for this mind to arise 
easily and for it to arise very strong and stable, to start with it must be a sentient being 
who has the aspect of being attractive and valuable. For when someone close to us meets with suffering, we cannot bear it; wh en our enemies meet with suffering, we enjoy 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
137 it; and when someone who is neither a friend  nor an enemy meets with suffering, mainly 
an equanimity that neglects him arises.  
2 The difference of attraction arising or not arising toward friends, enemies, and the in between 
In this regard, since the former is attractive to our mind, the more we cherish him, the 
more his suffering will be unbearable to us , and the more compassi on will arise for him. 
If we cherish him a little or somewhere between a little and a lot156, our inability to bear 
his suffering will also be small. On the othe r hand, if we cherish someone very much, we 
cannot bear it at all when he meets with only slight suffering. When we see our enemy 
suffering, not only does the wish that he be free from it fail to arise, but rather the 
thought occurs to us “May his suffering increase and may he not be free from it.” That is 
our reaction to someone we find unattractive . Moreover, our joy at his suffering will also 
be greater or smaller, depending on how unattractive he is. With respect to the suffering 
of someone who is neither a friend nor an enemy, it is neither that we cannot bear it nor 
that we enjoy it. That is our reaction when someone is neither attractive nor unattractive.  
3 How to generate great love and great compassion by establishing them as greatly attractive by means of the 
three—recognizing them as our mothers, remembering their kindness, and wishing to repay it  
If this is done, meditating on sentient beings  as our relatives is for the sake of making 
them attractive to us. [164] However, sinc e the person we are most closely related to157 is 
our mother, the three—meditating on them as having been our mother, remembering 
their kindness, and wishing to repay this kindness—establishes them as dear and 
attractive. The love that holds sentient beings  to be delightful as an only child is the 
effect of these three. It produces compassion. 
4 With respect to mere love and compassion it is not certain which is the cause and which is the effect 
With respect to the love that wishes them to meet with happiness and compassion, there 
does not seem to be any certainty as to which one is the cause and which one is the effect.  
5 Whose system these instructions are 
These meditations on sentient beings as our relatives have been explained by Ācārya 
Candrak īrti, Venerable Candra, and Ācārya Kamala śīla as the cause for the mind of 
enlightenment to arise. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1A-2A2B The way in which the extraordinary attitude and the generation of 
the mind of enlightenment are effects 
This has two points: 
1 Doubt 
2 Response 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1A-2A2B-1 Doubt 
It should really be sufficient if, compassion having arisen due to such a gradual training 
of the mind, the wish arises to attain enlighte nment for the welfare of all sentient beings. 
Why is the extraordinary attitude inserted between them? 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1A-2A2B-2 Response 
This has two points: 
A Although there is immeasurable compassion, there may not be the extraordinary attitude of taking the 
responsibility upon oneself 
                                                 
156 Tib. gces pa chung 'bring la , literally “for (someone) we cherish a little or middle.” 
157 Tib. gnyen gyi mthar thug , literally “the ultimate of our relatives.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
138 Although hearers and solitary realizers also have the immeasurable compassion and the 
love that think, “If only sentient beings were to meet with happiness and if only they 
were free from suffering!,” still, those wh o are not Mah āyānists do not take the 
responsibility to accomplish happiness for all sentient beings and to eliminate their 
suffering. Therefore it is necessary to generate the extraordinary attitude, the special 
attitude of those with brave hearts. You understand this from a quotation from the Sūtra 
Requested by S āgaramati  in the commentary on the Sublime Continuum.  
B How the extraordinary attitude induces the generation of the mind of enlightenment 
Once the mind to free sentient beings has arisen in this manner, owing to your current 
situation you could not complete even the welfare of one sentient being. Not only that, 
even if you were to attain the state of the two kinds of arhats, you would only be able to complete the welfare of very few beings, [165] and their welfare would be to merely 
accomplish liberation. Since they cannot establish them in omniscience, who could 
complete the temporary and fina l welfare of limitless beings? If you reflect in this vein, 
you will come to understand th at only a buddha is able to do this, and you will generate 
the wish to attain buddhahood for the welfare of sentient beings. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1A-2B The actual gradual training 
This has three points:  
1 Training in the mind striving for the welfare of others 
2 Training in the mind striving for enlightenment 
3 The result of the training: identifying the generation of the mind of enlightenment 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1A-2B1 Training in the mind striving for the welfare of others 
This has two points:  
A Laying the foundation for generating this mind 
B Actual generation of that mind striving for the welfare of others 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1A-2B1A Laying the foundation for generating this mind 
This has two points:  
1 Producing an equanimous mind toward sentient beings  2 Accomplishing that all sentient beings have an attractive aspect 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1A-2B1A-1 Producing an equanimous mind toward sentient beings 
This has two points: 
A The preparatory steps 
B How to cultivate equanimity 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1A-2B1A-1A The preparatory steps 
The preparatory steps and the like as explained before in the context of lesser and 
intermediate beings should be adopted and sustained here as well. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1A-2B1A-1B How to cultivate equanimity 
This has five points: 
1 The need for an equanimous mind after attachment and hatred have been stopped  
To start with, if you do not accomplish an equanimous mind, having stopped the bias of 
attachment toward some sentient beings and hatred toward others, any love and 
compassion that arise will arise with partiality . As they do not arise if you observe them 
without impartiality, you sh ould cultivate equanimity. 
2 What kind of equanimity needs to be cultivated 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
139 Among the two types of equanimous mind that have been taught, one that has the aspect 
of establishing living beings as lacking mental  afflictions, such as attachment, hatred, and 
so forth, and one in which oneself is free from attachment and hatred toward sentient 
beings, here it is the latter. 
3  The order of meditations 
Since this is the order of meditation by which it will easily arise, initially you should take 
as your object of meditation  a person who has neither help ed nor harmed you [166] and, 
through eliminating attachment and anger, accomplish an equanimous mind. When an equanimous mind toward that person has been accomplished, you then need to 
accomplish an equanimous mind with respect to friends and relatives. A non-equanimous 
mind toward them is to be biased due to attachment and hatred or not to be equanimous due to lesser or greater attachment. When you are equanimous toward them, you should 
cultivate an equanimous mind toward your enemies. The lack of equanimity toward them 
i s  d u e  t o  h a t r e d  t h a t  d e r i v e s  f r o m  s e e i n g  them as totally incompatible with yourself. 
Having become equanimous toward them, you should cultivate an equanimous mind 
toward all sentient beings.  
4 By meditating on what attachment and hatred are stopped. 
Moreover, the following two th oughts are taught in Kamala śīla’s Stages of Meditation II : 
“Since from their side all sentient beings are the same in wanting happiness and not 
wanting suffering, it would be inappropriate for me to benefit some whom I consider 
close and harm or fail to benefit others whom I consider distant,” and “Since from my 
own side there is not any sentient being who in beginningless cyclic existence has not been my relative hundreds of times, who should I have attachment for and who should I 
have hatred for?” Also with regard to attachment to our relatives, the 
Sūtra Requested by 
the Noble Daughter Chan drottara (Candrottarad ārikāparipŗcchāsūtra) says: 
In former times I killed each one of you; I was also formerly chopped
158 by you. 
We all have been foes and murderers unto each other. 
How can a mind of attachment arise in you? 
As was explained above in the context of the fault of uncertainty, you should think about 
the way in which friends and enemies quickly change. In this manner you will avert both 
anger and attachment.  
5 Ceasing attachment and hatred although the mind of friend and enemy has not been ceased  
We need to differentiate between friends and enemies having apprehended them to be 
the basis of their respective features. [167] Th erefore, what is to be ceased is the mind 
that is biased due to attachment and hatred, taking as a reason that someone alleging 
someone to be a friend or enemy, whereas the mind of friend and enemy does not need 
to be averted.  
2B4B-2A2C-2B1A-2B1A-2 Accomplishing that all sentient beings have an attractive 
aspect 
This has three points:  
A Meditating on all sentient beings as one’s mother 
B Remembering their kindness 
C Meditating on repaying their kindness 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1A-2B1A-2A Meditating on all sentient beings as one’s mother 
This has two points:  
                                                 
158 Tib. gshags shing gtubs , literally “slashed and cut into pieces.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
140 1 The thought that they have been one’s mothers in the past 
In the s ūtras it is taught that, since cyclic existence is beginningless, our births are also 
beginningless. Therefore we have been born and we have died incessantly, so that there 
is no body in cyclic existence that we have not taken, no place where we have not been born, and also no-one who has not been a relative such as our mother. 
2 The thought that they are still one’s mother 
Moreover, this is not only true of the past, they will again be in the future. Therefore, 
reflecting in that way, you should try to gain strong certainty that they have been your mother, for, once that certainty arises, it w ill be easy to remember their kindness and so 
forth. On the other hand, if it  does not arise, there will be no foundation for remembering 
their kindness and so forth. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1A-2B1A-2B Remembering their kindness 
This has five points:  
1  The thought that it is skilful to start with your mother of this life 
Geshe Potowa maintained that the thought re membering their kindness will arise quickly 
if, after meditating on all sentient beings as your mothers, you initially meditate on your mother of this life. You should meditate like that. You should visualize your mother in front of you in a clear aspect and repeatedly reflect: “She has been my mother not only 
now, but times past counting since beginningless cyclic existence. That way, when she 
was my mother, she protecte d me from all harm and a ccomplished all happiness and 
benefit for me.” 
2 The way in which she also protected you in this life 
In particular, even in this life she initially carried you in her womb for a long time. Then, 
when she had given birth to you, she pressed your yellow tousled hair against the heat of 
her body, she swung you on her fingertips, nurs ed you with her milk, fed you as an infant 
from her mouth, wiped away your saliva with her mouth, [168] cleaned your filth with her 
hands, caring for you untiringly in many different ways. In addition, when you were hungry or thirsty, she gave you food and drink. When you were cold, she gave you 
clothing. When you were in need, she gave you her possessions that she herself had 
hardly used. When even the most basic necessities where hard to come by, she bore 
great hardship and spared herself no negativity, suffering, or bad talk to get them and 
give them to you. 
3 A mother cherishes her child more than herself 
Whenever her child suffered from a disease and so forth, she wished from the depths of 
her heart to die rather than for her child to die, to be ill rather  than for her child to be ill, 
and so forth. With effort, she did whatever she could to eliminate her child’s suffering. 
4 How to meditate on the essential points separately 
To summarize, by whatever level of knowledg e and whatever level of ability she had, she 
thought single-pointedly about ways to acco mplish your happiness and benefit, and to 
remove any harm and suffering from you.  
5 How to meditate progressing gradually 
If, by mediating in this way, a mind remembering her kindness that is not just words has 
arisen, you should then meditate on recogniz ing other friends and relatives, your father 
and so forth, as also having been your mothers. Then you should also meditate on 
recognizing neutral persons as having been your mothers. When a similar mind arises 
toward them as that toward your friends an d relatives, you should also meditate on 
recognizing your enemies as having been yo ur mothers. When a similar mind arises 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
141 toward them as that toward your mother, you should proceed from the recognition of all 
beings as having been your mothers, and meditate, gradually extending it more and 
more. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1A-2B1A-2C Meditating on repaying their kindness 
This has four points:  
1 Even though you do not recognize them due to birth, death, and transmigration, it would be shameful to 
neglect them. 
There is nothing more shameful than carelessl y neglecting your suffering, protectorless, 
kind mothers, just because you do not recognize them anymore due to birth, death, and 
transmigration, and being preoccupied with free ing yourself from cy clic existence. In 
Letter to a Student  it says: 
My relatives have got immersed in th e ocean of cyclic existence [169] 
And seem to have fallen into an abyss; if I neglected them, 
Unrecognized due to birth and death and transmigration, And sought liberation alone, there would be nothing more shameful. 
2  To neglect those who have been kind does not accord with the well-mannered  
Thus, thinking “If neglecting such kind beings  is unacceptable even  to the ill-mannered, 
how can I reconcile it with my own ways?”  you should take the responsibility to 
reciprocate their kindness. 
3 As it would be inappropriate to repay the benefit with something contaminated, one should liberate them 
from ignorance 
If someone asks: “Well then, how should I re pay the benefit?” Whatever pleasures and 
riches of cyclic existence your mothers obtain, they are deceived by all of them. Thus we 
should repay the benefit thinking “In the past, by the power of the mental afflictions, evil spirits that possess me, I prod uced all kinds of additional sufferings in those who were 
already suffering by nature, like putting salt and the like on the injured who were already 
severely wounded. I will establish all those wh o have benefited me out of love in the 
happiness of liberation, nirv āṇa.” 
4  How to meditate on the essential points separately 
In brief, if even your own kind mother who, restless and insane, blind and without 
anyone to guide her, is evidently stumbling with each step and approaching a fearsome 
abyss, cannot put her hope in her child, who can she count on? If it is not for her child to 
free its mother from fear, who else should do it? Likewise the sentient beings who have 
been our mothers, their mi nds stirred up rather than in the natural state159 due to the evil 
spirits of the mental afflictions, insane and without control over their consciousness, 
lacking eyes to see the path to high status and certain goodness, without a blind person’s 
guide of perfect knowledge—in each instant they stumble due to being distracted by faulty behavior [170] and wander toward the abyss of cyclic existence in general and the 
lower realms in particular. As you see th em, you should reflect that these mothers 
necessarily put their hopes in their child, and t h a t  i t  i s  a l s o  f o r  t h e i r  c h i l d  t o  g e t  h i s  
mothers out of there. You should repay their kindness by definitely getting them out of 
cyclic existence. In the 
Compendium of Trainings  it says: 
Insane with afflictions, blinded by ignorance, 
On a path with many abysses, 
Stumbling with every step, myself 
And others are always the basis of sorrow. 
Migrators are the same in suffering. 
                                                 
159 Tib. sems rnal du gnas pa dkrugs pas , literally “their minds that abide in a natural state stirred up.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
142 In view of this, although it is indeed said to be inappropriate to look for faults in others, 
although you should hold the slightest positive quality in amazement when you see it, 
here it is appropriate to relate to misery. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1A-2B1B Actual generation of th at mind striving for the welfare of others 
This has three points:  
1 Meditating on love 
2 Meditating on compassion  
3 Meditating on the extraordinary attitude 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1A-2B1B-1 Meditating on love 
This has seven points:  
A The observed object 
The observed objects of love are sentient beings who are not endowed with happiness. 
B The aspect of love 
Its aspect is the thought: “How wonderful it would be if they were to meet with 
happiness. May they meet with happiness!” And: “I will make them meet with happiness!”  
C The merit is even greater than constantly making offerings to the buddhas 
As regards the benefit, it says in the King of Meditative Stabilizations S ūtra:  
Many kinds of offerings without measure 
In myriads of neighboring pure fields 
Constantly offered to th e most excellent beings, 
Fall short of a fraction of the mind of love.  
This is to say that the merit is much greater than that of constantly making offerings of 
things to the field that is the final object with very vast things. 
 D If you cultivate love in this field, the merit will exceed even the former 
Also, in Array of Qualities in Mañju śri's Buddha-realm  (Ārya-
Mañjuśribuddhak ṣetraguṇavyūha) it is explained: 
In the world sphere called “Thousand Ornaments” of the great king 
Buddheśvara, at the northeastern border, [171] sentient beings possess a 
happiness similar to the ha ppiness of monks who have  entered cessation. If a 
mind of love toward all sentient beings, generated in this field for as little as 
the duration of a finger snap, produces far more merit than a celibate practicing pure conduct there for a hund red thousand millions of years, what 
need is there to mention that of abiding in that mind day and night?  
E Achievement of the eight benefits such as being loved by gods and human beings  
In Nāgārjuna’s Precious Garland we also find: 
Three hundred small pots of food one offers 
Three times every day fall short 
Of the merit of love sustained For the duration of  just one moment. 
You are loved by gods and humans, 
They protect you as well and you have 
Mental happiness and much happiness, 
Poisons and weapons can do no more harm, 
You achieve your goals without effort 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
143 And will be born in the world of Brahma. 
Even if you do not reach liberation, 
You will win the eight qualities of love. 
If you have love, you are loved by gods and men and they naturally gather around you. 
Since even the Victors defeat the hosts of M āra by the force of love, it becomes the best 
of protections and so forth.  
F The stages of meditation on love 
The stages of meditation on love are to respectively meditate initially on love for your 
friends and relatives, then for neutral persons, then for your enemies, and then for all 
sentient beings. 
G The way in which to meditate on love 
The way in which to meditate on love is as follows. Just as compassion arises when you 
reflect again and again on how sentient beings  have the suffering of suffering, likewise 
you should reflect again and again on how sentient beings lack contaminated and 
uncontaminated happiness and on the manners in which they are devoid of happiness. 
Once you have familiarized yourself with this , the wish for them to meet with happiness 
will arise naturally. In addition, having directed your mind to the various kinds of 
happiness, you will then provide sentient beings with them. [172] 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1A-2B1B-2 Meditating on compassion 
This has six points:  
A The observed object of compassion 
The observed objects of compassion are sentient beings who suffer due to any of the 
three kinds of suffering. 
B The aspect of compassion 
Its aspect is the thought: “If only they were free from these sufferings,” “May they be 
free from them,” and “I will  free them from them.” 
C The sequence of the meditations on compassion 
The sequence of the meditations is to medi tate on compassion for your friends and 
relatives first, then for neutral persons, th en for your enemies, and then for all the 
sentient beings of the ten directions. 
D The main point of meditating in that sequence  
This gradual meditation on equanimity, love, and compassion in which you divide the 
objects into specific categories was developed by Ācārya Kamala śīla following the 
Abhidharma S ūtra (Abhidharmas ūtra). This is a very important point because if from the 
start you train in observing sentient beings in  general without dividing them into specific 
categories, it will seem as if equanimity and so forth had arisen, bu t when you then think 
about friends and so forth one by one, it will appear that it does not arise for any of 
them. On the other hand, if you experience a change in your mind toward them one by 
one as explained above, and then extend it to many, when at the end you observe them 
in general and sustain that attitude, it will  arise purely regardle ss of who is observed, 
whether a group or each singly.  
E The way to meditate 
The way to meditate is in terms of the suffe rings that were explained when considering 
how the sentient beings who have been our mothers have fallen into existence and are 
experiencing the general and specific sufferings. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
144 F The measure of the arising of compassion 
The measure of the arising of  compassion is taught in Stages of Meditation I :  
At the point where the compassion that has the aspect of the constant desire 
to remove the suffering of all bein gs—as if your own beloved child was 
unhappy—operates naturally in you spontaneously and operates in accordance 
with your own nature, it is complete. Thereby it obtains the name great 
compassion . [173] 
Thus if compassion toward all sentient beings naturally arises to the extent that it arises 
in a mother when the child she loves with all her heart suffers, it is said to be fully-
qualified great compassion. Through this the measure for the arising of great love should 
also be understood. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1A-2B1B-3 Meditating  on the extraordinary attitude 
This has two points:  
A The actual way to meditate on the extraordinary attitude  
Having meditated on love and compassion in this  manner, finally, you will think: “Alas! If 
these sentient beings who are pleasant and attractive to me are thus deprived of 
happiness and tormented by suffering, how shall I make them meet with happiness and how shall I free them from suffering?” In taking upon yourself, at least in mere words, 
the responsibility to liberate them, your mind is trained. 
B Clearing up doubt 
Although this point has already been made briefly in the context of repaying their 
kindness, it is shown here that the love and compassion that think “How wonderful it 
would be if they were to meet with happiness” and “How wonderful it would be if they were free from suffering” are not sufficient. This is because of the need that was taught to generate the love and comp assion capable of inducing the thought: “I myself will 
accomplish the happiness and benefit of sentient beings.” This is not to be done just 
during meditation sessions but is to be sustained continuously, remembering it during all 
behaviors after the sessions and so forth as is taught in 
Stages of Meditation  I. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1A-2B2 Training in the mind striving for enlightenment 
Once you realize, urged by the steps explained so far, that enlightenment is necessary for 
the welfare of others, you will al so develop the wish to attain it. Nonetheless, since that 
in itself is not sufficient, at the beginning you should increase your faith through thinking 
about the positive qualities of the exalted body, exalted speech, exalted mind, and 
enlightened activities as they were explained earlier in the context of taking refuge. 
Then, since that faith is said to act as the basis for your aspiration, you generate the 
wish to attain those qualities from the bottom of your heart. That will induce certainty 
that the achievement of an exalted knower of all aspects is indispensable also for your 
own welfare. [174] 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1A-2B3 The result of the training: identifying the generation of the mind of 
enlightenment 
This has two points:  
A The general definition 
The general definition is as taught in Ornament for Clear Realization : “The mind 
generation is the desire for perfectly complete enlightenment for the welfare of others.” 
B Divisions 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
145 Engaging in Bodhisattva Conduct , following the Array of Stalks S ūtra, teaches the two—
the aspiring and engaging mind generations saying:  
The wish to go and actually going— 
The way that difference is understood Is how the discerning should understand  The difference between those two respectively. 
If there appear to be a lot of inconsistencies in this respect, there is also the statement 
in 
Stages of Meditation I  that the mind that thinks: “M ay I become a buddha for the 
welfare of sentient beings” is the aspiring mind and that, after the vow has been taken, 
that mind is the engaging mind generation. 
Explanation of how to train the mind through equalizing and exchanging oneself and others 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1B The training based on that which occurs in the texts by Śāntideva 
This has three points:  
1 Thinking about the advantages of exchanging and the disadvantages of not exchanging oneself 
and others 
2 Demonstrating that you can generate this mind if you familiarize yourself with it 
3 The stages of meditation on how to exchange oneself and others 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1B-1 Thinking about the advantages of exchanging and the 
disadvantages of not exchanging oneself and others 
This has three points:  
A  To quickly accomplish the two welfares it is appropriate to exchange oneself and others  
In Engaging in Bodhisattva Conduct  it says: 
Whoever wishes to protect  
Himself and others rapidly 
Should practice the secret instructions which Consist in exchanging oneself and others. 
B The advantages of exchanging and the disadvantages of not exchanging oneself and others 
All happiness that ex ists in the world 
Arises from wanting happiness for others. 
All suffering that exists in the world 
Arises from wanting one’s own happiness. 
What need is there to say any more? 
The childish work for their own welfare [175] 
The Munis for the welfare of others. Look at the difference between the two! 
C Therefore buddhahood and so forth are difficult to attain if one does not exchange oneself and others  
One’s happiness and the suffering of others— 
If one fails to exchange them correctly, One will not reach buddhahood, 
Saṃsāra will also be without happiness. Just as it is expressed here, you 
should think of cherishing oneself as the door  to all problems and cherishing others as 
the basis of all excellences. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1B-2 Demonstrating that you can  generate this mind if you familiarize 
yourself with it 
This has two points:  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
146 A The actual topic 
In the same way that fear used to arise in you even at hearing your enemy’s name but 
later on, having made it up, you became friends and got very sad if he was absent, 
likewise due to the mind following habits, you can familiarize yourself with seeing 
yourself like someone else and others like yourself. In the same text it says: 
Do not avoid things because they are difficult. 
By the strength of familiarization 
One whose name was frightful to hear Will make you sad if he is away. 
And: 
It is not all that hard to posit  My body as belonging to others. 
B Clearing up doubt 
If you think: “Since someone else’s body is not my own body, how could it be appropriate 
to generate the same attitude of ‘mine’ towa rd it?” This body was also created from the 
semen and blood of our parents, and even though it was created from parts of others’ 
bodies, we hold it to be “I” by the power of  previous familiarization; likewise if we 
familiarize ourselves with cherishi ng others’ bodies as if they were our own, this mind will 
arise. The same text says: 
Therefore, with regard to drops 
Of someone else’s blood and semen, 
You apprehend yourself; like that Get used to
160 it regarding others! 
Through thorough reflection on the advantages and disadvantages along these lines, a 
strong enthusiasm for this meditation will arise from the depths of the heart. [176] 
Having seen that, if you familiarize yourself  with it, you can generate this attitude, you 
should meditate on it. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1B-3 The stages of meditati on on how to exchange oneself and others 
This has two points:  
A Removing obstacles 
B The actual way to meditate 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1B-3A Removing obstacles 
This has two points:  
1 Identifying the mind of exchanging oneself and others 
2 Removing obstacles to it  
2B4B-2A2C-2B1B-3A1 Identifying the mind of exchanging oneself and others 
What is called “exchanging oneself and others” and “making oneself into the other and 
making others into oneself” does not mean training in the mind that thinks: “The other person is me” and “His eyes and so forth are my eyes and so forth.” Rather, it is to 
exchange the rank of the two—(1) the mind that cherishes oneself and (2) the mind that 
neglects others—and to generate the mind th at cherishes others like we cherish ourselves 
and neglects ourselves like we neglect others. That is also why it was taught that one’s own happiness and the suffering of others should be exchanged. Having perceived self-
cherishing as our enemy, we will stop making our own happiness our priority. Having 
perceived cherishing others as a positive quality and having stopped neglecting the 
                                                 
160 Tib. goms pa(r gyis),  usually translated here as “familiarize yourself with.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
147 suffering of others, we will make it our priori ty to eliminate it. In short, we will act for 
the sake of eliminating the suffering of ot hers without concern fo r our own happiness. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1B-3A2 Removing obstacles to it  
When training in this mind , there are two obstacles. 
A Removing the obstacle of considering oneself and others as distinct individuals 
B Removing the obstacle of thinking: “Since the suffering of others does not harm me, I need not make an 
effort to remove it” 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1B-3A2A Removing the obstacle of considering oneself and others as distinct individuals 
This has two points:  
1 The actual topic 
Separating the two, oneself and others—the basis of one’s own and others’ happiness and 
suffering—into distinct entities, like blue and yellow, you hold them to be established in 
this way. Then, with respect to the happin ess and suffering based on them, you think: 
“Since it is mine, it should be accomplished or  removed. Since it is someone else’s, it is 
to be neglected.” Therefore, as an antidote to this, think: “Myself and others are not distinct entities by nature. Rather, as we look at one another, the mind “other” arises in 
me, whereas the mind “I” arises  in the other person. Thus it is like “the mountain over 
here” and “the mountain over there.” For instance, although from this perspective the mind “the mountain over  there” arises with respect to th e mountain over there, when you 
go to the mountain over there, the mind “the mountain over here” arises. Therefore 
[177] this is not the same as the fact that in whoever looks at the color blue, a mind of just blue will arise, whereas a mind  of another color will not arise.  
2 The scriptural sources 
In this manner, the Compendium of Trainings  also teaches that self and other are not 
established by their own entities but merely posited in dependence on the point of view: 
Through familiarity with the equality 
 Of other and self bodhicitta grows firm. 
Self and other  are relational; 
As fictitious as that side  and this side .  
The slope is not that side  by itself. 
Depending on the perspective it’s this side , 
The self in itself is not established. 
Depending on the perspective it’s other . 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1B-3A2B Removing the obstacle of thinking: “Since the suffering of others does not harm me, I need not 
make an effort to remove it” 
This has four points:  
1 Refutation in terms of the actions of a youth and an elderly person  
If this were the case, there would be no need to accumulate wealth when young out of 
concern for the sufferings of old age since th e sufferings of the elderly person would not 
harm the youth. 
2 Refutation in terms of different parts of the body and different times 
It is said: “Likewise, the hand would not eliminate the sufferings of the foot because they are other.” This is a mere illustration and should also be applied to the sufferings of the 
morning and those of the evening, and so forth. 
3 Abandoning the doubt that these analogies are not the same as “self” and “other” since they refer to the 
same continuum or collection 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
148 If you think: “The two, self and other, are not the same since the elderly person and the 
youth are the same continuum, while the hand and the foot are the same collection.” A 
continuum  and a collection  are designated on many instants and a combination of many 
parts; they lack an autonomous entity. Since your own self and the self of others must be 
posited on a continuum or a collection, they are not established by way of their own entities which would not merely be self and other posited in relation. 
4 By the power of familiarization the mind  cherishing others c an also develop [178] 
Yet your own suffering is unbearable due to the power of familiarization with self-cherishing from beginningless time. Therefore, if you familiarize yourself with cherishing 
others, their suffering will also become unbearable. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B1B-3B The actual way to meditate 
This has five points:  
1 Thinking about the disadvantages of cherishing oneself and the advantages of cherishing others 
By the power of attachment to the self, this  self-cherishing has produced much that is 
undesirable from beginningless time up to now. Despite the fact that you have wanted to 
create excellence for yourself, you have reli ed on unsuitable means, considering your 
own welfare paramount. Due to  this, neither your own welfare nor that of others has 
been accomplished although co untless eons have passed. Not only have you failed to 
accomplish that, you have only been torm ented by suffering. If you had shifted the 
concern for your own welfare to that of others, you would have become a buddha a long 
time ago and both your own and others’ we lfare would have, without doubt, become 
excellent. But since you did not do that, the time has been spent with meaningless 
exertion.  
2 The need to put an end to self-cherishing by regarding it as an enemy 
Think: “Now that I have unde rstood this, I will rely on the mindfulness and introspection 
that this self-cherishing is my worst enemy,  a n d  m a k e  m u c h  e f f o r t  s o  t h a t  t h e  s e l f -
cherishing that has not arisen does not arise and that which has arisen does not last 
long.” Having made this cert ainty stable, you should famili arize yourself with it many 
times. 
3 Generating the mind cherishing others 
Thinking about the advantages of cherishing others again and again in this way, you will 
generate strong enthusiasm to do so from the bottom of your heart. Then you will not 
generate the mind neglecting others that has not yet arisen, and that which has arisen 
will not last long. By means of the thought that othe rs are dear, pleasa nt, and attractive, 
as far as it has arisen, you should generate the mind cherishing others, just as you 
previously cherished yourself.  
4 How to meditate remembering the teachings of earlier holy beings [179] 
The Elder said: “The Tibetans know bodhisattv as who do not know how to train in love 
and compassion. Well then, how do you do it? You should do it having trained 
sequentially from the beginning.” 
Langri Tangpa said: “Shawopa and I have eighteen human methods and one horse 
method, nineteen altogether. The human methods are to generate the mind of supreme 
enlightenment and train in doing whatever one does for the welfare of sentient beings. 
The method of horses is the self-cherishing that does not allow the mind of enlightenment that has not arisen to arise and that which has arisen to remain and 
increase. Therefore, having taught it in passing, we train in whatever harms it. As for 
sentient beings, we train in whatever benefits them, having taught this as the 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
149 fundamental point.” 
Khamlungpa said: “Since we act deviously towa rd noble sentient beings, they will also do 
the same to us.” 
5 The appropriateness of putting effort by many approaches into the methods for generating the mind of 
enlightenment 
It is good if a habit develops that constantly checks to what extent this mind has been generated since everything stems from it: whether or not the root of the Mah āyāna has 
been planted and whether or not one is included among Mah āyānists. Even if it does not 
arise, do not leave it at that but rely on a virtuous spiritual friends who teaches it, and 
always keep company with the companion that is mind training. Read the scriptures of 
the Teacher and their commentaries. As its ca use, accumulate the co llections and purify 
your obscurations. Since it is certain that if you train your mind in this way, the seed will 
be fully planted, these actions are of no little importance and a reason for joy. It is as the 
Great Elder said: 
For those who wish to enter the gate of  
Mahāyāna Dharma it’s worth an eon 
Of effort for bodhicitta to grow 
Which like the sun and moon eliminate Darkness and pacify scorching heat. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B2 The measure of the mind of enlightenment having arisen [180] 
That should be understood from what was already explained above. 
Explanation of how to assume the mind generation by means of a ritual 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3 The way to assume the mind of enlightenment by means of a ritual 
This has three points:  
A Receiving that which has not yet been received 
B Guarding that which has been received without degenerating it  
C The method for restoring the vow if it has been degenerated 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3A Receiving that which has not yet been received 
This has three points:  
1 From whom: the object from whom it is taken 
2 By whom: the basis that takes it 
3 How: the ritual by which it is taken 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3A-1 From whom: the object from whom it is taken 
The assertions of the earlier masters accord with Master Jetari that it is not enough for 
the person from whom the vow is taken to possess the vow of the aspiring mind and to be abiding in the trainings, rather he must possess the engaging vows. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3A-2 By whom: the basis that takes it 
All gods, n āgas, and so forth who are physically and mentally suitable to generate the 
aspiring mind are also a suitable basis for it. The Commentary on the Difficult Points of 
the “Lamp for the Path”  says:  
Repulsed by cyclic existence, mindful of death, with wisdom and great 
compassion. 
Thus it should be someone who has gained a little experience of transforming his mind 
into the mind of enlightenment due to having trained the mind in the stages of the path as explained previously. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
150 2B4B-2A2C-2B3A-3 How: the ritual by which it is taken 
This has three points:  
A The preparatory ritual 
B The actual ritual 
C The concluding ritual  
2B4B-2A2C-2B3A-3A The preparatory ritual 
This has three points:  
1 Special taking of refuge  
2 Accumulating the collection of merit 
3 Training in the attitude 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3A-3A1 Special taking of refuge 
This has three points:  
A Decorating the place, displaying representations, and setting up offering substances 
B Making a request and taking refuge 
C Stating the trainings of having taken refuge 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3A-3A1A Decorating the place, displaying representations, and setting up 
offering substances 
This has three points:  
1 General indications concerning the place, th e representations, offerings, and so forth 
Clean an isolated place, smear it  with the five cow substances,161 anoint it with superb 
perfumed water such as sandalwood, and scatter fragrant flowers. Set out 
representations of the Three Je wels—[181] metal statues and so  forth, texts and so forth, 
and images of bodhisattvas—on a throne, a table, or a raised platform. Do the 
preparatory ritual with as valuable offering items such as canopies and flowers as 
possible, as well as music, food, and so forth. Arrange a throne for the virtuous spiritual 
friend and also adorn it with flowers. You accumulate the collection of merit by paying 
respect to the former masters, the Sa ṅgha, and giving an offering cake162 to the 
elemental spirits. 
2 Clearing up doubts about this 
If you do not have any offerings at all, as described in the Sūtra of the Good Eon 
(Bhadrakalpikas ūtra) it can be accomplished even with cloth fringes. If you do have 
offerings, they should have been obtained through great effort without deceit and should 
be arrayed in such a way that your friends cannot help marveling.  
When the Elder was requested for the mind generation by Tibetan teachers in Mangyül 
and Samyé, he reportedly said that it did not arise through inferior offerings. He said that 
also as a representation a consecrated statue of the main master of the teachings was 
imperative, and also as a text at least the Verse Summary of the Perfection of Wisdom in 
Eight Thousand Lines  (Prajñāpāramitāsañcayag āthā) should be used. 
3 The steps to be performed by the guru and student  
Then, the assembly of āryas is invoked. The student, washed and well dressed, with his 
hands joined, is encouraged by the guru to gene rate clear faith in the positive qualities of 
the merit field from the bottom of his heart. He should then slowly say the seven-limb 
prayer, imagining that he  is in front of the buddhas and bodhisattvas. 
                                                 
161 These are products of a cow that has lived in remote mount ain areas for a certain period of time feeding only on the 
pure grass and herbs of such places (o ral explanation by Geshe Thubten Soepa). 
162 Tib. gtor ma . 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
151 2B4B-2A2C-2B3A-3A1B Making a request and taking refuge 
This has two points:  
1 Making a request 
2 Special taking of refuge  
2B4B-2A2C-2B3A-3A1B-1 Making a request 
Then the student, having generated the discrimination of his guru as the Teacher, 
prostrates to him and makes offerings, including a mandala, to him. With his right knee on the floor, palms joined, he makes a request for the purpose of the mind of 
enlightenment: 
Just as the previous tath āgata, arhat, perfectly complete buddhas, [182] as 
well as the great bodhisattvas abiding on the great grounds, first generated the mind of unsurpassed, perfectly comp lete enlightenment, likewise I, whose 
name is (...), request the master to generate the mind of unsurpassed, 
perfectly complete enlightenment. 
Repeat this three times. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3A-3A1B-2 Special taking of refuge  
This has two points:  
A The attitude together with the objects 
Then the student takes refuge, with the behavior explained earlier, to the objects—the 
Buddha, the Dharma (the true paths that mainly bring about the cessations), and the Saṅgha (the irreversible ārya bodhisattvas)—with the general attitude thinking: “From 
now until I achieve enlightenment, in order to pr otect all sentient bein gs, I take refuge in 
the Buddha, the teacher of refuge; I take refuge in the Dharma, the actual refuge; I take 
refuge in the Sa ṅgha, those who I ask for help to achieve refuge”; and with the special 
attitude of making the strong aspiration: “I will never turn away  from this attitude at any 
time.” 
B The words of the ritual 
Master, please grant me your attention. I, whose name is (…), from now until I 
reach the essence of enlightenment, take refuge in the best of men, the 
blessed buddhas.  
Master, please grant me your attention. I, whose name is (…), from now until I 
reach the essence of enlightenment, take refuge in the best of Dharma, the 
Dharma that is peace, free from attachment. 
Master, please grant me your attention. I, whose name is (…), from now until I 
reach the essence of enlightenment, take refuge in the best of assemblies, the 
Saṅgha of irreversible ārya bodhisattvas. [183] 
Repeat this three times. The request for atte ntion when taking refuge in each of the 
Jewels and the unusual words for taking refuge in the Dharma accord with the ritual 
composed by the Elder. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3A-3A1C Stating the trainings of having taken refuge 
Here too the master should express the trainings that were explained before in the 
context of lesser beings. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3A-3A2 Accumulating the collection of merit 
As before, the seven-limb prayer should be done in the presence of the direct and lineage 
gurus and the merit field explained previously. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
152 2B4B-2A2C-2B3A-3A3 Training in the attitude 
As explained previously, the observed objects and aspects of love and compassion should 
be visualized. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3A-3B The actual ritual  
This has seven points:  
1 The behavior 
In front of the master, the student should kneel down on his right knee; alternatively 
sitting in a crouching position is also approp riate. With palms joined, he should generate 
the mind of enlightenment. 
2 The distinction of the mind generation 
The mind generation here is not the mere mind generation that thinks “I will attain 
buddhahood for the welfare of others.” Rather, it is the promise that, observing the mind that has been generated, thinks, “I shall not give it up as long as I have not attained 
enlightenment.” This is why that attitude shou ld be generated in dependence on a ritual. 
3 An exception associated with this 
If you are unable to train in the trainings of the aspiring mind, you should not make this 
promise. On the other hand, if  the mere thought “I will beco me a buddha for the welfare 
of all sentient beings” is generated by means of a ritual, everyone can do it, regardless of 
whether or not they are able to train in the trainings of the mind generation. 
4 It is inappropriate to posit two systems of guarding and not guarding the trainings with respect to the 
engaging mind of enlightenment 
With respect to the aspiring mind, these two systems may be appropriate, however, with 
respect to taking the engaging mind by means of a ritual, it is inappropriate to take it 
without training in the trainings. Therefore it is inadmissible to assert that a difference of 
appropriateness and inappropriateness should be made with regard to the many rituals 
for the vow transmitted from N āgārjuna and Asa ṅga. [184] 
5 Although it is appropriate for someone not training in the trainings to generate the aspiring mind, the 
engaging vow is inappropriate 
The Advice to King Prasenajit  (Rājāvavadakas ūtra) s a y s  t h a t  i f  o n e  c a n n o t  t r a in  i n  t h e  
trainings of generosity and so forth, a great amount of merit is accomplished from merely 
generating the mind of enlightenment. Taking this as its source, Stages of Meditation I  
says: 
Whoever cannot train in the perfections fully in all their aspects should still 
generate the mind of enlightenment thoroughly conjoined with method 
because the results will be great. 
Thus it is clear that it is appropriate for someone incapable of training in the trainings of 
generosity and so forth to generate the mind of enlightenment but inappropriate to take 
the vow. 
6 The ritual for assuming the mind generation  
The ritual for assuming the mind generation is: 
All buddhas and bodhisattvas residing in the ten directions, please grant me 
your attention. Master, please grant me your attention. I, whose name is (…), 
by means of the roots of virtue of the nature of generosity, the nature of 
morality, and the nature of meditation that I have created, caused to be 
created, and rejoiced in the creation of in this life and in previous lives, just as 
the previous tath āgata, arhat, perfectly complete buddhas and great 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
153 bodhisattvas thoroughly abiding on th e great grounds generated the mind of 
unsurpassed perfectly complete enlightenment, in the same way also I, whose 
name is (…), from now until I reach the essence of enlightenment, will 
generate the mind of unsurpassed, pe rfectly complete, great enlightenment, 
[185] I will liberate the beings that ar e not liberated, free those who are not 
free, give breath to those unable to  breathe, and cause those who have not 
completely passed beyond sorrow to completely pass beyond sorrow. 
Say this three times. Even though it is not clearly mentioned in the refuge ceremony and 
in this ritual, it is necessary so repeat these words after the master. 
7 The method for taking the mind generation by oneself in a ritual  
This is the manner of taking the mind generation in the presence of a master. In the 
Elder’s Mind Generation Ritual  it says what to do if we cannot find a master:  
The ritual for generating the mind of enlightenment oneself in the absence of a 
master is as follows. Having brought to mind the Tath āgata Śākyamuni and all 
the tath āgatas of the ten directions, prostrate to them and do the rite of 
offerings and so forth. Then, according to the previous order, make the 
request, take while leaving out the word “Master,” and so forth. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3A-3C The concluding ritual 
The master should mention the trainings of the aspiring mind to the student. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3B Guarding that which has been received without degenerating it  
This has two points:  
1 Training in the cause of the mind generation not degenerating in this life  
2 Training in the cause of not being separated fromthe mind generation again in future lives 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3B-1 Training in the cause of the mind generation not degenerating in 
this life 
This has four points: 
A Training in remembering the advantages, so that the strength of one’s delight in the mind 
generation increases 
B Training in generating it six times, so that the actual mind generation increases 
C Training in not mentally abandoning any sentient being for whose welfare the mind has been 
generated 
D Training in accumulating the collections of merit and wisdom 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3B-1A Training in remembering the advantages, so that the strength of 
one’s delight in the mind generation increases 
This has three points:  
1 The way the advantages are explained in the scriptures 
2 The way the mind of enlightenment is praised in the writings of the holy beings  
3 The instruction to exert oneself as it is this very mind that the buddhas and their children have seen to be 
the supreme method  
2B4B-2A2C-2B3B-1A1 The way the advantages are explained in the scriptures 
This has two points:  
A The uncommon cause 
B Showing the advantages 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3B-1A1A  The uncommon cause [186] 
You consider the advantages of the mind of enlightenment, studying the s ūtras or 
hearing them from your guru. Since they have been taught extensively in the Array of 
Stalks S ūtra, they should be studied there. The quotation from it above says: “It is the 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
154 seed of all the Dharma of the Buddha,” and all the conduct and aspirations of the 
bodhisattvas are summarized in it. Therefore it  is said to be like a brief presentation. 
Although the extensive explanation of the branches is boundless, since the brief 
presentation contains everything, the brief pr esentation, like a synthesis of them, teaches 
a synthesis that summarizes the essential points of all the paths of bodhisattvas.  
2B4B-2A2C-2B3B-1A1B  Showing the advantages 
This has two points:  
1 The transition 
2 The actual advantages 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3B-1A1B-1 The transition 
As the advantages taught in Asa ṅga’s Bodhisattva Levels  concern the aspiring mind of 
enlightenment, from among them, the two a dvantages of generating a stable mind 
generation are mentioned first. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3B-1A1B-2 The actual advantages 
This has two points:  
A You become a holy field 
B You thoroughly hold the merit of non-harm 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3B-1A1B-2A You become a holy field 
This has four points:  
1 You become an object of veneration 
As stated in the scriptures—“The world wit h its gods and human beings will bow to 
you”—as soon as you generate this mind, you become an object of veneration for all 
sentient beings.  
2 You become an exalted being 
As stated in the scriptures yo u outshine the arhat great bein gs by way of your lineage as 
soon as you generate this mind. You become a guru or an exalted being.  
3 You become a field of merit 
You become a field of merit due to yielding limitless effects even through doing minor meritorious actions.  
4 You become a support for the whole world 
“Due to supporting the whole world, you are like the earth.” In accordance with that statement you become like a father of the nine beings.  
2B4B-2A2C-2B3B-1A1B-2B You thoroughly hold the merit of non-harm 
This has six points:  
1 The way in which you are guarded by protectors 
Since you are guarded by twice as many protectors as protect a universal monarchs, [187] yak ṣas and non-human primordial local guardians cannot harm you even when you 
are asleep, intoxicated, or non-conscientious.  
2 Mantras and the like will succeed more easily 
You pacify calamities, harm, and infectious diseases with the words of secret mantra and 
knowledge mantra. If even things that cannot be accomplished in the hands of sentient beings, will be accomplished when they come into your hands, what need is there to 
mention that other things will be accomplished? Due to this, the collection of activities, 
pacification and so forth, are shown to be easily accomplished in dependence on the mind 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
155 generation. Therefore, if that is present, the common attainments will also quickly be 
accomplished. 
3 Famines and the like will not occur  
Fear, famine, and harm from non-human beings will not occur in those places in which they have not occurred, and after transmig rating, you will have little harm, will be 
without illness, and so forth.  
4 You are without anger and patient  
Due to being endowed with pati ence and a gentle disposition,  you will bear harm that is 
done to you and will not return the harm and the like. 
5 It will be difficult for you to be reborn in the lower realms, and you will quickly be freed 
Also it will be difficult for you to be reborn in  the lower realms and, if it happens, you will 
quickly be freed. While there you will have little suffering and thereby, as a result, 
become extremely disenchanted with cyclic existence. Also compassion for those sentient 
beings will arise. 
6  How the advantages are immeasurable 
If the merit of the mind of enlightenment were  to become form, it could not be contained 
in space itself. Making offerings of material things to the buddhas does not compare to it 
even partially. In Questions of the Householder V īradatta (Viradattaparip ŗcchā) it says:  
If the merit of bodhicitta 
Were to have a physical form, 
All the realm of space would be filled; It would be surpassed by it.  
Buddha fields as numerous as  
The sand grains of th e river Ganges, [188] 
Offered by someone, filled with jewels,  
To the protector of the world— 
If someone joins his palms and bows 
To bodhicitta this is distinctly Superior to that offering made. 
As for this, it has no limit. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3B-1A2  The way the mind of enlightenment is praised in the writings of the holy beings 
When the Great Elder circumambulated the Vajr a Seat and thought about what to do to 
attain complete enlightenment quickly, the sm aller statues stood up and asked the bigger 
ones: “What should those who want to quic kly become a buddha train in?” whereupon 
the latter replied: “They should train in the mind of enlightenment.” When, in the sky 
above the Gandhola statue, a young woman questioned an older woman, the latter made 
a similar reply. It is said that due to hear ing this, his mind became very certain with 
respect to the mind of enlightenment. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3B-1A3 The instruction to exert oneself as it is this very mind that the buddhas and their children have 
seen to be the supreme method  
In that way, you should understand that th e mind of enlightenment is the condensed 
essential point of all the Mah āyāna instructions, the great treasure of all spiritual 
attainments, the special feature distinguishing the Mah āyāna from the H īnayāna, the 
supreme basis that exhorts one to the vast co nduct of the Victors’ children. You should 
increase the strength of your delight in me ditating on it and act like someone thirsty 
hearing of water beca use when analyzing the paths, the buddhas and their children, 
having made it more and more subtle by means of their marvelous exalted knowledge 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
156 over many eons, saw it  to be the supreme method for attaining buddhahood. Thus it also 
says in Engaging in Bodhisattva Conduct :  
Having reflected thorou ghly for many eons 
The buddhas163 saw this above all as beneficial. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3B-1B Training in generating it six times, so that the actual mind 
generation increases  
This has two points:  
1 Training in not giving up the aspiring mind generation 
2 Training in increasing the aspiring mind generation [189] 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3B-1B1 Training in not giving up the aspiring mind generation 
This has two points:  
A Giving it up is heavier than a defeat of the vows of individual liberation and as a consequence one must 
wander in the lower realms for a long time 
In the Verse Summary of the Perfection of Wisdom in Eight Thousand Lines  it was taught 
that if you take the buddhas, bodhisattvas, and your spiritual friend as your witnesses 
and, in their presence, vow to liberate the sentient beings that are not liberated and so forth, but then lay down the burden of the mind generation because of discouragement 
due to seeing  
• the enormous number of sentient beings and their bad actions,  
• the long time you need to exert yourself—many eons, or 
• that it is necessary to train in the limitless two collections and difficult practices,  
it will be a greater negativity than a defeat of individual liberation.  
In 
Engaging in Bodh isattva Conduct  it says that if you give up the mind you promised, 
you will have to wander in the lower realms for a long time. 
B Not giving it up due to delight like that of finding a jewel in a rubbish heap 
Also that same text says: 
As a blind man finds a jewel 
In a heap of dust, like that, 
Effortlessly bodhicitta 
Has arisen within me.  
Think “What I found is just as amazing”  and “I will not give it up under any 
circumstances.” Observing this, reinforce your heart’s decision not to give it up even for 
an instant. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3B-1B2 Training in increasing the aspiring mind generation 
This has two points:  
A It is not enough to merely not give it up, it must be reinforced 
Since it is not enough to merely not give it up, you should reinforce it three times a day 
and three times at night with great effort. 
B How the ritual is performed at the six times 
If you can accomplish the extensive ritual explained above, you should do it according to that. If you cannot accomplish it, you should train in love and compassion, having 
                                                 
163 Tib. thub dbang . 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
157 visualized the merit field and made offerings. You should do this six times a day. The 
ritual for that is to say th e following three times in the day and three times at night: 
I take refuge until I am enlightened 
In the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Supreme Assembly. [190] Through the practice of generosity and the other perfections, May I attain buddhahood in order to benefit migrating beings. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3B-1C Training in not mentally abandoning any sentient being for whose 
welfare the mind has been generated 
The measure for mentally abandoning a sentient being is the occurrence of the thought: 
“I will not work for his welfare now or ever after” in dependence on some condition, for 
example that he has done something that is unacceptable to you. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3B-1D Training in accumulati ng the collections of merit and wisdom 
Having assumed the aspiring mind through a ritual, you should strive to accumulate the 
collections through daily offeri ngs to the Jewels and so forth as the cause for increasing 
the mind of enlightenment. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3B-2 Training in the cause of not being separated from the mind 
generation again in future lives 
This has two points:  
A Training in abandoning the four black dharmas that cause it to degenerate 
B Training in adopting the four white dharmas that do not allow it to degenerate 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3B-2A Training in abandoning the four black dharmas that cause it to 
degenerate 
This has four points:  
1 Deceiving one’s abbot, master, guru, or those worthy of offerings 
2 Causing others to regret virtues that they do not regret 3 Saying something uncomplimentary and the like about a sentient being who has entered the Mah āyāna 
4 Acting out of deceit and shiftiness but without the extraordinary attitude 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3B-2A1 Deceiving one’s abbot, master, guru, or those worthy of offerings 
This has two points:  
A Object and action 
Among the four black dharmas, with respect to that of deceiving one’s abbot, master, 
guru, or those worthy of offerings, the objects that are one’s abbot and master are easy to understand. The guru is someone who wishes to benefit you, and those worthy of 
offerings are those endowed with positive qualit ies, even though they do not belong to 
the previous two. 
If you wonder about what deed becomes a black dharma with respect to them, to 
knowingly cheat them by any means is a black dharma. 
B Clearing up doubts 
However, as the deceit and shiftiness that are not lies are indicated below, here it has to 
be cheating through lying.  This is because in the Compendium of Trainings  it is taught 
that abandoning a black dharma constitutes a white dharma and that the antidote of this 
black dharma is the first of the four white dharmas. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3B-2A2 Causing others to regret virtues that they do not regret 
This has two points:  
A Object and action 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
158 With respect to causing others to regret virtues that they do not regret, the object is 
another person without regrets about a virtue that he has done. What one does to him is 
that, with the intention of making him regret , one generates regret for that which is not 
an object of regret. [191] 
B Clearing up doubts 
As regards these two, it is the same whether or not the person is deceived and whether 
or not the person has regrets.  
2B4B-2A2C-2B3B-2A3 Saying something uncomplimentary and the like about a sentient being who has entered the 
Mahāyāna 
This has five points:  
A Object and action 
With respect to saying something uncomplim entary and the like about a sentient being 
who has entered the Mah āyāna, the object is someone who has generated the mind of 
enlightenment and now possesses it. What one does to him is to say something 
unpleasant motivated by hatred. 
B The measure 
The object to whom it was sa id understands the meaning. 
C How it is necessary to abandon this since it easily occurs and is a great fault 
It is easy for this to occur and it is also a very great disadvantage. That has already been 
mentioned previously in brief. Fu rthermore it is taught in the Sūtra of the Magic of the 
Complete Certainty of Total Peace  that if a bodhisattva generates a mind of contempt 
toward a bodhisattva, he must remain in hell for that many eons, and that apart from deprecating a bodhisattva, nothing can make a bodhisattva fall into the lower realms. 
D How it takes you further away from enlightenment 
In the Verse Summary of the Perfection of Wisdom in Eight Thousand Lines  it also says 
that if a bodhisattva who has not yet obtained a prophecy argues out of anger with a 
bodhisattva who has obtained a prophecy, for however long a mind of anger arose, he 
will have to spend that many  eons longer on the path. 
E The need to exert oneself in confession and restraint 
Because of that, it is also taught in the same text that you need to put an end to anger in 
all its aspects and put effort into confessing it and restraining it immediately whenever it arises. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3B-2A4 Acting out of deceit and shiftiness but without the extraordinary attitude 
This has two points:  
A  Object and action 
With respect to an activity done out of deceit and shiftiness but without the extraordinary 
attitude, the object is any other sentient being. What one does to him is to engage in 
deceit and shiftiness. 
B Explaining the meaning of the word [192] 
In this regard, deceit and shiftiness are explained in terms of deceiving with respect to 
measures and weights and so forth and something like what Gyelwa Yechung did: In order to send someone off to Ragma, he caused him to be sent to Tölung first so 
afterwards he would accept  Ragma. According to the 
Compendium of Trainings , deceit is 
to display qualities that actually do not exist, and shiftiness is to take measures for faults 
not to become evident.  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
159 2B4B-2A2C-2B3B-2B Training in adopting the four white dharmas that do not allow it to 
degenerate 
This has four points:  
1 Abandoning lying knowingly 
2 Abiding with the extraordinary attitude without deceit or shiftiness 3 Generating the discrimination that bodhisattv as are like the Teacher and praising them 
4 Ripening sentient beings 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3B-2B1 Abandoning lying knowingly 
The object of the first white dh arma is all sentient beings. The action is to abandon lying 
to them knowingly even for the sake of one’s life or for as little as a joke. If you act in 
this way, you will be sure not to cheat specia l objects such as your abbot, master, and so 
forth through lies. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3B-2B2 Abiding with the extraordinary attitude without deceit or shiftiness 
The object of the second white dharma is all sentient beings. The acti on is to abide with 
the extraordinary attitude toward them without deceit or shiftiness, that is to abide with 
an honest attitude. It is the antidote to the fourth black dharma. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3B-2B3 Generating the discrimination that bodhisattvas are like the Teacher and praising them 
This has three points:  
A Object and action 
The object of the third white dharma is all bodhisattvas. Th e action is to generate the 
discrimination of them as resembling the Teacher and to proclaim truthful praise about 
them in the four directions.  
B How there is a need to guard against this 
Sharawa said that although we have been cr eating a little bit of something like virtue, 
there is no sign of its incr ease and many signs of its exhaustion. Virtue is exhausted 
through hatred toward bodhisattvas and our companions, disdain toward them, and 
through insulting them. Therefore, if we are able to abandon insulting them and 
bodhisattvas, we will no longer expe r i e n c e  w h a t  i s  r e f e r r e d  t o  i n  t h e  Compendium of 
Trainings  as “harm dependent on persons.” Since we do not know in whom the mind of 
enlightenment is present, we act from the perspective of training in pure appearances, generating the discrimination of all sentient beings as the Teacher in accordance with the 
Kāśyapa Chapter (K āśyapaparivarta) . 
C The way to express the qualities [193] 
If there is an opportunity to express their positive qualities and an audience, do so. 
However, if you do not go to all four direct ions and proclaim them, this is not a fault. 
This white dharma is the antido te to the third black dharma. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3B-2B4 Ripening sentient beings 
This has two points:  
A The actual fourth white dharma: object and action  
B Statements in other scriptures as well 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3B-2B4A The actual fourth white dharma: object and action 
The object of the fourth white dharma is th e sentient beings who are ripened by you. The 
action is to make them hold to complete enlightenment without wishing for a temporary 
vehicle. Moreover, while from your side yo u  s h o u l d  c a u s e  y o u r  d i s c i p l e  t o  m a k e  a  
connection with it, if that thou ght does not arise in the disciple, it does not become a 
mistake because you were unable to accomplish it. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
160 By means of this white dharma you abandon the second black dharma, for, if you wish, 
from the bottom of your heart, to establish others in the ultimate happiness of all, you do 
not accomplish it in order to connect them to  the generation of mental unhappiness for 
the sake of generating mere regret which is still mental unhappiness. 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3B-2B4B The explanation in three scriptures, the Compendium of Trainings  and so forth 
This has three points:  
1  The advantage of establishing others in the mind generation  
In the Sūtra Requested by a Lion  it says: 
“By means of what is bodhicitta 
Not given up in all one’s lives, 
If not even in one’s dreams, Much less while one is not asleep?” 
He spoke: “In cities or in villages 
In the countries where you live, 
Guide others correctly to enlightenment. Through that, bodhicitta will not be abandoned.” 
2 The statement that by abandonin g pride and the like th e mind generation will not to be abandoned 
Furthermore, in Array of Qualities in Mañju śri's Buddha-realm  it is taught that the 
aspiring mind164 is not abandoned if one possesses four qualities: having abandoned 
pride, having abandoned jealousy, having abandoned miserliness, and being mentally 
joyful when seeing others’ wealth. 
3  If all actions and conduct are done conjoined with the mind generation, one will not be separated from the 
mind of enlightenment in all lives 
This is clearly taught in the Cloud  of Jewels of S ūtra: [194] 
If you train in the mind of enlightenm ent in all behaviors and generate the 
mind of enlightenment befo re starting any virtuous activity, you will not be 
separated from this precious mind in other lives either. If you do not 
investigate time and time again how... 
2B4B-2A2C-2B3C The method for restoring the vow if it has degenerated 
If you transgress the trainings, excluding the two transgressions of giving up the aspiring 
mind and mentally giving up sentient beings, as long as you do not have bodhisattva vows, there is no downfall fr om the point of view of a bodhisattva. However, since it 
transgresses the trainings of the promise of intermediate virtue, it becomes faulty 
conduct and therefore should be confessed by means of the four powers. 
Explanation of how to train in the conduct having generated the mind of enlightenment 
2B4B-2A2C-2C Having generated the mind of enlightenment, how to train in the conduct 
This has three points:  
1 The reason why it is necessary to train in the trainings, having generated the mind of 
enlightenment 
2 Demonstration that buddhahood is not achieved  by training in method or wisdom alone 
3 Explanation of the actual stages of training in the trainings  
                                                 
164 Although the Tibetan text actually says smon lam , “prayers,” it would seem more correct for it to read smon sems , 
“aspiring mind.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
161 2B4B-2A2C-2C1 The reason why it is necessary to train in the trainings, having 
generated the mind of enlightenment 
This has three points:  
A  Buddhahood is not achieved without accomplishing the trainings 
Even if you do not train in the trainings of generosity and so forth after generating the 
mind of enlightenment in this  manner, it will still be of gr eat benefit according to the 
above quotation from Life of Maitreya . However, if you do not make the bodhisattva 
trainings your essential practice, it will be impossible to become a buddha. Ther efore you 
should train in the conduct. In the King of Meditative Stabilizations S ūtra it says: 
“One should make it the essential practi ce. Why? Because, oh  youthful one, for 
one who makes it his essential practice  it will not be difficult to obtain 
unsurpassed perfectly complete enlightenment.” 
B First of all taming oneself because one will not tame others without taming oneself 
Also Kamala śīla says in Stages of Meditation I  [195]: 
A bodhisattva who has generated the mind understands that he cannot tame 
others without taming himself and thoroughly applies himself to the practice of generosity and so forth. Without them he cannot achieve enlightenment. 
C What must be accomplished 
What must be accomplished once the vow has been taken is the training in those very 
trainings associated with it. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C2 Demonstration that buddhahood is  not achieved by training in method or 
wisdom alone 
This has three points:  
A How to train in the unmistaken and complete method 
B Refutation of wrong conceptions about this 
C Refutation of the answers to objections about this 
2B4B-2A2C-2C2A How to train in the unmistaken and complete method 
This has two points:  
1 The need to be unmistaken about the complete path  
In Stages of Meditation II  it says:  
One who engages in the method for accomplishing buddhahood needs an 
unmistaken method, for, however hard yo u try, a mistaken path will not bring 
about the desired result, just like pulling  a cow by its horn, if you want milk. 
If, although faultless, it is incomplete , the result will not come about despite 
your effort, just as a sprout will not grow if either the seed, water, earth, or 
the like are incomplete. 
2 Identifying the complete path 
Well then, what are the co mplete and unmistaken causes and conditions? In Vairocana’s 
Manifest Enlightenment (Vairocan ābhisaṃbodhi) it says: 
Oh Lord of Secrets, the exalted wisdom of omniscience arises from the root 
that is compassion. It arises from the cause that is the mind of enlightenment. 
It is culminated by method.  
In this regard “compassion” has already been explained. “The mind of enlightenment” is 
the two: the conventional mind of enlightenm ent and the ultimate mind of enlightenment. 
“Method” is thoroughly complete generosity and so forth. This was explained by the great 
trailblazer Kamala śīla. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
162 2B4B-2A2C-2C2B Refutation of wrong conceptions about this 
This has two points:  
1 Wrong modes of conception 
2 Their refutation 
2B4B-2A2C-2C2B-1 Wrong modes of conception 
This has two points:  
A Wrong modes of apprehension 
One such mistaken conception regarding the path is upheld  by the Chinese Hashang and 
others who say: “As long as th ey are discursive thoughts—no need to talk about it if they 
are bad conceptions, but even if they are good conceptions—they bind us in cyclic 
existence. Therefore their effects do not tran scend cyclic existence, just as one can be 
bound with fetters of gold or ropes, and just as both white and black clouds obscure the 
sky, [196] and just as pain is produced regardless of whether one is bitten by a white or 
a black dog. That is why just equipoise without conceptions about anything is the path to buddhahood. Generosity, ethics, and so forth were taught for the sake of foolish beings incapable of meditating on this definitive meaning. Therefore, having found the definitive 
meaning, to engage in those conducts is like  a king becoming a commoner or like, having 
found the elephant, looking for its footprints.” 
B Wrong explanation of their sources  
Hashang substantiates his position by quoting eighty passages from s ūtras that praise 
non-conceptuality. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C2B-2 Their refutation 
This has five points:  
A How scholars refute the worst of wrong views 
B How some unfortunate beings adhere to them despite those refutations 
C How non-abiding nirv āa has to be accomplished by a path of both wisdom and method 
D How the emptiness possessing the best of all aspectsis necessary for the attainment of buddhahood 
E How the position that only accepts wisdom is refuted in the treatises 
2B4B-2A2C-2C2B-2A How scholars refute the worst of wrong views 
His statement that all the factors of method are not a genuine path to buddhahood is an 
enormous deprecation, and by refuting engagement in the essence of the Victor’s teachings—selflessness—with the wisdom of individual investigation, it abandons the 
mode of the highest meaning, erring far away from it. Although Kamala śīla has refuted it 
well with stainless scriptural passages and reasonings, and although he has presented in 
detail the good path that pleases the Victors,… 
2B4B-2A2C-2C2B-2B How some unfortunate beings adhere to them despite those refutations 
…there are still some who scorn the side of conduct, such as guarding and restraining, 
and who discard them while cultivating the paths, acting as has been described above. It appears that some, apart from deprecating the factor of method, discard the way of 
understanding the view, while others discard the search for the view of suchness by 
means of the wisdom of individual investigation and then skillfully assert the Chinese 
meditation of not thinking about anything. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C2B-2C How non-abiding nirv āa has to be accomplished by a path of both wisdom and method 
This has four points:  
1 That there is no need for method and wisdom to be complete contradicts all scriptures and reasonings 
This does not occur on the side of meditation on emptiness either. [197] However, even 
if it were admitted as meditation on emptin ess, the statement “Those who meditate well 
on the meaning of emptiness should meditate on emptiness alone and need not cultivate 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
163 consciousnesses of conventionalit ies, the side of conduct” contradicts all the scriptures of 
the Buddha, and simply seems to go beyond the path of reasoning. The object to be 
achieved by Mah āyānists is non-abiding nirv āṇa. With respect to that, non-abiding in 
cyclic existence is achieved  through what is called the wisdom realizing suchness , the 
stages of the path relying on the ultimate , the path of the profound , and what is called 
the collection of exalted wisdom  and the factor of wisdom , whereas non-abiding in 
nirvāṇa or peace is necessarily achi eved through what is called the wisdom cognizing 
varieties , the stages of the path relying on conventional truth , the path of the vast , the 
collection of method , and the factor of merit . 
2 Establishing by scriptural passages how method and wisdom refute the two extremes 
The following words are taken from the Sūtra of Showing the Tath āgata's Inconceivable 
Secret : 
The collection of exalted wisdom is what  abandons all mental afflictions. The 
collection of merit is what fully nurtur es all sentient beings. Bhagavan, since 
this is so, the bodhisattva mahasattvas strive for the collection of merit and 
exalted wisdom. 
3 Establishing by scriptural passages how we are bound to the extremes of existence and peace as long as 
method and wisdom are not complete 
Also, in Teaching of Vimalak īrti (Vimalak īrtinirdeśa) it says:  
In response to the questions “What is the bondage of bodhisattvas?” and 
“What is their liberation?”: 
Wisdom not conjoined with method is bondage. 
Wisdom conjoined with method is liberation. 
Method not conjoined with wisdom is bondage. [198] 
Method conjoined with wisdom is liberation. 
4 The achievement of buddhahood depends on both wisdom and method 
And in the Foremost of Gay ā Sūtra: 
The bodhisattva path, in brief, is made up of two. What are the two? They are the following: method and wisdom. 
Their significance is also taught clearly in 
Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment : 
Through wisdom divorced from perfection practice 
The obscurations will not be exhausted Therefore, in order to abandon 
All obscurations—afflictive and cognitive,
165 
The Yoga of the perfection of wisdom  
Should always be practiced166 combined with method. 
That is why method di vorced from wisdom 
As well as wisdom divorced from method 
Are referred to as “bondage,” therefore 
You should not abandon either.  
And: 
Omitting the perfection of wisdom, 
The perfections of generosity 
                                                 
165 Tib. shes bya’i sgrib pa , usually translated here as “obscurations to knowledge.” 
166 Tib. bsgom , usually translated here as “meditated” or “cultivated.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
164 And so forth—all collections of virtue  
Are explained by the Victors as method.  
Great beings who cultiv ate the wisdom aspect, 
Through familiarity with the methods, 
Will thereby quickly achieve enlightenment; Not by meditating on just selflessness. 
Knowing the emptiness of existence,
167 
The realization that aggregates, realms,  
And sources are without production, 
Is thoroughly explained as wisdom . 
2B4B-2A2C-2C2B-2D How the emptiness possessing the best of all aspectsis necessary for the attainment of 
buddhahood 
In the Sūtra Requested by Ratnac ūḍa (Ratnac ūḍaparipŗcchā) it is taught that it is 
necessary to meditate on the emptiness that possesses the supreme of all aspects—which 
is complete in all the factors of method, such as generosity and so forth.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C2B-2E How the position that only accepts wisdom is refuted in the treatises 
In the Sūtra Gathering All the Threads  it says: 
Foolish people intend to repudiate the bodhisattvas’ practice of the six 
perfections for the sake of enlightenm ent saying: “You should train in the 
perfection of wisdom alone. [199] What is the use of training in the 
remaining?” 
And: 
Foolish people also say: “One becomes enlightened by only one approach, that 
is through the approach of emptiness.” However, they do not have completely 
pure conduct. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C2C Refutation of the answers to objections about this 
This has three points:  
1 Refutation of the objection that asserts that method is unnecessary if emptiness has been realized 
2 Refutation of the objection that asserts that method is unnecessary because in the view of emptiness the six 
perfections are complete 
3 Demonstration of contradictions in others’ assertions 
2B4B-2A2C-2C2C-1 Refutation of the objection that asserts that method is unnecessary if emptiness has been 
realized 
This has two points:  
A Stating the assertion B Its refutation 
2B4B-2A2C-2C2C-1A Stating the assertion 
One may think: “Training in the conduct of generosity and so forth is necessary if one 
does not have a stable realization of emptiness, but if one has that, it is sufficient.” 
2B4B-2A2C-2C2C-1B Its refutation 
This has four points:  
1 Refutation because it is in contradiction to the s ūtras of definitive meaning 
If this were so, the Victors’ children who have  attained the first ground and so forth, and 
especially the Victors’ children on the eighth ground who have achieved power over non-conceptual wisdom, would not need the conduct.  However, this is inappropriate, for in 
                                                 
167 Tib. rang bzhin , usually translated here as “inherent existence.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
165 the Sūtra on the Ten Grounds it is taught “On each of the ten grounds, one, such as 
generosity, also becomes paramount. However, it is not that the remaining ones are not 
practiced.” Therefore, on each of the grounds, all six or all ten are sa id to be practiced. 
2 How even with the highest realization of emptiness method and wisdom are necessary 
In particular on the occasion of the eighth ground, when the bodhisattva abides on the 
ultimate and all elaborations are pacified owing to the exhaustion of all mental afflictions, 
the buddhas exhort him saying: “Buddhahood cannot be achieved through this mere 
realization of emptiness; this realization is achieved even by hearers and solitary realizers.” 
3 How it is therefore inappropriate to think that there is no need for method and wisdom right from the 
beginning 
“My bodies, my exalted wisdom, my buddha fields, and so forth are immeasurable. Look 
at them! Nor do you have my powers and the like. Therefore set about it with joyous 
effort! Think of the unpacified sentient beings agitated by various mental afflictions! [200] Do not give up patience either!”  
If the buddhas are so emphatic in explaining to eighth ground bodhisattvas the need to 
train in bodhisattva conduct, this obviously applies even more to others.  
4 How even on the high paths of mantra, the way to gene rate the mind and train in the six perfections is the 
same by and large 
Although in the context of the high path s of unsurpassed mant ra there are indeed 
differences in this regard, it was already explained above that, in general, the two—the 
mantra and perfection vehicles—are the same by and large in sharing the structure of the 
path of generating the two minds of enlightenment and training in the six perfections. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C2C-2 The objection thinking “Since the six perfections are complete when you do not think about 
anything, this is sufficient” and its refutation 
This has two points:  
A How they are seemingly complete according to that way of reckoning 
B Refuting that with a digression 
2B4B-2A2C-2C2C-2A How they are seemingly complete according to that way of reckoning  
 “We do not assert that generosity and so forth are unnecessary, but they are complete 
when you do not think about anything because by not adhering to the recipient, the act of giving, nor the substance given, non-observing generosity is complete and likewise the 
remaining perfections are complete. Also because it says in the s ūtras that the six 
perfections are contained in each one of them.” 
2B4B-2A2C-2C2C-2B Refuting that with a digression  
This has three points:  
1 The absurd consequences that would ensue if this were so 
If all the perfections were complete simply th rough this, they would also be complete in 
the calm abiding of a t īrthika’s single-pointed mind at the time of meditative equipoise 
since he does not adhere to them. In particular, as it says in the Sūtra on the Ten 
Grounds , hearers and solitary realizers who have a non-conceptual exalted wisdom with 
respect to reality would become Mah āyānists during meditative equipoise on it because 
the entire bodhisattva conduct would be complete. 
2 If it were sufficient that in each one all six are complete, it would follow that a mandala would be offered with 
one single substance  
If you assert that this alone is sufficient because it is taught that in each perfection all six are included, then, while offering a mandal a with the verse “Giving cow dung together 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
166 with water...” it would also be appropriate to do  just that since it is  said that all six are 
present. [201] 
3 How unseparated wisdom and method influence each other 
The following analogy is given in order to ill ustrate conduct conjoined with the view and 
wisdom conjoined with method. When a mother tormented by sorrow at the death of her 
beloved child engages in conversations with other people and the like, due to the power 
of her sorrow she does not give it up, no matter what minds arise. Yet not all her minds 
are minds of sorrow. Similarly, if the wisdo m realizing emptiness is very powerful, the 
minds that observe your making gifts, prostrations, circumambulations, and so forth do 
not realize emptiness, but it is not contradictory that they operate possessing the power 
of that wisdom. If you start off with the intense power of the mind of enlightenment as 
you do at the beginning of a meditation session, although the mind of enlightenment is 
not manifest during the meditative stabilization of emptiness, that does not contradict its 
being influenced by it. The way in which wisdom and method are not separate is also like that. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C2C-3 Demonstration of contradictions in others’ assertions 
This has six points:  
A It is incorrect that the causes for high status and certain goodness are contradictory 
B One’s words will be contradictory like the speech of madmen 
C Sources for the absence of observed objects and internal contradictions 
D Contradiction to bringing about any certainty E Contradictions with the many s ūtras and so forth that teach the absence of an observed object 
F Clarification of the position that applies equally to s ūtra and tantra 
2B4B-2A2C-2C2C-3A It is incorrect that the causes for high status and certain goodness are contradictory 
You should not be misled with regard to the statement that the results of the collection 
of merit are your present body, resources, long life, and so forth of cyclic existence. If 
method is divorced from wisdom , this is indeed the case. Howe ver, if it is conjoined with 
it, it is altogether suitable to be the cause of liberation and omniscience. There are 
infinite scriptural passages for this, like in N āgārjuna’s Precious Garland : 
The form body, in brief, Your Highness,  
Is born from the collection of merit. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C2C-3B One’s words will be contradictory like the speech of madmen 
Moreover, sometimes you expound that the faulty conduct and all the mental afflictions that become the causes of the lower realms can also become causes of buddhahood, and sometimes you seem to say that  that virtues like generosity, ethics, and so forth that 
become the causes of high status are causes of cyclic existence rather than the causes of 
enlightenment. [202] You should set your mind at ease before talking! 
2B4B-2A2C-2C2C-3C Sources for the absence of observed objects and internal contradictions 
This has three points:  
1 The presentation in the s ūtras 
It also says in the s ūtras: 
Strong adherence to the six, generosity and so forth, is the action of M āra.  
In the Three Heaps S ūtra (Triskandhaka) it also explains: 
Giving gifts falling into observing, guarding one’s ethics considering them 
supreme ethics, and so forth; these should be confessed individually. 
Also from the Sūtra Requested by Brahm ā (Brahmaparip ŗcchāsūtra): 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
167 However much conduct exists, all of  it is conceptual. Thorough non-
conceptuality is enlightenment. 
You should not be mistaken with respect to these statements. 
2 The contradiction to the way in which the first passage is explained  
The meaning of the first is that generosity motivated by mistaken adherence to the two 
selves is explained as an action of M āra since it is impure. However, generosity and so 
forth are not presented as the actions of M āra. 
3 The contradiction to retaining the words of the second passage, because it actually says: “falling into 
observing” 
Otherwise you would have to say “Giving gift s should be confessed in general” without 
the need to fall into observing saying “Bes towing gifts having fall en into observing.” 
Therefore it follows that it has not been taught in this manner. In Stages of Meditation 
III it becomes a very crucial point for Kamala śīla to give this kind of answer, for if you 
misunderstand this, you will ap prehend signs of a self of  persons or phenomena and 
assert the entire side of conduct to be connected with signs.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C2C-3D Contradiction to bringing about any certainty 
This has three points:  
1 It contradicts the teachings that one should rely on abandoning negativities and so forth 
2 The fault that this assertion contradicts all reasonings and makes it impossible to gain certainty with regard 
to anything  
3 Understanding the statements in the context of the two truths 
2B4B-2A2C-2C2C-3D1 It contradicts the teachings that one should rely on abandoning negativities and so forth 
If the mind of giving that thinks “I will give away this substance” and the mind of 
restraint that thinks “I will rest rain myself from this faulty conduct” and all such virtuous 
conceptions were conceptions of a self of ph enomena apprehending the three spheres, it 
would make sense for those who have found the view of selflessness of phenomena [203] 
to cease them in every way just like hatred, pride, and so forth, and it would be inappropriate to rely on them for that purpose.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C2C-3D2 The fault that this assertion contradicts all reasonings and makes it impossible to gain 
certainty with regard to anything 
If any conception that thinks “This is this” were  considered to be a conception of a self of 
phenomena that conceives the three spheres, then thinking about the positive qualities of 
a spiritual teacher, the great significance of the leisures and endowments, and so forth, 
remembering death, thinking about the sufferi ngs of the lower realms, taking refuge, and 
contemplating that from this action arises that effect, training in love, compassion, and 
the mind of enlightenment, and training in the trainings of the engaging mind of 
enlightenment would be thoughts thinking “This is this,” “From this that arises,” “This has 
these positive qualities and those shortcomings.” Since that would necessarily just induce 
certainty, the conception of a self of phenomena would increase more and more as 
certainty with respect to those above-mentioned topics increases. Moreover, the certainty 
with respect to those paths would decrease as certainty with respect to the selflessness 
of phenomena is nurtured more and more. Thereby, the side of conduct and the side of 
view having come to contradict each other like hot and cold, a strong and long-term 
ascertaining consciousness with respect to both of them could not be generated. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C2C-3D3 Understanding the statements in the context of the two truths 
This has three points:  
A Method and wisdom are not contradictory like hot and cold 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
168 At the time of the result both the truth body is posited as the object to be obtained and 
the form body is considered as the object to be obtained. In accordance with the two not 
being contradictory, the following two at the time of the path must also not be 
contradictory: an ascertaining consciousness that is induced with respect to the total freedom from even the merest particle of elaborations of an observed object that is 
apprehended as having signs of the two selves, and an ascertaining consciousness that is 
induced with respect to “From this, that arises” and “This has that fault or quality.”  
B How the two valid cognitions that posit the two truths assist one another 
In fact that depends on how the view of the basis, the two truths, is settled. [204] Through scriptural passages and reasonings, th e valid cognition thoroughly positing the 
ultimate settles the mode of subsistence or the manner of being of all the phenomena of 
cyclic existence and nirv āṇa as without the merest particle  of inherent existence. The 
valid cognition of conventions thoroughly positing causes and effects individually ascertains phenomena that are causes and e ffects without the slightest confusion. Once 
you gain certainty, by way of scriptures and reasonings, that these two do not harm each 
other in the least but rather assist each other, then you will realize the meaning of the 
two truths and you will come to count yo urself among “those who have found the 
intention of the Victor.” 
C Clarification of the misconception expressed in the third quotation 
The meaning of the third quotation is explained in  Stages of Meditation III . Since the 
context of this s ūtra is the context of an analysis of production and so forth with respect 
to the teaching that generosity and so forth are not really produced, they are taught to 
be merely imputed by conception saying “They are conceived.” However, they are not 
taught to be objects to be discarded and not relied upon. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C2C-3E Contradictions with the many s ūtras and so forth that teach the lack of an observed object 
This has four points:  
1 It contradicts the Compendium of All the S ūtras  
As regards the statement that a one-sided path is not enough, it is also clearly set forth 
in the Compendium of All the S ūtras (Sūtrasamuccaya) :  
Bodhisattvas who are separated from sk illful means should not make strong 
effort in the pr ofound dharma. 
2 It contradicts the s ūtras since omniscience does not arise when there is no observed object 
In the Sūtra of Showing the Tath āgata's Inconceivable Secret  it says: 
Child of the lineage, it is like this. For instance, a fire burns due to a cause; if 
the cause is absent, it subsides. Likewise, a mind blazes due to an observed 
object; if the observed object is absent, it subsides. 
3 How it is necessary to individually investigate the meaning of the presence or absence of observed objects 
Therefore the bodhisattva skilled  in means knows how to completely extinguish observed 
objects by means of the thoroughly pure perfection of wisdom but he does not 
completely extinguish observed objects with respect to the roots of virtue. [205] He does 
not allow the observed objects for mental afflictions to arise but settles the mind on the 
observed objects of the perfections. He also individually investigates the observed object 
that is emptiness but looks upon the observed object all sentient beings  with great 
compassion.  
The individual statements regarding the way in which there is an observed object and the 
way in which there is no observed object need to be differentiated. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
169 4 Although the bonds of the mental afflictions and apprehending signs have been loosened, it is inappropriate 
to grow lax in guarding and restraining 
Likewise, the bonds of the mental afflicti ons and apprehending signs need to be 
loosened, whereas the ropes of the trainings need to be tightened. The two misdeeds 
need to be destroyed, whereas virtuous actions do not need to be destroyed. Therefore, 
being restrained by the trainings and being bound by the apprehension of signs are not 
the same, nor are loosening guarding and restraining and loosening the bonds of the 
conception of a self the same. Therefore the meaning of destruction and self-liberation and so forth need to be examined well. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C2C-3F Clarification of the position that applies equally to s ūtra and tantra 
This has two points:  
1 The object refuted by Kamala śīla 
The way in which Master Kamala śīla refuted mental inattent ion does not refute the 
meditation in which the mind is placed within the view that has settled the meaning of 
the manner of being and placed single-pointedly on that without mentally attending to anything else. However, it does refute that the mere stabilization in which the mind is left 
without conceiving anything, without placing it on the meaning settled by the view, the 
manner of being, constitutes meditation on emptiness. 
2 Pointing out that it will be explai ned that althoug h the trainings in thoroughly complete method and wisdom 
are the same in both s ūtra and mantra, when individually investigated there are differences 
This is the same for the mantra and the perfection vehicles. However, I will explain how 
there are similarities and differences in the two systems with regard to analyzing by 
means of the wisdom of individual investigation and sustaining one’s meditation. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3 Explanation of the actual stages of training in the trainings  
This [206] has two points:  
A How to train in the Mah āyāna in general 
B In particular how to train in the Vajray āna 
Explanation of how to train in the conduct of the Victors’ children in general 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A How to train in the Mah āyāna in general 
This has three points:  
1 Developing the wish to train in the trainings of bodhisattvas  
2 Having developed the wish, taking the vows of the Victors’ children 
3 Having taken them, the way in which to train in them 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-1 Developing the wish to train in the trainings of bodhisattvas  
With respect to the vinaya and tantra it is inappropriate to listen to the trainings without 
taking the respective vows, however, the pres ent trainings are different from those. First 
you come to understand the trainings so that your continuum is purified. Then, if you feel 
enthusiasm for holding them, the vows are imparted on you. If you take them to mind as 
an object after having understood the tr ainings, and then take the vows, having 
developed a heartfelt wish to trai n in them, they will be very st able. That is why this is a 
good method. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-2 Having developed the wish, taking the vows of the Victors’ children 
In the commentary on the Ethics Chapter of Asa ṅga’s treatise on Bodhisattva Levels  I 
already extensively settled how to first take the vows and, followin g that, how to guard 
against the root downfalls and downfalls that are infractions, and how to restore the 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
170 vows if they have been degenerated. Therefore, since the vows definitely need to be 
looked into before they are taken, you should come to understand these points there. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3 Having taken them, th e way in which to train in them 
This has three points: 
A What the foundation of the trainings is 
B How the trainings are contained in it C The stages by which to train in them 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3A What the foundation of the trainings is  
Although there are infinite clear divisions, when grouped together by type, all the 
trainings of bodhisattvas are contained in the six perfections. Therefore, the six perfections constitute the great synopsis that condenses all the essential points of the bodhisattva path.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3B How the trainings are contained in it 
This has two points: 
1 The actual meaning: the definite number of the perfections 
2 In addition to tha t, their definite order 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3B1 The actual meaning: the definite number of the perfections 
This has two points:  
A The transition 
B The actual topic 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3B1A The transition [207] 
The Bhagavan merely made a synopsis of six perfections, whereas Maitreya,the holy 
regent of the Victors, elucidated, as they had been intended, the essential points of the reasons for it having been made in that way and produced certainty. The way in which their number is definite is those very points. Therefore, when you find certainty which 
captivates the mind with respec t to this, hold the instructions regardin g the practice of 
the six perfections as supreme. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3B1B The actual topic 
With regard to the perfections, the number is definite as six:  
1 The number is definite from the point of view of high status  
2 The number is definite from the point of view of the accomplishment of the two welfares  
3 The number is definite from the point of view of the complete accomplishment of the welfare of 
others in all aspects 
4 The number is definite from the point of view of comprising the entire Mah āyāna 
5 The number is definite from the point of view of influencing all aspects of the path or method 6 The number is definite from the point of view of the three trainings 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3B1B-1 The number is definite from the point of view of high status  
This has three points:  
A How the support has to be excellent in all its parts 
In order to bring the vast conduct of a bodhisattva to completion, you need many 
consecutive lives and, in orde r to progress along the path in them, you need a support 
that is totally perfected in all its features. Without it, even if you practice with something 
that merely has all the parts like our cu rrent support, there will be no progress 
whatsoever. Thus a support that is excellent in all its parts is necessary. 
B Having identified the excellent support, how the causes that are corresponding causes for that are achieved 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
171 Furthermore, you need a support that is endowed with the four excellences: (1) 
resources at your disposal, (2) a body with which to practice, (3) companions with whom 
to practice, and (4) the ends of actions that are to be undertaken.  
However, due merely to their being excellent, many become conditions for the mental 
afflictions. Thus it is also necessary not to come under the power of the mental afflictions. But that is not enough either, you need to distinguish well the observed 
objects that are to be unmistakenly engaged in  and turned away from with respect to the 
essential point of what should be adopted and what should be discarded because 
otherwise [208] the excellences will destroy themselves, just like bamboo and plantain 
trees are destroyed by bearing fruit and like a molly is destroyed by pregnancy. If you have wisdom, you will understand that the ex cellences are the effect s of previous good 
actions, and you will strive for their causes agai n so that they will in crease. If you do not 
have wisdom, you will use the effects you pr eviously accumulated and thereby exhaust 
them. Since you do not newly increase them, they will become the beginning of suffering 
in future lives. Hence the emer gence of those six perfections in future lives does not 
come about without a cause nor from a cause that does not correspond with them, and 
the perfections are definite as six like  their corresponding sequential causes. 
C Relating what has been said above to the scriptures and distinguishing high status of the time of the path 
and the result in detail 
The resources and so forth at the time of the path are temporary high status. Culminated 
high status—an excellent body and so forth—ex ist on the buddha ground. It is also stated 
like that in  Ornament for the Mah āyāna Sūtras: 
Excellent body and resources and excellent 
Retinue and undertakings are high status, 
And never to be controlled by mental afflictions, And being unmistaken regarding activities.
168 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3B1B-2 The number is definite from the point of view of the 
accomplishment of the two welfares  
This has two points:  
A The transition 
B The actual topic 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3B1B-2A The transition 
When you train in bodhisattva conduct with such a support, the activities of bodhisattvas 
are exhausted in the two: those that accomplish one’s own welfare and those that 
accomplish the welfare of others. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3B1B-2B The actual topic 
This has six points:  
1 How the first three of the six perfections bring about the welfare of others 
Specifically, in order to accomplish the welfare of others it is necessary, first of all, to 
benefit them by means of material gifts. Since generosity accompanied by harm to 
sentient beings does not lead to anything, it is itself of great profit to others completely 
to turn away from actions that  harm others together with thei r bases. Therefore, ethics is 
necessary. However, as that pure ethics cannot come about if you retaliate once or twice, 
unable to bear being harmed, [209] the patience that in the face of harm thinks “It does 
                                                 
168 Those six characteristics of the higher realms constitute results related to the six perfections as their respective 
causes: excellent commodities as the result of giving, excellent  bodies as the result of ethics, excellent companions as 
the result of patience, conditions for the accomplishment of one’s enterprises as  the  r esult o f jo y o us ef f o rt,  and th e  
absence of wrong views concerning actions as the result of wisdom. (cf. Wayman 1992: 106.) 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
172 not matter” is necessary to culminate ethics. Since you do not retaliate out of patience, 
others are prevented from accumulating a lot of negativities and, inspired by that, apply 
themselves to virtue, whereby it is of great benefit to others. 
2 What brings about one’s own welfare 
If your own welfare is to attain the happiness of complete liberation through the power of 
wisdom, you should moreover place your mind  in equipoise by means of concentration 
through not allowing your mind to become dist racted. Thus it is necessary to achieve the 
serviceability of a mind that abides on the observed object as long as you wish.  
3 How joyous effort becomes the foundation of both welfares 
Since this does not arise in the lazy, you need to set about it with the joyous effort that 
does not relent day and night. Hence this is their foundation. 
4 A scriptural passage to that effect 
Therefore, in order to bring about the two welfares, the perfections are definite as six. In 
Ornament for the Mah āyāna Sūtras it says: 
Great effort for the welfare of beings Is made by giving, not harming, and patience. 
Abiding and freedom
169 with their foundation 
Enact your own welfare in all aspects. 
5 One does not establish others in complete liberation in dependence on wisdom  
This does not comprise the welfare of others in all aspects.  
6 Identifying the respective sequence of the last two perfections 
In the statement “Abiding and freedom,” the mind abiding  on the observed object is said 
to be the work of meditative concentration and freedom  from cyclic existence is said to 
be the work of wisdom. When  these two are distinguished, calm abiding will not be 
mistaken to be sp ecial insight.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3B1B-3 The number is definite  from the point of view of the complete 
accomplishment of the welfare of others in all aspects 
At the outset eliminate the poverty of sentient beings through material things. Following 
that, do not harm any sentient being whatsoev er. Not only that, be patient when harmed. 
Due to being their companion, act with undaunted joyous effort. Rely on concentration 
and, with magical emanations and so forth, provide whatever they wish for. When they 
have become suitable vessels, give them good explanations in dependence on wisdom, so 
that by clearing up their doubt, [210] you li berate them. Because of this, the perfections 
are definite as six. 
Not holding back and not causing harm at all, 
Patient with harm, unthwarted by what’s to be done, Joyful, and well-spoken—that being the case 
The welfare of others is also one’s own welfare. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3B1B-4 The number is definite  from the point of view of comprising 
the entire Mah āyāna 
Thus you will not be attached to resource s you have acquired, and you will not view 
resources that you have not acqu ired with interest. When that is present, you will be able 
to guard the trainings, whereby you will take up ethics and respect it. Due to patience 
with sufferings that arise in dependence on sentient beings and non-sentient phenomena, 
                                                 
169 Tib. grol ba,  usually translated here as “liberation.”  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
173 you will not be discouraged. Due to applying yourself to and delighting in any kind of 
virtuous activities, you will not be disc ouraged by them. You will cultivate the non-
conceptual yoga of calm abiding and specia l insight. These six encompass the entire 
Mahāyāna of migrating beings, for that is sequentially accomplished through the six 
perfections and nothing more than those six is necessary. 
No joy in resources, highest respect, 
Not being discouraged regarding the two, 
As well as non-conceptual yoga; 
In this all Mah āyāna is exhausted. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3B1B-5 The number is definite  from the point of view of influencing 
all aspects of the path or method: how the six perfections become the method for 
accomplishing any of the individual aspects 
This has five points:  
A The way in which generosity is contained in the path 
The path or the method of non-attachment to resources that are objects you have 
already acquired is generosity because by familiarizing yourself with giving them away 
you become free from attachment to them. 
B The way in which ethics acts as a method 
The method for restraining the distraction of exerting oneself for the sake of acquiring 
objects that have not yet been acquired is et hics because in one wit h the vows of a fully 
ordained monk all the distractions of ends of actions do not arise. 
C The way in which patience acts as a method 
The method for not giving up sentient beings is patience because one is not depressed by 
all the sufferings of being harmed.  
D The way in which joyous effort acts as a method [211] 
The method for increasing virtue is joyous effort because through undertaking virtue with 
joyous effort it increases. 
E The way in which the last two perfections act as a method 
The methods for completely purifying the obscurations are the last two perfections because the mental afflictions are completely purified by concentration and the 
obscurations to objects of knowledge are completely purified by wisdom.  
That is why the perfections are definite as six. 
The path of non-attachment to objects 
Is gained and that of restraining distractions. 
Not giving up sentient beings, increasing, and  Cleansing
170 obscurations are further paths. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3B1B-6 The number is defini te from the point of view of the three 
trainings 
This has two points:  
A How the perfections are contained in the three trainings 
The entity of training in ethics is ethics. Moreover, since it is adopted when there is the 
generosity that is indifferent to resources, generosity is the collection of ethics. Also when ethics is adopted, since it is protected by the patience that does not return abuse 
for abuse, patience is in its retinue. Concentration is training of the mind whereas 
                                                 
170 Tib. (rnam par) sbyong ba , usually translated here as “(completely) purify(ing).” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
174 wisdom is training in wisdom. Joyous effort is  included in all three trainings. Therefore 
the perfections are definite as six. 
From the perspective of the three trainings, 
The Victor perfectly explained  The six perfections: the first is the three, Two are aspects of the last two, 
And one is included in all three. 
B Hence the importance of understanding that the number is definite 
Thus, by means of whatever excellent su pport one thoroughly completes whatever 
welfare, one’s own or that of others, through however many types of methods one 
possesses after abiding in whichever vehicle—that which thoroughly completes and gathers the support accomplishing any of  the trainings, the welfare, the Mah āyāna, the 
method, and the trainings should be understood to be those very six perfections. You should think about this until you gain great certainty that they are the sum of all the essential points of the bodhisattva practices. [212] 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3B2 In addition to that, their definite order  
This has three points:  
A The order in which they arise 
If you have generosity that is  indifferent and not attached to resources, you will adopt 
ethics. If you possess ethics th at refrains from faulty beha vior, you will be patient with 
regard to harm. If you have patience that does not despair with respect to hardships, you 
will be able to act with joyous effort since adverse circumstances will be few. As you act 
with joyous effort day and night, the concentration that is able to establish the mind in 
virtue will arise. When the mind is in meditati ve equipoise, you will ha ve the realization of 
reality just as it is.  
B The order in terms of inferior and superior 
The earlier are inferior, and  the latter are superior.  
C The order in terms of coarser and subtler 
Since the earlier are easier to engage in and do than the latter, they are coarser. Since 
the latter are more difficult to engage in and do than the earlier, they are more subtle. In 
Ornament for the Mah āyāna Sūtras it says: 
The latter grow due to the earlier ones; Since they abide as inferior and superior, 
Since they are coarser and more subtle, 
They were taught in stages like that. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C The stages by which to train in them 
This has two points:  
1 How to train in the conduct in general 
2 How to train in the last two perfections in particular 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1 How to train in the conduct in general 
This has two points: 
A Extensive explanation of how to train in the conduct in general 
B The summarized meaning 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A Extensive explanation of how to train in the conduct in general 
This has two points:  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
175 1 Training in the perfections that ripen one’s own buddha qualities 
2 Training in the four means of gathering disciples that ripen the continua of others 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1 Training in the perfections that ripen one’s own buddha 
qualities 
This has six points:  
A How to train in generosity B How to train in ethics 
C How to train in patience 
D How to train in joyous effort 
E How to train in concentration 
F How to train in wisdom 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1A How to train in generosity 
This has three points:  
1 The entity of generosity 
2 Subdivisions 
3 How to generate generosity in one’s mental continuum 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1A1 The entity of generosity 
This has two points:  
A Entity 
The entity of generosity is a virtuous intention to give and the actions of body and 
speech motivated by it. [213] It is the intention at the time the body and speech engage 
in generosity. 
B The measure for its perfection  
The completion of the perfection of generosity does not depend on having eliminated the poverty of migrating beings by giving away to others substances to be given. Rather it 
becomes the perfection of generosity through destroying the grasping of miserliness and 
thoroughly completing one’s familiarization with the mind of giving to others along with 
the effects of giving.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1A2 Subdivisions 
This has two points:  
A Subdivisions from the point of view of individual supports 
B Subdivisions of the entity of generosity itself 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1A2A Subdivisions from  the point of view of individual supports 
This has two points:  
1 Explanation of the individual generosities for the individual supports  
In Bodhisattva Vows of Liberation (Bodhisattvapr ātimokṣa) it is taught that generosity of 
material things is generally practiced by la y bodhisattvas, whereas ordained bodhisattvas 
should practice the generosity of the Dharma rather than generosity of material gifts. 
2 The acquisition and giving of material things that interrupts the studies and so forth of the ordained is 
prohibited, whereas if they are obtained without harm to their studies, they should be given 
Moreover, in the Compendium of Trainings , intending that which interrupts studies and so 
forth, it says that the giving of gifts by the ordained having worked for the sake of 
material things is prohibited. However, if they obtain them in plenty through the power of previous merit without harm to their virtuous activities, they should give material things. 
Sharawa also said: “To you I will  not talk about the benefits of giving but I will talk about 
the disadvantages of grasping.” This is the talk of one who was not pleased that the 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
176 ordained were giving gifts, having toiled to obtain and accumulate wealth and often 
damaged their ethics.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1A2B Subdivisions of the entity of generosity itself 
This has three points:  
1  The generosity of the Dharma 
 The generosity of the Dharma is to unmi stakenly teach the holy Dharma, to teach 
properly, without misdeeds, the worldly aims of actions such as crafts and so forth, and 
to make others engage in upholding the basis of the trainings. 
2 The generosity of fearlessness 
The generosity of fearle ssness is [214] to thoroughly prot ect others from fear of humans 
such as kings, bandits, and so forth, from fear of non-humans such as lions, tigers, and 
so forth, and fear of the elements such as water, fire, and so forth. 
3 The generosity of material things 
The generosity of material things is to give material things to others. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1A3 How to generate generosity in one’s mental continuum. 
This has three points:  
A How in order to complete the perfection of generosity, the mind giving away all one’s possessions rather 
than the mere destruction of miserliness is necessary 
B Thinking about the advantages of giving and the disadvantages of not giving  
C The actual method for engaging in generosity 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1A3A How in order to complete the perfection of generosity the mind giving away all one’s 
possessions rather than the mere destruction of miserliness is necessary 
By merely destroying all miserliness without exception regarding one’s body and 
possessions, it does not become the perfection of generosity because since miserliness is 
included in the factor of attachment, the two types of arhats of the H īnayāna have also 
abandoned it without exception along with all its seeds. Hence it is necessary not only to 
eliminate the obstacle to giving, the holding on  to all things that is miserliness, but to 
generate the thought, from the bottom of one’s heart, of giving away all one’s 
possessions to others. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1A3B Thinking about the advantages  of giving and the disadvantages of not giving  
For that it is necessary to meditate both on  the disadvantages of thoroughly holding on 
to things and on the advantages of giving. The former are as taught in the Moon Lamp 
Sūtra (Candraprad īpasūtra): 
Since the body is unclean, and the life  force fluctuates like water gushing 
down a steep mountain, and both body and life force are controlled by karma 
thus lacking an independent self, you should see them to be false, like a dream or a mirage, and cease your attachment to them. If you do not reverse it, you 
will come under the control of attachment , accumulate great faulty conduct, 
and go to the lower realms. 
The second, the advantages of giving, are as taught in the 
Compendium of Trainings : 
In this way my body and mind 
Pass away in every instant. 
If I attain, with this body that is  Tainted and impermanent, 
Permanent, untainted enlightenment, 
Is it not obtained for free? 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
177 2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1A3C The actual method for engaging in generosity 
This has four points:  
1 How to actually generate generosity 
2 Importance of the inner attitude 3 Generosity that is a mere thought 
4 How to associate generosity with the six perfections 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1A3C-1 How to actually generate generosity 
This has two points:  
A The actual topic [215] 
Engaging in Bodhisattva Conduct  describes how generosity should actually be generated: 
My body as well as my resources, 
All my virtues of the three times, 
I give away without sense of loss to 
Accomplish the welfare of  all sentient beings. 
Like that, taking the three—body, resources, and roots of virtue—as your object, you 
should familiarize yourself ag ain and again with the thought of  giving them away to all 
sentient beings. 
B How beginners should act 
Since presently this wish is immature and of little strength, you should not actually give 
away your flesh and so forth, even though  you have already given away your body in 
thought to sentient beings. Nonetheless, in the Compendium of Trainings  it says that if 
we do not train in the thought of giving aw ay our body and life, due to the lack of 
familiarity with it we will not be able to do  so in the future ei ther. Therefore it is 
necessary to train in that thought from now on. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1A3C-2 Importance of the inner attitude 
This has two points:  
A The disadvantages of forgetting the welfare of others 
Thus, when you use food, clothing, and so forth that you have given away to sentient 
beings with a sincere thought, if, having fo rgotten the thought “I will use these for the 
welfare of others,” you instead use them for your own welfare as a result of craving, it is 
an afflicted downfall. If, without this craving, you forget the discrimination that observes 
all sentient beings or if you are attached for the sake of another sentient being, it is a 
non-afflicted downfall. If you use for your ow n sake those things dedicated to others, 
having discriminated them to be th e substances of others, it becomes taking what has 
not been given  and if it is something valuable, it becomes a defeat of the pratimok ṣa 
vow. On the other hand, if you use them thinking: “I will use the resources of this 
sentient being for his own welfare,” there is no fault. This is mentioned in the 
Compendium of Trainings . 
B Clearing up doubt concerning a defeat 
The way in which it becomes a defeat is when you have dedicated something with a 
sincere thought to a migrating being who is a human being, and he, having cognized it, also holds it to be his, if you take it for your own welfare with the discrimination that it 
belongs to someone else and if it is of some value, then the factors for it to become a 
defeat are present. That is the intention here. [216] 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1A3C-3  Generosity that is a mere thought 
Apart from that, Bodhisattva Levels  teaches that the training in the aspiration to emanate 
immeasurable varieties of phenomena, objects to be offered, and to give them to sentient 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
178 beings with clear faith from the bottom of on e’s heart increases immeasurable merit with 
little effort and is the generosi ty of the wise bodhisattva.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1A3C-4  How to make generosity possess the six perfections 
If at the time of training in the perfection of generosity it is made to possess the six 
perfections, the training that occurs will be very powerful. The six are made complete in 
that, in addition, at that time there is: the ethics that restrains the mental attention of 
hearers and solitary real izers; the aspiration for and pati ence with respect to the qualities 
of a knower of all aspects and patience when abused by others; the joyous effort that 
generates the aspiration for the sake of increasing them more and more; the 
concentration that is a single-pointed mind not mixed with the H īnayāna that dedicates 
that virtue to complete enlightenment; and the wisdom that understands the object 
given, the giving, and the recipient to be like illusions. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1B How to train in ethics 
This has three points: 
1 The entity of ethics 
2 Its subdivisions 
3 How to generate ethics in one’s mental continuum 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1B1 The entity of ethics 
This has two points:  
A The entity of ethics 
Ethics is the mind of abandonment that is a mind turned away from harming others 
together with its basis. This is  mainly from the point of view of the ethics of restraint. 
B The entity of the perfection of ethics 
Through thoroughly completing the familiarit y with this mind more and more, it becomes 
the perfection of ethics. It is not that you externally establish all sentient beings in 
freedom from all harm without exception. In Engaging in Bodhisattva Conduct  it says: 
Achieving the mind of abandonment 
Is taught as perfection of ethics. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1B2 Its subdivisions 
This has three points: 
A The ethics of restraint 
B The ethics of accumulating virtuous qualities 
C The ethics of bringing about the welfare of sentient beings 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1B2A The ethics of restraint 
This has two points:  
1 General presentation 
The ethics of restraint, [217] from the point of view of its being accompanied by a 
motivation, is the ten abandonments that abandon the ten non-virtues. From the point of 
view of its entity, it is the seven abandonments of body and speech that abandon the 
seven non-virtues.  
2 Precise features 
This is the intention of Bodhisattva Levels  in stating that the ethics of restraint in the 
continuum of a bodhisattva is the seven type s of vows of individual liberation: When 
those possessing the vows of individual liberation possess the bodhisattva vows, the 
ethics of restraint is the actual vows of indivi dual liberation of the cl ass of the laity or the 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
179 ordained and the abandonments and vows that are common to them in their continua. 
When those who are unsuitable as a support for the vows of individual liberation possess 
bodhisattva vows, the ethics of restraint is the abandonments and restraints of 
abandoning either the natural misdeeds or the formulated misdeeds that are common to 
individual liberation. Although the vows of individual liberation in the continuum of a 
bodhisattva are vows of ethics in the contin uum of a bodhisattva, they are not actual 
bodhisattva vows, whereas the rest have a common basis with the bodhisattva vows. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1B2B The ethics of gathering virtuous qualities 
The ethics of gathering virtuous qualities is to observe virtues such as the six perfections and to generate that which has not yet arisen in one’s own continuum, to not degenerate that which has arisen, and to increase it more and more. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1B2C The ethics of bri nging about the welfare of sentient beings 
The ethics of bringing about the welfare of se ntient beings is to accomplish the welfare of 
sentient beings in this and future lives through ethics without any misdeeds as 
appropriate.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1B3 How to generate  ethics in one’s mental continuum 
This has three points:  
A Preconditions and advantages of ethics 
B The entity of ethics 
C Making ethics possess the six perfections 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1B3A Preconditions and advantages of ethics 
This has two points:  
1 What is the cause of pure ethics and what it depends on 
Pure ethics depends on practicing what should be engaged in and counteracted according 
to the formulated rules of the Buddha. Furthermore, it follows the strong and firm wish to guard ethics. For it to arise, you must meditate for a long time on the disadvantages of 
not guarding it and the advantages of guarding it. [218] This was explained above in the 
context of intermediate beings.  
2 Considering advantages and disadvantages of guarding and not guarding ethics. 
Moreover in the Compendium of the Perfections it also says: 
You cannot attain your own with degenerate discipline,171 
So where would you get the power for others’ welfare? 
Therefore, it is inappropri ate, if you strive well 
For others’ welfare, to loosen your respect for it. 
And: 
This ethics, special path of attainment, 
Accomplish it like the naturally co mpassionate 
It is of the excellent nature of pure wisdom172 
Free from errors, it’s called “the best of ornaments.” 
Pleasant fragrance guarde d in all three realms, 
It is a balm not at odds with ordination 
Those who are ethically disciplined, though conforming Outwardly, will be nobles among humans. 
                                                 
171 Tib. tshul khrims , usually translated here as “ethics.” 
172 Tib. ye shes , usually translated here as “exalted wisdom.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
180 This says that in dependence on ethics, your mental continuum improves more and more; 
you become similar in training to the great beings who are naturally  compassionate; you 
attain the pure exalted wisdom that has abandoned all seeds of faulty conduct; although 
other ornaments do not beautify the very young or very old, the ornament of ethics is the supreme ornament for whoever possesses it, whether young, old or in between, since it 
pleases everyone; although other fine fragrances only spread in the direction of the wind 
and do not spread in other directions whereby they are limited, the scent of ethics’s fame 
spreads in all directions; although ointments such as sandalwood, which cool the torment 
of heat, contradict ordination, the ointment that protects from the torment of the heat of 
the afflictions does not contradict ordination but rather accords with it; and even though 
you only seem to have the signs of ordination, to be endowed with the jewel of ethics is more excellent than anything else.  
Again from the same text: 
Without expressing a word, without much effort, 
Resources and services needed  for practice gather. [219] 
The world bows low without intimidation; 
Power and wealth are gained  without effort and work. 
Although his lineage may be unworthy of mention, 
Although he did not help or benefit them All beings, including the ones he never knew, 
Bow to a being endowed with ethics.  
Even the dust made au spicious by his feet 
Is raised to the head for its sanctity. Gods and humans 
Prostrate so it touches their heads and carry it everywhere. 
Thus, one should think about the advantages as expressed here.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1B3B The entity of ethics 
This has three points:  
1 Instruction on the importance of how you train in ethics 
Although there are three kinds of ethics, the ethics of restraint—practicing the 
engagements and avoidances concerning the formulated rules of individual liberation or 
what is common to them—is itself important fo r bodhisattvas in the beginning. If it is 
guarded, the others will also be guarded, whereas if it is no t guarded, the others will not 
be guarded either. Therefore the Compendium of Determinations  says that if the ethics of 
the bodhisattva vows degenerates, all the vows  are degenerated. Whoever thinks that the 
vows of individual liberation are for hear ers and rejects their formulated rules of 
engagement and avoidance saying: “I must train in the other bodhisattva trainings” has 
thus not grasped the essential point of the trai ning in ethics of bodhisattvas, for it is 
taught many times that the ethics of rest raint is the basis and province of the two 
subsequent ethics. 
2 The main ethics of restraint: how the mind of restraining from natural misdeeds should be generated again 
and again 
The main ethics of restraint is to abandon the natural misdeeds. The synthesized 
essential points of the great disadvantages of the natural misdeeds are to abandon the 
ten non-virtues. Therefore the mind of restraint that does not even move toward their 
motivations should be generated again and again. [220] 
From the Compendium of the Perfections : 
The path to the bliss of high status and liberation 
Is not to degenerate from the ten paths of action. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
181 Abiding in them you will have the special effect, 
The thought intending to benefit173 migrating beings.  
“Completely restraining one’s speech, one’s body, one’s mind, 
In brief, is ethics,” said the Victor. 
They are the basis comprising all ethics Without exception, so thoroughly train in them. 
3 Summarized presentation 
In brief, to take this as the basis and train again and again in the mind of restraint that 
trains in the trainings of whatever ethics one has promised is the practice of ethics.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1B3C Making ethics possess the six perfections 
Ethics is made to possess the six perfections like this. Abiding in ethics oneself and establishing others in it is generosity . The remaining perfections are as before. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1C How to train in patience 
This has three points:  
1 The entity of patience 
2 Its subdivisions 
3 How to generate patience in one’s continuum  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1C1 The entity of patience 
This has two points:  
A Explanation of the entity of patience 
The entity of patience is th e mind abiding at ease withou t being overwhelmed by harm 
and the occurrence of suffering, as well as very abiding dedication to the Dharma. Its 
opposites are hatred, disheartenment, lack of appreciation, and lack of desire. 
B The completion of the perfection of patience 
The completion of the perfection of patience is the mere complete familiarity of the mind with ceasing one’s own belligeren ce and so forth; it does not depend on freeing other 
sentient beings from their unruliness.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1C2 Its subdivisions 
There is the patience of not paying heed to harm by others, the patience of accepting the 
suffering that arises in one’s own continuum, and the patience of a mind certain with respect to the Dharma.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1C3 How to generate patience in one’s continuum 
This has two points:  
A Meditating on the advantages of patience and the disadvantages of impatience 
B The actual way to cultivate patience 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1C3A Meditating on the advantages of patience and the disadvantages of impatience 
This has two points:  
1 The advantages of patience 2 The disadvantages of impatience 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1C3A-1 The advantages of patience 
You think about the fa ct that later on you will have [221] few enemies, you will not be 
separated from dear ones, yo u will experience much happin ess and mental happiness, 
                                                 
173 Tib. phan bsams pa’i bsam pa  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
182 you will die without regret, and you will be re born among the gods after this body has 
perished. In the Compendium of the Perfections  it says:  
For those with the mind that ne glects the welfare of others 
It was taught “The best of ways is patience.” 
That which is good and excellent in the world, Patience protects it from the faults of anger. 
It is the best of or naments of the strong, 
Peak of power for those embracing austerities, 
Torrent of water for pr airie fires of malice. 
All harm is removed by patien ce in this life and others. 
Against the armor of patien ce of excell ent beings 
The arrows of words of un ruly beings are wrecked. 
Thereby they turn into excellent flowers of praise 
And become attractive  garlands of fame. 
And: 
Patience is also the workshop  where forms are accomplished 
With beautiful qualities and adorned with the signs.
174 
You should meditate on the advantages as taught here until you reach a strong and 
stable certainty with regard to them. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1C3A-2 The disadvantages of impatience 
This has two points:  
A Invisible disadvantages  
B Visible disadvantages along with supplementary remarks 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1C3A-2A Invisible disadvantages  
This has four points:  
1 How anger destroys the roots of virtue 
2 How they are destroyed even if the object of anger is an ordained person who is not a bodhisattva 
3 Clearing up doubts concerning their destruction 
4 Details regarding the way in which they are destroyed 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1C3A-2A1 How anger destroys the roots of virtue 
This has three points:  
A The actual topic 
In Engaging in Bodhisattva Conduct  it says: 
What has been gathered175 in thousand eons 
Like giving and offerings to those gone to bliss, 
All those good deeds, whatever there is, 
An instant of anger destroys it all. 
Apparently this was compos ed in accordance with Āryaśūra’s work Compendium of the 
Perfections . The Play of Mañju śri Sūtra (Mañjuśrivikrīḍitasūtra) says that it destroys the 
virtue accumulated over a hundred eons. 
B Differences in the object of anger 
With respect to the object, some explain that it must be a bodhisattva, whereas some 
assert that it is a general object. The former accords with the Commentary on the 
“Middle Way :” 
                                                 
174 Tib. mtshan rab , literally “best/highest signs”, that is the signs of a buddha. 
175 Tib. bsags pa , usually translated here as “accumulated.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
183 Therefore, through anger toward a child of the Victors 
The virtue from giving and discipline one has [222] amassed 
Over a hundred eons is crushed in an instant. 
C The support 
As regards the support of the one in whom anger arises, since even if a bodhisattva gets 
angry it destroys his roots of virtue, there is no need to mention that this is the case for 
one who is not a bodhisattva who gets angry at a bodhisattva. In the Explanation of 
Candrak īrti’s “Commentary on the ‘Middle Way’”  (Madhyamak āvatārațikānāma) it says 
that whether or not it is certain that the object is a bodhisattva and whether or not the 
reason for the anger, seeing faults, is true, the destruction of virtue is similar to how it 
was explained above. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1C3A-2A2 How they are destroyed even if the object of anger is an ordained person who is 
not a bodhisattva 
In general, anger does not need to be directed at a bodhisattva in order for it to destroy 
roots of virtue. A passage quoted from the Sarv āstivādin scriptures in the Compendium of 
Trainings  says: 
If a monk prostrates to a st ūpa of hair and nail relics  with extended limbs and 
a pure mind, he will come to enjoy as many kingdoms of universal monarchs 
as there are particles of dust in the ground covered up to the golden 
foundation.  
And:  
Even those roots of virtue will be exhaus ted if he injures or disparages one of 
pure conduct. Therefore, if one should  not even be angry at a charred log, 
how much less so at a body endowed with consciousness! 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1C3A-2A3 Clearing up doubts concerning their destruction 
This has two points:  
A Doubts raised by scholars 
B Their refutation 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1C3A-2A3A Doubts raised by scholars 
Some scholars say that the meaning of the destruction of  roots of virtue  is that the 
potential of earlier virtue to bring about its effect quickly is destroyed, and the 
emergence of its effect is delayed, so that th e effects of hatred and so forth emerge first. 
However, if they meet with suitable conditions afterward, it is not that their respective 
effects do not emerge, for if there is no mundane path whatsoever that can eliminate the 
seeds of the objects of abandonment, it is im possible for seeds to be eliminated by the 
mental afflictions.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1C3A-2A3B Their refutation 
This has two points:  
1 The seed is uncertain  
2 How destruction  does not just mean postponement  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1C3A-2A3B-1 The seed is uncertain  
This has two points:  
A How the effect does not arise due to conditions even though its seed is still there 
The reason that it is uncertain is because ev en though ordinary beings purify non-virtues 
by means of the four opponent powers, their seeds are not abandoned. However, 
although the conditions are met later on, [223] it is impossible for the fully ripened 
effects to emerge.  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
184 B Even if the seed has not been abandoned, its effect is not produced once tolerance is achieved 
Once the peak and tolerance levels of the path of preparation have been attained, 
although wrong views and the seeds of non-virtues that become the causes of the lower 
realms have not been abandoned, wrong views and rebirths in the lower realms are impossible even if these seed s meet with their conditions. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1C3A-2A3B-2 How destruction  does not just mean postponement  
This has two points:  
A The absurd consequence 
According to the statement “What’s heaviest in cyclic existence with karma...,” either a 
virtuous or a non-virtuous karma, by ripeni ng sooner, can temporar ily block the occasion 
for another karma to ripen. Ho wever, it cannot be posited nor has it been taught that 
virtuous or non-virtuous karma is destroyed by merely that. The temporary postponement of its ripening is not suitable to be the meaning of the 
destruction of roots of virtue  
because otherwise it would have been necessary to teach that all strong non-virtues 
destroy the roots of virtue.  
B Analogy for how the effect is not produced although the seed has not been abandoned 
Therefore, with respect to this, Master Bh āvaviveka said:  
As explained above, neither non-virtues that have been purified by the four 
powers nor roots of virtue that have been destroyed by wrong views or 
harmful intent can bring about their effect s even if later on they meet with the 
conditions; just like a seed that has been damaged cannot produce a sprout 
even though the conditions are met. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1C3A-2A4 Details regarding the way in which they are destroyed 
This has three points:  
A How the fully ripened effect and the effect corresponding to the cause may or may not be destroyed 
Moreover, even though negativities that have been accumulated are cleared away by 
purifying them with the four powers as descri bed above, this does not contradict the fact 
that they delay the arising of higher paths. Thus in some people the effects of giving gifts 
and guarding ethics, such as the arising of excellent resources and bodies, are destroyed. 
However, due to the effect corresponding to the cause, familiarizat ion with giving and the 
mind of abandonment, the roots of virtue of generosity and ethics arise again easily and 
cannot be destroyed. In others the arising of the effect corresponding to the cause as a 
continuum of similar type, inner ethics and so forth, is destroyed, but the arising of an 
excellent body, resources, and so forth [224] is not destroyed. Again others, as described 
previously, will have some realizations of th e path that enable them to completely 
traverse it within one eon unless anger to ward a bodhisattva who has obtained his 
prophecy arises in their minds. If one thought of anger arises, their traversal of the path 
within one eon will be delayed al though the path that exists  in their continua is not 
relinquished. In brief, what I mean is that, with respect to purifying non-virtues, not all its efficacy is necessarily purified and likewis e, with respect to the destruction of virtue, 
not all its efficacy is necessarily destroyed.  
B How that depends exclusively on the scriptures 
Nonetheless this is an important point, and since it seems necessary to analyze it in 
dependence on the Buddha’s scriptures and the reasonings based on them, you should 
analyze it looking at the Buddha’s excellent teachings.176  
C How the two great actions operate  
                                                 
176 Tib. gsung rab , usually translated here as “scriptures.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
185 Thus the invisible disadvantages of anger ar e that it projects very unpleasant fully 
ripened effects and prevents the emergence of other very pleasant fully ripened effects. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1C3A-2B Visible disadvantages along with supplementary remarks 
This has three points:  
1 How peace of mind and so forth are not experienced 
The visible disadvantages of anger are taught in Engaging in Bodhisattva Conduct : you 
do not experience mental peace and certainty, previous joy and happiness are ruined and 
later on are not achieved, sleep does not come and the mind does not remain at ease, if 
your hatred is strong, even those you nurtured with kindness forget about your kindness 
and kill you, even friends and relatives get irritated and abandon you, and even those 
you gather with gifts do not stay, and so forth.  
2 How to gain certainty regarding the faults 
In Engaging in Bodhisattva Conduct  it says: 
There’s no negativity equal to hatred There’s no austerity equal to patience. Therefore patience should be practiced 
Earnestly, in various ways. 
Thus you should consider the advantages and disadvantages and make an effort to 
develop patience in many ways. 
3 Supplementary remarks 
It should be understood from the Compendium of Trainings  that hatred is not ascertained 
to be the only faulty conduct that collec ts both major fully-ripened effects and the 
destruction of roots of virtue. [225] There is the wrong view that deprecates the law of cause and effect, the abandonment of the holy Dharma, contempt, generation of pride, 
and so on toward bodhisattvas, gurus, and so forth. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1C3B The actual way to cultivate patience 
This has three points:  
1 How to cultivate the patience that is unconcerned with respect to harm 
2 How to cultivate the patience that accepts suffering 
3 How to cultivate the patience devoted to a mind of certainty regarding the Dharma 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1C3B-1 How to cultivate the patience that is unconcerned with respect to harm 
This has five points:  
A The offender’s lack of control  
If you investigate whether or not someone who harmed you was free not to harm you, 
you will find that he did not ha rm you while being in control, for he generated the wish to 
harm you out of causes and conditions such as the seeds of mental afflictions from 
previous familiarity and improper mental at tention. Also due to them he engaged in 
activities that inflicted harm and thereby produced suffering in others, for under the 
power of other, the mental afflictions, he had become as if their slave.  
B The inappropriateness of anger given that he has no control 
Even if someone, driven by something else without control, has harmed you, anger is 
inappropriate. For instance, if someone, possessed by an evil  spirit, were to come under 
its power and wish to harm you, his benefactor freeing him from it, and if he were to 
strike you, you would not get even the slightest bit angry at him but instead think: “He is 
acting like this now because the evil spirit  has deprived him of his freedom.” You would 
put effort into doing whatever you could to free him from the evil spirit. A bodhisattva 
should also act like that. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
186 C The scriptural source for this 
From Four Hundred Stanzas : 
Just as a doctor is not disturbed 
By one who is gripped by a spirit and angry, 
The Sage beholds the mental afflictions Not the person afflicted by them. 
Master Candrak īrti also says: 
“This is no fault of sentient beings, It is a fault of the mental afflictions.” 
The wise who have analyzed this in detail 
Are not disturbed by sentient beings. 
D How anger is inappropriate if one thinks of one’s own karma 
Moreover, the experience of suffering produced by the one who harms you [226] is the 
experience of the effect of a negative action accumulated by you yourself in the past and, in dependence on that, the action is exhauste d. If you cultivate pati ence with respect to 
it, you will not newly accumulate causes for experiencing suffering later on, whereas if 
you get angry, you will have to experience suffering that is even greater than that.  
E Consequently, the appropriateness of being patient as if it were a medical examination 
It is therefore quite appropriate to be patient with minor suffering in order to avert 
greater suffering, such as being patient with  bloodletting, burning, and so forth as a 
method for curing a serious illness. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1C3B-2 How to cultivate the patience that accepts suffering 
This has three points:  
A Countering the categorical aversion to suffering that arises 
If the suffering that has arisen is curable, aversion is unnecessary. If it is not suitable to 
be cured, again, aversion to it is useless be cause it is without bene fit, and it is even 
disadvantageous, for even tiny suffering becomes extremely hard to bear if you are very 
intolerant, whereas even grea t suffering is bearable if you are less intolerant.  
B Considering the positive qualities of suffering itself 
The way to mentally take the side of suffering is to train the mind again and again 
thinking “If there was no such suffering, the wish to definitely emerge from cyclic existence would not arise, therefore it has the positive quality of exhorting my mind to 
liberation; it has the positive quality of eliminating my arrogance since, when I am beset 
with suffering, my conceited superiority is dest royed; it has the positive quality of making 
me shun negativities because when I experience an intense feeling of suffering, since it 
arises from non-virtue, I must turn away from its cause if I do not wa nt this effect; it has 
the positive quality of making me delight in accomplishing virtue since, due to being 
tormented by suffering, I want happiness and for that purpose I must accomplish virtue; and, having understood that compassion is generated for the beings of cyclic existence as I think “In proportion to my ow n experience, others also suffer ,” this suffering fulfills my 
wishes.”  
C It is not difficult if you fam iliarize yourself in small steps 
Here again it says:  
Something that does not [227] get easier 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
187 If you get used to177 it, does not exist. 
Therefore endure even major harm  
By getting used to minor harm.  
Thus, if you put on the armor of the intention to accept suffering and expose yourself to 
suffering in small steps, your streng th to accept suffering will grow. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1C3B-3 How to cultivate the patience that is devoted to a mind of certainty regarding the 
Dharma 
The way to cultivate the patience that is de voted to a mind of certainty regarding the 
Dharma is to train in devotion to the followin g without bias: the objects of clear faith, the 
Three Jewels; the objects to be actualized, the two selflessnesses; the object of desire, the great power of the buddhas and bodhisattvas; the objects to be adopted and discarded, the causes that are excellent conduct and faulty conduct as well as their 
effects; the object of meditation, enlightenment, the meaning to be achieved; the method 
for attaining that, the path of the bodhisattva trainings; the objects of hearing and 
thinking, the holy Dharma of the twelve scriptural branches, and so forth. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1D How to train in joyous effort 
This has three points:  
1 The entity of joyous effort 
2 Its subdivisions 
3 How to generate joyous effort in one’s continuum 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1D1 The entity of joyous effort 
In Bodhisattva Levels  joyous effort is explained as a mind that delights strongly for the 
sake of gathering virtue and working for the welfare of sentient beings, as well as the 
actions of the three doors motivated by it. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1D2 Its subdivisions 
This has three points:  
A Armor-like joyous effort 
From the three, the first is armor-like joyous  effort. When bodhisa ttvas undertake joyous 
effort, prior to applying themselves they put on the armor of the thought that first 
delights the mind. That is they delight, even if they are to attain buddhahood after 
abiding only in hell for 100,000 times 10 milli on rounds of three immeasurable eons in 
order to eliminate the suffering of one single be ing. Also with respect to putting in effort 
to attain complete enlightenme nt, they wear the armor of th e thought “If I will not give 
up engaging in joyous effort for that length of time, what need is there to mention that I 
will not give it up if the time is less than that and if the suffering is less?” 
B The joyous effort of gathering virtuous dharmas 
The joyous effort of gathering virtuous dharmas is to apply oneself to them for the sake 
of accomplishing the six perfections. 
C The joyous effort of working for the welfare of sentient beings 
The joyous effort of working for the welfare of sentient beings [228] is similar to the 
above. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1D3 How to generate joyous effort in one’s continuum 
This has four points:  
A The benefits of undertaking joyous effort 
                                                 
177 Tib. goms , usually translated here as “familiarize yourself.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
188 B The disadvantages of not undertaking joyous effort 
C How to actually generate joyous effort 
D How joyous effort is made to possess the six perfections 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1D3A The benefits of undertaking joyous effort 
This has two points:  
1 One will not be overcome by distraction and so forth and will achiev e the two attainments 
From Ornament for the Mah āyāna Sūtras: 
Joyous effort is best within virtue’s collection. 
Thus, relying on it, one attains that which follows. 
Through joyous effort, immediately, best source of happiness, 
Including mundane and supramundane attainments. 
Through joyous effort one gains worldly wealth one desires. 
Through joyous effort one becomes totally pure. 
Through joyous effort one is liberated  Passing beyond the tr ansitory collection. 
Through joyous effort one wake s to supreme enlightenment. 
2 How those endowed with joyous effort not only develop these qualities but also non-humans like them 
In the Compendium of the Perfections  it also says: 
For him who has great joyous effort and does not dismay, 
There’s nothing that can’t be attained, that can’t be accomplished.  
And: 
Also all non-humans like to benefit him. He achieves all manners of sam ādhi.
178 
He passes days and nights having results. 
He won’t decline because of his mass179 of good qualities, 
Through aims more noble than concerns of humans 
He will flourish like an utpala flower. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1D3B The disadvantages of not undertaking joyous effort 
The disadvantages of not undertaking joyous effort are described in the Sūtra Requested 
by Sāgaramati : 
For the lazy, enlightenment is very far and far in all ways. In the lazy, 
generosity through wisdom does not exist. For the lazy, the welfare of others does not exist. 
And 
Mindfulness of the Excellent Teaching  also says: 
The one foundation of  mental afflictions 
Is laziness, no matter in whom. 
He who has laziness by itself, 
Does not have qualities whatsoever. 
You should think like this. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1D3C How to actually generate joyous effort 
This has three points:  
1 Adverse conditions for joyous effort 
                                                 
178 Tib. ting (nge) ‘dzin , usually translated here as “meditative stabilization.” 
179 Tib. tshogs , usually translated here as “collection.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
189 2 Relying on favorable conditions for joyous effort 
3 How the body and the mind become serviceable through joyous effort  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1D3C-1 Adverse conditions for joyous effort 
There are two adverse circumstances for joyous effort:  
A Seeing that one is able to accomplish virtuous dharmas but not engaging in them 
B The discouragement that thinks: “How could I ever accomplish anything like that?” 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1D3C-1A Seeing that one  is able to accomplish virtuous dharmas 
but not engaging in them [229] 
This has two points: 
1 The actual topic 
One postpones things till later thinking “There is still time,” and if not that, one is 
overcome by attachment to bad activities. 
2 The antidotes 
The antidote to the first, the laziness of procra stination, is to meditate on the three: this 
body that you have ob tained quickly disintegrates, afte r death you will fall into the lower 
realms, and it will be difficult to find such a good support once ag ain. This was already 
taught before. 
The following considerations are the antidote to attachment to bad activities: the holy 
Dharma is the cause for the arising of boundle ss joy in this and futu re lives, meaningless 
idle chatter and the distractions of excitement and so forth degenerate the great aim in 
this life, and seeing that  it is the source that generates manifold suffering in future lives, 
it should be stopped. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1D3C-1B The second adverse condition: the discouragement that 
thinks: “How could I ever accomplish anything like that?” 
This has two points:  
1 The actual topic 
2 The antidotes 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1D3C-1B1 The actual topic 
Discouragement is also of three types: 
1. The discouragement that thinks: “Since the objects to be attained, the positive 
qualities of a buddha, are limitless, I cannot attain them.”  
2. The discouragement that thinks: “Since the method, giving away my arms, legs, 
and the like is immensely difficult, I cannot accomplish it.” 
3. The discouragement that thinks: “As for the place, since it is necessary to take 
infinite rebirths in cyclic existence, du ring that time I will be harmed by the 
sufferings of cyclic existence.” 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1D3C-1B2 The antidotes 
There are also three antidotes: 
A The antidote to discouragement with respect to the object of attainment 
The antidote to the first is the thought: “Even the buddhas did not already attain 
elevated paths right from the start. Rather, they were like me and became buddhas by 
going on to increasingly higher paths. Since the Bhagavan also said that even those who 
are greatly inferior to me will attain buddhahood, wh y should I not attain it too unless I 
do not make the effort?” 
B The antidote to discouragement with respect to the method 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
190 The antidote to the second is to think: “As long as the discrimination arises that it is 
difficult to give away my body and so forth, I will not give it away. However, when it is 
time to give it away, it will not be diff icult but will be like giving away cooked 
vegetables.” 
C The antidote to discouragement with respect the locale of accomplishment  
The antidote to the third [230] is to stop discouragement, thinking: “Due to the 
abandonment of negativities by a bodhisattva, their effects, suffering feelings, do not 
arise. Due to his stable realization that cyclic existence lacks inherent existence, like an illusion, there is no suffering in his mind. If he thrives due to physical and mental 
happiness even though he remains in cy clic existence, despair is useless.” 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1D3C-2 Relying on favorable conditions for joyous effort 
Relying on favorable conditions for joyous effort has four types: 
A The power of devotion 
The power of devotion is to meditate on causes and effects so as to aspire to discard and adopt. 
B The power of stability 
The power of stability is not to engage in anything haphazardly without investigating it, and, having investigated it, to engage in it and culminate it. 
C The power of joy  
The power of joy makes your undertaking of joyous effort uninterrupted and insatiable, 
like a child engaged in play. 
D The power of suspension 
The power of suspension is to rest when yo ur body and your mind are worn out due to 
your joyous effort. As soon as you have recovered, you start again. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1D3C-3 How the body and the mind become serviceable through joyous effort  
In this way, in dependence on stopping adverse conditions and relying on favorable 
conditions, you should undertake joyous effort until your body and your mind become 
light like a piece of cotton carried by the wind. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1D3D How joyous effort is made to possess the six perfections 
When you train in joyous effort, you should make it possess the six perfections. Abiding 
in joyous effort yourself and establishing others in it is the generosity of joyous effort. The remaining are as before. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1E How to train in concentration 
This has three points:  
1 The entity of concentration 
2 Its subdivisions  
3 How to generate concentration in one’s continuum 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1E1 The entity of concentration 
The entity of concentration is a mind that abides single-pointedly on any suitable virtuous 
object. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1E2 Its subdivisions  
In terms of its entity, there are the two: mundane and supramundane. In terms of class, there are the three: the class of calm abiding, the class of special insight, and the class t h a t  i s  a  u n i o n  o f  t h e  t w o .  W h e n  i t  i s  d i v i ded in terms of its functions, there is the 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
191 concentration that causes one to abide in physical and mental happiness in this life, the 
concentration that manifestly accomplishes positive qualities, and the concentration that 
brings about the welfare of sentient beings. 
A The concentration that causes one to abide in physical and mental happiness in this life 
This is [231] the concentration that generates physical and mental pliancy as one places 
the mind in meditative equipoise. 
B The concentration that manifestly accomplishes positive qualities 
This is a concentration that accomplishes the positive qualities shared with the hearers, 
such as the clairvoyances, complete liberations, totalities, and masteries.180 
C The concentration that brings about the welfare of sentient beings 
This is the concentration that accomplishes the welfares in eleven ways by means of 
concentration. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1E3 How to genera te concentration in one’s continuum 
The thoughts regarding the advantages of cu ltivating meditative concentration and the 
disadvantages of not cultivatin g it will be explained in th e chapter on calm abiding. 
The generosity of training in concentration po ssessing the six perfections is to abide in 
concentration oneself and establish others in it. The remaining are as before. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1F How to train in wisdom 
This has three points:  
1 The entity of wisdom 
2 Its subdivisions  
3 How to generate wisdom in one’s continuum 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1F1 The entity of wisdom 
In general wisdom is that which very thorough ly distinguishes the qualities in the thing 
that is being investigated. Here it is the wisdom that is skilled in the five sciences and so 
forth. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1F2 Its subdivisions  
There are three: the wisdom realizin g the ultimate, the wisdom realizing 
conventionalities, and the wisdom realizing the welfare of sentient beings.  
A The wisdom realizing the ultimate 
This is the wisdom examining the suchness th at is selflessness by means of a meaning 
generality and the wisdom examining the su chness that is selfle ssness by means of a 
direct perceiver. 
B The wisdom realizing conventionalities  
This is the wisdom that is skilled in the five sciences. 
C The wisdom realizing the welfare of sentient beings 
This consists in knowing how to accomplish , without misdeeds, the welfare of sentient 
beings in this and future lives.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1F3 How to generate wisdom in one’s continuum 
This has two points:  
                                                 
180 Terms for certain concentrations: “liberations” from atta chments of the various realms, control over colors and 
elements in the “totalities,” and over fo rms and other objects in the “masteries.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
192 A The advantages of generating wisdom 
B The disadvantages of not generating wisdom 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1F3A The advantages of generating wisdom 
This has five points:  
1 It is the root of all positive qualities 
In Hundred Verses on Wisdom (Prajñ āśataka)  it says: 
The root of all the positive qualities, 
The seen and the unseen, is wisdom. Thus, for the sake of accomplishing both, 
Wisdom should be fully embraced. 
2 The fact that a bodhisattva is not perturbed by good or bad conditions and that he is skilled in methods such 
as generosity and so forth depends on wisdom 
Although a bodhisattva gives his own flesh to  someone who asks him for it, [232] like 
taking a leaf from a medicinal plant it is no t done with the discursive thoughts of pride, 
discouragement, and so forth but is done from  a direct perception of suchness by means 
of wisdom. By means of the wisdom seeing the problems of existence and peace, he 
practices ethics for the welfare of others, thereby purifying his ethics. By means of the 
wisdom realizing the faults of impatience and the positive qualities of patience, his mind is subdued due to which he is not captivated by heretical practices and suffering. By 
means of wisdom, he understa nds the excellent basis that undertakes joyous effort and 
exerts himself in that, whereby there is gr eat progress on the path. By means of the 
wisdom relying on a process of reasoning, he  achieves the supreme joyful bliss of the 
concentration that abides on the meaning of suchness. In this way, the complete purity 
of the first five perfections, generosity, and so forth, depends on wisdom. 
3 One endowed with wisdom can accomplish without contradiction even those actions that appear 
contradictory to common beings 
Those endowed with wisdom can accomplish wi thout any contradiction two qualities that 
appear to be opposed. If a bodhisattva were  to become a universal monarch with power 
over the four continents, the fact that he does not come under the power of desirable 
objects is due to the force of the minister of wisdom. Likewise, although his love that 
sees sentient beings as attractive is very strong, it is not even slightly mixed with 
attachment. Although he has long-term in tense compassion that cannot bear the 
suffering of sentient beings, he is without the laziness that is oppressed by sorrow and 
does not delight in virtue. Although he possesses immeasurable joy, he is without the 
restlessness that distracts the mind from the observed object. Although he possesses great and continuous equanimity, he does not neglect the welfare of migrating beings 
even for an instant. He does those deeds out of wisdom because the equally strong 
obstacles to accomplishing them are ceased through wisdom.  
4 That the two truths are considered non-contradictory is also due to wisdom 
In Praise of the Praiseworthy  it says: 
Without discarding reality, [233] 
It also accords with conventionalities. 
Thus there is no need to discard reality, the great certainty one has gained that not even 
a mere particle of the reference object whose signs are being apprehended is 
established. That is non-contradictory and compatible with the fact that conventionalities are found through a profound ascertainment that individual effects arise from their 
individual inner and outer causes and co nditions. Although they are extremely 
contradictory for those without a sharp mind, for those possessing wisdom they are non-
contradictory and are compatible.  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
193 5 That permissions and prohibitions are non-contradictory also depends on wisdom 
In the same text it also says: 
Regarding permissions and prohibitions 
Some of your words are definite as one. 
Whereas others are not as definite, Still there is no contradiction between them. 
Thus there are many different permissions and prohibitions in the higher and lower 
vehicles and in s ūtra and tantra. For those seeking the intention of the infinite scriptures 
regarding the two being practiced by a single person, to those who do not have a sharp 
mind they are contradictory, whereas to the skilled they are not. This too is due to 
wisdom.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1F3B The disadvantages of not generating wisdom 
This has three points:  
1 The fault of being separated from wisdom 
2 Causes of wisdom and so forth 3 How wisdom is made to possess the six perfections 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1F3B-1 The fault of being separated from wisdom: the fault that, if wisdom is lacking, 
generosity and so forth will not become completely pure 
If they are separated from wisdom, the five —generosity and so fo rth—and the view will 
not be pure. In the Compendium of the Perfections  it says: 
In those who strive for results in the absence of wisdom, 
The nature of giving is not completely pure. 
To give others welfare is taught as “the best of gifts.” 
The rest are applications for increasing wealth. 
And: 
If wisdom’s light does not dispel the darkness, 
One will not come to possess pure ethics. 
Mostly, that discipline, due to the absence of wisdom, Will be disturbed by afflictions through flawed
181 understanding.  
And: 
Positive qualities of patience won’t stay in one’s mind 
If it’s disturbed by faults of distorted wisdom. Nor will fame in a king without positive qualities, 
Who hates to examine the excellent and the faulty. 
And [234]: 
It is extolled as sublime for the discerning. 
There is nothing more subtle and deep than it. 
Completely unobscured by the fault of attachment, The mind won’t take the stra ight path without wisdom. 
And: 
Those holding that wisdom’s way does not involve effort, 
Their view will not become completely pure.  
Fame in a king implies that for a king who lacks positive qualities fame may occur once, 
but it will degenerate and pass.  
                                                 
181 Tib. skyon , usually translated here as “fault(y).” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
194 2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1F3B-2 Causes of wisdom and so forth 
This has three points:  
A The importance of hearing as a cause of wisdom 
Therefore it is necessary to generate wisdom Its cause, hearing the completely pure 
scriptures in accordance with one’s mental capacity, is set out in the Compendium of the 
Perfections : 
Having heard little, blind, unable to meditate; 
What understanding would someone so lacking reflect on? Therefore, make effort in hearing. From that cause there’s thinking, 
While through meditation spacious wisdom arises. 
B The wisdom that abandons the two obscurations also depends on hearing 
Venerable Maitreya also wrote in his Sublime Continuum : 
Conceptualization of the three spheres 
We posit as knowledge obscurations, 
Conceptualization like miserliness As afflictive obscurations. 
Apart from wisdom there’s no cause 
That abandons them and therefore 
Wisdom is supreme. Accordingly 
Hearing for its sake is supreme. 
And in the
 Compendium of Trainings  it says: 
You should be patient. You should seek hearing. 
Then you should reside in a forest.  
Strive in equipoise meditation 
C The imprints of training in the instructions 
The holy beings of the past also said: First you should gather together the Dharma of 
hearing that exists in your mind. Then again and again you should think about it, 
appraise it, and investigate it. It does not help to make oneself forget the Dharma and 
train to simply hold the mind once. The highest teachings are suitable for excellent 
meditators, intermediate teachings are suit able for intermediate meditators. However 
much one meditates, to the same extent one’s knowledge of the Dharma should grow. 
[235] Once this certainty has grown firm th rough such considerations, you will not listen 
to the words of negative companions who say: “All virtuous and non-virtuous thoughts 
are to be abandoned because they are conceptions.” Rather, you will think: “The Dharma 
does not teach anything like that and my virtuous spiritual friend also does not assert that,” and you will not listen to  them. Lacking that, someone who has a little bit of faith 
but no wisdom will burst into tears when he  sees a crying face and will burst into 
laughter when he sees someone who is laughing. Considering true whatever people say, like a river he will go wherever he is lead. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1F3B-3 How wisdom is made to possess the six perfections 
When you train in wisdom, you should make it possess the six perfections. Abiding in the 
state of wisdom oneself and establishing othe rs in it is the generosity of wisdom. The 
remaining ones are as above. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-2 Training in the four means of gathering disciples that ripen 
the continua of others  
This has three points:  
A  The entity of the four means of gathering disciples  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
195 Generosity is the same as explained in th e context of the perfection of generosity. 
Pleasant speech is to teach the perfections to  disciples. Meaningful conduct is to make 
the disciples engage in the meanings that w e r e  t a u g h t  o r  t o  m a k e  t h e m  e n g a g e  i n  
adopting them correctly. To act in accordance with the meaning is to abide in whatever 
meaning one has brought othe rs into contact with and train in accordance with it. 
In Ornament for the Mah āyāna Sūtras it says: 
By that same giving, teaching it, making others 
Adopt it, and by engaging in it oneself, 
There is asserted to be pleasant speech, 
Meaningful conduct, and accord with the meaning. 
B The reason for the presentation of four means of gathering disciples 
Why are the means of gathering disciples definite as four? In order to gather a retinue for the sake of bringing them into contact with virtue, they first need to be joyful. In this 
regard, give them gifts of material things and attend to their bodies. Once they have become joyful in that way, in order for them to engage in the path, they first need to know how to do that. For that, moreover, explain the Dharma to them by speaking 
pleasantly, so that they give up unknowing and entertaining doubts, and make them 
engage in apprehending the meaning unmistakenly. When they understand that, you 
make them engage in accomplishing virtue through meaningful conduct. [236] 
Furthermore, if you do not accomplish that yourself but explain to others “You should 
engage like this. You should avoid like that,” they will say “Why do you tell others to 
accomplish it, if you do not accomplish it yo urself? You too still need to be corrected by 
others” and they will not listen to  what is to be a ccomplished. However, if you accomplish 
that yourself, they will also think: “Since he  himself abides in the virtue in which he 
guides me, there will definitely be benefit an d happiness for me if I accomplish it,” and 
they will newly engage in the path. Also, thos e who are already engaging in the path will 
not turn away from it and will grow firm. Th erefore you should act in accordance with the 
meaning. 
C The need to rely on the four means of gathering disciples 
Since the buddhas taught that the four means of gathering accomplish all the welfare of 
all disciples and that they are a good method , those who gather a retinue should rely on 
them:  
Those who gather a retinue  Should perfectly rely in this way 
Accomplishing all the welfare of everyone They are extolled as a good method. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1B  The summarized meaning 
The Great Elder taught how to accomplish them during meditative equipoise and 
subsequent attainment:  
As for bodhisattva conduct 
It is the vast six perf ections and so forth. 
The yogi arising from meditative equipoise 
Steadfast accomplishes the path of accumulation. 
In this way, the beginner bodhisattva who has taken the vows of the Victor’s children and 
abides on the path of accumulation never pa sses beyond the six perfections, whether in 
meditative equipoise or subsequent attainment. Therefore some of the six perfections are 
sustained in meditative equipoise and some in subsequent attainment. Some of the entity 
of concentration, calm abiding, and the entity of the perfection of wisdom, special 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
196 insight, are cultivated in medi tative equipoise. The first three perfections and some parts 
of concentration and wisdom are sustained in subsequent attainment. Joyous effort 
occurs in both meditative equipoise and subsequent attainment. One class of patience—
some minds ascertaining the profound Dharma —also occur during meditative equipoise.  
The Great Elder said: 
Whenever you rise from me ditative equipoise [237] 
Familiarize yourself with th e view of all phenomena 
As equal to the eight illustrations of illusions. 
Subsequently purify conceptions and give 
Priority to the training in method. 
At the time of meditative equipoise, Balance calm abiding with special insight; Familiarize yourself wit h this continuously. 
If you hear about such wonderful conduct, so hard to do due to the mind being 
untrained, it produces anguish in the mind. Although even bodhisattvas are unable to practice it right from the start, if you come to understand it and acquaint yourself with it 
down to it being an object to  be aspired for, later on you will come to naturally engage in 
it without depending on effort. That is why familiarization is  important, for if you see it as 
impossible to actually engage in them an d discard even familiarizing yourself with 
training in them, you will be extremely far from the completely pure paths.  
In 
Praise of Infinite Qualities  (Guṇāparyantastotra) it says: 
What causes harm in worldly beings if they only hear about it, 
What even you have never practiced over an extended time, 
Those practices will become natural through familiariz ation over time. 
Henceforth it is hard wit hout familiarity to increase positive qualities. 
Therefore it is inevit able for those who have taken bodhisattva vows to train in the 
conduct, and also those who have not taken the vow by means of a ritual should put 
effort into developing the wish to train in  it. Then, if they take the vows, having 
increased the strength of th eir delight in the training, the vows will be very stable. 
Therefore you should put effort into this. 
This concludes the explanation of training in the aspiring mind through the stages of the 
path of great beings and the stages of the path of training in the conduct of the Victors’ children in general. 
 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
197 CHAPTER 5 
Calm Abiding and Special Insight 
Explanation of how to train in the last two perfections in particular 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2 How to train in the last two perfections in particular 
This has two points: 
A Transition 
B The actual explanation 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2A Transition 
The training in the last two perfections in particular [238] consists in methods for 
cultivating calm abid ing and special insigh t because those two are included in the 
perfections of concentration and wisdom respectively. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B The actual explanation 
This has six points:  
1 The benefits of cultivating calm abiding and special insight 
2 Demonstration that the two—calm abiding and special insight—include all meditative stabilizations 
3 The entities of calm abiding and special insight 
4 The reason why both calm abiding and special insight need to be cultivated 
5 How the order of calm abiding and special insight is definite 
6 How to train in calm abiding and special insight individually 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-1 The benefits of cult ivating calm abiding and special insight 
This has five points:  
A Demonstration that all the positive qualities of the Mah āyāna and H īnayāna are results of calm abiding and 
special insight  
In the  Sūtra Unraveling the Intended Meaning  it is set forth that all the mundane and 
supramundane positive qualities of the Mah āyāna and H īnayāna are results of calm 
abiding and special insight. 
B Setting out a doubt about that 
You may wonder: “Aren’t calm abiding and spec ial insight positive qualities of the mind182 
that are gained from meditation? How can all those positive qualities be admissible as 
results of those two?” 
C The response to it 
Actual calm abiding and special insight are indeed positive qualities of the mind gained from meditation, as explained below. Therefore not all the positive qualities of the Mahāyāna and H īnayāna are results of the two. Nevertheless, all the meditative 
stabilizations starting from a single-pointed mind placed on a virtuous object are included 
in the class of calm abiding, and all the vi rtuous wisdom minds individually analyzing the 
meaning of the mode or varieties are included in the class of special insight. It is with 
that intended meaning that all the positive qu alities of the three vehicles are said to be 
results of calm abiding and special insight. Hence there is no contradiction.  
D How the benefits of abandoning what should be abandoned are tied to a scriptural passage from the Sūtra 
Unraveling the Intended Meaning   
In the Sūtra Unraveling the Intended Meaning  it also says: 
Having familiarized themselves 
                                                 
182 Tib. rgyud  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
198 With calm abiding and special insight, 
Beings will gain complete liberation 
From the bondage of bad states183 and signs. 
This is what is meant: “bad states” are latencies that remain in the mind, capable of 
generating more and more mistaken consciousnesses, while “signs” revive those latencies for the adherence to wrong objects arising time and time again. [239] 
Instructions on the 
Perfection of Wisdom  (Prajñāpāramitopade śa) explains that the former are abandoned 
through special insight and the latter through calm abiding. Those are the benefits of 
what are designated as calm abiding  and special insight . 
E The benefits thereby pointed out should also be understand as the benefits of the other two  
However, even if they are not designated as calm abiding  and special insight , the 
meaning is the same. Statements on the benefits of concentration and wisdom should be 
understood as the benefits of these two.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-2 Demonstration that the two—calm abiding and special 
insight—include all meditative stabilizations 
In the Sūtra Unraveling the Intended Meaning  it says that all the limitless meditative 
stabilizations proclaimed in the Mah āyāna and the H īnayāna are nevertheless subsumed 
under calm abiding and special insight. Therefore, since those who strive for meditative 
stabilization cannot investigate all its limitless manifestations, they should thoroughly 
investigate how to sustain the epitome of a ll meditative stabilizations—calm abiding and 
special insight.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-3 The entities of  calm abiding and special insight 
This has two points:  
A The entity of calm abiding 
B Explaining the entity special insight 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-3A The entity of calm abiding 
This has two points:  
1 Stating a source 
The entity of calm abid ing is set forth in the Sūtra Unraveling the Intended Meaning :  
Dwelling alone in solitude, he directs the mind inwardand attends to those very 
phenomena, just as he ha s thoroughly reflected on them. He attends to them 
with the mind directed inward continuously and attentively. The states he thus 
enters and abides in many times in which physical and mental pliancy arise are 
called calm abiding . 
2 The meaning of this statement 
The meaning of this is that if the mind, having attended to it continuously without distraction, stays on the object by itself so that the joyful bliss of physical and mental 
pliancy arises, that meditative stabilizatio n becomes calm abiding. This will arise from 
merely keeping the mind inward undistracted ; it does not depend on internalizing the 
suchness of things.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-3B Explaining the entity of special insight 
This has six points:  
1 Stating a source 
The entity of special insight is set forth in the same s ūtra: 
                                                 
183 Tib. gnas ngan len gyi ‘ching ba , literally “from the bonds of taking on bad states.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
199 Having achieved physical pliancy and mental pliancy, he abidesin them, 
abandons the aspects of the mind, and [ 240] devotes himself to the individual 
investigation of the images within, the objects of meditative stabilization, the 
very phenomena he has likewise reflected on. Thus, with regard to the images that are the objects of meditative stabilization, any thorough differentiation of 
the meaning of those objects of kn owledge, any exceedingly thorough 
differentiation, full investigation, full analysis, tolerance, acceptance, 
classification, viewing, and conceptualization, is called 
special insight . In that 
way the bodhisattva is skilled in special insight. 
2 Elucidating the meaning of the s ūtra passage 
Here, “thorough differentiation” is a differentiation of the varieties and “exceedingly 
thorough differentiation” is a differentiation of the mode. “Investigation” is a coarse 
investigation and “analysis” is a subtle analysis.  
3 How statements from other s ūtras and commentaries accord with the  Sūtra Unraveling the Intended Meaning   
In the Cloud of Jewels of S ūtra it says: 
Calm abiding is one-pointed mind, 
Special insight is investigation.184 
Venerable Maitreya also says: 
Restraint to the concepts of dharmas should also be Known as the path of calm abiding; 
Full analysis of their meanings 
As the path of special insight. 
And: 
Depending on correct abiding, What serves to place the mind on mind  And to differentiate dharmas 
Are calm abiding and special insight. 
In dependence on correct medi tative stabilization, placing th e mind is said to be calm 
abiding, and the wisdom differentiating dharmas exceedingly thoroughly is said to be 
special insight. In 
Bodhisattva Levels  i t  i s  s e t  f o r t h  j u s t  l i k e  t h a t  a n d  i n  Stages of 
Meditation II  it also says: 
The abidance within the mind itself,185 in which distraction toward external 
objects has calmed down, and the mind gets continuously and naturally 
involved in its internal object with joy and pliancy, is called “calm abiding.” 
That which thoroughly analyzes suchness at the time of abiding in that very 
state of calm abiding is special insight.  
Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom  explains this in the same way. 
4 Therefore calm abiding and special insight are not distinguished by way of the observed object [241] 
So according to Bodhisattva Levels  and Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom , each of 
them, calm abiding and special insight, can have both the mode and the varieties as its 
object. Therefore calm abiding and special insight are not differentiated by way of their 
objects. There is calm abiding that realizes emptiness, and there is  also special insight 
that does not realize emptiness. In fact it is because the rush to external objects has 
calmed down and the mind is abiding on in ternal objects that something is called calm 
                                                 
184 Tib. so sor rtog pa , usually translated here as “individual investigation.” 
185 The term sems nyid , “mind itself” is often used synonymously with “nature of the mind.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
200 abiding , and it is because of a spec ial, that is, distinguished, insight that something is 
called special insight .  
5 How it is inappropriate to distinguish calm abiding and special insight based on whether or not the clarity 
factor of the consciousness is intense  
The assertion by some that the mind abiding non-conceptually without an intense clarity 
factor is calm abiding, whereas that with an intense clarity factor is special insight, is 
inappropriate because it contradicts everything explained earlier, and because this 
distinction is merely a distinction between a meditative stabilization with and without 
laxity. This is also because, to be sure, every meditative stabilization of calm abiding also 
needs to be purified of laxity, and in every meditative stabilizat ion that is free from laxity, 
the clarity factor of the mi nd will definitely arise.186  
6 The need to differentiate between the realization of emptiness and blissful lucid non-conceptuality 
Thus it is necessary to identi fy whether or not a mind is a meditative stabilization that 
observes emptiness, a wisdom consciousness, on the basis of whether or not that mind 
realizes either of the two selflessnesses because there are countless non-conceptual 
meditative stabilizations of bliss and clarity in which the mind is not directed at the 
suchness187 of an object. Since direct perception establishes that the mind can be held 
like that in a non-conceptual state even though the view realizing the mode of being has 
not been found, there is not even the slightest contradiction in the arising of non-
conceptual meditative stabilizations that do not understand emptiness. From that point of 
view, if the mind is held for a long time, through the power of the mind being held, a workability of vital energies will arise. [242] Since it is natural for joyful bliss to arise in 
the body and the mind when that has arisen, it is not contradictory for bliss to arise. 
Once that has arisen, through the power of one’ s vivid sensation of joyful bliss, the factor 
of clarity arises. Therefore it cannot be posited that all blissful, clear, non-conceptual 
meditative stabilizations realize suchness. Consequently, since bliss, clarity, and non-
conceptuality arise in meditative stabilizations that realize emptiness, and since there are 
also many meditative stabilizations in which the mind is not directed at emptiness yet bliss, clarity, and non-conceptu ality still occur, it is necessa ry to distinguish between the 
two.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-4 The reason why both calm abiding and special insight need to 
be cultivated  
This has four points:  
A Illustration 
Why is it not enough to cultivate either calm abiding or special insight? Why is it 
necessary to cultivate both?  
To illustrate this: when you light a butter lamp at night in order to lo ok at murals, if the 
butter lamp is both very bright and does no t flicker due to wind, you will see the painted 
figures very clearly. However, if the butter la mp is not bright or if—even though bright—it 
flickers in the wind, you will not see the forms clearly.  
B Explaining the meaning  
Likewise, with respect to vie wing the profound meaning, if you have both the wisdom 
unmistakenly ascertaining the meaning of suchness and the imperturbability of a mind 
that stays on its object at will, you will see su chness clearly. However,  if you do not have 
the wisdom realizing the mode of being, despite your non-conceptual meditative 
stabilization in which your mind remains unscattered, you will not be able to realize the 
                                                 
186 Tib. ‘ong ba  
187 Synonym for emptiness . 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
201 mode of being, however much you familiarize yourself with meditative stabilization. On 
the other hand, if you have the view that understands selflessness but lack the firm 
meditative stabilization in which the mind remains single-pointed, you will not be able to 
clearly see the meaning of the mode of being. Therefore both calm abiding and special insight are necessary. 
C Relating this to scriptural passages 
In Stages of Meditation II  it says:  
With special insight alone, divorced fr om calm abiding, the yogi’s mind is 
distracted to other objects, and [243] li ke a butter lamp in the wind it will not 
become stable. This being so, the ligh t of wisdom will not shine forth very 
bright, which is why you should rely on both alike. 
And: 
Through the power of calm abiding the mi nd will not be moved by the winds of 
conceptualization—like a butter lamp placed away from the wind. Through 
special insight you abandon the snares of all inferior views so that others188 do 
not affect you anymore. It is like it has been set forth in the Moon Lamp S ūtra:  
“Through calm abiding’s power you’ll be immovable; 
Through special insight you’ll be like a mountain.” 
If you investigate with wisdom that is thus conjoined with the meditative equipoise of 
calm abiding, without unevenness due to laxity and excitement of the mind, you will 
know the meaning of reality. With that intention it says in the Compendium of the 
Teachings : 
When your mind is in meditative equi poise, you will know reality as it is. 
From Stages of Meditation I : 
Since the mind is unsteady like water, there is no abiding without the basis of 
calm abiding. A mind that is not in meditative equipoise cannot know reality as 
it is. The Bhagavan also said: “Reality is fully known as it is by a mind in 
meditative equipoise.”  
D How doing something virtuous has great power once calm abiding has been accomplished 
When you accomplish calm abiding, not only does it counteract the fault of your wisdom 
consciousness wandering off while correctly investigating selflessness. The fault of 
distraction to other objects stops for all analytical meditations that you do with the 
wisdom of individual investigation: on im permanence, actions and their effects, the 
disadvantages of cyclic existence, love, compassion, training in the mind of 
enlightenment, and so forth. Then, since you get involved in each individual object, whatever it may be, without being distracted to something else, everything virtuous you do is very powerful. As long as you have no t obtained calm abiding, due to predominant 
distraction to other objects [2 44] any virtuous practice you do will be weak. It is as it 
says in 
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Conduct :  
A person whose mind is being distracted 
Is in the fangs of mental afflictions. 
And: 
The Seer taught that recitation, 
Ascetic practices, and so forth, 
                                                 
188 Tib. gzhan dag , this could also be rendered as “other things.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
202 Even if engaged in long, are 
Pointless with a distracted mind. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-5 How the order of calm abiding and special insight is definite 
This has three points:  
A The actual order 
B Explanation of how calm abiding is a precondition for special insight C Setting out and responding to an objection 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-5A The actual order 
In Engaging in the Bodhisattva Conduct  it says: 
Having understood that special insight 
Conjoined with calm abiding destroys the afflictions, 
First seek calm abiding … 
Thus you first accomplish calm abiding and then cultivate special insight based on it.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-5B Explanation of how calm abiding is a precondition for special insight 
This has two points:  
1 Setting out an objection 
2 The response to it 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-5B1 Setting out an objection: If you meditate observing emptiness from the beginning, since 
you have reality as the observed object of calm abiding, calm abiding and special insight will arise 
simultaneously so that the two do not need to be sequential  
With regard to that you may wonder: In Stages of Meditation I , “Its object of observation 
is indefinite” the observed object of calm abiding is said to be indefinite, and as 
explained previously, both phenomena and reality are among the objects of calm abiding. Therefore it should actually be all right to understand the meaning of selflessness and 
then simultaneously generate both calm abiding, a meditation observing that 
understanding due to which the mind does not get distracted, and special insight 
observing emptiness. Why first seek calm ab iding and then cultivate special insight? 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-5B2 The response to it 
This has three points:  
A For an understanding of emptiness and a mere experience of mental transformation to arise, prior calm 
abiding is not necessary  
Now, this is the manner in which calm abiding precedes spec ial insight: For an 
understanding of the view realizing selflessn ess to arise, prior calm abiding is not 
necessary because the view is also seen to arise in the absence of calm abiding. For an 
experience of mental transformation concerning that view to arise, prior calm abiding is 
not necessary either because even without calm abiding there is nothing contradictory in anexperience of mental transformation arising through familiarization with repeated analysis by means of individual investigation. [245] If it were contradictory, it would 
absurdly follow from the same reason that the experience of mental transformation 
arising with respect to imperman ence, the faults of cyclic existence, or the training in the 
mind of enlightenment also depends on calm abiding.  
B The manner in which calm abiding needs to precede special insight 
The manner in which calm abiding needs to precede special insight: What, then, is the 
manner in which calm abiding precedes special insight? Here the context for the 
generation of special insight is that of ordinary beings without a previous realization 
arisen from meditation who newly generate it. In this regard, there is a method of 
meditation on selflessness wi th a special consciousness that realizes emptiness. Its 
peculiarities will be explained below. Apar t from that, in the context of the P āramitāyāna 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
203 and the three lower classes of tantra, analytical meditation is necessary because special 
insight, which is a realization born from meditation, does not arise unless you have 
examined the meaning of selflessness by means of individual investigation and then 
engaged in analytical meditation sustaini ng it. If you seek an understanding of 
selflessness and repeatedly ana lyze its meaning before accomplishing calm abiding, it will 
be impossible to accomplish calm abiding in dependence on that because calm abiding 
has not been accomplished. If  you perform non-analytical stabilizing medi tation, even 
though you accomplish calm abiding in depend ence on it, this will only be a method for 
sustaining calm abiding, and you will not ha ve a method for sustaining special insight 
apart from that. Therefore you must seek special insight afterwards. That is why you do 
not deviate from the order of seeking calm abiding first and then cultivating special insight in dependence on it. So if this system did not understand the method for generating special insight to be the generation of pliancy by means of the analytical 
meditation of individual investigation, there would be no good reason to seek calm 
abiding first and then meditate on special insight in dependence on it
189.  
C How it contradicts the texts of the great trailblazers to assert an order other than this  
It is completely inadmissible not to meditate in accordance with that order. As mentioned 
earlier it says in the Sūtra Unraveling the Intended Meaning  that you cultivate special 
insight in dependence on the a ttainment of calm abiding. [ 246] This is because the order 
of the concentration and wisdom forming part  of the six perfections—“In dependence on 
the former the latter arises”—and the order of the higher training in meditative 
stabilization in dependen ce on which the higher training in wisdom arises is an order in 
which you first cultivate calm abiding be fore special insight is cultivated. In Bodhisattva 
Levels  and Śrāvaka Levels ( Śravakabh ūmi) it also says that special insight is cultivated in 
dependence on calm abiding. Essence of the Middle Way , Engaging in the Bodhisattva 
Conduct , and the three volume Stages of Meditation , as well as Jñ ānakīrti and Śāntipa, 
set forth that you seek calm abiding and then cultivate special insight. Therefore the 
assertions of some Indian masters that without seeking calm abiding separately, you generate special insight from the beginning out of an analysis with the wisdom of individual investigation, are in contradict ion to the texts of the great trailblazers. 
Therefore it is inappropriate for the intelligent to rely on them.  
The order of calm abiding and special insight is like that when yo u newly generate them. 
Later on the order is undefined, for having cu ltivated special insigh t, you still cultivate 
calm abiding. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-5C Setting out and responding to an objection  
This has two points:  
1 The objection that there is a contradiction to scripture in this 
But then, how is it that the Compendium of Knowledge  says:  
Some have attained special insight but have not attained calm abiding. They 
strive for calm abiding in dependence on special insight. 
2 The response that abandons the fault pointing out the need to distinguish between the actual level and the 
calm abiding included in the preparatory stage 
This does not refer to those who have failed to attain the calm abiding included in the 
preparatory stage of the first concentration but to those who have failed to attain the 
calm abiding of the actual level of the first concentration and above. Upon direct 
                                                 
189 The implication here is that analytical meditation generate s a level of pliancy exceeding th at of calm abiding, which, 
however, does not come about without the latter. Cf . Wallace 1998: 125 as well as Thurman 1993: 114 and 235. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
204 realization of the four truths, calm abiding of the first concentration and above are in fact 
attained in dependence  on that because in Actuality of the Stages  it says:  
Furthermore, someone who has fully understood suffering and so on up to the 
path as they really are and who has not attained the first concentration and so 
forth [247] places the mind and does not perform any thorough differentiation a s  s o o n  a s  h e  a t t a i n s  i t .  I n  d e p e n d e n c e  o n  j u s t  t h a t  s u p e r i o r  w i s d o m  h e  
applies himself to a superior state of mind. 
I n  g e n e r a l ,  t o  p u t  i t  s i m p l y ,  n i n e  m i n d s  m a y  b e  c a l l e d  c a l m  a b i d i n g  a n d  f o u r  
investigations,
190 thorough investigation and so forth, may be called special insight. 
However, actual calm abiding and special insight, as explained here, must be posited 
after pliancy has arisen.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6 How to train in calm  abiding and special insight individually 
This has three points:  
A How to train in calm abiding 
B How to train in special insight  
C How the two, calm abiding and special insight, unite 
Explanation of how to train in calm abiding, the entity of concentration 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A How to train in calm abiding 
This has three points:  
1 Attending to the prerequ isites of calm abiding 
2 How to cultivate calm abiding in dependence on the prerequisites 3 The measure for the accomplishment of calm abiding through meditation 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A1 Attending to the prerequisites of calm abiding 
This has six points: 
A To stay in a favorable place  
As regards staying in a favorable place, the five positive qualities of a place are: easy 
access191 to food, clothing, and so forth, in that they can be obtained without trouble; a 
good location in that predators and other wild beasts as well as enemies and the like do 
not live there; good ground in that it does not produce diseases; good company in that one has companions of equal ethics and views; and being well endowed in that during 
the day there are few people around and at night there is little noise. In 
Ornament for 
the Mah āyāna Sūtras it says: 
A place for intelligent people’s attainments 
Has good access, a good location,  
Good ground as well as good companions, 
And conveniences192 for yoga. 
B Few desires 
Few desires is to not be excessively attached to good or numerous robes and so forth.  
C Contentment 
Contentment is to always be content with merely adequate robes and the like. 
                                                 
190 Investigation of phenomena from the point of view of th eir nature, their performance of functions, dependence, and 
logical establishment. 
191 Tib. rnyed pa , usually translated here as “find” or “obtain.” 
192 Tib. bde ba’i yo byad  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
205 D To completely abandon many activities [248] 
To completely abandon many activities is to completely abandon inferior activities such as 
business, excessive association with lay or ordained people, as well as one’s medical 
practice, astrological calculations, and so forth. 
E Pure ethics 
Pure ethics with regard to pratimok ṣa and bodhisattva vows is to not tear down the basis 
of the trainings through natural or formulated misdeeds, and even if it is torn due to non-
conscientiousness, to restore it quickly throug h regret in accordance with the teachings.  
F To completely abandon discursive thoughts of desire 
To completely abandon discursive thoughts of desire and the like: you should abandon all 
discursive thoughts of desire by meditating on  their disadvantages for this life, such as 
being killed or arrested, and for future lives such as going to the lower realms. Or you 
should meditate thinking “All the pleasant and unpleasant things of cyclic existence are 
impermanent and subject to destruction. If I will certainly be separa ted from all of them 
before long, why do I get overly attached and so on?” In Lamp for the Path to 
Enlightenment  it says:  
Even if you exert yourself greatly, 
Even for a thousand years, if 
Calm abiding’s limbs193 areimpaired, 
Stabilization194 will not be accomplished. 
For those with the heartfelt wish to accomplish the meditative stabilization of calm 
abiding and special insight, it is therefore essential to put effort into the thirteen 
prerequisites and the like set forth in Śrāvaka Levels .  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2 How to cultivate calm abiding in dependence on the 
prerequisites 
This has two points:  
A The preparation 
B The actual practice 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2A The preparation 
You should long cultivate the six preparatory practices explained earlier as well as the 
mind of enlightenment and, as part of that , also train in the core meditation topics 
shared with lesser and intermediate beings.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B The actual practice 
This has two points:  
1 What body posture to meditate in  
2 Explanation of the stages of meditation themselves 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-1 What  body posture to meditate in 
As it says in Stages of Meditation , you should sit on a very soft and comfortable seat and 
adopt [249] a body posture with eight characteristics: The legs may be fully crossed or 
half-crossed, so you should do that. The eyes are directed over the tip of the nose, 
neither too open nor too closed. You should si t with your body straig htened up and erect 
rather than too bent or crooked, and with your mindfulness placed inward. Your 
shoulders should be straight and even. The head is held not too high nor too low and 
                                                 
193 Tib. yan lag  is usually translated as here as “limb,” but it can al so be translated as “prerequisite,” like the word Tib. 
tshogs  in the following sentence. 
194 Tib. ting nge ‘dzin , usually translated here as “meditative stabilization.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
206 without tilting to one side; you should keep yourself erect from the nose down to the 
navel. The teeth and lips should remain natural, just as they are. The tongue should be 
placed near the upper teeth. As for the breath, your exhalations and inhalations should 
not be audible, forceful, or uncontrolled. Rather, their coming and going should by all means proceed imperceptibly, leisurely, andeffortlessly. That is the way to do it. Thus 
you should first accomplish the body posture with the eight and especially gentle 
breathing as explained.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2 Explanation of the stages of meditation themselves 
This has two points:  
A Transition 
B The actual explanation 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2A Transition 
In most expositions of the stages of the path  it says that calm ab iding is accomplished by 
way of the eight factors195 set forth in Separation of the Middle from the Extremes  
(Madhyāntavibhāga) that abandon the five faults. The instructions from Geshe Lagsorwa’s 
lineage explain that on top of that, the six powers, the four attentions, and the nine 
minds explained in Śrāvaka Levels  n e e d  t o  b e  a c c o m p l i s h e d .  I n  h i s  Ornament for the 
Mahāyāna Sūtras and Separation of the Middle from the Extremes  the venerable Maitreya 
also sets forth the nine methods for mental  abidingand the eight factors for abandoning 
the faults. Following them, Indian sc holars such as Haribhadra, Kamala śīla, and Śāntipa 
also set forth many stages of accomplishing meditative stabilization. In the Mantray āna 
you also need to know them. In particular, faults196 of meditative stabilization such as the 
five faults197 and the way to eliminate them are presented extensively in scriptures from 
the collection of s ūtras.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B The actual explanation 
This has two points [250]:  
1 How to generate flawless meditative stabilization 
2 The stages of quiescence that arise in dependence on it  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1 How to generate flawless meditative stabilization 
This has three points:  
A What to do before focusing the mind on the object  B What to do while focusing the mind on the object 
C What to do after focusing the mind on the object  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1A What to do before focusing the mind on the object 
This has four points:  
1 The need to rely on antidotes to laziness at the outset  
If you cannot put an end to laziness which does not delight in cultivating meditative 
stabilization but rather enjoys the opposi te, it will prevent yo u from engaging in 
meditative stabilization all alon g, and even if you achieve it  once, it will not possibly be 
persistent and therefore deteriorate quickly. Fo r this reason it is of great importance to 
put an end to laziness at the outset.  
2 Individual explanation of the four antidotes 
Now if you achieve the pliancy in which your body and mind expand with bliss, you will 
not become weary, day or night, in applying  yourself to virtue, whereby laziness will be 
                                                 
195 Tib. ‘du byed brgyad , i.e. “the eight antidotes.” 
196 Tib. skyon  
197 Tib. nyes 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
207 stopped. To generate it, you must be able continuously to maintain joyous effort for 
meditative stabilization, the cause for generating pliancy. To generate that, you need the 
intense, sustained aspiration of striving for meditative stabilization. As a cause of that, 
the firm faith of strong fascination due to seeing the positive qualities of meditative stabilization is necessary. Ther efore you should repeatedly cultivate the faith of reflecting 
on the positive qualities of meditative stabilization. 
3 The scriptural source for this  
In Separation of the Middle from the Extremes  it says: 
The basis and that which is based on it, 
The cause and the effect itself. 
Here the  basis  is aspiration, the basis of endeavor. That which is based on it  is endeavor 
or joyous effort. The  cause  of aspiration is the faith of conviction with regard to the 
positive qualities. The  effect  of endeavor is pliancy.  
4 How to reflect on the positive qualities of meditative stabilization   
The positive qualities of the meditative stabiliz ation to be cultivated here are as follows. 
Once meditative stabilization has been acco mplished, mental happ iness and physical 
comfort greatly increase, so that you stay happy in this lifetime. Due to the acquisition of 
physical and mental pliancy, the mind is fit to make use of any virtuous object at will. 
Since uncontrolled distraction [251] toward mistaken objects has subsided, faulty conduct 
does not occur much while whatever virtue you do has great strength. In dependence on 
calm abiding, positive qualities such as cl airvoyance and miraculous powers can also be 
achieved, and in particular, the realization of special insight that realizes emptiness arises 
in dependence on it so that the root of cyclic existence can be cut quickly. If you consider 
any of these and other positive qualities, th e power of your enthus iasm forcultivating 
meditative stabilization will increase. You sh ould get to know them and meditate on 
them. Once this has arisen, it will constant ly urge you, from within, to cultivate 
meditative stabilization so that you will easily  attain it, and, upon its attainment, since 
you engage in the medita tion again and again, it will be very  difficult for it to degenerate.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1B What to do while focusing the mind on the object 
This has two points:  
1 Identifying the basis which the mind is placed on, the object  
2 How to direct the mind toward it 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1B-1 Identifying the basis which the mind is placed on, 
the object  
This has two points:  
A General presentation of objects 
B Identification of objects for given situations 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1B-1A General presentation of objects 
This has two points:  
1 Indication of the actual objects 2 Indication of what person should make what his object 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1B-1A1 Indication of the actual objects 
This has two points:  
A Identifying the divisions of objects  
As regards the four objects for yogis taught by the Bhagavan, the pervasive objects are 
four in number: the ones on which you place the mind without analyzing and objects of 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
208 analysis, which makes two, the limits of phenomena—the mode and the varieties—and 
the accomplishment of a purpose—achieving transformation through meditation by means 
of the previous two meditation methods that observe the meaning of the mode and the 
varieties.  
As regards objects for purifying one’s conduc t, there are five meditation objects that 
serve as antidotes to one’s predominant conduct in previous lives—attachment, hatred, 
delusion, pride, and discursive thought: respectively, the repulsive, love, 
interdependence, the divisions of the elements, as well as one’s respiration.  
The objects for the skillful are also five in number: objects of skill with regard to the 
aggregates, elements, sense fields, the twelve links of interdependence, [252] as well as 
the established and the unestablished. 
The objects for purifying mental afflictions are two: the peaceful and coarse states of the 
higher and lower levels and the sixteen aspects of the four truths, impermanence and so 
forth.  
B How these individually serve a special purpose 
In this regard, the objects for purifying one’ s conduct are special in  that the attachment 
and so forth of those who act with attachment and so forth more than usual is easily 
stopped and meditative stabilization is easily achieved in dependence on them.  
The objects for the skillful are good objects for calm abiding because they negate a self 
of persons apart from those phenomena and therefore correspond with the arising of 
special insight which realizes selflessness.  
Meditation objects for purifying mental afflictions are of great significance in that they 
become general antidotes to  mental afflictions.  
There are no pervasive objects ap art from the preceding objects. 
Therefore meditative stabilization should be accomplished in dependence on the 
meditation objects of calm abiding with their special pu rposes. Those who practice 
meditative stabilization in dependence on pebbles, pieces of wood, and the like clearly do 
not know the presentation of objects of meditative stabilization.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1B-1A2 Indicatio n of what person should make what his 
object 
This has two points:  
A How what person should make what his mediation object  
In accordance with what is set forth in the Sūtra Requested by Revata , it is taught that 
persons ranging from those in whom attachment predominates to those in whom 
discursive thought predominates should rely on the individual objects specified, ranging 
from the repulsive to one’s respiration, re spectively. Those with balanced conduct and 
those with slight mental afflictions may concentrate on any one object they are happy 
with; they do not need a certain one.  
B Differences between predominant and slight attachment and so forth 
In this regard, predominance of one of the five mental af flictions, attachment and so 
forth, means that through habituation to attachment and so forth in previous lives, long-
term attachment and so forth arise for a long time toward small objects of attachment 
and so forth. [253] Those with balanced conduct have not got habituated to attachment and so forth in previous lives but they do not see them as disadvantageous. Therefore, 
even though predominant, long-term attachment and so forth do not arise toward their 
respective objects, it is not that they do not occur at all. Those with slight mental 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
209 afflictions have not got habituated to attachment and so forth in previous lives, and due 
to the fact that, among other things, they see them as disadvantageous, attachment and 
so forth only arise slowly toward many major objects of attachment and so forth. Toward 
medium and small objects they do not ar ise. Moreover, those with predominant 
attachment or another one of the five take long to accomplish quiescence, those with 
balanced behavior not that long, and those with slight mental afflictions accomplish it 
quickly. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1B-1B Identifi cation of objects for given situations 
This has eight points:  
1 General explanation 
In dependence on which object is calm abiding accomplished here? In general, the meditation objects for individuals
198 are just as explained above. In particular, it is 
important that those with predominant discur sive thought meditate on the breath.  
2 Numerous texts set forth ho w to accomplish meditative stabilization observing the Tath āgata’s body  
Furthermore Stages of Meditation II and III follow the Sūtra on the Concentration Which 
Perceives the Buddha of the Present Face to Face 
(Pratyutpannabuddhasa ṃmukhāvasthitasam ādhisūtra) and the King of Meditative 
Stabilizations S ūtra in teaching the accomplishment of meditative stabilization observing 
the Tath āgata’s body. The Commentary on the Difficult Points of the “Lamp for the Path”  
also quotes statements by Master Bodhibhadra that meditative stabilization is achieved 
observing the Tath āgata’s body.  
3 How it has a great purposeto make it the basis of one’s observation accordingly 
As for concentration on the Buddha’s body, limitless merit arises through remembering the Buddha. If your image of that body is clear and stable, it makes a great difference to your visualization of the field for accumulating merit through prostrations, offerings, 
prayers, and so forth, as well as the field for purifying obscurations through confession, 
restraint, and so forth. [254] The positive qu ality that your recoll ection of the Buddha 
does not deteriorate at the time of death, the great difference it makes to deity yoga 
when you cultivate the path of mantra, and so forth show that it has a great purpose.  
4 How to make what bodily form one’s object  
In the King of Meditative Stabilizations S ūtra it says:  
With his body just like the color of gold The Lord of the World is excessively beautiful. 
The bodhisattva whose mind is involved in this object Is said to be in equipoise meditation. 
You should make something like  that your basis of observation. Moreover, between the 
two types of visualization, one in which the object is freshly created by the mind and one 
in which the object is naturally present, the latter has the great distinction of generating 
faith
199 and accords with teachings200 shared among the vehicl es. Therefore you should 
proceed in the latter way.  
5 How to research the basis of observation 
                                                 
198 Tib. gang zag so so , literally “individual persons.” 
199 Tib. dad pa skye ba , literally “faith arising.” 
200 Tib. skabs  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
210 As you research the basis201 of observation, the basis202 for the mind to focus on, you 
should first find a good painted image, statue, or the like of the Teacher’s body, look at it 
again and again and, having captured the features, familiarize yourself with its 
appearance as an object of the mind. Or else you should reflect on the meaning of a description by some spiritual master that you have heard, make it appear to your mind, 
and pursue your basis of observation. However, rather than making the basis of 
observation appear like a painted image, statue, or something like that, you should train 
for it to appear in the aspect of the actual Buddha.  
6 It is inadmissible to practice medita tive stabilization, looking at the ba sis of observation with one’s eyes 
It makes perfect sense that Master Yeshé Dé refutes the practice of some people who set 
up an image in front of them, l ook at it with the eyes, and meditate by staring at it. This 
is because meditative stabili zation is not accomplished in a sense consciousness but 
rather in the mental consciousness, so the ac tual object of meditative stabilization is a 
direct object of the mental co nsciousness, which is why you must focus on that. Also, in 
accordance with what was explained earlier, it is taught that you must observe the 
meaning generality of the actual observed  object or its image that appears.  
7 The need to determine just one object in the beginning  
Elsewhere it says that although part of the image is detailed and part of it is rough, you 
should first observe the rough part and afte rwards, when your meditation on that has 
stabilized, observe the details. [255] According to experience, the rough features appear 
very easily, so you shou ld work on the basis of observation from the rough outline of its 
image. In particular, when you practice, as long as you have not accomplished fully 
qualified meditative stabilization, it is inappropriate to move between many different 
types of objects. This is because, if you pr actice meditative stabilization while moving 
between many dissimilar objects, it will beco me a great obstacle to your accomplishment 
of calm abiding. Āryaśūra says: 
By stabilizing on one object 
Stabilize the thoughts of the mind. By going through a lot of objects The mind is disturbed by mental afflictions. 
And 
Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment  also says it with the determiner “on any one:” 
On any one object that is suitable— 
Place the mind on something virtuous.  
8 The measure for getting the basis of observation and, having got it, the need to focus on that very object  
That being so, the measure for first getting the basis of observation that the mind focuses on is this: When you visualize the head, two arms, torso, and two legs 
successively a couple of times and attend to the whole body at the end of that, then, if 
you are able to see merely half the limbs and parts appear to the mind, you should be 
satisfied with that and focus on it even if ther e is no brilliant clarity. That is because if 
you are not satisfied with that alone and do no t focus on it but rather want more clarity 
and repeatedly visualize, the ob ject will become clearer, however, not only will you fail to 
acquire stable meditative stabilization, this will  become an obstacle to its acquisition. But 
even though the object is not very clear, if you focus on just that mere partial object, you 
will acquire meditative stabilization quickly. Th en, due to its benefit for clarity, the clarity 
aspect will also be accomplished easily. This appears in Master Yeshé Dé’s advice and is 
essential.  
                                                 
201 Tib. rten 
202 Tib. gzhi 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
211 Now [256] you should focus on the whole body to the best of your abilities, and if some 
parts of the body appear clearly, you should focus on those. If they become unclear 
again, you should focus on the whole again.  
At that time, if a color, shape, number, or size appears that was not ascertained earlier—
for example203 you want to meditate on something yellow and something red appears, you 
want to meditate on a sitting figure and a standing one appears, you want to meditate on 
one and two appear, or you want to meditate on something big and something small 
appears—it is inappropriate to pursue the m; so you should only make your original 
object, whatever it is, th e basis of observation. 
In the context of practicing the deity yoga of secret mantra, you must achieve a clear 
appearance of the deity, so until that appears,  you should try to generate it by various 
means. However, here, if it is difficult and the deity’s as pect does not appear, you may 
also accomplish meditative stabilization by pl acing the mind and focusing on any one of 
the objects presented above that is suitable or  within the view ascertaining suchness; for 
the main purpose is to a ccomplish calm abiding.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1B-2 How to direct the mind toward it 
This has three points:  
A Presentation of the faultless approach 
B Eliminating faulty approaches 
C Indicating the length204 of sessions 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1B-2A Presentation of the faultless approach 
This has nine points:  
1 Indication that faultless meditative stabilization has two features 
2 How it is unreasonable that some people add bliss and the like, making it three or four distinctions 
3 Identification of laxity and excite ment and the importance of skill in th e method for sustaining meditative 
stabilization that stops to the two 
4 How both mindfulness and introspection are necessary as means for the mind not to wander off from its 
object 
5 How the mind is directed toward the meditation object through mindfulness 
6 Identification of mindfulness 
7 How it is shown through an analogy that mindfulness continuously ties the mind to the object 8 How meditative stabilization becomes faulty without a firm mode of apprehension of the ascertaining 
consciousness 
9 Even someone wishing to achieve calm abiding by placing the mind without thinking of anything must 
generate the power of mindfulness 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1B-2A1 Indication that faultle ss meditative stabilization has two features 
The meditative stabilization to be accomplished here has two features; it has the factor of 
intense clarity of an extremely clear mind, and it has the factor of non-conceptual stability of a mind abiding sing le-pointedly on its object.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1B-2A2 How it is unreasonable that some people add bliss and the like, making it 
three or four distinctions 
Here some add bliss and make it three features, others add limpidity and make it four. 
However, the limpidity has two aspects: the limpidity of one’s cons ciousness feels more 
limpid than even an immaculate crystal bowl full of immaculate  water being hit by 
sunlight in the absence of clouds. And [257] when the aspects of objects such as pillars appear, a limpidity arises that feels as if one could count even their finest particles. 
These two nevertheless arise from the intensity of the clarity factor being generated and sustained after subtle laxity has been eliminated. Therefore it is unnecessary to mention 
them separately in the beginning.  
                                                 
203 Tib. sogs, the examples for color, shape, number, an d size are each concluded by this word. 
204 Tib. tshad , usually translated here as “measure.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
212 Although joy and bliss in the form of pleasurable sensations arise as an effect of the 
meditative stabilization to be accomplished here, they do not arise in association with the 
meditative stabilization included in the preparatory stage of the first concentration and 
therefore are not counted here.  
The emergence of such an intensity in the clarity factor is impeded by laxity, and single-
pointed non-conceptuality is impeded by exci tement. Precisely that is the reason why 
these two, laxity and excitement, become the main obstacles to the accomplishment of 
pure meditative stabilization.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1B-2A3 Iden tification of laxity and excitement  and the importance of skill in the 
method for sustaining meditative  stabilization that  stops the two 
That is why, if you do not know how to identify subtle and gross laxity and excitement, 
and if you do not know an impeccable method for sustaining meditative stabilization that 
stops both of them, even calm abiding—not to mention special insight—cannot arise. 
Therefore the intelligent  who strive for meditative stabiliz ation should become skilled in 
this way.  
That is to say laxity and excitement are a dverse conditions to the accomplishment of 
calm abiding, and the id entification of adverse conditions as well as the actual methods 
for stopping them are taught below. So here I will describe how to generate meditative 
stabilization as a favorable condition for calm abiding.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1B-2A4 How both mindfulness and introspection are necessary as means for the 
mind not to be distracted away from its object  
In this regard, meditative stabilization is th e factor of the mind single-pointedly abiding 
on its object, that is to say it must stay on the object continuously. For that there are 
two requirements: a means of not letting the mind get distracted from its original object 
and awareness of whether or not it actually is distracted. The first is mindfulness, the second is introspection. In the 
Commentary on “Ornament for the Mah āyāna Sūtras” it 
says: 
Mindfulness and introspection [258] direct  it, for one prevents the mind from 
scattering away from its object, and the second is fully aware of the mind 
scattering away. 
When mindfulness deteriorates and you forget the meditation object, there is distraction 
and you lose the object immediately. Therefore mindfulness that does not forget the object is the root. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1B-2A5 How the mind is directed toward the meditation object through 
mindfulness 
This is how to direct the mind toward its object: You visualize the basis of observation as 
explained above. Then, once it just about appears, you should generate a forceful mode 
of apprehending the object with your consciousness, uplift the mind, and place it without newly analyzing anything. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1B-2A6 Identification of mindfulness 
This has two points:  
A A source identifying the entity of mindfulness 
B The features of mindfulness 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1B-2A6A A source identifying the entity of mindfulness 
In the Compendium of Knowledge  mindfulness is said to  have three features: 
What is mindfulness? Non-forgetfulness of the mind with respect to a thing it 
is familiar with; so its function is utter non-distraction. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
213 2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1B-2A6B The features of mindfulness 
This has three points:  
1 The object feature 
The feature of the object: Since mindfulness does not arise with respect to a hitherto 
unfamiliar object, it says “a thing it is familiar  with.” In this context,  it is the appearance 
of the basis of observation having been ascertained before. 
2 The feature of the mode of apprehension 
The feature of the mode of apprehension, “Non-forgetfulness of the mind” is the factor that the mind does not forget that object; in this context it does not forget the basis of 
observation. The manner in which the mind does not forget it is not said to be the mere 
ability to remember your master teaching “T he basis of observatio n is like this...” when 
others ask, and you are made to think about it. Rather, the mind tied to the object is 
directly mindful of it and does not get distra cted even in the slightest. When there is 
distraction, mindfulness is lost through its mere occurrence. 
Hence, after you have placed the mind on the basis of observation, you should generate 
the thought: “That is how it is tied to the object” and then, without renewed conceptual 
[259] thought, without interrupting the force of this very mind, sustain it continuously. 
That is the essential point about how mindfulness is applied.
205 
3 The feature of function 
Its functional feature is not to let the mind get distracted from its object. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1B-2A7 How it is shown through an analogy that mindfulness continuously ties 
the mind to the object 
That being so, tying the mind to an object so as to tame it is taught through the analogy 
of taming an elephant. In this analogy, a wild el ephant is tied to a very firm tree trunk or 
pillar with many thick ropes, and if it follows the instructions of the elephant-tamer, that 
is all the better. If it does not,  it is repeatedly prodded into submission with a sharp hook 
and thus tamed. Likewise the mind which resembles an untamed elephant is tied to a firm pillar, the object explained earlier, with the rope of mindfulness, and if it cannot stay there, it is pricked with the hook of introspection and gradually brought under control. In 
Essence of the Middle Way  it says: 
The erring elephant of the mind 
Is firmly tied with the rope of mindfulness To a stable pillar, the object, and 
Gradually ruled with the hook of intelligence. 
And in 
Stages of Meditation II : 
With the rope of mindfulness and introspection, the elephant of the mind should be tied to that very tree trunk of the object. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1B-2A8 Ho w meditative stabilizatio n becomes faulty without a firm mode of 
apprehension of the ascertaining consciousness 
It is said that meditative stabilization is accomplished in dependen ce on mindfulness and 
that, like a rope, mindfulness continuously ties the mind to the object. Therefore the 
principal method for fostering206 the accomplishment of meditati ve stabilization is that of 
sustaining mindfulness. Yet mi ndfulness has a mode of apprehension with an aspect of 
ascertainment. So when you foster meditative  stabilization and place the mind without a 
firm mode of apprehension of the ascertaining consciousness, you gain the clarity factor 
                                                 
205 Tib. bsten , usually translated here as “rely on” or “attend to.” 
206 Tib. skyong tshul , usually translated here as “way to sustain.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
214 of mental limpidity, but the clarity factor of stark intensity of the ascertaining 
consciousness does not emerge. As a result, powerful mindfulness does not arise, and 
since subtle laxity is not stopped either, the meditative stabilization becomes faulty. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1B-2A9 Even someone wishing to achieve calm abiding by placing the mind 
without thinking of anything must generate the power of mindfulness [260] 
Even someone who sustains mere non-conceptuality of the mind without placing it on any 
other basis of observation such as a deity’s body, should remind himself “I will place the 
mind without thinking of any object whatsoever” and then prevent the mind from 
scattering and being distracted. Since non-distraction  is also synonymous with 
mindfulness that does not forget the object , he does not deviate from the above method 
of sustaining mindfulness. Therefore, someone who meditates in this manner also applies 
the mindfulness that reveals the power of the ascertaining consciousness. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1B-2B  Eliminating faulty approaches 
This has eight points:  
1 Identifying a misconception that should be eliminated 
There is the following kind of misconception: “When the mind is roused as explained 
above, held tight, and placed on the object non-conceptually, there is no laxity, but 
excitement predominates. I can see that I will not thereby gain the capacity207 for a 
continuous stability factor. However, with my lofty awareness lowered, by loosening my 
tight grip on it a lot, I see the stability factor  rise quickly. This is an excellent method.” A 
lot of people think so and expound: “Best meditation during best relaxation.” 
2 Its elimination  
However, this position fails  to distinguish between the occurrence of laxity and the 
occurrence of meditation. As explained earlier,  faultless meditative stabilization requires 
two features, and the stability factor of the non-conceptual mind by itself is not enough. 
If you think that “In such a case, when the mind has become confused and there is 
darkness, this is laxity, whereas otherwise it is faultless meditative stabilization because 
there is the clarity factor of mental limpidity,” apparently, you fail to distinguish between 
lethargy and laxity. These will be explained below. 
3 How it is difficult for faultless meditative  stabilization with the two features to arise 
Therefore, whenever your awareness, held overly  tight, is intensified, the clarity factor is 
present but excitement predominates so that it is difficult for the stability factor to arise. 
On the other hand, whenever you relax it a lot while sustaining your meditation, the 
stability aspect is there but laxity predominates  so that intense clarity is absent. Yet it is 
difficult to maintain208 just the right level of tightness and relaxation, and therefore it is 
[261] difficult for meditative stabilization free from laxity and excitement to arise. 
Thinking of that, Candragomin says: 
When I make an effort, excitement arises, 
Sinking occurs when I abandon it. 
If by this it is hard to get even engagement, 
What shall I do with my agitated mind?  
And: 
When I practice with effort, excitement arises; Whenever I relax it, sinking occurs. 
If it is hard to find the middle between them, 
                                                 
207 Tib. thub pa  
208 Tib. zin pa  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
215 What shall I do with my agitated mind? 
He is saying that when you hold your mind tight thus making an effort, there is 
excitement. On the other hand, when you notice this, relax your mind that tries hard to 
get involved in its object, and abandon the endeavor, the laxity of sinking arises within the mind. Therefore it is difficult to find the middle ground free from the two extremes of laxity and excitement, an even engagement in which the mind abides evenly balanced. If 
he was thereby presenting rela xation as best, there would be no reason whatsoever for 
difficulties, and since he is saying that laxity arises from it, it is inappropriate to practice 
meditative stabilization that way.  
4 How to meditate balancing tightness and relaxation  
As for the point where tightness and relaxation are balanced, having investigated this for 
yourself you should be more relaxed than that level of awareness where you think “If I 
heighten it this much, excite ment will surely arise,” and yo u should also place it above 
that level where you think “If I leave209 it just here, laxity will easily arise”. 
5 Presentation of sources for this  
In the context of the first and second mind,210 Noble Asa ṅga also says: 
That is to say when placement and corr ect placement are performed, there is a 
mental attention that holds the object tight211 as it gets involved in it.212  
In Stages of Meditation I  it is also explained that:  
You should eliminate laxity and hold the object tight.213 
6 The fault of not knowing how to apply mindfulness 
If you sustain your meditation without knowing the above method for applying 
mindfulness, however mu ch you meditate, only lots of fa ults will come out of it: great 
forgetfulness, dulling of your  intelligence that discrimina tes among phenomena, and so 
forth. 
7 The need to watch with introspection while holding the object with mindfulness [262] 
You may wonder: “Well then, while the mind is tied to the object with mindfulness, is it 
appropriate to generate conceptual thought that watches whether or not the object is 
being held well?” In Stages of Meditation II  it says that this is what needs to be done. 
Specifically, it is not that you first abandon meditative stabilization and then watch214 in 
this way. Rather, from within  your state of abidance in meditative stabilization, you 
merely watch whether or not the mind is st ill remaining on the original object it was 
placed on earlier, and if not, whether it has become excited or lax. Once your mind is 
placed in meditative stabilization, you should watch it now and then, neither at too short 
nor at too long intervals. If you do this before the force of the previous mind is exhausted, this has the value that the mind w ill become intense again, that its intensity 
will last for a long time, and that laxity and excitement will be recognized quickly. 
8 The need to sustain this meditation again and agai n with mindfulness, without forgetting the object  
                                                 
209 Tib. bzhag , usually translated here as “place.” 
210 Cf. below under ‘The actual stages of mental abiding that arise’. 
211 Tib. bsgrims  
212 The process of developing calm abiding is divided up into nine stages associated with four types of attention. The 
first two stages, known as “placement” and “thorough placemen t” (often referred to as “continuous placement”), are 
associated with the concentrated attention mentioned here. 
213 Tib. dam du gzung  
214 Tib. lta ba , usually translated here as “view.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
216 Sustaining the meditation like that, occasi onally recalling the fi rst object, is also 
necessary as a cause for powerful mindfulness that operates continuously. That is why 
this method for sustaining mindfulness is set forth in Śrāvaka Levels  and why it says in 
Explanation of the “Separation of the Middle from the Extremes” (Madhy āntavibāghațīkā):  
In the statement “Mindfulness consists in not forgetting the object” the 
instruction on making the mind abide on it is to express it with the mind.  
The application of mindfulness is for the purpose of stopping being distracted from the 
object and forgetting it. Therefore, not fo rgetting the object consists in mentally 
expressing the object, attending to it again and again. By way of analogy, it is like when 
you are afraid that you might forget something you know. If you recall it again and 
again, you will hardly forget it.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1B-2C Indicating the length of sessions 
This has three points:  
1 How it is taught in Stages of Meditation   
Now then, is there an established length of meditation sessions, specified in terms of 
“The mind is tied to the object and placed for just this long?” The major texts such as 
Śrāvaka Levels  do not seem to clearly uphold an established length. However, [263] in 
Stages of Meditation III  it says: 
Like that, gradually, you should  sit for twenty-four minutes,215 one and a half 
hours,216 three hours,217 or as long as you can. 
Apparently this was set forth in the context of the established length of meditation 
sessions for special insight meditation after calm abiding has already been accomplished, 
but in the context of initially practicing calm abiding it is evidently similar.  
2 How it is difficult for beginners to cut through laxity and excitement if the sessions are long  
In fact, if you recall the object every so of ten and watch every so often, the method for 
sustaining mindfulness and introspection as explained earlier is indeed faultless even for 
long sessions. However, in most beginners fo rgetfulness arises if the sessions are long. 
They get distracted and wander off, and although laxity and excitement occur in the 
meantime, they do not identify them quickly but only recognize them after a long time. 
Alternatively, even if they do not forget their mindfulness, they  easily fall under the 
power of laxity and excitement and do not identify them quickly. Since the former of 
these two impedes the arising of strong mi ndfulness whereas the latter impedes the 
arising of strong introspection, it is difficult to cut through laxity and excitement. Specifically, it is a lot worse to forget the meditation object, get distracted, and then fail to identify the occurrence of laxity and excitement than not to identify the occurrence of 
laxity and excitement quickly while still remembering the meditation object. Therefore, as 
the antidote that counteracts distraction and the deterioration of mindfulness, the method of sustaining mindfulness explained above is very important.  
3 The need to act in accordance with  one’s mental abilit ies and so forth 
In case of great forgetfulness, the mind getting distracted and wandering off a lot, and if 
the introspection that quickly identifies laxity  and excitement is weak, short sessions are 
needed. On the other hand, if forgetfulness hardly arises and it seems that laxity and 
excitement can be recognized quickly, there is  nothing wrong with s lightly longer sessions 
                                                 
215 One chu tshod , a unit based on traditional Indian time measurement and used in the Abhidharma. It is equivalent to 
one out of 60 parts of a day i.e., 24 minutes. 
216 Tib. thun phyed , literally “half a night watch.” 
217 Tib. thun gcig , literally “one night watch”—common measure for a full meditation session. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
217 either. With this intention it is said that the duration, twenty-four minutes and so on, is 
not specified. In brief, since it  needs to be in accord with one’s mental abilities, it says 
“as long as you can.” 
Apart from that, [264] rest in meditative equipoise unless you suffer some temporary 
physical or mental harm. If you do, you should  not persist in your meditation but rather 
eliminate the constitutional obstacles and then meditate. That is the meaning218 of 
experts, so you should understand acting like that to be another factor for the length of sessions.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1C What to do after focusing the mind on the object 
This has two points:  
1 What to do when excitement or laxity occur 
2 What to do while free from laxity and excitement 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1C-1 What to do when excitement or laxity occur 
This has two points:  
A Applying the antidote to non-identification of laxity and excitement B Applying the antidote to not endeavoring to abandon laxity and excitement even though they have 
been identified 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1C-1A Applying the antidote to non-identification of 
laxity and excitement 
This has two points:  
1 Settling the characteristics of laxity and excitement 2 The method for generating introspection that realizes them during meditation 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1C-1A1 Settling the characteristics of laxity and 
excitement 
This has two points:  
A Settling the characteristics of excitement 
B Settling the characteristics of laxity 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1C-1A1A Settling the characteristics of excitement 
This has three points:  
1 Presenting a source 
Excitement is just as it is stated in the Compendium of Knowledge : 
What is excitement? It is a very unpacified mind that pursues pleasant signs 
and belongs to attachment. It has the function of disrupting calm abiding. 
2 Its three features, object, aspect, and function 
It has three features. Its object is somethin g attractive and pleasant. Its aspect is the 
mind being unpeaceful and scattered outward. Since it is part of attachment, it gets 
involved in its object through the aspect of craving. Its function is to disrupt the mind abiding on its object.  
3 The manner in which excitement disrupts the mind abiding on its object 
While the mind is tied to an object within, through the excitement of attachment to formssuch as sounds the mind is drawn without control toward those objects and 
becomes distracted. It is just as stated in 
Praise of Confession : 
                                                 
218 Tib. dgongs pa , usually translated here as “thought” or “intention.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
218 However much you focus219 on calm abiding, 
Your mind, directed at something again and again, 
Is drawn away by the noose of the mental afflictions  
Without control, with the rope of attachment to objects. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1C-1A1B Settling the characteristics of laxity 
This has five points:  
1 Some people lump together laxity and dullness, which goes against the scriptures [265] 
In many translations laxity is also rendered as sinking . Some people assert a lethargy in 
which the mind lacks clarity and limpidity and abides without scattering to other objects 
to be laxity, which is incorrect, for it says in Stages of Meditation II  and in the  Sūtra 
Unraveling the Intended Meaning  that laxity arises from lethargy. In the Compendium of 
Knowledge  laxity is indeed explained in the context of the secondary affliction distraction. 
However, when there is distraction as explained there, virtue may also arise, so it is not 
necessarily afflicted.220 
2 How the identification of these two differs and a source for that 
Consequently, in the Compendium of Knowledge  and in the auto-commentary  on Treasury 
of Manifest Knowledge , lethargy is said to be a heaviness, an unserviceability of the body 
and the mind that forms part of delusion. With laxity, the mode of apprehension of the 
mind holding its object is slack, and the object  is not held clearly or tightly. Therefore, 
even if there is the factor of  limpidity, when the mode of apprehending th e object lacks 
clarity, there is laxity. From  Stages of Meditation II : 
You should understand that at times when the mind does not see the object 
clearly—like someone blind or someone entering darkness or someone closing 
his eyes—at those times there is laxity. 
In the other great texts I have not seen a cl ear take on the characteristics of laxity. 
3 Moreover, the two are not the same because in laxity there is also virtue 
With regard to laxity there is either virtue or neutrality, whereas lethargy is only a non-
virtue or a neutral obscuration221 and part of delusion. 
4 The need for two factors, the factors of mental clarity and tightness, to eliminate laxity 
In the great texts it says that in order to eliminate laxity, you should uplift the mind, 
meditating on a joyful object such as a buddha image or light. Thereby you prevent the object’s lack of clarity, whic h is like darkness having fallen on the mind, and the decline 
in the mind’s mode of apprehension. Then yo u need both a clear object and tightness in 
your mode of apprehension. 
5 The need to ascertain laxity in accordance with Stages of Meditation  because it is a major area of mistake 
[266] 
Excitement is easy to recognize but laxity is not clearly identified in the great texts, which 
is why it is difficult to understand. Yet it is  essential because this is a major ground for 
mistaking one’s meditative stabilization to be  faultless. Therefore you should investigate 
and identify it well with mental subtlety based on your experience and in accordance with 
the statements in Stages of Meditation . 
                                                 
219 Tib. dmigs pa , usually translated here as “observe.” 
220 That does not mean distraction is a totally pure state without any mental af fliction but rather that it does not 
necessarily come under the 20 secondary afflictions because there are also wholesome varieties. (Oral explanation by 
Geshe Thubten Soepa) 
221 Although in the latter case it is not non-virtuous, it is  nevertheless a mental affliction. Another example of such a 
neutral  mental affliction is the attachment of beings in higher re alms. It also belongs to the af flictive obscurations, but it 
is not classified as unwholesome. (Oral explanation by Geshe Thubten Soepa) 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
219 2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1C-1A2 The method for generating introspection that 
realizes these during meditation  
This has five points:  
A The need to generate introspection that realizes whether or not laxity or excitement have arisen 
It is not enough merely to have an understanding of laxity and excitement. Rather, you 
need the ability to generate introspection that knows exactly whether or not laxity or excitement have arisen during your meditation. In fact, not only do you need the ability 
to generate introspection that identifies laxi ty and excitement as s oon as they arise due 
to the gradual generation of po werful introspection. You also need the introspection that 
recognizes them when they are just about to arise but have not actually arisen, for in 
Stages of Meditation II and III it says: 
If you notice222 laxity of the mind or a suspicion that it is lax... 
And:  
If you notice excitement of the mind or a suspicion that it is excited...  
B If you do not rely on introspection, your meditation will come under the influence of laxity and excitement 
As long as this kind of introspection has not arisen, although you decide that from this 
point till that point there was flawless meditation without laxity or excitement, this is 
baseless, for even if laxity or excitement were to arise, you would not be able to 
ascertain them given that powerful introspection has not arisen. In accordance with that, 
it also says in Separation of the Middle from the Extremes : 
Once laxity and excitement are realized...  
In order to realize laxity and excitement you need introspection. 
Therefore, if the introspection that cannot fail to recognize laxity and excitement has not 
arisen, you may meditate for long and even  while away years with subtle laxity and 
excitement without sensing them as they occur. 
C The method for sustaining mindfulness is essential as a cause of introspection 
Well then, how do you generate introspection?  A most essential cause is the method for 
sustaining mindfulness presented earlier. [267] If you can generate continuous mindfulness in that ma nner, you will be ab le to stop forgetting the object and wandering 
off. Thereby you will stop lo ng-term insensitivity to the occurrence of laxity and 
excitement. Hence, you will recognize laxity and excitement easily. This is very clear 
when you look at it from the perspective of your own experience, the amount of time it 
takes you to recognize laxity and excitement when mindfulness has deteriorated, and the 
amount of time it takes you when it has not. With this understanding 
Engaging in the 
Bodhisattva Conduct  says: 
Once mindfulness is there to stay at the 
Gate of the mind in order to guard it, 
At that point introspection will come… 
Explanation of the “Separation of the Middle from the Extremes”  also speaks of 
mindfulness as the cause of introspection.  
D Watching continuously whether or not the mind scatters is the essential point for sustaining introspection 
This one cause is to observe the aspect of the deity’s body and the like, that which is 
being apprehended, or the aspect of the apprehender, such as the experience, mere awareness, or mere clarity, and then, while applying mindfulness as explained earlier, 
                                                 
222 Tib. mthong , usually translated here as “see.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
220 hold the mind, watching continuously whether or not there is scattering. This should be 
understood as the essential point for sustaining introspection. In accordance with that, 
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Conduct  also says: 
Investigating again and again 
The state of body and mind, in brief, Just that alone is the characteristic 
Of the guarding of introspection. 
E The need to differentiate well between the methods for sustaining mindfulness and introspection 
By doing this, you therefore generate introspection that recognizes any laxity and excitement as soon as they are about to arise. By means of applying mindfulness on the 
other hand, the forgetfulness of your mind being distracted and wandering off is stopped so that you observe well. You need to distinguish between them.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1C-1B Applying the antidote to not endeavoring to 
abandon laxity and excitement even though they have been identified 
This has two points:  
1 The need to intend the application of the antidote 
2 The actual manner of application 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1C-1B1 The need to intend the application of the antidote 
Through doing well at the method for sustaining mindfulness and introspection as 
explained earlier, strong mindfulness will arise so that even subtle laxity and excitement 
can be recognized by means of introspect ion. Hence there will be no fault of not 
identifying laxity and excite ment. However, non-application or the accepting lack of 
endeavor, a failure to cultivate the endeavor to stop the two as soon as they arise, [268] 
is a great fault of meditative stabilization. Th at is why you should cultivate the intention 
referred to as application or endeavor  as its antidote.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1C-1B2 The actual manner of application 
This has two points:  
A Identifying the intention and how to stop laxity and excitement 
B Identifying the causes in dependence on which laxity and excitement arise 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1C-1B2A Identifying the intention and how to stop laxity 
and excitement 
This has two points:  
1 Identifying the intention 
2 How to stop laxity and excitement 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1C-1B2A-1 Identifying the intention 
In the Compendium of Knowledge  it says: 
What is intention? It is the mind creating compositional factors, action of the 
mind that has the function of causing the mind to get involved in virtue, non-
virtue, or something neutral. 
That means the mental factor that moves the mind and impels it to something virtuous, 
non-virtuous or neutral, any of those three, like iron moving without control under the 
power of a magnet, is intention. Here you should therefore understand it as the intention 
that motivates the mind to abandon either laxity or excitement when they occur.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1C-1B2A-2 How to stop laxity and excitement 
This has two points:  
A How to stop laxity 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
221 B How to stop excitement 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1C-1B2A-2A How to stop laxity 
This has four points:  
1 Counteracting it by attending to something joyful or the features of light and the like 
Now how do you stop laxity and excitement? A mind that is lax has withdrawn inward too 
much and lost its mode of apprehending the object. For that reason it says in Stages of 
Meditation I  that you should attend to a cause for the mind to move outward again, 
something joyful. In fact it should be so mething like the Buddha’s body rather than 
something joyful giving rise to mental afflictions. Alternatively, if you attend to a sign of light, such as sunshine, and clear away the laxity, you should immediately tighten your 
mode of apprehending the object and sustain it. At this point, do not meditate on a 
disenchanting object, because disillusionment is  a cause for the mind to withdraw inward. 
However, if you examine any object you wish to examine with the wisdom of individual 
investigation and feel enthusiasm, this will counteract laxity. From the 
Compendium of 
the Perfections : 
When there is sinking uplift the mind through the 
Power of striving for special insight. 
2 How to counteract laxity by heightening the mind’s mode of apprehension 
Now, this laxity or sinking [269] is lax because the mode of apprehending the object has gone down, and it is sinking because it has withdrawn inward too mu ch. Therefore it is 
counteracted by the enthusiasm upon uplifting the mode of apprehension and expanding 
the object. In 
Essence of the Middle Way  it says: 
When it sinks, expand the mind through 
Meditation on spacious objects.  
And: 
When it sinks, uplift it also  By seeing the value
223 of joyous effort.  
The most important antidote for stopping laxity is this: When you consider the benefit of 
the Three Jewels and the mind of enlightenment  as well as the positive qualities of the 
precious leisure you have gained and the like, it  should be as effectiv e for refreshing your 
awareness as cold water when it is splashed into the face of someone asleep. This depends on the experience you have gained through your analytical meditation of individual investigation on beneficial topics.  
3 The discrimination of light, purifying meditation objec ts, and the like specifically against the object being 
unclear as if darkness had fallen upon the mind 
When you apply the antidote, meditation on light, to the causes that reinforce the 
development of laxity—lethargy, sleepiness, and mental states with an aspect of darkness 
that induce those two—laxity which depends on them does not arise, and that which has already arisen is counteracted.  
Śrāvaka Levels  also talks about having a break from  this activity, taking to mind the 
characteristics of light and familiarizing oneself with them again and again, uplifting the 
mind with any of the six recollections—of the Three Jewels, ethics, giving, and deities—or other purifying objects, as well as reciting teachings that point out the disadvantages of 
lethargy and sleepiness, looking to the side or at the moon and the stars, washing one’s 
face with water, and so forth. 
                                                 
223 Tib. phan yon , usually translated here as “benefit.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
222 4 How to apply special remedies against subtle and gross laxity separately 
Furthermore, if the mental laxity is very slight and does not occur more than once in a 
while, you should tighten the mode of ap prehension of the mi nd as you meditate. 
However, when dense laxity recurs again and again, [270] suspend the meditation, apply 
the antidotes as appropriate and continue to meditate as soon as the laxity has been 
cleared away. If the object the mind is holding becomes unclear and an aspect, slight or 
dense, of something like darkne ss falling upon the mind occurs, as an antidote to that 
take up the characteristics of lights such as a butter lamp, fire, and sunshine. If you 
familiarize yourself with them again and again, a great limpidity of mind will arise.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1C-1B2A-2B How to stop excitement 
This has two points:  
1 The need generally to attend to something depressing as an antidote to excitement 
When it comes to excitement, the mind runs after forms, sounds, and other objects due 
to attachment, so for that you should attend to something depressing, a cause for the mind to withdraw inward. However, as soon as the excitement has subsided because of that, you rest in equipoise. In 
Essence of the Middle Way  it says: 
Pacify excitement by 
Attending, for instan ce, to impermanence 
And: 
You should collect the distracted mind 
By seeing the faults of the signs of distraction. 
2 How to apply special remedies against subtle and gross excitement separately 
When intense or long-lasting excitement occurs, it is effective to loosen the meditation 
for a while and meditate on something disillusioning, whereas collecting the mind inward 
and placing it every time it scatters is not. Whenever the excitement is not that strong, you should collect the distracted mind inward and tie it to the object. In the 
Compendium 
of the Perfections it says: 
Whenever your mind has got excited Avert this by means of calm abiding.  
With an excited mind, you should not attend to inspiring or delightful objects, for they cause the mind to be distracted outward. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1C-1B2B Identifying the causes in dependence upon which 
laxity and excitement arise 
This has five points:  
1 Common causes of laxity and excitement 
The common causes of the two, laxity and excitement, are not guarding one’s sense 
doors, not eating the right amount, not puttin g effort into one’s practice without sleeping 
during the first and last parts of the night, and remaining without introspection.  
2 Causes of laxity 
The causes of laxity are great sleepiness, [271] the mind being excessively loose in its hold on its object, not balancing calm abid ing and special insight but relying on calm 
abiding too much, the mind remaining as though in darkness, and not taking joy in 
directing the mind toward the object.  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
223 3 Causes of excitement 
The causes of excitement are said to be little disillusionment, the mind being excessively 
tense with respect to its object, not being used  to making an effort, and the mind being 
distracted by thoughts of relatives and the like. 
4 If you do not put effort into abandoning even subtle laxity and excitement, you do not know how to 
accomplish pure meditative stabilization 
Therefore you need to recognize, through intros pection, even subtle aspects of laxity and 
excitement and stop them all entirely. If you give up, thinking “Although in the beginning 
I cut through subtle excitement, distraction, and the like, they were never cut off, so I 
will not cut through them any longer” or if yo u think “Unless they are intense and come 
in excessively long chains, there is no need  to cut through them because they are brief 
and weak so that no karma will be accumula ted,” you do not know  how to accomplish 
pure meditative stabilization. That is be cause you depart from the conclusions by 
venerable Maitreya and others on how to accomplish meditative stabilization. 
5 When you merely have the factors of stability and limpidity, with that of cl arity lacking intens ity, there is no 
hope for meditati ve stabilization 
Therefore summon your mind from its wandering and excitement so that it is tied to the 
object within, and seek the stability factor. Whenever the stability factor has arisen, beware of laxity and bring forth intense clarity. You should accomplish faultless 
meditative stabilization by alternating between those two. Do not trust mere limpidity 
that lacks the factor of clarity together with intensity of the mode of apprehension. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B1C-2 What to do while free from laxity and excitement 
This has six points:  
A Since it is a mistake to apply antidotes although laxity and excitement have been cut off, you need to apply 
the antidote to that, the equanimity of natural composure 
When even subtle laxity and excitement have been cut off as explained earlier and the 
mind enters into equanimity without the imbalances of becoming either lax or excited through the meditation, at that time it would be a mistake for your meditative 
stabilization if you applied antidotes or endeavored, so you should cultivate equanimity as 
the antidote to that. [272] This is how your meditation becomes faulty through 
application and endeavor: by bringing the mind back inward and uplifting it whenever it is 
lax, you grow confident that laxity and excitement do not arise in every session. At that 
stage, it would be a mistake to beware of laxity and excitement very much as in the 
beginning. If you did, your mind would become distracted, so you need to know how to loosen up. That is to say loosen the endeavor rather than letting go of the intensity of 
your mode of apprehension.  
B That is what you do from the time you are past the peak of laxity and excitement 
Therefore this cultivation of equanimity is not performed whenever laxity and excitement 
do not occur but from the time you are past the peak of laxity and excitement because as 
long as you have not passed the peak for laxity and excitement, there is no equanimity.  
C How to identify that very equanimity 
Well then, what is this equanimity? Among the three types of equanimity—equanimity 
feeling, immeasurable equanimity, and equanimity of application—it is the last one. Its 
entity is just as explained in Śrāvaka Levels : it is the mind rest ing even and at ease224 
upon its object from the class of calm abiding or special insight, operating naturally, and 
achieving serviceability. When you have achiev ed such equanimity, you should actualize it 
                                                 
224 Tib. rnal du , usually translated here as “in its natural state” or “naturally.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
224 while cultivating meditative stabilization, with out strong endeavor as long as laxity and 
excitement do not arise.  
D Presenting a source for these explanations on how to generate faultless meditative stabilization 
This is in accordance with what is set forth in Separation of the Middle from the 
Extremes : 
On that basis, th e serviceability 
Of one’s mind achieves all goals. 
It springs from the causes relied upon: The eight factors removing five faults— 
Laziness, forgetfulness 
Of the instructions, excitement and laxity, 
Non-application, and application. 
These are asserted to be the five faults. 
The basis and what is based on it, 
The cause and the effect of it,
225 
Not forgetting the object observed, 
Realizing excitement and laxity, 
Application to remove them, [273] 
Resting naturally when  they are calmed. 
E Explaining the meaning of the scriptural passage in detail 
Here “On that basis” is on the basis of unde rtaking joyous effort in order to eliminate 
unfavorable conditions. From that the meditative stabilization of mental serviceability 
arises. Furthermore, since it is the footing or basis of miraculous powers that bring about 
all goals such as clairvoyance, it achieves those goals. Such meditative stabilization arises 
from the cause of abandoning the five faults and relying on the eight factors. The five faults are as follows. At the time of prep aration, laziness is a fault because you will not 
apply yourself to meditative stabilization. When you put effort into meditative 
stabilization, forgetting the in structions is a fault, for if you forget the ob ject, there will 
be no meditative equipoise of the mind on the object. When it is in meditative equipoise, 
laxity and excitement are faults because they prevent mental serviceability. When laxity 
and excitement occur, it is a fault not to endeavor, for thereby the two will not be 
pacified. When there is no more
226 laxity and excitement, the intention to apply remedies 
is a fault. In Stages of Meditation227 it says that if you count laxity and excitement as one, 
they are five, whereas if you divide them up, they are six. 
Among the eight factors for abandoning them, their remedies, laziness has four. They are 
faith, aspiration, endeavor, and pliancy. Then, the remedies of forgetfulness, laxity and excitement, non-application, and application are mindfulness, introspection, the intention 
to apply antidotes, and the equanimity of resting naturally, respectively. They have 
already been explained above. 
F How this manner of  sustaining meditative stab ilization is common to all s ūtra and mantra instructions 
This freeing of the single-pointed meditative  stabilization of the mind from laxity and 
excitement by means of mindfulness and introspection is common to all the instructions 
on how to practice. Therefore you should not hold it to be a specific detail of the 
                                                 
225 cf. ‘Individual explanations on the four antidotes to laziness’. 
226 Tib. bral ba , usually translated here as “free from.” 
227 Tib. sgom rim rnams las . Tsongkhapa usually indicates whether he is re ferring to the first, the middle, or the last 
volume of Kamala śīla’s work, but here it merely says “in the Bhāvanākramas .” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
225 Lakṣanayāna228 which, however, is unnecessary in mantra. [274] It is also taught in many 
Highest Yoga Tantras.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B2 The stages of  quiescence that arise in dependence on it 
This has three points:  
A The actual stages of quiescence that arise 
B The method for accomplishing them by means of the six powers C How they involve the four types of attention 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B2A The act ual stages of quiescence that arise 
This has nine points: 
1 Placement 2 Continuous placement 
3 Patchy placement 
4 Close placement 
5 Taming 
6 Pacification 
7 Complete pacification 
8 Making single-pointed 
9 Even placement 
1. Placing the mind on such and such consists in collecting the mind from all external 
objects and directing it towa rd the object within. In Ornament for the Mah āyāna Sūtras it 
says: 
Having directed the mind toward the object, 229 
2. Continuous placement: The directed mind is continuously placed on the object over a period of time without it being distracted to anything else.  
Continuously don’t let it get distracted. 
3. Patchy placement: If you get distracted due to forgetfulness so that you are distracted to external things, you realize it and tie your mind to its object again. 
Realizing distraction quickly, 
You should patch it up again.  
4. Close placement is explained as follows in 
Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom : 
The mind, while extensive by nature, is collected again and again and thus refined, so 
that placement gets better and better.  This accords with the statement: 
Intelligent people should more and more 
Collect their minds internally. 
5. Taming: Having reflected on the positive qualities of meditative stabilization, you 
rejoice in it. 
Then, since you see the positive qualities, 
The mind is tamed in stabilization.230 
6. Pacification: You view distraction as a fault and pacify dislike for meditative 
stabilization. 
Seeing distraction as a fault 
Pacify dislike for it. 
                                                 
228 Tib. mtshan nyid theg , “vehicle of characteristics” or “v ehicle of metaphysical dialetics.” 
229 Unless identified otherwise, all the followin g quotations are taken from the same text. 
230 Tib. ting nge ‘dzin , usually translated here as “meditative stabilization.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
226 7. Complete pacificati on: completely pacifying occurren ces of attachment, unhappiness, 
lethargy, sleepiness, and so forth. 
Attachment, unhappiness, and the like 
Should be pacified as they arise. 
8. Making single-pointed: ma king an effort for the sake of effortless engagement. 
Then, by means of restraint and effort, [275] 
Along with actual application, 
You get it to come about naturally. 
9. Even placement: in Stages of Meditation  this is said to be the equanimity when the 
mind has become even. In Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom  i t  i s  s a i d  t o  b e  
spontaneous, natural engagement and the attainment of control231 due to the habit232 of 
u n ify i ng  t he  mind .  In a ccor da nce  w ith  th at i t  al so  say s in  Ornament for the Mah āyāna 
Sūtras:  
Since it’s habitual, there’s non-application. 
The names of these nine minds are as quoted in Stages of Meditation I  and elsewhere: 
This path of calm abiding is explained in  scriptures such as  the Perfection of 
Wisdom. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B2B The method for accomplishing them by means of 
the six powers 
This has five points:  
1 Identifying the six powers 
2 What minds are accomplished by them in what manner 3 How during the ninth stage of quiescence yo u effortlessly enter me ditative stabilization 
4 How the nine stages of quiescence have to be preceded by the earlier ones in turn 
5 The summarized meaning of those points 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B2B-1  Identifying the six powers 
The six powers are those of hearing, thinking, mindfulness, introspection, joyous effort, 
and thorough acquaintance. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B2B-2  What minds are accomplished by them in what manner 
This has six points:  
A The power of hearing 
Through the power of hearing the mind of placement is accomplished, for it merely 
consists in first tying the mind to the object, following just the instructions you have 
heard from someone on how to place the mind on an object. It is not something that you 
have become familiar with through your own repeated reflections.  
B The power of thinking 
Through the power of thinking the mind of continuous placement is accomplished, for you 
keep thinking about the continuation of that first tie to the object and sustain it. From 
that you will initially achieve thecapacity for a somewhat connected continuity.  
C The power of mindfulness 
Through the power of mindfulness the two minds of patchy placement and close 
placement are accomplished, for when the mind  gets distracted from the object, you are 
                                                 
231 Tib. rang dbang , usually translated here as “independence.” 
232 Tib. goms pa , usually translated here as “familiarization.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
227 mindful of the earlier object and collect the mind inward. Generating the power of 
mindfulness from the start, you do not let your mind get distracted from the object.  
D The power of introspection 
Through the power of introspection the two minds of taming and pacification are accomplished, [276] for through recognizing, with introspection, the disadvantages of scattering toward discursive thought and toward the signs of  the secondary afflictions, 
and through viewing them as faults, you do no t allow your mind to scatter toward those 
two. 
E The power of joyous effort 
Through the power of joyous effort yo u accomplish the two minds of complete 
pacification and making single-pointed, for you abandon even subtle occurrences of discursive thought and secondary afflictions with endeavor, thereby not responding to 
them. Since you do so, laxity, excitement, and so forth cannot obstruct your meditative 
stabilization, and meditative stabilization th at arises continuously is accomplished.  
F The power of thorough acquaintance 
Through the power of thorough acquaintan ce you accomplish the mind of even 
placement, for through the power of intens e familiarization with the previous one, 
meditative stabilization that operates naturally without effort arises. 
These points accord with the intended meaning of Śrāvaka Levels , so you should not rely 
on any other explanations.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B2B-3  How during the ninth mental abiding you effortlessly enter meditative 
stabilization  
Now, when you have attained the ninth mind, it is like in the followin g analogy. If you are 
very used to reciting a text or something like that, then whenever the motivation to recite 
it first arises and you recite it, even though your mind is distracted by something else in the meantime, the recitation itself continues uninterruptedly without endeavor. Likewise, 
when you have placed your mind in equipoise once through the mindfulness of having 
initially directed it toward th e object, then even though mi ndfulness and introspection are 
not applied continuously, you become capable of entering meditative stabilization 
continuously over a long period withou t being interrupted by scattering. When 
mindfulness and introspection are continuous, there is no need for the endeavor of 
application, and that is called 
without application or endeavor .  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B2B-4  How the nine stages of quiescences have to be preceded by an earlier 
one in turn 
For that to arise, first a long-lasting meditati ve stabilization that c annot be obstructed by 
unfavorable conditions such as laxity and excitement has to arisewhenever mindfulness 
and introspection are each applied with endeavor. That is the eighth mind. [277] That 
and the ninth one are the same in that condit ions unfavorable to meditative stabilization 
such as laxity and excitement cannot disrupt them. Yet since it is necessary here to applymindfulness and introspection uninterrupt edly, it is said to be connected with 
application or endeavor.  
For that to arise, it is necessary to stop even subtle laxity, excitement, and so forth as 
soon as they arise, without responding to them. Therefore the seventh mind is necessary. 
For that to arise there is the need for powerful introspection watching that there is no 
scattering toward conceptual thought and se condary afflictions, distraction by them 
having been understood to be a disadvantag e. Therefore you need the fifth and sixth 
minds because those two are accomplished with introspection that has become powerful. 
For something like that to arise,  however, there is the need for both the mindfulness that 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
228 immediately remembers the object even if the mind has been distracted from it, and the 
mindfulness that does not allow any distraction from the object in the first place. 
Therefore the third and forth minds are necessary because these two are accomplished 
by those two types of mindfulness. For these to  arise, however, first of all the mind must 
be tied to the object, and the continuity of that bond must be undistracted. Therefore the 
first and second minds arise first. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B2B-5  The summarized meaning of those points 
Thus, to summarize, you should first follow the instructions you have heard and correctly 
perform the method for placing the mind in equipoise. Then repeatedly think about that 
manner of placement and sustain its continuity by way of the ability to piece short 
periods together. Then, if mindfulness deteriorates and you get distracted, you should collect your mind quickly and quickly be mindful of the object you have forgotten. Then 
you should generate even stronger mindfulness and generate a power of mindfulness 
such that you do not get distracted from the meditation object in the first place. By 
accomplishing powerful mindfulness and by seeing the faults of laxity, excitement, and so forth—that your mind gets distracted from the object to something else, you should 
generate intense introspection to watch over it. Then you should generate strong 
endeavor so that even when there is distraction due to subtle forgetfulness, it is recognized immediately and eliminated, and once it has been eliminated the periods 
without obstruction by unfavorable conditions are lengthened. [278] Once that has 
arisen, you put in effort, you perfect your familiarization through meditation, and you 
accomplish the ninth mind that enters medita tive stabilization withou t endeavor. In fact 
before, when the ninth mind has not yet been achieved, the yogi needs endeavor to place 
the mind in meditative stabilization. But when the ninth mind has been attained, even 
though you do not endeavor to place the mind  in meditative equipoise deliberately, it 
totally goes into meditative stabilization.  
If despite your achievement of the ninth mind , which is like that, you have not achieved 
pliancy, you still cannot posit it as the achievement of calm abiding either, let alone the 
achievement of special insight. This is explained below. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A2B-2B2C How they involve the four types of attention 
This has four points:  
1 The actual types 
Śrāvaka Levels  explains that the nine stages of quiescence involve four types of 
attention. Explained in accordance with that, there is tight engagement at the time of the 
first and second minds because the mind needs to be tightened with effort. Then, during 
five minds, laxity and excitement interrupt you, and you cannot sustain long meditation 
sessions, so at that time there is interrupted engagement. Then, as regards the eighth mind, laxity and excitement cannot cause interruptions so that you can sustain meditation sessions for long. Therefore, at that time, there is uninterrupted engagement. Then, for 
the ninth mind, there is no interruption, and it is not necessary to rely on constant 
endeavor, so you settle into the attention of effortless engagement. 
2 Setting out a doubt about that 
Well, there is interrupted engagement at the time of the first and second minds, and 
there is also a need to tighten the mind at the time of the five intermediate minds. Why 
is it that the first and second are not said to have the attention of interrupted 
engagement and that the five in between are not said to have the attention of tight 
engagement?  
3 The response to that 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
229 With the first and second minds, the mind is in and out of meditative stabilization,233 
however, the latter for much longer. With the five intermediate ones , the mind abides in 
meditative stabilization far longer. Therefore the term interruption of meditative 
stabilization  has been applied to the latter and not to the former. [279] That is why 
although the two sets are indeed the same in having tight engagement, the presence and 
absence of interruptions and engagement over time is not the same. Therefore the five 
intermediate minds are not posited as attentions that have tight engagement.  
4 The need continuously to rely on joyous effort in accordance with that 
In the Compendium of the Perfections  it says: 
Through uninterrupted yoga strive234 
To accomplish concentration. 
If you rest again and again, 
You will not get fire through friction. 
The method of yoga is like that: 
Don’t give up till you gain the distinction. 
You should accomplish it in acco rdance with that statement. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A3 The measure for the accomplishment of calm abiding through 
meditation 
This has three points: 
A Indication of the dividing line between having accomplished it or not 
B General indication of how to traverse the path in reliance on calm abiding 
C Indication of how to traverse a mundane path in particular 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A3A Indication of the dividing line between having accomplished it 
or not 
This has two points:  
1 Presenting the actual point 
2 The signs of possessing attention along with a clarification of doubts 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A3A-1 Presenting the actual point 
This has two points:  
A Indicating whether or not calm abiding has been achieved from the point of view of whether or not 
pliancy has been completely achieved 
B Indicating the way in which calm abiding is accomplished once pliancy has been achieved 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A3A-1A Indicating whether or not calm abiding has been 
achieved from the point of view of whether or not pliancy has been completely 
achieved 
This has five points:  
1 Setting out a doubt 
When you can sustain the ninth mind free from subtle laxity and excitement throughout 
long meditation sessions as has been explained earlier, and when you attain meditative 
stabilization that operates spontaneously, independent of the endeavor to apply mindfulness and introspection continuously, has calm abiding been achieved or not?  
 2 The response to that 
                                                 
233 Tib. sems ting nge ‘dzin du ‘gro ba dang der mi ‘gro ba gnyis , literally “the mind both goes into meditative 
stabilization and does not go there.” 
234 Tib. brtson , the first component in Tib. brtson ‘grus , translated here as “joyous effort.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
230 When meditative stabilization has been achieved, there is a twofold division: pliancy 
having been achieved or not. If pliancy has no t been achieved, it is a similitude of calm 
abiding rather than actual calm abiding.  
3 The source  
In the Sūtra Unraveling the Intended Meaning  it says: 
“Bhagavan, when the bodhisattva directs his mental attention inward, his mind 
observing the mind, as long as physical and mental pliancy have not been 
achieved, what is that mental  attention called?” [280]  
“Maitreya, it is not calm abiding. It should be described as an inclination that 
corresponds with calm abiding, as something associated with it.” 
In Ornament for the Mah āyāna Sūtras it also says:  
Since it’s familiar, there’s non-application. Then his body and mind attain, 
Extreme overwhelming pliancy; afterwards He is said to have mental attention. 
In this context “mental attention” is calm abiding. 
In 
Stages of Meditation II  it also clearly says: 
When the body and the mind of the one who has thus familiarized himself with 
calm abiding become extremely pliable, and when his mind becomes fully 
controlled with regard to objects observed at will, at that time he should know 
that calm abiding has been accomplished. 
And from Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom : 
Here the bodhisattva dwelling alone in seclusion should mentally attend to his intended object. Having abandoned his mental conversation, he should attend 
many times to the mind itself as it appears. As long as physical and mental pliancy have not arisen, it is a mental attention that corresponds with calm 
abiding, whereas once they have arisen, it is calm abiding. 
4 Although the meditative stabilization before the attainment of pliancy belongs to the desire realm level, it is 
not a level of meditative equipoise in the desire realm  
Now, what level is meditative stabilization before the attainment of pliancy included in? It is included in the level of the desire realm.  Although it has such single-pointedness of 
mind, it is a level of non-equipo ise, and it is not posited as a 
level of equipoise . The 
reason explained in Actuality of the Stages  is that it is not accomplished through non-
regret, supreme joyful bliss, and pliancy.  
5 That meditative stabilization is th e meditative stabilization of a single- pointed mind of the desire realm 
Thus, when pliancy has not been attained, the meditative stabilization that does not rely on constant mindfulness, in which the mind goes into non-conceptuality of its own 
accord, and which [281] seems as though it could be combined with any physical activity—moving, walking, lyin g, and sitting—is called single-pointed mind of the desire 
realm. It is not actual calm abiding.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A3A-1B Indicatin g the way in which calm abiding is 
accomplished once pliancy has been fully achieved 
This has two points:  
1 Explanation of how pliancy is  identified and how it arises 
2 Indicating the actual way in which calm abiding is accomplished once pliancy has been fully achieved  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
231 2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A3A-1B1 Explanation of how pliancy is identified and how it arises 
This has seven points:  
A Identification 
Well then, what is the manner in which pliancy is achieved? Once it has been achieved, 
what is the method for proceeding to calm abiding? This is what the Compendium of 
Knowledge  says with respect to pliancy: 
What is pliancy? It is the serviceability of the body and the mind due to cutting 
the continuity of taking on bad physical and mental states. Its function is to eliminate all obscurations. 
B The meaning of the scriptural passage from the Compendium of Knowledge  
Their taking on bad physical and mental states  consists in that the body and the mind are 
unfit to be employed for any virtuous activity at will. The antidote to that, physical and 
mental pliancy, is an extreme serviceability with respect to the body and the mind being 
employed for virtuous activities. It is due to freedom from taking on bad states, both 
physical and mental. Specifically, if you endeavor to give up mental afflictions and bad physical states you take on that are within th e class of mental afflictions and obstruct the 
joy of abandoning mental afflictions, you will get rid of such unserviceability as heaviness 
of the body, and then its lightness is the serviceability of the body.  
Likewise, if you endeavor to abandon mental afflictions and taking on bad mental states 
that are within the class of mental afflictions and obstruct the joy of abandoning mental 
afflictions, you will pass beyond
235 the unfitness of the mind for being directed toward the 
object and engaging in it with delight. Then the mind engaging in its object 
unobstructedly is a serviceable mind.  
C Sources for that  
In accordance with that Ācārya Sthiramati says: 
In this regard, serviceability of the body  is that from whic h whatever lightness 
arises for the activities of the body itself. Serviceability of the mind is another 
phenomenon arisen from mind that is the cause of the mind becoming fresh and happy after entering into pure mental attention. [282] When you are 
endowed with it, you engage in objects unobstructedly, whic h is why it is 
called serviceability of the mind. 
In brief, although you want to try hard and abandon the mental afflictions, the 
unserviceability of your seemingly diffident body  and mind makes this as difficult to do as 
if you were engaging in some unpleasant duty  of yours. Once the unserviceability of the 
body and the mind has been reversed, the body and the mind become extremely easy to use. In 
Śrāvaka Levels  it says that such perfectly complete serviceability of the body and 
the mind arises in small portions right from the beginning when you obtain meditative 
stabilization. So it increases, eventually turning into pliant, single-pointed calm abiding. In fact at first it is subtle and therefore hard to recognize, but later on it becomes easy to recognize.  
D How, among the two types of pliancy, mental pliancy is the first to arise 
An early sign of such pliancy about to arise complete with all its characteristics and easy 
to discern236 is a feeling of heaviness at the top of the head experienced by the person 
striving to cultivate meditative stabilization. It is not an uncomfortable heaviness. As 
soon as it arises, you are freed from taking on  bad mental states that obstruct the joy of 
                                                 
235 Tib. bral ba , usually translated here as “free from.” 
236 Tib. brtag pa , usually translated here as “investigate.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
232 abandoning mental afflictions, and its antidote, pliancy, arises first.237 In Śrāvaka Levels  it 
says: 
As an early sign that gross single-pointedness of mind which is easy to discern 
as well as pliancy of mind and body will arise before long, the top of the head 
will seem heavy. In fact this symptom is not harmful. As soon as it arises, any 
bad mental states taken on within the class of the mental afflictions that 
obstruct the joy of abandonment are abandoned, and their antidotes, 
serviceability of mind and mental pliancy, arise. 
E How physical pliancy arises from that 
Then, in dependence on the force of that pliancy of mental serviceability having arisen, 
[283] the energies that cause physical pliancy to arise circulate within the body. When those energies circulate in your body parts and pervade them, you are freed from taking 
on bad physical states, and the antidote to taking on bad states, physical pliancy, arises. 
Moreover, after they have spread throughout the body, the latter seems as though filled 
with the power of serviceable energy. In 
Śrāvaka Levels  it says: 
Through its occurrence, the energies of the great elements that are conducive 
to the arising of physical pliancy circul ate within the body. As they circulate, 
one is freed from taking on any bad physical states within the class of the 
mental afflictions that obstruct the joy of abandonment. Their antidote, 
physical pliancy, spreads throughout the body and the latter seems as though 
filled with it. 
F The difference between those two kinds of pliancy 
In this regard, physical pliancy is an extremely pleasant sensation within the body; it is 
not a mental factor. Master Sthiramati says: 
If a distinctive physical sensation is conj oined with joy, you should recognize it 
as physical pliancy because in the s ūtras it says that when the mind is joyful, 
the body becomes pliant. 
G How among the two kinds of bliss, that of physical and that of mental pliancy, the bliss of physical pliancy 
arises first 
Thus, when physical pliancy first arises, through the force of the energies, a great 
experience of bliss arises within the body in dependence on which a very exquisite experience of joyful bliss is also produced in the mind.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A3A-1B2 Indicating the actual way in which calm abiding is accomplished once pliancy 
has been fully achieved 
This has two points:  
A The actual manner 
Then the force of that pliancy having arisen for the first time gradually diminishes. In 
fact, it is not that pliancy has been exhausted and goes away. However, that gross pliancy has moved the mind excessively, so when it neutralizes, unshakable pliancy that is delicate like a shadow and in accord with meditative st abilization arises. When the 
joy
238 has disappeared, the mind [284] remains firmly on its object, and calm abiding free 
from the restlessness of agitation through great joy is achieved. 
                                                 
237 Getting rid of negative mental tendencies and the developmen t of the antidote are in direct opposition to each other: 
the more you have of one, the less the other one will be present. Otherwise the obvious question would be why the 
antidote develops if you are already rid of negative states. The relationship should rather be understood in these terms: 
at the point where the negative states have come to an end,  the antidote is fully developed. According to Geshe Thubten 
Soepa they are “Like hot and cold. One comes as the other one goes away.” 
238 Tib. sems dga’ , “joy of the mind.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
233 B The source for that 
In Śrāvaka Levels it says: 
When that first arises, you are endowed with mental joy, a feeling of mental 
ease, and supreme mental happiness, and even the object appears manifestly 
endowed with joy. Then, little by little, all the force of pliancy that first arises 
turns extremely subtle and the body becomes endowed with shadow-like 
pliancy. The mind abandons all the joy again, and through calm abiding gets 
involved in the object completely fi rm and utterly peaceful in aspect.  
When that happens, through the attainment of the attention and the calm abiding 
included in the preparatory stage of the first concentration, the lesser attention of 
meditative equipoise is atta ined. This is explained in Śrāvaka Levels .  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A3A-2 The signs of possessing attention along with a 
clarification of doubts 
This has two points:  
A The actual signs of possessing attention 
B Clarification of doubts 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A3A-2A The act ual signs of possessing attention 
This has eight points:  
1 How this is set forth in Śrāvaka Levels  
The signs by which to recognize that you yourself or others have achieved attention are 
set forth in Śrāvaka Levels . Through attaining that, a set of four is achieved in small 
measure: a mind included in the form realm, physical pliancy, mental pliancy, and single-pointedness. Also, you are enabled to purify  mental afflictions by means of calm and 
coarse
239 paths or paths associated with aspects of the four noble truths; physical and 
mental pliancy arise very quickly when the mind is equipoised inwardly; for the most 
part, the five hindrances, desire for sensua l pleasure, slee piness, and so forth do not 
occur, and when you rise from equipoise, you are still imbued with some physical and 
mental pliancy.  
2 Once this attention has been achieved, it is easy for calm abiding to become pure 
Once attention with these signs is achieved, [2 85] it is easy for the path of calm abiding 
to become pure.240 After meditative equipoise of the mind in single-pointed calm abiding, 
physical and mental pliancy can quickly be induced so that pliancy increases. Śrāvaka 
Levels  explains that the more pliancy increase s the more calm abiding also increases, 
whereby they mutually increase each other. In brief, when the mind is serviceable, the 
energies become serviceable. At that time  extraordinary physical pliancy occurs, and 
upon its occurrence special meditative stabilization arises. Through that, again, an 
extraordinary serviceability of energies is accomplished whereby physical and mental 
pliancy is induced. 
3 Statements from Śrāvaka Levels  about how other positive qualities also arise  
Apart from that, Śrāvaka Levels  explains that at the time the mind is first placed single-
pointedly, it is placed without mindfulness of or attention to anything else whatsoever: 
In order not to turn to all the sign s and prevent distraction, you prevent 
mindfulness and attention to them, from the beginning, by focusing 
completely. 
                                                 
239 A so-called mundane special insight that consists in looking at lower levels as coarse and higher levels as peaceful. 
240 In this context become pure  means become a higher level path . (Oral explanation by Geshe Thubten Soepa). 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
234 When you have familiarized yourself with that, according to Śrāvaka Levels :  
By the stages of focusing on single-p ointedness itself and focusing on calm 
abiding within, be sure to place your mind in just this way on the mental 
continuum and on the entire continuity of the mind becoming free from signs, 
free from discursive thought, and abso lutely calm. When you have achieved 
the mind of calm abiding in that manner,  if signs and concep tions arise due to 
the faults of forgetfulness and unfamili arity, and if appearances arise due to 
secondary mental afflictions, if holes start showing, if they become your 
object, from the point of view of having seeing their disadvantages earlier you 
should not be mindful of such occurrences nor attend to them. Through your 
not minding them and not attending to them in this mann er, those objects 
completely disintegrate, and [286] when they have been completely 
eliminated, the mind is placed on the very absence of appearances. Sir, this 
object is subtle and hard to comprehend, therefore aspire and try hard in order 
to comprehend it. 
That is how meditative stabilization is said to arise. 
4 Explaining the meaning of that 
The section up to “absolutely calm”241 shows how the three, freedom from signs and so 
forth, arise gradually from sustai ning the meditation as before.  
Then, the section up to “you should not be mindful of such occurrences” explains that 
whenever signs and so forth appear in the mind even th ough calm abiding has been 
accomplished—because there is no great fa miliarity with it and so forth—you should 
remember the disadv antages of the mind coming under their influence, not pursue them, 
and place the mind without thinking of anything. 
Then, the section up to “absence of appearances”242 explains that through your 
familiarizing yourself in this manner, whicheve r of the three, marks and so forth, arises, 
through the force of familiarit y with not thinking about it in any way, it will subside by 
itself independently of deli berately focusing the mind. The section explains that 
thereafter you abide in the non-appearance of the three, and you are not carried away by 
them. The remainder of the passage points out that this calm abiding is subtle and that it 
is difficult to comprehend the explanation of it. 
5 How the mind is not directed at signs  
In this regard, the signs are explained as 10 signs: of the five objects, forms and so 
forth, of the three poisons, and of male and female. As for the manner in which they 
vanish, first a multiplicity of signs of forms and so forth appear, and as soon as they appear, they subside by themselves and are purified. Finally, when you settle in 
meditative equipoise, the signs of forms, sounds, and so forth do not appear, only the 
mind—knowing and clarity—and vibrant happiness do.  
6 How all discursive thoughts also subside by themselves 
Then, this is how discursive thoughts disappear: Since you have placed your mind as 
before without being mindful of them and without attending to them, discursive thoughts 
that have arisen, like bubbles emerging from water, cannot proliferate greatly or conjoin [287] and subside by themselves. Then, through your sustaining the meditation as 
explained earlier, your knowledge of the experience and the appearance of bliss, without 
being stopped deliberately, unable to withsta nd the focus, subside again by themselves, 
                                                 
241 Up to the equivalent of “place your mind” in the Tibetan text. 
242 Up to the equivalent of “is placed on” in the Tibetan text. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
235 like bark peeling off, and get purified by th emselves as soon as they arise. Bliss and 
knowledge of the experience become more subtle.  
7 Differences between that and the time after meditative equipoise 
At that time, when you are in meditative equipoise, there are no appearances such as 
that of your own body, and there is a sense as if your mind had become indivisible from space. As you rise from meditation, it feel s as if your body had suddenly appeared. 
Afterwards, even afflicted discursive thoughts of hatred and the like that arise are also 
different from before or originally: weak and unable to conjoin over long periods of time.  
8 Experiences of great mental clarity and the like also occur 
These periods are period s of what is called complete pacification . The experience of 
clarity is great and you feel you can count the minute particles of pillars and walls of a 
house. Due to the intense stability factor, sleep like before when you had not yet 
achieved meditative stabilizatio n does not even come during the hours of sleep; it seems 
mixed with meditative stabilization and you have many pure dream appearances and the 
like. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A3A-2B Clarification of doubts 
This has four points:  
1 A doubt 
When the kind of meditative stabilization explained above is achieved, which of the five 
paths is the context to place it in?  
2 Its clarification  
If it is the meditative stabilization explained above that is cultivated after the view of selflessness has been unmistakenly ascertained and the mind has been placed within that view,
243 it can be placed in the context of the path of liberation of ordinary beings. 
However, if it is a meditation sustained otherwise, Śrāvaka Levels  says that even 
mundane paths of the view with the coarse and subtle aspects that accomplish the actual 
level of the first concentration, are accomplished in dependence on this meditative stabilization. Therefore non-Buddhist sages [288] who free themselves from attachment 
by means of mundane paths up to that of Nothingness and those below, also need to 
progress to higher paths in dependence on it. So it is a meditative  stabilization common 
to both non-Buddhists and Buddhists.  
3 If it is also conjoined with any of the three principal aspects of the path, it becomes a path of liberation and 
so on 
Otherwise, if it is conjoined with detachment  from cyclic existence due to the view that 
correctly realizes selflessness and a realization of the faults of exis tence, and if it is 
conjoined with the thought to definitely emerge that strives for liberation, it becomes a 
path of liberation. If it is conjoined with the mind of enli ghtenment, it even becomes a 
Mahāyāna path. Likewise, for example, if the generosity of giving a pinch of food to an 
animal and the guarding of one kind of ethics is conjoined with those intentions, they 
become collections of the paths of liber ation and omniscience, respectively.  
However, here, what is being analyzed is not whether or not it becomes a path of 
liberation and omniscience by way of conjunction with other paths. Rather, what is being 
analyzed is what the path becomes thro ugh the own entity of this meditative 
stabilization.  
                                                 
243 A given meditation does not need to have this view as its main object. Still, it remains linked with it in so far as it 
derives its particular taste from the view. (Oral explanation by Geshe Thubten Soepa) 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
236 4 Hence the need to differentiate with regard to blis s, clarity, and non-conceptuality whether or not a given 
meditation is an emptiness meditation 
That is why, in meditations without mindfulness and mental activity, the blissful, clear 
non-conceptuality termed unfabricated by the mind  and without grasping  is of two types: 
that which is and that which is not an emptin ess meditation with the mind in equipoise on 
the meaning of suchness. Therefore it is extremely important to differentiate them well, 
for there is much ground for mistaking that which is not a realization of suchness for its realization. If you do not differentiate them as explained earlier, you will even take meditative stabilization, which is common to this Dharma and that of others, to be the 
main point of completion stage Highest Yoga Tantra. So you should investigate this in 
detail. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A3B General indication of how to traverse the path in dependence 
on calm abiding 
This has six points:  
1 How it is of great importance to cultivate special insight in dependence on it 
Should someone who has thus [289] achieved attention, the non-conceptual meditative 
stabilization explained above, sustain just that non-conceptuality characterized by clarity, 
non-conceptuality, and so forth?  
Such meditative stabilization having been generated in the mental continuum is for the 
sake of generating special in sight that destroys the mental afflictions. Therefore, if 
special insight does no t arise in dependence on it, however much you familiarize yourself 
with meditative stabilization, you will not even be able to abandon the mental afflictions 
of the desire realm, not to mention the mental afflictions as a whole. For that reason it is 
necessary to cultivate special insight.  
2 How there are two special insights to be cultivated 
In fact there are two, the special insight that progresses along mundane paths 
abandoning manifest afflictions, and the special insight that progresses along 
supramundane paths abandoning the seeds of afflictions from the root. The former is a 
meditation with the coarse and peaceful aspects of viewing lower levels as coarser and 
higher ones as more peaceful; the latter is  a meditation of the view with the sixteen 
aspects, impermanence and so forth, regarding the four truths. Both are set forth in 
Śrāvaka Levels , the principal one being the view that realizes the selflessness of 
persons.244  
3 How calm abiding constitutes the basis for the progress of all non-Buddhist and Buddhist yogis on the path  
That being so, anyone, non-Buddhists who aban don manifest afflictions by cultivating the 
path with coarse and peaceful aspects, and Buddhists who abandon afflictions from the 
root by meditating on  the meaning of selflessness, re quire the calm abiding explained 
above as the basis for abandoning affliction s of both non-Buddhist and Buddhist yogis. 
Not only that, but any Mah āyāna or H īnayāna yogi must accomp lish that meditative 
stabilization, and as for Mah āyānists, again, all Mantray āna and P āramitāyāna yogis must 
accomplish that calm abiding. Therefore this calm abiding is crucial as the basis of 
progress on the paths of all yogis. 
4 How it is unacceptable for us Buddhists not to have the special insight that realizes selflessness  
For Buddhists [290] it is not unacceptable to lack the former of those two special insights, but the latter special insight that  realizes selflessness is an element
245 whose 
lack is unacceptable. In fact, if you attain the calm abiding explained above, which is 
                                                 
244 Selflessness forms part of the 16 aspects of the four nobl e truths. It is the most important one in this context. 
245 Tib. yan lag  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
237 included in the preparatory stage of the first concentration, you can attain the liberation 
that is freedom from all bonds of cyclic existence by cultivating special insight in 
dependence on it, even without achieving the calm abiding of higher concentrations or 
formlessness. On the other hand, if you do not realize the nature of selflessness and fail to meditate on it, you will not free yourself from cyclic existence even if you abandon all 
manifest afflictions up to complete Nothingness and thus attain the Peak of Existence by 
means of the calm abiding explained above and the mundane specia l insight dependent 
on it. 
5 A source for that 
From Praise of the One Worthy of Praise : 
Beings who fail to turn to your teachings, 
Who are blinded by delusion, 
Having gone to the Peak of Existence 
Attain an existence and suffer again. 
Those who follow your  teachings, without 
Attaining the basis of concentration 
Still avert existences, 
While being looked over by M āra. 
6 Yogis of Highest Yoga Tantra also need to traverse the path based on calm abiding 
For that reason, yogis of Highest Yoga Tantra also need to develop one kind of calm 
abiding even though they do not generate the special insight that observes the varieties of peaceful and coarse aspects and the calm abiding accomplished by means of it. In fact the point where it first arises is during the generation stage.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6A3C Indication of how to traverse mundane paths in particular 
This has four points:  
1 How features of two kinds of beginners are explained in Śrāvaka Levels   
Here Śrāvaka Levels  explains that from the ninth mind you are a beginner in attention as 
long as you have not achieved attention, whereas one who has achieved attention and, 
out of a desire to purify mental afflictions, cultivates the attention that individually knows 
the characteristics246 is a beginner in purifying afflictions.  
2 The need to differentiate those two properly [291] 
If this point explained in Śrāvaka Levels  is not ascertained properly, the false impression 
will arise that the lowest of the paths of  concentration and formlessness is the 
preparatory stage of the first concentration, and that the first mind that arises included in 
the preparatory stage is the individual recognition of characteristics because the 
individual recognition of characteristics is the first of six attentions247 that are discussed in 
that regard.  
3 Establishing the validity of this distinction  
It is inadmissible to hold this because ther e is no way for the preparatory stage of the 
first concentration to arise like that without calm abiding having been achieved, and if 
that preparatory stage has not been ac hieved, calm abiding is not achieved.248 Also, since 
                                                 
246 One out of six attentions taught in the context of  the preparatory stage to the first concentration. 
247 Those six attentions are not equivalent to the four attentions described above. Rather, they are another set of 
attentions associated with special contemplations that Jé Tsongkhapa does not elaborate on here.  
248 In other words calm abiding and the preparatory stage to the first concentration are attained simultaneously and may 
be thought of as equivalent. This preparatory stage is not the first concentration proper and therefore not its lowest 
path. Between the realization of calm ab iding and the attainment of the actual first concentration there is a phase of 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
238 the individual recognition of characteristics is an analytical meditation, calm abiding that 
has not been achieved before cannot be newly accomplished by means of that 
meditation.  
4 The need for beginners to achieve calm abiding from the attention included in the preparatory stage of the 
first concentration before achieving the attention that individually recognizes characteristics included in the 
preparatory stage of the first concentration 
Therefore the first of the six attentions of the first preparatory stage is the beginning of 
cultivating the special insight included in the preparat ory stage. However, it is not 
immediately at the beginning of the first preparatory stage, for the calm abiding included 
in the preparatory stage must precede it. All the meditative stabilizations prior to the 
achievement of the meditative stabilization included in the first preparatory stage are single-pointed minds of the desire realm. That is why, according to the great texts, there 
seem to be very few who achieve even calm abiding. 
For fear of wordiness I have not written here about how to free oneself from attachment 
to the desire realm by means of the si x attentions of the preparatory stage. 
Explanation of how to train in special insight, the entity of wisdom 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B How to train in special insight  
This has four points:  
1 Relying on the prerequisites of special insight 
2 Divisions of special insight 
3 How to cultivate special insight 
4 The measure of having achieved special insight through meditation 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1 Relying on the prerequisites of special insight 
This has two points:  
A General presentation of how to rely on the prerequisites of special insight [292] B In particular how the view is settled 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1A General presentation of how to rely on the prerequisites of 
special insight 
Stages of Meditation II  sets forth three prerequisi tes of special insight:  
1. relying on holy beings, 
2. seeking to hear the Dharma from holy beings, and 
3. reflecting on it properly. 
With regard to this, there are three points:  
1 The need to hear and reflect on the scriptures 
2 The need to follow one of the great trail-blazers as appropriate 3 On the history of Madhyamaka 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1A-1 The need to hear and reflect on the scriptures 
It is an indispensable causal prerequisite of special insight to develop the view realizing 
suchness by means of the wisdoms of hearing and reflecting, having heard the stainless texts in dependence on experts who unmistakenly know the essential points of the 
scriptures. This is because if you lack the view that has resolved the meaning of the 
mode of being, it will be impossible for the realization of special insight that realizes things as they are to arise.  
                                                                                                                                                                  
investigating meditation—the so-called six a ttentions. It follows that the first of th ose is not the first mental state of the 
preparatory stage, since the latter is preceded by actual ca lm abiding which is the first mental state of the preparatory 
stage. (Oral explanation by Geshe Thubten Soepa) 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
239 2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1A-2 The need to follow one of the great trail-blazers as appropriate 
Again, such a view must be sought by one who is relying not on the interpretable 
meaning but on the definitive meaning. Therefore you need to understand the difference 
between interpretable and definitive meaning and understand the meaning of the 
scriptures of definitive meaning. Again, with this, if you do not rely on a treatise by one 
of the great, valid , trailblazing founders which elucidat es the Buddha’s intentions, you will 
be like a blind person without a guide going off into a dreadful direction. Therefore you 
should rely on a non-mistaken commentary.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1A-3 On the history of Madhyamaka 
This has two points:  
A The need to seek the view relying on N āgārjuna’s system 
B How the ways of explaining N āgārjuna’s intention emerged 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1A-3A The need to seek the view relying on N āgārjuna’s system 
Who should you rely on? On Ārya Nāgārjuna, widely renowned throughout the three 
levels, whom the Bhagavan himself prophesied very clearly in numerous s ūtras and 
tantras as elucidating the essence of his teachings, the profound meaning free from all 
extremes of existence and non-existence. You should seek the view realizing emptiness 
relying on his texts. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1A-3B How the ways of explaining N āgārjuna’s intention emerged 
This has six points:  
1 Identification of the original M ādhyamikas 
2 Analysis of the names applied by earlier generations 
3 The validity of explanations in accordance with that of Yeshé Dé on the authors of Madhyamaka treatises 
and the stages by which the Madhyamaka systems of Sautr āntika and Yog ācāra emerged 
4 Those designations are not suited to Master Candrak īrti 
5 The validity of the designations Sv ātantrika and Pr āsagika associated with scholars of the later propagation 
6 Which of the masters to follow 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1A-3B1 Identification of the original M ādhyamikas [293] 
Since the great M ādhyamikas249 such as the masters Buddhapalita, Bh āvaviveka, 
Candrak īrti, and Śāntarakṣita consider Āryadeva to be as valid as his master, both the 
father and his spiritual son are sources for the other M ādhyamikas. Therefore earlier 
generations called those two M ādhyamikas of the original te xts and the others partisan 
Mādhyamikas.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1A-3B2 Analysis of the names applied by earlier generations 
This has three points:  
A Names applied from the point of view of how conventionalities are established  
Some spiritual teachers of earlier generations say that there are two kinds of 
Mādhyamikas named from the point of view of how they posit conventionalities: 
Sautrāntika-Mādhyamikas who assert that external objects conventionally exist, and 
Yogācāra-Mādhyamikas who assert that , conventionally, external objects do not exist. 
B Names applied from the point of view of how the ultimate is asserted 
From the point of view of how the ultimate is asserted, also, two names have been 
applied: those who assert the collection of an object such as a sprout and its appearance, 
which lacks true existence, to be an ultimate truth, are proponents of illusions 
established by a reasoning consciousness , and those who assert the affirmative 
eliminative phenomenon which eliminates th e elaborations with respect to appearances250 
                                                 
249 Tib. dbu ma , “centre” or “middle” and, by extension, the Middle Way  or Madhyamaka  as a philosophical system. Its 
exponents are referred to as M ādhyamikas. 
250 These two philosophical positions will be taken up below when the divisions of ultimate truths are presented.  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
240 to be an ultimate truth, are proponents of thorough non-abiding . The first of these were 
asserted to be masters such as Śāntarakṣita and Kamala śīla. Some Indians also asserted 
the designations illusion-like  and thoroughly non-abiding .  
C How those names and their meaning to do with the way of asserting the ultimate are obscured 
The great translator Loden Shérab says “Positing them as two groups from the point of 
view of how they assert the ultimate is an obscured presentation generating amazement.” 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1A-3B3 The validity of explanations in accordance with that of Yeshé Dé on the authors 
of Madhyamaka treatises and the history of the founders of Sautr āntika-Madhyamaka and Yog ācāra-
Madhyamaka  
With regard to this, Master Yeshé Dé ex plains: “In the Madhyamaka treatises by the 
noble father, N āgārjuna, and his spiritual son, Āryadeva, it is not made clear whether 
external objects exist or not. After them Master Bh āvaviveka refuted the system of mere 
knowledge251 and established a system in which ex ternal objects conventionally exist. 
Then Master Śāntarakṣita made a different Madhyamaka system based on Yog ācāra 
treatises, teaching that external objects do not conventionally exist and that ultimately 
the mind is without inherent existence. [294] Thereby two kinds of M ādhyamikas 
emerged. The former were called Sautr āntika-Mādhyamikas, the latter Yog ācāra-
Mādhyamikas.” The great tr eatises reveal the history of clarification in accordance with 
that.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1A-3B4 Those designations are not suited to Master Candrak īrti 
However, although Master Candrak īrti asserts that external objects conventionally exist, it 
is unsuitable to call him a Sautr āntika because he does not conform to other proponents 
of the tenet system. To assert that he accords with the Vaibh āṣika is also inadmissible.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1A-3B5 The validity of the designations Sv ātantrika and Pr āsagika associated with 
scholars of the later propagation 
The scholars of the later propagation of teachings in the land of snowy mountains 
created two designations for M ādhyamikas, Sv ātantrika and Pr āsaṅgika. That accords 
with Candrak īrti’s Clear Words (Prasannapad ā). 
Therefore the M ādhyamikas are ascertained to be of two types, those who conventionally 
assert external objects and those who do not. When the names are applied from the 
point of view of how the view ascertaining emptiness is generated within the mental 
continuum, they are also ascertained to be of two types, Pr āsaṅgika and Sv ātantrika. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1A-3B6 Which of the masters to follow 
This has three points:  
A Indication that the earlier Kadampas’ quest for the view following Candrak īrti was in the Elder’s intention 
Yet following which of those masters do you se ek the intentions of the noble father and 
his spiritual son? Following the Gr eat Elder who made Master Candrak īrti’s system the 
main Madhyamaka system, the earlier great masters of these instructions also held to this 
system as the main one.  
B How Jé Tsongkhapa himself asserts the two systems, Buddhapalita’s and Candrak īrti’s, as the main ones 
and then Bh āvaviveka‘s as important 
Master Candrak īrti saw that among the commentators on Fundamental Treatise on the 
Middle Way  (Mūlamadhyamakak ārikā) Buddhapalita had elucidated Ārya Nāgārjuna’s 
intentions completely. He based himself on th at system, took a lot of good explanations 
                                                 
251 Tib. rnam rig , synonym for Tib. sems tsam (Cittamātra): the philosophical school of Mind Only so called because its 
proponents maintain that all ph enomena are of the same nature as the mind cognizing them.  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
241 a l s o  f r o m  M a s t e r  B h āvaviveka, refuted those that seemed slightly incorrect, and 
elucidated the intentions of Ārya Nāgārjuna. 
C How these two masters are important with respect to explaining the profound meaning [295] 
Since the commentaries by these two masters are seen to be very outstanding with 
regard to explaining the texts of the noble father and son, the intentions of the noble father and son will be settled here following in the footsteps of the masters Buddhapalita 
and Candrak īrti. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B In particular how the view is settled 
This has three points:  
1 Identification of afflicted ignorance 
2 Demonstration that it is the root of revolving in cyclic existence  
3 One wishing to abandon the apprehension of a self should seek the view of selflessness  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-1 Iden tification of afflicted ignorance 
This has five points:  
A Although attachment and the like are in a class discordant with knowledge, they are not chief  
B Although in general ignorance is posited as the mere opposite of knowledge, here it is the opposite of the 
knowledge realizing the lack of true existence 
C Explaining the two subtle apprehensions of a self as mental afflictions 
D How ignorance superimposes what inherent existence 
E Detailed explanation of the apprehension of a self 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-1A Although attachment and the like are in a class discordant with knowledge, they 
are not chief 
The antidotes to the other mental afflictions such as attachment taught by the Victor are 
partial antidotes, whereas the antidote to ignorance he taught becomes an antidote to all 
of them. Therefore ignorance is the basis of all errors and faults. In Clear Words  it says: 
In the nine divisions of the buddhas’ teachings based on the two truths, 
Such as the sets of s ūtras proclaimed for the extensive conduct of worldly 
beings, 
The ones that were taught for the sake  of removing attachment will not cause 
hatred to be exhausted; 
And those that were taught for the sake of removing hatred will not cause 
attachment to be exhausted; 
What was taught for the sake of exhau sting pride will not overcome the other 
defilements. 
Therefore they are not so pervasive, a ll those speeches are not of such great 
meaning. 
Those that were taught for the sake of exhausting delusion252 overcome all the 
mental afflictions. 
All the mental afflictions are thoroughly based on ignorance; that’s what the 
Victors taught.” 
That being so, you must meditate on suchness253 as the antidote to ignorance. Moreover, 
unless you have identified ig norance, you will not know how to cultivate its antidote. 
Therefore it is extremely important to identify ignorance. 
                                                 
252 In the system of Dharmak īrti and Candrak īrti, which the present text is  largely based on, delusion (gti mug)  and 
ignorance (ma rig pa)  a r e  s y n o n y m o u s .  I t  i s  o n l y  i n  t h e  s y s t e m  o f  A s a ṅga and Vasubandhu that the two terms are 
defined differently with ignorance covering a wider range of meaning than delusion. 
253 The ultimate nature of phenomena withou t any elaborations; synonym for emptiness. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
242 2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-1B Although in general ignorance is posited as the mere opposite of knowledge, 
here it is the opposite of the knowledge realizing the absence of true existence  
Ignorance [296] is the opposite of knowledg e, but knowledge on the other hand should 
not be taken as any knowledge. Rather, it is the wisdom knowing the suchness of 
selflessness. Its opposite is no t suitable to be the mere absence of that wisdom or just 
something else. Therefore it is its antagonist.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-1C Explaining the two subtle apprehensions of a self as mental afflictions  
It is the superimposition254 of a self and, more specifically, the two superimpositions of a 
self of phenomena and of pers ons. So both the apprehension  of a self of phenomena and 
the apprehension of a self of persons are ignorance.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-1D How ignorance superimposes what inherent existence 
The manner of superimpositio n is to apprehend that phenomena exist by way of their 
own entity, by way of their own character, or inherently. In this regard it says in the 
Questions of Up āli Sūtra (Upāliparipŗcchā) that phenomena are posited by the power of 
conception: 
The various flowers that gladden the mind, 
The golden, resplendent, attractive mansions, 
Both completely lack a creator; They’re posited by the power of conception.  
The world is imputed by force of conception. 
And in 
Sixty Stanzas of  Reasoning (Yukti ṣaṣțikā) it also says: 
Since the perfect Buddha said 
The world has ignorance as its cause, 
Why would it be invalid to say  
That this world is due to conception? 
The commentary on the meaning of this statement explains that the worlds are not 
established by way of their own entity, bu t are merely imputed by conception. In Four 
Hundred Stanzas it also says: 
If, in the absence of conception, Desire and so forth do not exist, 
Who with intelligence would uphold Intrinsic realitie s and conception? 
And in the commentary on this: 
Things that exist only through the existence of conception and do not exist 
without conception are without doubt ascertained to be unestablished by way of their own entity, like a snake imputed to a rope. 
This statement [297] explains that from the point of view of being imputed while not being established by way of their own entities, attachment and so forth resemble a snake imputed to a rope.
255 Yet the latter is not the same as attachment and so forth in terms of 
whether or not they conventionally exist.  
                                                 
254 The Tibetan word sgro ‘dogs  literally means “attach feathers.” It is usually rendered as “imputation,” “exaggeration,” 
or “superimposition.” 
255 This is a popular analogy: in the twilight someone mistak es a coiled rope for a snake and gets frightened, designating 
it as “snake” and imputing the characteristics of a snake to it. Tib. btags pa , “distort”, “tie”, “attach”, “put on”, “name” is 
therefore translated here and below as the near-synonyms “impute” and “designate” commonly used in this context. 
However, the main emphasis is not on th e actual designation but rather on the characteristics the mind thereby imputes 
to the object apprehended. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
243 2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-1E Detailed explanation of the apprehension of a self 
This has two points:  
1 Explanation that the apprehension of a self is twofold  
2 Distinctions between the apprehension of a self and the view of the transitory collection  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-1E1 Explanation that the apprehension of a self is twofold 
This has two points:  
A How the two apprehensions of a self are the same in their subjective aspect but still differentiated through 
their observed objects  
For those reasons the manner of apprehending things as truly existent, the object of 
negation, is to apprehend them not as posited by the power of beginningless conception but as established over and above objects by way of their own entities. Its referent 
object
256 is called self or inherent existence . The non-existence of this with a person as 
the substratum is taught to be the selflessness of a person, and the non-existence of it 
with phenomena, such as an eye and a nose, as the substratum is taught to be the selflessness of phenomena. Therefore the ap prehension of that inherent existence as 
present in persons and phenomena is implicitly understood as the apprehension of the 
two selves.  
B The reason for differentiating the two apprehensions of a self in that manner  
In the Commentary on the “Four Hundred Stanzas”  it says: 
In this regard the so-called self is an entity of things that does not depend on 
anything else—inherent existence. Its non-existence is selflessness. Owing to 
the division of phenomena and persons, it is understood as twofold: a 
selflessness of phenomena  and a selflessness of persons . 
It is like that. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-1E2 Distinctions between the apprehension of a self and the view of the transitory 
collection 
This has three points:  
A The apprehension of an I, the view of the transitory collection, has a person as its observed object 
W i t h  r e s p e c t  t o  t h e  o b s e r v e d  o b j e c t  o f  t h e  a p p r e h e n s i o n  o f  a  s e l f  o f  p e r s o n s ,  t h e  
Commentary on the “Middle Way”  explains that some Sa ṃmitīyas257 assert part of the five 
aggregates and some assert only the mind to be the basis or observed object of the view 
of a self. As for the mind, again, Cittam ātrins258 and certain M ādhyamikas who assert a 
mind-basis-of-all assert that the mind-basis -of-all is the observed object, and some 
Mādhyamikas such as Bh āvaviveka who do not assert it, as  well as many Hearer schools, 
assert that it is the mental consciousness. However, with these systems, when it comes 
to the meaning invested in the designation person , the one cultivating the paths, the one 
revolving in cyclic existence, and so forth, [298] you need to know the two modes of 
positing a mere I and positing something like a mind-basis-of-all as the basis of that I’s 
characteristics.  
                                                 
256 Tib. zhen yul  
257 Exponents of one philosophical system within Hinay āna Buddhism. 
258 Follower of the “Mind Only” school of Mah āyāna Buddhism. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
244 With respect to the innate259 view of the transitory collection260 which is an apprehension 
of a self, the Commentary on the “Middle Way”  refutes that the aggregates are its 
observed object, and in the co mmentary it is said to have the dependently imputed self 
as its observed object. It is said that even the mere collection of aggregates is not the 
conventional self, so neither the collection of  aggregates at one time nor the collection 
which is the continuum of the aggregates from an earlier to a later moment are its 
observed object. Rather , the mere I which is the observed  object of the mere thought “I” 
arising, or the mere person, sh ould be taken as its observed object. Neither the individual 
aggregates nor their collection is posited as the basis of that I’s261 characteristics. 
However, this point, an unsu rpassed distinguishing feature of this system, has been 
explained in great detail elsewhere.  
B The difference between observed objects of the two apprehensions of true existence  
The mind thinking “I” that arises toward the observed object of the innate view of the 
transitory collection must arise naturally. Therefore, although the innate apprehension of the self of a person that apprehends the person associated with someone else’s 
continuum to be established by way of his ow n character is innate, it is not the innate 
view of the transitory collection of that person.  
The observed object of the innate view of the transitory collection apprehending mine is 
the mine itself
262, the observed object of the innate mind thinking “mine.” It should not 
be held that one’s own eyes and so forth are the observed object. 
Its aspect is to observe that object of observation and apprehend the mine to be 
established by way of its own character.  
The objects of the innate apprehension of a self of phenomena are the form aggregate 
and so forth, the eyes, ears, and so forth associated with one’s own or someone else’s 
continuum, as well as the environments and so forth which are not included in a 
continuum. Its aspect is as explained before. In the Explanation of Candrak īrti’s 
“Commentary on the ‘Middle Way’”  it says: 
Delusion is the ignorance that superimposes a non-existent own entity of 
things. It has the nature of obstructing the view of their inherent existence, it conceals
263 them. 
And: 
Thus, [299] through the power of afflicted ignorance included in the links of 
cyclic existence...  
The statement asserts that the apprehension of objects as truly existent is ignorance and 
that it is an afflicted ignorance. Therefore there is accordance here with the former of 
two ways of positing the apprehension of a self of phenomena as a mental affliction and as an obscuration to knowledge.  
                                                 
259 Tib. lhan skyes , “co-nascent” or “co-emergent,” refers to an associat ion whereby every living being perceives itself as 
well as other persons and phenomena independently of conscious thought or philosophical tenets. 
260 Although the view of the tran sitory collection consists in regarding one’s aggregates as self or possessions of the self, 
they are not its referent object according to the Pr āsaṅgika system. The statement that this view is directed at the 
aggregates should be understood as an explanation of the term view of the transitory collection  rather than an 
identification of its referent object. (Oral explanation by Geshe Thubten Soepa) 
261 In other texts, particularly th ose associated with debate, Tib. mtshan gzhi  is also translated as “illustration” or 
“example.” 
262 The Tibetan expression nga yi ba nyid  literally means “mine- ness.”  
263 The Tibetan word used, kun rdzob , is also part of the term for conventional truth , Tib. kun rdzob (kyi) bden pa . That 
term therefore explicitly signifies conventional truths as something co ncealing or obscuring something else. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
245 C Showing that this manner of identifying the apprehension of true existence is asserted by the noble father 
and son 
This was also taught by the noble father and son. In Seventy  Stanzas  on Emptiness 
(Śūnyatāsaptati) it says: 
That which conceives things born from causes  
And conditions to be real 
Was said by the Teacher to be ignorance. From that the twelve links arise. 
With good understanding that things are empty 
Through seeing reality, there is no ignorance. 
That is the cessation of ignorance, Whereby the twelve links cease to exist.  
To “conceive things... to be real” is to apprehend them as established in reality or truly. This is similar in meaning to a statement from 
Precious Garland : 
As long as the aggregates are apprehended, 
An I will be apprehended in them. 
which says that as long as the apprehension of aggregates has not stopped, you will not 
stop the view of the transitory collection. 
In Four Hundred Stanzas  it also says: 
Like the body sense in the body 
Delusion abides in all of them. 
Therefore, by conquering delusion, All the mental afflictions are conquered. 
Delusion will no more arise  
If interdependent arising
264 is seen. 
Therefore, with all my effort, here, 
I will only talk about that. 
As regards the delusion set forth in this manner, the context is an identification of the 
delusion which is one of the three poisons. It is therefore afflicted ignorance. In order to stop this ignorance, it is said to be necessary to realize the profound meaning of 
interdependence, the meaning of emptiness appearing as the meaning of dependent 
arising. In accordance with the explanation in the commentary on this text, afflicted 
delusion should therefore be taken to be a superimposition
265 of true existence on things. 
This manner of understanding [300] was set forth clearly by the venerable Candrak īrti 
following the example of Buddhap ālita’s commentary on Ārya Nāgārjuna’s intention. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-2 Demonstration th at afflicted ignorance is the root of 
revolving in cyclic existence  
This has six points:  
A Whereas the innate apprehension of a self must be posited as the root of cyclic existence, artificial ones are 
not suitable to be posited so  
That being so, the ignorance apprehending the two selves explained above is also not the 
apprehension of artificial selves of persons and phenomena that are imputed by the 
uncommon assertions of non-Buddhist and Buddhist tenet systems, (1) a permanent, unitary, and independent person, (2) external objects of apprehension—particles that do 
                                                 
264 Tib. rten (cing) ‘brel (ba) , usually translated here as “dependent relation” or “interdependence.” 
265 This is because true or truly existent  refers to something existing by way of its own characteristics, i.e. independent 
of other factors.  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
246 not have parts such as an eastern side an d gross composites of them, (3) internal 
apprehending consciousnesses—moments of awareness without time parts such as earlier 
and later and a continuum of awareness joining such partless moments together, and (4) 
self-consciousness that is non-dualistic in terms of being empty of such objects and subjects. Rather, it is the two innate appreh ensions of a self that all those whose minds 
are or are not affected by tenets have in common and that have operated beginninglessly 
without depending on the minds’ being affected by tenets. Just that is held to be the root 
of cyclic existence here. In the 
Commentary on the “Middle Way”  it says: 
In those who spend numerous eons unconscious as beasts 
And do not perceive this unborn permanent something, 
The apprehension of self is still seen to operate. 
Through this reasoning it can be understood th at what binds all sentient beings in cyclic 
existence is innate ignorance, and since artificial ignorance is only present in proponents 
of tenets, it is inadmissible as the root of cyclic existence. 
B Since the innate mode of apprehension does not involve artificial manners of apprehension, it does not help 
to stop those manners of apprehension 
It is extremely important to gain discriminating certainty about this. If you do not 
understand that, then, at the time of settling emptiness by means of the view, [301] you will not know how to hold as the main thing the ascertainment of the absence of real 
existence as apprehended by innate ignorance and how to negate the objects of artificial 
apprehensions as subordinate to that. If you negate the two selves, neglecting the 
refutation of the mode of apprehension of innate ignorance, you will ascertain just the selflessness that negates imputations by only the proponents of tenets mentioned earlier. 
Therefore, at the time of me ditation, you will also necessar ily meditate on just that 
because the ascertainment through the vi ew is for the sake of meditation.  
C The absurdity of opposing innate mental afflictions by merely refuting the referent objects of artificial 
concepts 
Therefore, when you meditate on that selfle ssness and it becomes manifest, even if you 
take that familiarization to its completion, there will be nothing more to it than just that. Thus it is very absurd to assert that through seeing the non-existence of the two selves 
merely as imputed by artificial apprehensions,  the innate mental afflictions are stopped. 
In the 
Commentary on the “Middle Way”  it says: 
When you realize selflessness, you abandon 
The permanent self, but that’s not asserted as basis 
Of apprehending a self. Hence it’s quite odd To say that knowing such selflessness casts out the self-view
266. 
And in the commentary it also says: 
For clarification, this point, the mutual unrelatedness, is explained by way of 
analogy:  “While seeing a snake in a ho le in a wall of one’s house, 
To make oneself abandon the fear of the snake 
By clearing up doubts saying ‘There is no elephant here!’ Alas would only be laughable to others.” 
Although this is said with regard to the self lessness of persons, it is the same also with 
regard to the selfle ssness of phenomena: 
When you realize selflessness, you abandon, 
                                                 
266 Tib. bdag (tu) lta (ba) , translated above as “view of a self.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
247 The artificial self, but that’s not asserted 
As basis of ignorance. Hence it is quite odd 
To say that knowing such selflessness casts out the self-view. 
D Although both the view of the transitory collection and ignorance are the root of cyclic existence, there are 
not two roots of cyclic existence 
Objection: In Precious Garland  it says: 
As long as one apprehends the aggregates, 
So long will one ap prehend a self. [302] 
If there is this apprehension,267 there’s karma, 
And from karma there is rebirth. 
The apprehension of a self268 of phenomena that apprehen ds the aggregates as truly 
existent is explained as the root of cyclic existence. In the Commentary on the “Middle 
Way”  it says: 
Seeing with his mind that all the faults of afflictions Arise from the view of th e transitory collection. 
The view of the transitory collection is explained as the root of cyclic existence. The two 
explanations are contradictory because two discordant roots of cyclic existence are 
inadmissible.  
Answer: There is no fault. Th is system distinguishes the tw o apprehensions of a self by 
means of their observed objects, but there is no  difference in the aspect of their mode of 
apprehension because both have the aspect of apprehending the object to be established 
by way of its own character. The contradiction of two roots of cyclic existence is understood to consist in positing two modes of  apprehension that do  not accord in their 
way of engaging in their objects as the root s of cyclic existence. Therefore, when the 
apprehension of a self of phenomena is taught as the cause of the view of the transitory collection, the two internal divisions of ignorance are being pointed out as cause and 
effect. When the two are taught as the root of the mental afflictions, they are pointed out 
as the root of all the mental afflictions whose mode of appr ehension is discordant with 
them. Since the two of them also have that aspect,
269 there is no contradiction, just as 
there is no contradiction in both earlier and later moments of the same kind of ignorance 
being the root of cyclic existence.  
Although it does not appear that Venerable Candrak īrti specifically and clearly explains 
the view of the transitory collection as ignorance, he generally says that the 
apprehension of things as truly existent is afflicted ignorance, without distinguishing 
between persons and phenomena. He also asserts that the apprehension of a self of 
persons is the apprehension of persons as established by way of their own character. Moreover, he frequently explains the innate view of the transitory collection as the root 
of cyclic existence. If he asserted it to be different in meaning from the ignorance which 
is the apprehension of true existence, he would be positing two roots of cyclic existence with discordant modes of apprehension, which would be contradictory. Therefore both of 
them should be understood as ignorance.  
E Demonstration that the noble father and son assert the apprehension of true existence to be the root of 
cyclic existence [303] 
All the other innate and artificial mental afflictions, as they operate, apprehend individual 
features of that very object superimposed by the innate ignorance explained earlier. 
                                                 
267 Literally “If the apprehension of self exists.” 
268 Tib. bdag, “self,” and nga, “I,” are used synonymously in the present text. 
269 Tib. tshul, usually translated here as “manner” or “way.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
248 Therefore, just as the other four sense powe rs, eyes and so forth,  abide in dependence 
on the body sense power rather than abiding in a separate sphere270 independently, all 
the other mental afflictions also operate in dependence on innate ignorance, which is why 
delusion is said to be chief. 
Delusion abides in all of them like the 
Body sense power throughout the body. 
In the Commentary on the “Four Hundred Stanzas”  it says: 
Desire and so forth also operate by superimposing features such as 
attractiveness and repulsiveness on the mere inherent existence of things 
imputed by delusion. Therefore they operate in a manner that is not different 
from delusion and even depend on it, for delusion is chief.  
After that, once delusion has apprehended the objects as established by way of their own 
character, if the object is agreeable with one’s own mind, attachment arises as it is 
observed, and if it appears to be disagreeable with one’s own mind, anger arises toward 
it. If the object does not appear either agreeable or disagreeable with one’s mind and 
remains as an ordinary thing in between, neither of the other two arises when the object 
is observed but further delusion  of the same kind arises. In Sixty  Stanzas of  Reasoning  it 
says: 
Why would the great venom, the afflictions, not arise  
In those with a mind, that is, with their basis.  
Even while in ordinary states  
It’s seized by the snake of  the mental afflictions.  
In the commentary these lines are explained as above. 
That the view of the transitory collection arises from apprehendi ng the aggregates as 
truly existent appears to be the intended meaning of Precious Garland  as well.  
The way the remaining mental afflictions arise should be inferred and understood from 
the explanations in the context of intermediate beings.  
F How to understand the stages of how the mental afflictions arise from the Commentary on the “Compendium 
of Valid Cognition”  as well [304] 
Also, in the Commentary on the “Compend ium of Valid Cognition” it says: 
He who sees a self will always 
Adhere to what he refers to as “I”. 
Through that adherence there’s craving for happiness, 
Through that craving faults are obscured. 
Good qualities are seen whereby there’s strong craving. 
What’s “mine” is grasped, that which achieves them. 
As long as there is attachment to self 
One will thus revolve in cyclic existence. 
You should come to understand it that way. 
Although this system and the way the two apprehensions of a self are posited according 
to the above explanation are not the same, you should come to understand the stages of 
how the mental afflictions arise in dependence on  it. Initially, once th e observed object of 
the thought “I” is apprehended as established by way of its own character, attachment to 
the self arises. That generates craving for the self’s happiness. However, since there is 
                                                 
270 Tib. de las yul  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
249 no independent happiness of the self that does not depend on mine,271 there is craving for 
mine. That obscures its faults and causes one to see positive qualities in it. Consequently, 
mine is grasped as something achieving the se lf’s happiness. Due to the mental afflictions 
arisen in this manner, actions are committed, and through those actions, again, one is 
reborn in cyclic existence. In Seventy  Stanzas  on Emptiness  it says: 
Actions have mental afflictions as cause; 
The karmic patterns derive from afflictions;272 
The body has actions as its cause; 
Those three are empty of entityness.  
You should train in this manner to gain certainty regarding the stages of revolving in 
cyclic existence.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3 One wishing to abandon that apprehension should seek 
the view of selflessness  
This has two points: 
A The reason why you need to seek the view realizing selflessness if you wish to abandon that 
ignorance  
B How to generate the view realizing selflessness 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3A The reason why you need to seek the view realizing 
selflessness if you wish to abandon that ignorance 
This has four points:  
1 It is stupid not to make an effort for the pure view to arise in one’s mental continuum, despite the wish to 
abandon ignorance 
2 Showing that the apprehension of a self must be abandoned  
3 Indication that the analysis of scriptures and reasonin gs is important for abandoning the apprehension of a 
self  
4 In order to abandon the apprehension of a self it is necessary to refute its referent object; the reason for that 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3A1 It is stupid not to make an effort for the pure view to arise in one’s continuum, 
despite the wish to abandon ignorance 
It is necessary to want the extinction in which the ignorance explained above, the two 
apprehensions of a self, has been abandoned; it is also asserted as necessary [305] and 
even seems to be wanted. That being so, so meone who wants to but does not put effort 
into understanding how apprehending a self be comes the root of cycl ic existence has very 
dull faculties. So does someone who, despite partial insight into this, does not put effort 
into generating the pure view of selflessness in his continuum, having thoroughly refuted the object apprehended by the apprehension o f  a  s e l f  w i t h  s c r i p t u r e s  o f  d e f i n i t i v e  
meaning as well as reasonings. That is because they have lost the vital essence of the 
path leading to liberation and omniscience, yet they remain indifferent about it.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3A2 Showing that the apprehension of a self must be abandoned 
This has two points:  
A How it is taught in the treatises 
B How it is taught in the s ūtras 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3A2A How it is taught in the treatises 
This has five points:  
1 How it is taught by the glorious Dharmak īrti 
This is why the glorious Dharmak īrti said: 
Without these objects being negated, 
                                                 
271 Tib. bdag gi rnams  is in the plural unlike the Tib. nga’i (what’s “mine”) in the quotation. 
272 Tib. nyon mongs las bdag nyid  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
250 They cannot possibly be abandoned. 
Abandoning hatred, desire, and so forth,273 
Connected with faults and positive qualities,274 
Is done by not seeing these in objects, 
Not through some external approach. 
When removing an external object of abandonment such as a thorn that has pierced your 
skin, you can completely remove it by means of something like a needle, independently 
of the object caught275 in this manner being negated. You do not do it like this when 
getting rid of an internal mental object of abandonment. Rather, you must abandon it 
seeing that the object does not have the meaning apprehended276 by, for instance, the 
apprehension of a self.  
2 How it is taught by the glorious Candrak īrti 
The glorious Candrak īrti also taught that once all the afflictions, such as attachment, as 
well as birth, aging, and so forth are seen to arise from the apprehension of a self, the 
desire to negate and ab andon it will arise. At that point the yogi negates with reasonings 
the object superimposed by the apprehension of a self, the self of a person. 
In the Commentary on the “Middle Way”  it clearly says: 
Once his mind has seen: all afflictions and faults 
Arise from the view of th e transitory collection, 
A yogi knows the self to be its object 
And performs the negation of the self. 
In fact that is what someone who meditates on suchness must do. Th erefore it says “a 
yogi.” 
3 This is also the meaning intended by the protector N āgārjuna [306] 
This approach is also the most superior intention of the protector N āgārjuna. In Sixty 
Stanzas of  Reasoning  he says: 
That is the cause of all the views, 
Without it afflictions do not arise. 
Therefore, if you thoroughly know this, Views and afflictions are thoroughly cleansed. 
If you wonder how this is known: 
By seeing dependent origination
277, 
That things born dependently are unborn. 
That was taught by supreme omniscience. 
He is pointing out that the apprehension of true existence called assertion as real things , 
which is the cause of all afflicted views and all other mental afflictions, is abandoned 
through realizing the suchness of things, their not having inherently arisen, by means of 
the reason of dependent arising. The insight that there is no inherent existence does not 
arise without a negation of the object of th e apprehension that th ings are inherently 
established.  
4 How it is taught by Āryadeva 
                                                 
273 literally “desire, hatred, and so forth.” 
274 literally “positive qualities and faults.” 
275 Tib. bzung ba’i yul  
276 Tib. bzung ba’i don  
277 Tib. brten nas ‘byung ba , usually translated here as “dependent arising.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
251 A statement by Āryadeva that accords with this was already quoted earlier. In Four 
Hundred Stanzas  he also says: 
If selflessness is seen in objects, 
The seed of existence will be ceased. 
That is, through seeing that the object of observation apprehended by the apprehension 
of a self278 lacks a self, the root of existence, ignorance, is cut. 
5 How Śāntideva also taught in accordance with that 
Venerable Śāntideva also taught: Thus the emptiness of persons is thoroughly 
established. Therefore, since their root has been cut, all the mental afflictions do not 
arise at all.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3A2B How it is taught in the s ūtras 
It is as the Noble Sūtra of the Tathagata’s Secrets ( Ārya-Tath āgataguhyaka-s ūtra) says: 
Śāntimati, it is like this. For example, wh en a tree is cut at the root, all the 
branches, leaves, and twigs dry up. Likewise, Śāntimati, when the view of the 
transitory collection is fully pacified, all the mental afflictions and secondary 
mental afflictions are fully pacified. [307] 
It is saying that through cultivating the realization of the person as an emptiness empty 
of inherent establishment, the view of the transitory collection is stopped, and once it has 
stopped, all the other mental afflictions are also stopped. On the other hand, without the 
object of the apprehension of a self of pers ons having been negated, the realization of 
selflessness is impossible.  
The sūtra passage points out that the view of the transitory collection is the root of all 
the other mental afflictions. If it were different in meaning from ignorance, there would 
be two discordant roots of cyclic existence. Therefore it should al so be understood as 
ignorance.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3A3 Indication that the anal ysis of scriptures and reasonings is important for 
abandoning the apprehension of a self 
In brief, when the many supreme scholars who commented on the meaning of the 
scriptures on the profound settled the mean ing of suchness, they carried out athorough 
analysis by means of numerous scriptures and reasonings. They did that having perceived 
that it is impossible to realize selflessness and emptiness without seeing that the self as apprehended by the mistaken apprehension does not exist and without seeing that it is empty of that self. It is essential to gain certainty with regard to this.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3A4 In order to abandon the apprehension of a self it is necessary to negate its 
referent object the reason for that 
This has two points:  
A In order to abandon the apprehension of a self it is necessary to negate its referent object 
B The reason for that 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3A4A In order to abandon the apprehension of a self it is necessary to negate its 
referent object 
If you do not meditate like this on the me aning of having negated the mistaken object 
which is the root of being bo und in cyclic existence, ev en though you meditate on 
something else that you consider profound, it will not harm the apprehension of a self at 
all. This is because, unless the mind enters  the suchness of selfle ssness and emptiness, 
                                                 
278 It is important not to confuse the object of observation of the conception of self wi th the object apprehended. 
Likewise, the aspect  of the mode of apprehension (‘dzin stangs kyi rnam pa)  should not be confused with the object  of 
the mode of apprehension (‘dzin stangs kyi yul)  which is non-existent. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
252 the apprehension of a self cann ot possibly be stopped; and because without the object of 
the apprehension of a self having been negated, you may simply withdraw your mind 
going off to its object, but that cannot be posited as entering selflessness.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3A4B The reason for that 
This has three points:  
1 The existence in general of three ways of apprehending I 
The reason for this is that when the mind gets involved in an object, there are three 
possible apprehensi ons: 1) an apprehension of that ob served object as truly existent, 2) 
an apprehension of it as not truly existent, and 3) an apprehension that does not qualify 
it as either of those two. Therefore, although you do not apprehend something as not 
truly existent, you do not necessarily appr ehend it as truly existent, and likewise, 
although you are not involved in the two selves, [308] you are not necessarily involved in 
the two selflessnesses, for there are infini te minds remaining in  the third category. 
2 The need to settle that the very basis with respect to  which the apprehension of true existence is mistaken 
does not exist in the way it is apprehended  
The two apprehensions of a self mainly operate while something concrete,279 a person or 
a phenomenon, is being observed. Therefore you need to settle that the very bases with 
respect to which they are mistaken do not exist in the way they are apprehended. 
Otherwise it will be like searching for a thief in  a meadow after he has gone to the forest. 
Consequently, since you bring the mistake to an end by thus meditating on the meaning 
that has been settled, such an emptiness is the supreme meaning of suchness. With the meaning of suchness settled as something apart that neglects this, only something 
imputed by one’s wishes will come to an end. Therefore remember that this would 
deviate from the meaning of the scriptures.  
3 The need to greatly cherish the realization of the view of suchness, having seen that if you stop the 
apprehension of true existence, you w ill turn away from cyclic existence  
That being so, the ignorance that apprehends the elaborations of persons, such as men 
and women, and of phenomena, such as forms and feelings, to be truly existent is 
stopped by gaining the view that realizes their emptiness, selflessness, and meditating on 
it. Once it has stopped, you stop discursive thought, the improper mental attention that 
superimposes signs such as attractiveness and repulsiveness when the object of the 
apprehension of true existence is observed . Once they have stopped, the other mental 
afflictions such as attachment that have the view of the transitory collection as their root 
are stopped. Once they have stopped, actions motivated by them are stopped. Once they 
have stopped, rebirth in cyclic existence projected by karma without control is stopped whereby liberation is achieved. With this in mind you should generate strong certainty 
and then decisively seek the view of suchness. In the 
Root Text on  Wisdom  it says: 
With karma and kle śas280spent there is freedom. 
Karma and kle śas arise from conceptions, 
Elaborations elaborate those. 
They are stopped by emptiness. [309] 
You need to know those stages of entering into and turning away fromcyclic existence 
and greatly cherish the realization of the me aning of suchness. However, it will not come 
through a vague involvement that fails to distinguish well the objects of observation. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B How to generate the view realizing selflessness 
This has three points:  
                                                 
279 Tib. dngos po , usually translated here as “thing.” 
280 Tib. nyon mongs , usually translated here as “mental afflictions,” is the equivalent of the Sanskrit term kleśa. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
253 1 The stages of generating the two views of selflessness 
2 The actual generation, in stages, of the two views of selflessness 
3 Presentation of conventional and ultimate truths 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B1 The stages of generating the two views of selflessness 
This has two points:  
A The stages themselves 
B The reason for that 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B1A The stages themselves 
As for the stages in which the two apprehensi ons of a self arise, the apprehension of a 
self of phenomena generates the apprehension  of a self of persons. Still, when you 
engage in the suchness of selflessness, you must first generate the view of the 
selflessness of persons and then, after that, generate the view realizing the selflessness 
of phenomena. In fact in Precious Garland  it says: 
Persons aren’t earth nor water, 
Aren’t fire, wind, nor space, Aren’t consciousness. If they are none of these, 
What could persons be other than that? 
Since beings are composites of the six elements, 
They are not real; exactly like that 
Each element is a composite too 
And therefore is not real either. 
It is as stated: first the person and then the basis it is imputed to, the elements such as earth, are said to lack inherent existence. 
Clear Words  and Buddhapalita also explain that 
when entering into suchness, one first enters by way of th e selflessness of persons. 
Śāntideva also says it like that.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B1B The reason for that 
This has two points:  
1 Proof through reasoning 
The reason why it must be done like this is that although there is no difference in 
subtlety with regard to the selflessness to be ascertained on the basis of persons and 
phenomena, due to essentials of the substratum it is easier to ascertain it on the basis of 
persons and more difficult to ascertain it on the basis of phenomena. Likewise it is more difficult, for example, to ascertain the self lessness of phenomena on the basis of eyes, 
ears, and so forth, and easier to ascertain it on the basis of reflections and the like, which is why these are taken as illustrations for settling selflessness on the basis of the 
former.  
2 Proof through scripture [310] 
This meaning is intended in the King of Meditative Stabilizations S ūtra where it says: 
Just as you know the notion of self Apply it to everything mentally. 
The entityness of all phenomena 
Is completely pure like space. 
All of them are known through one and 
All of them are seen through one. 
It says that once you know well the mode of subsistence of the I with regard to which 
the discrimination of a self, thinking “I”, op erates, you should apply its reasoning to all 
internal phenomena such as eyes and ears and external phenomena like pots. By knowing 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
254 them to be equivalent to it, you will be able to know and see the inherent existence of all 
other phenomena through knowing and se eing the natural disposition of one 
phenomenon.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2 The actual gene ration, in stages, of the two views of 
selflessness 
This has two points:  
A Settling the selflessness of persons 
B Settling the selflessness of phenomena 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2A Settling the selflessness of persons 
This has two points: 
1 Identification of persons 2 Settling persons as not inherently existent 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2A-1 Identification of persons 
This has four points:  
A The actual identification of persons 
Persons  are persons of the six classes281, gods and so forth, and persons who are ordinary 
beings, āryas, and so forth. Furthermore, they are the accumulators of white and black 
actions, the experiencers of the effects of th ose, those revolving in cyclic existence, the 
cultivators of paths for the sake  of liberation, the attainers of liberation, and so forth.  
B Commenting on the meaning of s ūtras that teach the self to be merely imputed to the aggregates 
A sūtra quoted in the Explanation of Candrak īrti’s “Commentary on the ‘Middle Way’”  
says: 
The so-called self is a fiendish mind and 
You have come to hold this view. 
The compositional aggregatesare empty. 
There is no sentient being here. 
Just as based on collections of parts 
People speak of chariots Likewise, in dependence on aggregates, 
Conventionally, they say “sentient beings.” [311] 
The first verse indicates the self lessness of persons, that ulti mately persons do not exist. 
The first line says that the apprehension of a self of persons is a fiendish mind, the 
second one says that those who apprehend in this manner are under the power of bad 
views, and the third and fourth say that the aggregates are empty of a self of persons. The second verse indicates that persons exists conventionally. More specifically, the first and second lines present an analogy and the last two connect it to the meaning, 
indicating that persons are merely imputed to the aggregates.  
C How to posit that person, the imputedphenomenon, as the object of observation of the innate apprehension 
of I  
The sūtra passage is saying that the collection of aggregates is the basis of imputation of 
the person, and the basis of imputation is not admissible as the imputed phenomenon. 
The collection of aggregates must be understood as both the collection of aggregates at 
a given moment and the collection of aggregates over earlier and later ones. Therefore it 
is inadmissible to posit the continuum of the collection of aggregates as the person.282 
                                                 
281 The six types of beings in sa ṃsāra. 
282 This is because one can neither say that it consists in the aggregates at a given point of time nor at an earlier or later 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
255 When the collection is posi ted as the basis of imputation, that which is collected283 is also 
posited as the basis of imputation, and theref ore it is unreasonable for both to be the 
person. In the Commentary on the “Middle Way”  it says: 
The sūtras say that since it depends on the aggregates, 
The mere collection of aggregates is not the self. 
And:  
The teacher said: “The aggregates are the self.” 
If that’s why you posit284 the aggregates as the self, 
It only refutes that the self is not the aggregates285, 
For other s ūtras make statements like form is not self. 
Therefore even the statement “The view of I and mine by some ascetics or Brahmins is 
only a view of these five aggregates” refutes, by means of the word only, that a self that 
is a different entity from the aggregates exis ts as the observed object of one’s innate 
apprehension of an I. That having been refuted, however, the aggregates are not shown 
to be the observed object of the apprehension of an I. If they were, that would contradict 
the statements in other s ūtras refuting that the five aggregates are the self. The reason 
for this is that, out of the two, the observed object and the aspect of the apprehension of 
an I, if they were the observed object, [312] they would have to be posited as the self.286 
Therefore the meaning of the s ūtra statement about viewing the aggregates must be 
explained as referring to observing the self that is imputed to the aggregates.  
D Hence the need to differentiate between the self that exists and the self that does not exist  
That is why you should differentiate between statements that the mere I, referred to as 
self, conventionally exists and statements that an inherently established person, referred 
to as self, does not exist even conventionally . Still, you should not say that this system 
asserts the self of persons to be conventionally existent287.  S u c h  a n  i d e n t i f i c a t i o n  o f  
persons is a distinguishing feature of this uns urpassed system. Ascertaining this well is 
an excellent means of realizing the uncommon selflessness of persons. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2A-2 Settli ng persons as not inherently existent 
This has three points: 
A Settling that the I does not inherently exist 
B Settling that mine does not inherently exist 
C Showing how, in dependence on that, persons appear like illusions 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2A-2A Settli ng that the I does not inherently exist 
This has two points:  
1 How the view realizing selflessness is born from the four essential points being complete 
2 Extensive explanation of the third and fourth essential points in particular 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2A-2A1 How the view realizing selflessness is born from the four essential points 
being complete 
This has four points:  
A The essential point of ascertaining the object of negation B The essential point of ascertaining the pervasion 
                                                                                                                                                                  
point. Where else in the continuum would it be found? 
283 Tib. tshogs pa can , literally “that which has a collection” or “t hat which is provided with a collection.” 
284 Tib. ‘dod, usually translated here as “assert” in similar contexts. 
285 Tib. phung las gzhan , literally “other than the aggregates.” 
286 They would have to be posited as the self in terms of the mere I  which is the referent obje ct of the person according 
to the Pr āsaṅgika system. (Oral explanations by Geshe Thubten Soepa) 
287 Conventionally existent in the sense that an inherently existent person is accepted as existing conventionally. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
256 C The essential point of seeing that the person and the aggregates are not one inherently established entity 
D The essential point of seeing that the person and the aggregates are not established as essentially distinct 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2A-2A1A The essential point of ascertaining the object of negation 
The first of four essential points that exist with regard to this is to examine one’s own 
mind so as to identify the manner of apprehending a self of persons. That was explained 
earlier.288  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2A-2A1B The essential point of ascertaining the pervasion 
This has two points:  
1 If a person is inherently established, it is either one or different and nothing beyond that 
The second is the decision that  if the person is inherently289 established, it must be 
established as either one entity with or different from the aggregates and that there is no 
means of establishment other than these two.  
2 Since accompanied  and unaccompanied form a general direct opposition, a third alternative to one and many 
is excluded 
In general it is established through experience that, when you determine something to be 
accompanied ,290 thinking something like “pot and pillar,” you elimin ate that it is 
unaccompanied , and when you determine something to be unaccompanied  thinking 
something like “pot,” you eliminate that it is accompanied . A third alternative, something 
that is neither one nor many, does therefore not exist. [313] Consequently you are made 
to ascertain that to be neither one entity nor different entities is also impossible.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2A-2A1C The essential point of seeing that the person and the aggregates are not 
one inherently established entity 
The third is to see the damage to the position that the two, the person and the 
aggregates, are one inherently established entity.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2A-2A1D The essential point of seeing that the person and the aggregates are not 
established as esse ntially distinct 
The fourth is to see well the damage to the position that the two are established as 
inherently different. When the four are comple te in that manner, the pure view realizing 
the suchness that is the selflessness of persons is born from that.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2A-2A2 Extensive explanation of the third and fourth essential points in particular 
This has two points:  
A The third essential point: refuting that the self and the aggregates are inherently one 
B The fourth essential point: refuting that the self and the aggregates are inherently different 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2A-2A2A The third essential point: refuting that the self and the aggregates are 
inherently one 
In this regard, if the self and the aggregates were one inherently established entity, 
there would be three faults do ing damage to this position. 
1 First fault 
                                                 
288 This point is explained in detail in Jé Tsongkhapa’s Great Exposition of the Stages of the Path  (which was composed 
before the present text) and other works. In order to get a real sense of this manner we apprehend our own selves, the 
teachings suggest imagining a situation in which one is unjustly blamed for someth ing. One then observes the sense of I 
that emerges which is considered a particularly  tangible apprehension of “I” in that case. 
289 “Inherently” (Tib. rang bzhin gyis ), “by its own entity” (Tib. ngo bo nyid kyis , also rendered as “essentially”) and 
“through its own characteristics” (Tib. rang gi mtshan nyid kyis ) are used synonymously here. 
290 Generally speaking, the opposites “one and distinct” (Tib. gcig dang tha dad ), “one and many” (Tib. gcig dang du 
ma), “unaccompanied and accompanied” (Tib. zla med dang zla bcas ) are not real synonyms, however, their alternative 
use here is due to the fact that Jé Tsongkhapa is summarizi ng the arguments from various texts. They may therefore be 
considered equivalent here. (Oral explanation by Geshe Thubten Soepa) 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
257 It would be pointless to assert a self. If the sameness of entity of the two were 
inherently established, they would be a permanently indivisible one. This is because if 
their sameness of entity were ultimately established, then whatever mind those two 
appeared to, they would necessarily not appear to  be different. The reason for this is that 
although among falsities—conventions—it is not contradictory for the mode of 
appearance and the mode of subsistence to be discordant, those two are necessarily 
contradictory in something established as true because something truly established that 
appears to a mind must appear just the way it is.  
The assertion of a self established through its own entity is for the sake of establishing 
an agent who discards and adopts aggregates because if he were one with the 
aggregates, this would be impossible. This is also set forth in the Root Text on  Wisdom : 
Once you understand that apart from the appropriated 
Aggregates there is no self, the appropriated 
Aggregates themselves can only bethe self.291  
That self of yours does not exist. 
2 Second fault 
The self would be many. There would be the fault that if the self were established as one 
with the aggregates, then just as one person has many aggregates, so one person would also have many selves, and just as there is no more than one self, so the aggregates 
would only be one. In the 
Commentary on the “Middle Way”  it says: 
The aggregates are many; if they were the self. 
Therefore there would also be many selves. 
3 Third fault [314] 
The self would arise an d disintegrate. In the Root Text on  Wisdom  it says: 
If the aggregates were the self, it Would arise and disintegrate. 
Just as the aggregates arise and disintegrate, so the self would also arise and 
disintegrate because the two would be one. 
4 It would amount to asserting that the self arises and disintegrates not merely conventionally but inherently  
You may think “It is asserted that the self or person arises and disintegrates in each 
moment.” There is no fault in merely asserting this conventionally. However, an opponent 
who asserts that persons are established by way of their own character thereby necessarily asserts that persons arise and disintegrate inherently. 
5 The consequence that memory of former lives would be inadmissible 
In this regard the Explanation of Candrak īrti’s “Commentary on the ‘Middle Way’”  sets 
forth three faults. The firs t one is set forth in the Commentary on the “Middle Way :” 
Things distinct by their character, included 
In one continuum do not make sense. 
With respect to something earlier and something later established as distinct by way of 
their own entities, a relationship of dependence between what is later and what is earlier 
is inadmissible. Since they are established with their own power as capable of setting 
themselves up, they cannot depend on anything else. If a single continuum is therefore 
inadmissible, the memory of former lives “In that life, at that time, I was such and such” 
                                                 
291 Literally: “are the self.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
258 does not make sense. It is like with Devada tta when he remembers a former life; he does 
not remember “I was Yajñadatta” whose continuum is distinct from his. 
6 The validity of memory in our system 
In our system a single continuum of the earlier and the later is not contradictory even 
though it disintegrates in each moment.292 Therefore the memory of former lives is valid.  
7 When certain people assert that buddhas and ordinary beings are one, it is an extreme view 
In people who have not realized the mean ing of this, the frequent statement in s ūtras: 
“In the past I was this person” [315] genera tes the first wrong view out of four bad 
views that were taught and that are based on an extreme associated with the past: “The 
two, the person at the time of buddhahood and the person at an earlier time, are one. 
Moreover, if they were compounded phenom ena, they would disintegrate moment by 
moment and therefore could not be one. Ther efore the two are permanent.” In order not 
to fall to that view you need to understand well the particular manner of remembering in 
which, at the time of rememb ering, you remember the “I” in  general, with out making a 
distinction in terms of the specific co untry, time, and nature of a life.  
8 The consequence that actions done would be wasted 
The fault that actions done would be wasted is that both the agent of an action and the 
experiencer of its effect could not be grouped together on the one basis of the mere I. 
9 The consequence of meeting with actions one has not done 
The fault of meeting with actions one has not done is the absurd consequence that the effects of actions accumulated by some distinct continuum would always be experienced 
by another continuum.  
10 If the earlier and the later were established by way of their entities, a single continuum would be impossible 
These two faults are associated with the essential point explained earlier in the 
Commentary on the “Middle Way”  that if the person were established by way of its entity, 
its earlier and later moments could no t be the same continuum. In the Root Text on  
Wisdom  it also says: 
If the god and the human were other, 
Their continuum would not be valid. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2A-2A2B The fourth essential point: Refuting that the self and the aggregates are 
inherently different 
This has five points: 
1 Indication of a source 
But what fault is there if you assert the two, the self and the aggregates, to be inherently 
different? The fault is set forth in the Root Text on  Wisdom : 
If it were other than the aggregates, 
It would not have their characteristics. 
2 The consequence that if the two were different by way of their entity, the self would not have the 
characteristics of the aggregates  
In this regard, if the self were different from the aggregates, so established by way of its 
entity, it would not have the characteristics that characterize the aggregates as compounded phenomena: production, disintegration, and abidance. It would be like a 
                                                 
292 Since it is conventional disintegration  which is dependent rather than inherent ly existent, there is the possibility of 
transformation and continuation in a future dependent continuum. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
259 horse, for example, that does not have the characteristics of an ox because it is 
established as an object other than an ox.  
3 The other approved syllogism establishing that by the sign of being uncompounded it is unsuitable to be 
apprehended as the basis of designation of the self or as the self  
You may think: “It is indeed like that but… ” Well then, it [316] would be inadmissible as 
the observed object that is th e basis of one’s innate appreh ension designating the verbal 
convention “self” because it is an uncompoun ded phenomenon like, for instance, a flower 
in the sky or nirv āṇa.293 
4 The consequence that something other than the characteristics of the aggregates would be apprehended as 
self indicates that it is not apprehended in that manner 
Moreover, if it existed inherently different from the characteristics of the aggregates, 
suitability as form and so forth, it would have to be observed as such, just as, for 
instance, form and mind are observed as different. Since there is not such apprehension, 
though, the self does not exist as something factually other. In the Root Text on  Wisdom  
it says: 
It is inadmissible for the self to be 
Other than the appropriated.294 
If it were other, you could apprehend it 
In their absence—which you cannot. 
And in the Commentary on the “Middle Way :” 
Thus, other than the aggregates there is no self, For, those apart apprehending it is not established.
 
5 The importance of gaining certainty with respect to such reasonings 
You should train in order to gain the firm certainty which sees that such reasonings damage a self existing inherently different from the aggregates because if you have not induced the pure, crushing certainty with respect the two sides of sameness and 
difference, the conclusion that  persons do not inherently ex ist will be a mere thesis so 
that you do not gain the pure view.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2A-2B Settling that mine does not inherently exist 
This has two points: 
1 That reasoning negating the inherent establishment of the self also negates an inherently2established mine; 
sources for this 
When you have thus sought, with reasonings , whether the self does or does not have 
inherent establishment, you negate the inherent existence of the self by means of your failure to find it as either on e or many. At that point, through the reasoning that analyzes 
suchness, you will not find an inherently esta blished mine, just like, for example, when 
you do not observe a barren woman’s son, you will not observe his mine, such as his 
eyes. In the 
Root Verses on  Wisdom  it says: 
If the I does not exist,  
How possibly could mine exist? [317] 
And in the Commentary on the “Middle Way”  it says: 
Since without an agent no actions exist, 
Therefore, there’s no mine without a self. 
                                                 
293 Jé Tsongkhapa is giving two common examples for uncom pounded phenomena: the flower in the sky for something 
non-existent and nirv āṇa for a (conventionally) existent phenomenon. 
294 Tib. nye bar len pa(’i phung po) , “the appropriated (aggregates).” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
260 Therefore, by seeing the I and mine as empty 
The yogi is completely liberated. 
2 The need to know how, through these reasonings, all ot her persons and their mine are also established as 
without inherent existence  
Thus those reasonings settle that the I of one’s own continuum, apprehended thinking “I” 
or the self or the person does not exist by way of its own entity. Through them you 
should also realize the entire meaning of the suchness which is the selflessness of persons: that all persons from hell-beings through buddhas and all their mine are not inherently established as one entity with or a different entity from their bases of 
designation, their contaminated or uncontaminated aggregates. Through those 
reasonings, you should also know how all th eir mine is likewise established as without 
inherent existence. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2A-2C Showing how, in dependence on that, persons 
appear like an illusion 
This has two points:  
1 Indicating the meaning of saying like an illusion  
2 The method in dependence on which things appear like an illusion  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2A-2C1 Indicating the meaning of saying like an illusion  
This has two points:  
A The unmistaken manner of appearing like an illusion 
B The fallacious manner of appearing like an illusion 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2A-2C1A The unmistaken manner of appearing like an 
illusion 
This has nine points: 
1 How all phenomena are ultimate ly illusion-like without signs 
In the King of Meditative Stabilizations S ūtrait says: 
Like a mirage, a gandharva city,295 
Like an illusion, just as a dream, 
Meditate on signs as empty of entity, 
Know all phenomena as like that. 
In the Mother of the Victors296 i t  i s  a l so  t a u g h t  t h a t  a ll  p h e n o m e n a  f r o m  f o r m  t h r o u g h  
exalted knowers of all aspects are like illusi ons and dreams. 
2 From among the two that  are like an illusion, here it is  the appearance that is illusion-like 
There are two meanings of being like an illus ion described in this way: 1) something like 
an ultimate truth that is said  to be illusion-like—although it is established as merely 
existent, [318] its true existence is underst ood to be negated—and 2) something like the 
illusion-like appearance of that  which appears while being empty. From among these two, 
here it is the latter.  
3 The need for the collection of two, the conventional mind to which appearances appear rather than being 
utterly non-existent and the reasoning consciousness to which the object dawns as empty of existing in the 
way it appears 
For this, the two, appearing as that and empty of existing the way it appears297, are 
necessary. However, if an object is utterly non-existent even as a mere appearance, just 
                                                 
295 Gandharvas are deities from the ancient Indian Vedic scriptur es who reveal celestial secrets. Their task is to prepare 
the divine potion soma. In the Tibetan traditio n they are treated as one kind of spirits. 
296 Synonym for Sūtra on the Perfection of Wisdom . 
297 Tib. snang ba ltar gyi don yod pas stongs pa  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
261 like the horn of a rabbit or the son of a ba rren woman, and does not dawn as empty of 
existing in the way it appears despite appearing,298 then the meaning of it being an 
illusion-like appearance will al so not dawn to the mind.  
4 The way in which phen omena resemble illusions 
Hence this is how you understand other phenomena as resembling the example of an 
illusion. For example, although the illusions co njured up by a magici an are from the start 
empty of being horses and elephants, their appearances as horses and elephants 
undeniably arise. Understand  that likewise, although ph enomena such as persons are 
from the start empty of inherent existence, of being established by way of their own 
entities on top of the objects, it is undeniable that they appear as if established that way.  
5 Such an emptiness is not a nihilisti c emptiness, or a mentally fabricated  emptiness, or a limited emptiness, 
or the like 
That being so, the appearances as a god, a human, and so forth are posited as persons 
and the objects that appear as form, sound, and so forth are posited as phenomena. 
Therefore, although persons and phenomena do not have even a mere particle of 
inherent existence established by way of their own character, the accumulators of karma 
and so forth, the actions of seeing and hearing and so forth, all the interdependent 
actions and agents are valid. All actions and agents are valid; therefore emptiness is not 
nihilistic. Since phenomena have primordially always been empty like that and are merely 
understood as empty, it is not a mentally fabricated emptiness either, and since all 
objects of knowledge are asserted in this ma nner, it is not a limited emptiness either. 
That is why, through being meditated on, it becomes the antidote to any adherence 
associated with the apprehension of true existence. This profound meaning is not 
unsuitable to become the object of any mind whatsoever. Rather, it [319] can be settled 
by means of the pure view  and it can be madethe object of mind by meditating on the 
pure meaning. Therefore it is also not an emptiness that cannot be practiced at the time 
of the path or one with nothing to see or realize. 
6 Setting out the doubt that the ascertainment of reflections as empty of what they appear to be is an 
ascertainment of their being empty of inherent existence  
Well then, if the ascertainment of reflections and so forth as empty of what they appear 
to be were the realization that their inherent existence does not exist, the absence of inherent existence would be realized by the direct perceivers of normal beings; so the 
latter would be āryas.
299 Otherwise, how could these be suitable analogies for the absence 
of inherent existence?  
7 Even if you realize that a reflection is empty of a fa ce, this is not a realization of its suchness since you have 
an apprehension of the true existence of the reflection 
In Four Hundred Stanzas  it says: 
It is explained that a seer of one thing 
Is a seer of everything. What is the emptiness of one 
Is the emptiness of all. 
It explains that the seer or realizer of the emptiness of one thing can realize the 
emptiness of other things. The realization that the reflection of a face is empty of being a 
face does not in any way damage the object of one’s apprehension of true existence that 
apprehends the reflection to be established by way of its own entity. Without the negation of its object the emptiness of inherent establishment of the reflection cannot be 
                                                 
298 Tib. snang yang  snang ba ltar gyi don yod pas stongs par mi ‘char  
299 Tib. ‘phags pa , “noble beings,” who have gained direct insight into emptiness, th e nature of reality, and thereby 
reached the path of seeing which makes them higher beings. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
262 realized. Therefore that mind does not realize the suchness of the reflection. Even if you 
realize that illusions are empty of being hors es and elephants, and that the appearances 
in dreams are empty of what they appear to be, you have not found the Madhyamaka 
view realizing that objects are like illusions and dreams.  
8 The reason why the analogi es of reflections and illusory horses, el ephants, and so fo rth have nevertheless 
been set forth 
However, the reason for taking them as analogies is the fact that it is easier to realize 
that they do not inherently exist compared to other phenomena like forms and sounds. [320] That they are empty of inherent existence established by way of their own entities 
is proven by showing the contradiction in their mode of subsistence and the way they 
appear to the mind, because if an object is established as true, those two cannot be 
different in aspect. You need to first allow yo urself to realize that these examples, well 
known in the world as false, lack inherent existence, and then generate the realization that other phenomena, not well known in the world as false, lack inherent existence. The 
meaning intended by stating the need for a sequence in which one of these two is earlier and the other later is not that by realiz ing the emptiness of one phenomenon the 
emptinesses of all other phenomena are explicitly realized. Rather, the meaning is that when the mind turns to whether other phenomena do or do not truly exist, it is able to realize it.  
9 The need to differentiate between the two realizations , that appearances such as reflections are empty of 
what they appear to be and that reflections are empty of being inherently established  
That being so, it does not have the same mean ing to be in a dream, to know it, and to 
realize that the appearances of men, women, and so forth are empty of those, and what 
is said in Ornament for Clear Realization : 
Even in dreams, to view that all 
Phenomena are like dreams and so forth 
… that in dreams all phenomena should be view ed as dreamlike. Likewise, the realization, 
in visions of meditative experience during meditative stabilization, that appearances like pots and woolen cloth are empty of what they appear to be, does not have the same 
meaning as the realization that they are like illusions and dreams that are not inherently 
established. Therefore you should investigate well the uncommon manner of appearing like an illusion which is set forth in scriptures  and treatises of definitive meaning saying 
that something should be known to be like an illusion and a dream.  
Having said this, a child still unfamiliar with  words who apprehends a reflection in the 
mirror as a face, a spectator who does not know about illusions and apprehends illusory appearances as horses, elephants, and so fort h, and someone in a dream who is unaware 
of it and therefore apprehends the appearances of mountains, houses, and so forth as real [321] resemble each other. On the other hand, an older person familiar with words, a magician, and a person who, in a dream, knows it to be a dream also resemble each other in that they know their particular appearances to be untrue. None of the two have 
found the view of suchness.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2A-2C1B The fallacious manner of appearing like an illusion 
This has eight points: 
1 Without the discrimination “It is this and not that” due to a mistake concerning the measure of the object of 
negation and the consequent non-existence of the object to be analyzed and the analyzer, an appearance is 
vague and nihilistic but does no t carry the meaning  of an illusion 
If the measure of the object of negation explained earlier has not been grasped well and 
the object is analyzed by means of reasonin g and broken up, the thought “That object 
does not exist” will first come up. Then, the an alyzer is also seen like that and since the 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
263 ascertainer of his non-existence is also non-existent, any ascertainment in terms of “It is 
this and not that” becomes impossible. Then, the vague appearances that arise do so in 
dependence on the failure to differentiate between inherent existence and non-existence 
and mere existence and non-existence. Therefore such an emptiness is an emptiness that also destroys interdependence. Hence, even though the vague appearances arise induced 
by that realization, this is not at al l the meaning of being like an illusion. 
2 Although such vague appearances arising at the time of analyzing the view are frequent, they are not 
Madhyamaka illusions  
That is why it is not difficul t, upon reasoned analysis, to think “Persons and so forth do 
not in the least have a mode of subsistence established on top of the objects by way of 
their own entities” and for appearances to simply arise vaguely in dependence on that. Something like that occu rs to everyone with an interest  in Madhyamaka tenets who has 
heard a little bit of Dharma being taught about how there is no inherent existence.  
3 The difficult point with pure illusion-like appearances is that they are a collection of  the two, the absence of 
inherent existence and the existence of mere nominal meaning  
However, the difficult point is to achieve certainty, from the bottom of the heart, about 
negating all inherent existence established by way of an own entity and positing those 
inherently non-existent persons and so forth as accumulators of ka rma, experiencers of 
effects, and so forth. Since that collection of  two that enables one to posit them is next 
to impossible, [322] it is  extremely difficult to find the Madhyamaka view.  
4 If you are mistaken concerning the measure of the object of negation and negate everything, the illusion 
cannot be anything beyond a rabbit’s horns 
Therefore, as you analyze suchness with analytical reasoning, you do not find production and thereby negate inherent production, but you do not negate every kind of production, cessation, and so forth. If you did, they would become empty of performing any function, like the horns of a rabbit or the son of a ba rren woman. With resp ect to what little 
illusion-like appearance would remain, the fault that all interdependent actions and 
agents would not have validity is set forth. In 
Four Hundred Stanzas  it says: 
If that were so how would existence 
Not resemble an illusion?  
And in the commentary: 
Once that which is dependently arisen is seen as what it is, it becomes like an 
illusory creation but not like the son of a barren woman. If one were to assert 
that through this analysis production is negated in every way and that 
therefore the non-production of compounded phenomena is demonstrated, then they would be not like illusions bu t rather something to be examined in 
terms of the son of a barren woman and the like. For fear of the conclusion 
that the dependently arisen does not exist, we do not compare phenomena with those but rather with ill usions and the like which do not contradict the 
dependently arisen.
 
5 Although it would be a fault if a subject existed in the face of a reasoning consciousness, it is not a fault for 
an illusion-like appearance aspect to remain as a trace of negation by that consciousness  
And: 
Therefore, upon such thorough analysis, since the inherent existence of things 
is not established, an illusion-like qual ity will be left as a remnant for each 
thing.  
6 Hence, although it is wrong to apprehend illusion-like appearances as truly existent with their own 
entityness, it is not wrong to ap prehend them as mere illusions  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
264 Therefore the appr ehension of appearances as someth ing illusion-like, interdependent, 
merely existent is not a faulty apprehension  of illusions, but if illusion-like appearances 
were apprehended as established by way of their entity and truly existent, [323] it would 
be a fault.  
7 A source for those points 
In the King of Meditative Stabilizations S ūtra it also says: 
Going through cyclic existence is like a dream. 
No one is born there nor does anyone die. 
No sentient beings or humans nor life can be found. 
These phenomena are like foam, plantain trees, 
Like illusions, lightning in the sky, 
Like the moon in water, like a mirage. 
Even after one dies here in this world, 
One does not move on to another world, nevertheless, 
Actions done are not lost, their white and black fruit 
Ripen in cyclic existence—there’s no contradiction. 
When sought with the reasonings that analyze suchness, persons and the like who are 
born, die, and transmigrate, and who withstand analysis are not found, not even a 
particle. Nevertheless, positive and negative effects occur relative to illusion-like 
phenomena. You need to arrive at an understanding of such statements. 
8 Moreover, even if phenomena appear  empty of gross obstructiveness, th is is not an illusi on-like appearance 
Moreover, some do not place and sustain the mind within the view that has come to a 
decisive conclusion, in meditative equipoise,  about the mode of being but gain a stable 
mere single-pointedness in which the mind does not apprehend anything at all. Through 
its power, when they arise from it, appearances such as that of a mountain appear insubstantial like a rainbow or thin smoke rather than hard and obstructive as they 
appeared before. This is also not the illusion- like appearance explained in the scriptures 
because it is an appearance of objects as empty of gross obstructiveness rather than the 
appearance of objects as empty of being inhe rently established. Also, the meaning of 
emptiness, which is the absence of inhere nt existence, cannot possibly be the non-
existence of obstructive hardness. Otherwise there would be the fault that when 
apprehending rainbows and the like as substrata, it would be impossible for an apprehension of true existence to arise, and when apprehending obstructive objects as 
substrata, it would be impossible to generate a consciousness realizing the absence of 
true existence.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2A-2C2 The method in dependence on which things 
appear like and illusion 
This has five points: 
A How illusion-like appearances arise 
B How the collection of the two, a reasoning consciousness and a conventional mind, occur simultaneously 
with regard to this 
C How there is consequently no need for a separate re asoning settling appearances as  illusion-like 
D How the illusion-like subsequent attainment acts on everything 
E Instructions on seeking asce rtainment of th e illusion-like 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2A-2C2A How illusion-like appearances arise 
Well then, what do you do for illusory objects to appear without mistake? [324] 
For example, you see illusory horses and elephants with your eye consciousness and 
ascertain, with your mental consciousness, that no horses or elephants in accordance 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
265 with the appearance exist; in dependence on  that, the ascertainment arisesthat this 
appearance of horses and elephants is an illusory or false appearance. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2A-2C2B How the collection of the two, a reasoning consciousness and a 
conventional mind, occur simultaneously with regard to this 
Likewise, persons and so forth undeniably a ppear to your conventional mind while you 
ascertain, by means of a reasoning consciousness, that they are empty of inherent 
existence established by way of their own entities; in dependence on these two, the ascertainment arises that the persons are illusory or false appearances. 
Due to that, if the meditation on space-like emptiness, a meditative equipoise in which 
not even a mere particle of the object aims for apprehending attributes exists, hits home, 
an illusion-like emptiness will appear as you look at the appearance  of objects in the 
subsequent attainment period after you have risen from that meditation.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2A-2C2C How there is consequently no need for a separate reasoning settling 
appearances as illusion-like  
Thus you analyze phenomena a lot with the reasoning analyzing whether or not they are 
established by way of their own entities, and you generate a very strong certainty that 
they lack inherent existence. Subsequently, when you look at the appearances that arise, 
they will appear like illusions. There is no se parate method for sett ling the illusion-like 
emptiness.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2A-2C2D How the illusion- like subsequent attainment acts on everything  
Therefore, even when engaging in activities on the sideof conduct such as prostrations 
and circumambulations, you should engage in them affected by the ascertainment of your 
analysis as explained earlier. Thereby you sh ould train in illusion-like appearance, and 
perform them from within that . Once you have trained in it , they will appear like illusions 
even through the mere recollection of the view. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2A-2C 2E Instructions on seeking as certainment of the illusion-like 
This has three points: 
1 How to train in emptiness because of the need to induce ascertainment with respect to both appearance and 
emptiness  
Put simply and easy to understand, the method for seeking this ascertainment is as 
follows. As was explained earlier, you shou ld cause the generality of the object of 
negation by reasoning to appear well, [325] consider well how ignorance in your 
continuum superimposes inherent existence, and identify it. Then you should consider 
how if there were such inherent existence, it would not be beyond oneness and difference, and how there is dama ge to assertions of it as either. You should induce the 
ascertainment of seeing the damage and fina lly stabilize the ascertainment thinking “A 
person does not even have the least inherent  establishment.” Like that you should train 
in the factor of emptiness a lot.  
2 How persons appear illusion-like wi thout your forge tting emptiness 
Then you should let the undeniable appearances of the designations of persons arise as 
the objects of your mind, attend to the interdependent factors of positing them as accumulators of karma and experiencers of effects, and gain certainty about how 
interdependence is valid in the absence of inherent existence.  
3 How the analogy of a mirror image is necessary when appearances and emptiness appear to be 
contradictory  
At a time when these two appear to contradict each other, you should take the analogy 
of a mirror image and the like and consider how they are non-contradictory. Although the 
reflection of a face is empty of the eyes, ears, and so forth, whatever appears, it 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
266 nevertheless arises in dependence on a face and a mirror and disint egrates when either 
of the conditions is gone. The two are undeniably contained in the common basis.300 You 
should train in the thought th at likewise, although persons also do not have even a 
particle of inherent establis hment, this does not contradi ct their accumulating karma, 
their experiencing effects, and their being born in dependence on previous karma, 
afflictions, and so forth. This you should know in all such circumstances.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2B Settling the selflessness of phenomena 
This has two points: 
1 How there is no difference in subtlety among objects of negation, but rather a distinction between two 
selflessnesses on account of their subjects 
2 How it is settled 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2B-1 How there is no difference in subtlety among objects of negation, but rather a 
distinction between two selflessnesses on account of their subjects 
The basis of designation of a person, the five  aggregates, the six elements such as the 
earth element, the six sense fields such as the eye, are phenomena and their [326] 
emptiness of inherent existence established by way of their own entities is the selflessness of those phenomena.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2B-2  How it is settled 
There are two ways of settling it: 
A Refutation transferring the reasoning explained earlier 
B Refutation by means of another reasoning not explained earlier 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2B-2A Refutati on transferring the reasoning explained 
earlier 
Among the things301 that are aggregates, elements, and sense bases, there are two types. 
With physical phenomena, you investigate both their parts in the various cardinal 
directions, such as east, and that which posse sses the parts. With consciousnesses, you 
investigate their temporal parts such as earlier and later ones and that which possesses 
the parts. Having investigated whether they are established by way of their entities as 
one or different, you refute them in the above fashion. That is the meaning of a s ūtra 
statement quoted earlier: 
Just as you know the notion of self 
Apply it to everything mentally. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2B-2B Refutation by means of another reasoning not 
explained earlier 
This has two points:  
1 Presenting the argument of interdependence 
2 How non-products are also established as not trul y existent through this and earlier reasonings 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2B-2B1 Presenting the argument of interdependence 
This has ten points: 
A A citation of sources 
B Explanation of what the s ūtra quotation means 
C Praise to the argument of dependent arising as that which destroys all inferior views 
D Identification of places where the view goes wrong—the extremes of superimposition and deprecation 
E How the two extremes are simultaneously eliminated through the reasoning of dependent arising 
F Presentations of dependent arising 
                                                 
300 The expression khyad gzhi mthun mong ba  is a technical term in debate refe rring to a phenomenon comprising the 
characteristics at issue. 
301 Tib. dngos po , “thing” is often used in the more restrictive sense of  “tangible object,” but occasionally it refers to any 
“existent phenomenon.” (Oral expl anation by Geshe Thubten Soepa) 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
267 G How truly established oneness and difference are also refuted by these two arguments 
H Statements of this in N āgārjuna’s texts 
I How it is praised as a view in which appearances and emptiness are seen as mutual companions 
J Instruction that it is necessary to differentiate between the four, inherent existence and non-existence as 
well as existence and non-existence in general 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2B-2B1A A citation of sources 
With regard to the argument of interdependence it says in the Sūtra Requested by 
Sāgaramati : 
Those which or iginate interdependently 
Do not exist by way of their entity. 
Inherent establishment is clearly refuted with the sign302 of dependent arising. 
In the Sūtra Requested by the N āga King Anavatapta (Anavataptan āgarājaparipŗcchā 
Sūtra) it also clearly says: 
Whatever is born from conditions is not born, 
It is not born by way of its entity. 
Whatever depends on conditions is said to be empty. 
Whoever has realized emptiness is conscientious. 
This is said very frequently  in the precious scriptures. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2B-2B1B Explanation of what the s ūtra quotation means 
The meaning of what the first line refers to as “not born” is explained by the second line 
saying “not born by way of its entity.” Theref ore a qualification of th e object of negation 
is applied to the refutation of birth. In the Descent to La ṅka Sūtra (Laṅkāvatārasūtra) 
quoted in Candrak īrti’s Clear Words  it also says: 
Thinking of their not being born inherently I said: “All phenomena are unborn.” [327] 
For fear that without a qualification having b een made, his statements  that birth does not 
exist could be held to indicate that all bi rth whatsoever is non-existent, the Teacher 
himself took up th e thought of the s ūtras and explained the meaning to be the non-
existence of inherent birth.  
Then, the third line says that dependence and reliance
303 on conditions is the meaning of 
being empty of establishment by way of one’s own entity. This indicates that emptiness 
of inherent establishment is the meaning of  dependent arising whereas an emptiness of 
performing functions that would negate mere birth is not.  
In the Root Text on  Wisdom  it also says: 
That which arises in dependence 
Is inherently pacified. 
By reason of arising dependently, it is pacified or empty of establishment by way of its 
entity. You should know that whatever obscure fabrications have been propounded—that 
because of dependent arising itself, the Madhyamaka system must propound non-arising and so forth—are thereby cleared away.  
                                                 
302 The word rtags, “sign,” is used as a technical term of debate here meaning logical sign : that which contains the 
reason in a proposition. For instance in the proposition “There  is a fire on the hill because smoke is rising” the logical 
sign is “smoke is rising.” 
303 Tib. la ltos pa , usually also translated here as “depend(ent) on.”  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
268 2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2B-2B1C Praise to the argument of dependent arising as that which destroys all 
inferior views 
The argument of dependent arising which is  like that is praised very much. In the Sūtra 
Requested by the N āga King Anavatapta  it says: 
Experts see dharmas304 arise in dependence; 
They do not at all depend on extreme views. 
Through realizing dependent arising as it is , one does not depend on views holding to 
extremes. The meaning of this is set forth in the Commentary on the “Middle Way :” 
Since things arise in utter mutual dependence, 
These conceptions cannot be imputed. 
Through this reasoning of dependent arising, 
The net of all bad views is therefore cut. 
This is the unexcelled dist inguishing feature of Mah ātma Nāgārjuna, the father, and his 
spiritual son. That is why,  from among various reasonings, I will describe that of 
dependent arising here.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2B-2B1D Identification of places where the view goes wrong—the extremes of 
superimposition and deprecation  
Here, there are mainly two obstacles—places where the pure view goes wrong: One is the 
[328] view of permanence and superimposition which has the object aim of the 
apprehension of true existe nce apprehending phenomena as  truly existent. As for the 
second one, the view of anni hilation and deprecation, th e measure of the object of 
negation has not been delimited and becomes excessive. Then it be comes impossible to 
induce the ascertainment of dependently aris ing causes and effects in one’s own system 
so that there is no way of identifying that something is this and not that.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2B-2B1E How the two extremes are simultaneously eliminated through the 
reasoning of dependent arising 
When inherent establishment is negated with a reason inducing the ascertainment that 
from such and such causes an d conditions such and such effects arise, those two are 
abandoned without remainder. This is because through ascertaining the reason, the view 
of annihilation is radically negated, and through ascertaining the meaning of the thesis, 
the view of permanence is radically negated.305  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2B-2B1F Presentation of dependent arising 
This has two points: 
1 Presentation shared with the Cittam ātrins 
Therefore external things such as sprouts and internal things such as compositional 
factors originate gradually in dependence on seeds and so forth and ignorance and so 
forth, respectively.  
2 The M ādhyamikas’ uncommon way of presenting dependent arising 
If that is so, their establishment through their own character is inadmissible because if they were established through their own entities, they would necessarily be established 
for themselves, through their own independent,  self-sustaining inherent existence; so 
their dependence on causes and conditions would be contradictory. In 
Four Hundred 
Stanzas  it says: 
That which has a dependent origin 
Does not have its independence. 
                                                 
304 Tib. chos, usually translated here as “phenomena.” 
305 The argument is dependent arising, the thesis is  “There is no self that inherently exists.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
269 All these don’t have independence, 
Hence, the self does not exist. 
Through this you should understand that since persons and pots and the like are also 
imputed in dependence on their own collections of parts, they do not have inherent establishment.  
Those are the two presentations of th e argument of dependent arising.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2B-2B1G How truly established oneness and difference are also refuted by these 
two arguments 
If something arises dependently and is labe led dependently, it does not exist as 
something established by way ofits own entity  as one with whatever it depends on. If it 
did exist as one, all actions and agents would be one.  The two [329] also do not exist as different
306 established by way of their entities because 
if they did, one could refute their relation, so their dependence would be contradicted.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2B-2B1H Statements of this in N āgārjuna’s texts 
In the Root Text on  Wisdom  it says: 
Whatever arises dependent on something 
Is not that thing for a while. 
Neither is it other than it. Hence,  It’s not annihilated nor permanent. 
And in 
Praise of the Transcendent One (Lok ātītastava)  it says: 
Logicians assert th at suffering is 
Created by itse lf or other, 
Or by both itself and other, 
Or that it is without cause. 
You said that it arises dependently. 
That which arises in interdependence 
Is asserted by you as empty. 
“Things do not exist independently!”— That’s your matchless lion’s roar. 
Through the argument of dependent arising, the apprehensions of oneness and 
difference, of the extremes of permanence and annihilation, and of the four extremes of 
origination
307 are thus said to be refuted.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2B-2B1I How it is praised as a view in which appearances and emptiness are seen 
as mutual companions 
Having thus induced certainty through the emptiness that is being empty of all the focal 
objects of an apprehension of signs, one does not give up one’s ascertainment of the 
relation between actions and their effects. The reliance on discarding non-virtues and 
adopting virtues due to that  is highly praised. In Essay on the Mind of Enlightenment  
(Bodhicittavivara ṇa) it says: 
Relying on actions and their effects 
While knowing this empt iness of phenomena; 
This is more wonderful still than the wonderful. 
This is more marvelous st ill than the marvelous. 
                                                 
306 Tib. gzhan du’ang med  
307 Origination from self, from other, from bo th, or from neither, i.e. without cause. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
270 2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2B-2B1J Instruction that it is necessary to differentiate between the four, inherent 
existence and non-existence as well as existence and non-existence in general 
This has six points: 
1 The actual advice 
For that to happen it is necessary to diffe rentiate between inherent existence, mere 
existence, non-existence by way of own character, and non-existence. It is as stated in 
the Explanation of Candrak īrti’s “Commentary on the ‘Middle Way :’”  
What wise person, while kn owing the presentation of causes and effects—
reflections without inherent existence—would observe to merely exist those 
forms, feelings, and so forth that do not exist other than as causes and 
conditions, and thereby [330] ascertain them as possessing inherent 
existence? Therefore although observed to exist, they do not inherently arise. 
2 How you fall to the two extremes if you do not differentiate between them along with a source 
If you do not differentiate between those fo ur, things will exist by way their own entity 
as soon as they exist, and they will be non-ex istent as long as they do not exist by way 
of their own entity. You will not move beyond  the two extremes of  superimposition and 
deprecation. In the Commentary on the “Four Hundred Stanzas”  it says: 
According to those who propound that real  substantial things exist, as long as 
a thing exists308, so long will an own entity exist in accordance with it, whereas 
when it is rid of its own entity, then the thing will no longer exist in any way 
and will therefore resemble a donkey’s horn. Therefore,  since they do not pass 
beyond propounding those two, all their assertions only match with difficulty. 
3 The manner in which those two extremes are eliminated 
This being so, you are freed from all extr emes of existence through the absence of 
existence by way of an own entity, and, within that, from all extremes of non-existence 
through the ability to posit causes and effects without inherent existence.  
4 The mere extremes of existence and non-existence and the two extremes associated with the places where 
the view goes wrong do not have the same meaning 
With regard to extreme  (Tib. mtha’ ), it says in Reasoning for Detailed Explanations 
(Vyākyāyukti) :  
Mtha’  is used for finish, for end, 
Nearness, direction, and the lower.  
Such extremes are indeed asserted in our system as well, however, as for the extremes 
that are places where the so-called view free from extremes  goes wrong, it says in 
Illumination of the Middle Way  (Madhyamak āloka) : 
If there were, in the Madhyamaka, any ulti mate thing at all, an object of the 
mind with its own entity by nature, then , since it would exist for that system, 
how could the strong adherence thinking “It is permanent” or “It is 
impermanent” be an extreme? It is unreasonable to say that proper mental attention in accordance with the suchness of things is a position one falls to. 
[331] 
As stated here, mental attention in accordance with how an object actually is, is not a 
position one would fall to, so it does not co nstitute holding to an extreme. In the world 
the edge of an abyss is called 
mtha309 and falling off it is called mtha’ la lhung . Likewise 
                                                 
308 Tib. yod pa nyid yin  
309 Jé Tsongkhapa is playing on the double-entendre of Tib. mtha’  meaning both “extreme” and “edge” or “brink.” The 
whole paragraph explores its use in the sense of “extreme,” indi cating that it does not refer to one pole of arbitrary sets 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
271 the apprehension of phenomena as truly existe nt and the apprehension that nothing at all 
is established or exists constitute the mtha’ lhung  of permanence and annihilation which 
are opposites of the correct fact. On the other hand the apprehensions that phenomena 
do not ultimately exist and that causes and effects conventionally exist and so forth do 
not constitute holding to extremes because the objects abide in the way they are 
apprehended.  
5 Sources for that 
This is why: In Vigrahavy āvartanī (Refuting Objections) it says: 
The lack of inherent existence, inverted, 
Is establishment as inherent. 
That is if something is not ultimately non-existent, it ultimately exists. Also: 
The non-assertion of conventionalities— That is not what we explain. 
In 
Seventy  Stanzas  on Emptiness it says: 
“Depending on this that arises”— 
This worldly mode was not refuted. 
6 The distinction that through phrases such as “neith er existent nor non-existe nt” there is no falling to 
extremes is a fixation on mere words  
Therefore the difference made between the two, “that thing310 is not existent”311 and “it 
exists” as opposed to “it does not exist” and “i t is not non-existent”, is nothing more than 
a difference in the way of expressing it. Yet in the manner the two appear to the mind 
there is no difference whatsoever, however much you analyze. Therefore it is nothing 
more than a fixation on mere words to prop o u n d  t h a t  o n e  f a l l s  o r  d o e s  n o t  f a l l  t o  
extremes through that manner of expression.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B2B-2B2 How non-products are also established as not 
truly existent through this and earlier reasonings 
This has twelve points: 
A Pointing out the intended meaning of the Root  Text on  Wisdom  that once products have been established 
through reasoning as not truly existent, non-products  are easily established as not truly existent 
Once compounded phenomena, persons and phenomena, have thus been established as 
not truly existent by way of the reasonings explained earlier, it is established with little 
difficulty that uncompounded phenomena such as space, analytical cessations,312 non-
analytical cessations, and suchness do not truly exist. With that intention it says in Root 
Text on  Emptiness : 
Compounded phenomena are not established, [332] 
So how could the uncompounded be?  
B The reason for that 
A n  e a s y  m e t h o d  f o r  e s t a b l i s h i n g  t h i s  i s  a s  f o l l o w s .  W h e n  i n h e r e n t l y  e s t a b l i s h e d  compounded phenomena have been refuted as above, even though they are not 
                                                                                                                                                                  
of opposites (such as warm and cold)—which may well be valid conventionally—but to certain misconceptions. 
310 Tib. gzhi de  
311 In Tibetan like in many other languages such as Spanish, a clear distinction is made between “to be” as a predicative 
copula (e.g. “to be young” or “to be a farmer,” Tib. yin) and “to be” as an existential verb (Tib yod). However, in this 
particular case where the two are combined to Tib. yod pa yin  (“to be existent”) as opposed to Tib. yod pa  (“to exist”) 
there is no difference in meaning. 
312 Analytical cessations are achieved by ov ercoming mental afflictions through methods of the path such as investigation 
and meditation. Cessations are not compound phenomena because they consist in the absence of something. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
272 inherently established, it is established that  with regard to them, agents and actions such 
as bondage and liberation, causes and effects, objects of comprehension and those who 
comprehend them may be posited. When that is established, even though non-products 
like reality and analytical cess ations are not established as truly existent, one can posit 
well the presentation of object s of attainment on the path, objects of comprehension, the 
Dharma Jewel as refuge for disciples, and so  forth. If they are not asserted as truly 
existent, one cannot at all say that these presentations of the need to posit them are 
inadmissible. Therefore it would be pointless to assert them as truly existent.  
C How to refute even the assertion that non-products such as reality and cessations are inherently truly 
existent by means of the reasoning of interdependence 
Those who assert them as truly existent must and do indeed also assert presentations of 
their definitions and definienda, their causes of  separation and effects of separation, their 
comprehension by such and such valid cognitions and so forth. At that point, if they do 
not relate them to their respective objects of  attainment, characteristics, comprehenders, 
and so forth, they cannot refute that all unrelated things become definitions and 
definienda of each other and the like. If they  assert relations, they cannot posit them 
since something truly existent, inherently established, cannot depend on something else.  
D Another refutation by way of their not being one nor many  
Similarly, you should also investigate whether uncompounded phenomena are one with or 
different313 from their bases of designation and negate their inherent existence. If by this 
reasoned analysis you cannot refute the assertion that they are truly established, you 
cannot negate true existence even in the slightest because it is the same in all respects 
for compounded phenomena.  
E The assertions that a product’s empt iness of inherently existing in its ow n right is a nihilistic emptiness and 
that suchness is established as truly existent are misguided with regard to emptiness [333] 
You may think that if the meaning of “Compounded phenomena are empty of inherently 
established own entities” is that those phenomena do not have such entities, it is thereby 
a nihilistic emptiness. Howeve r, suchness truly exists beca use it has its own entity.  
That is the furthest you can go wrong when  you settle compounded  phenomena as empty 
of inherent establishment, a view that deprecates the interdependence of compounded 
phenomena. The latter is a terrible view of permanence that superimposes true existence if something has its own entity. Therefore you would be entering into the correct meaning of emptiness
314 wrongly.  
F If emptiness of an own essence thus meant that he himself were empty of being himself, it would also be 
inadmissible for someone such as the holder of the thesis that certain phenomena truly exist, to think 
“inherently empty” and posit certain phenomena as truly existent 
If the emptiness of an inherently established own entity were the absence of it in itself, 
the absence in it would mean that nothing at all could possibly exist, so the holder of the thesis that certain phenomena truly exist, the scriptures and reasonings establishing this, 
and so forth would also be empty of an inherently established own entity. Therefore the 
basis would not be established, and therefore positing the tenet that some phenomena 
are truly established is a random statement without investigation.  
G The two, asserting that all phenomena are without true existence, a true existence that has been refuted 
through reasoning, and propounding that all phenomena are without true existence with a mistaken manner 
of understanding emptiness, are by no means the same 
                                                 
313 In the case of a non-product one investigates in detail whether it is the same as or different from its definition and 
definiendum, from its basis of designation and imputed phen omenon, from its essence and its characteristics, and so 
forth. (Oral explanation by Geshe Thubten Soepa) 
314 There is an important distinction here between “own enti ty” (something which does ind eed exist conventionally) and 
“inherently existent entity” (something which is not possible even conventionally according to the Madhyamaka position). 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
273 With good insight into the implications of this way of reasoning, all the Buddhist schools 
of the country of āryas315 that propound the true existence of phenomena are called 
proponents of things since they definitely propound that things are established as truly 
existent. Propounding that thin gs are without true existence and no more asserting any 
phenomena whatsoever to be established as tr uly existent would seem to be a sign of 
distinct superiority over those who prop ound the nonsense of this faction.  
With the above explanations you should also come to a good understanding of those who 
advocate two discordant positions with regard  to suchness and of how they pursue their 
modes of debate on whether or not ultimate reality is ultimately established, having 
agreed on the above kind of emptiness of an inherently established own entity with 
regard to conventional phenomena. [334] 
This is because the two, not asserting true  existence with regard to any things or 
phenomena, having refuted true existence with regard to phenomena by reasoning, and 
propounding that all things and phenomena are without true existence in dependence on 
a nihilistic emptiness, a mistaken manner of understanding emptiness, are dissimilar in all respects.  
H The doubt that if all non-products did not truly exist, this would be in contradiction with scriptures that teach 
nirvāa to be true  
If the meaning of “Compounded phenomena are not established,  / So how could the 
uncompounded be?”316 were as explained earlier, would this not be in contradiction to 
other statements by N āgārjuna? In Sixty Stanzas of  Reasoning it says: 
When the Victors teach nirv āṇa 
As the one and only truth, 
Who, what wise person, would think 
That the rest is not the opposite? 
Only nirv āṇa is said to be true while everything else is said to be untrue. In Praise of the 
Sphere of Reality (Dharmadh ātustotra) it also says: 
All the s ūtras teaching emptiness 
That were set forth by the Victor, 
Counteract the mental afflictions; 
They do not diminish this realm. 
That is the s ūtras teaching emptiness, the absence of inherent existence, are for the sake 
of abandoning mental afflictions and they do not teach that the realm of natural purity 
does not exist.  
I The response to this: although nirv āa is non-deceptive to a mind looking at it with direct perception, it is 
not a truth that bears analysis, so there is no contradiction with the above scriptural passage  
Those who think that way approach the meaning of the statements wrongly. The meaning 
of the above statement is that of the following statement by the Victor: 
Monks, this ultimate truth is singular, it is this: nirv āṇa, that which has the 
quality of non-deceptiveness. All composed things317 have the quality of being 
false, deceptive. 
This sūtra also says that nirv āṇa is true and that all composed things are false. The 
earlier part of the s ūtra passage very clearly explains that true means non-deceptive and 
the latter one very clearly explains that false means deceptive. [335] Moreover, the 
                                                 
315 Tib. ‘phags yul , a synonym for Tib. rgya gar , “India.” 
316 Quoted on p. [331]. 
317 Tib. ‘du byed , usually translated here as “compositional factors.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
274 Commentary on “Sixty Stanzas of Reasoning”  (Yuktiṣaṣțikāvŗtti) explains nirv āṇa as an 
ultimate truth, which it is: Therefore, to a mi nd looking at it with direct perception, it 
does not have any deceptiveness of appear ing inherently established while not being 
inherently established. To a mind to which the remaining phenomena, composed things, 
directly appear, they have the deceptiveness of appearing inherently established while 
not being inherently established. That is why they turn out not to be established as truths 
that bear analysis when you examine them with the reasoning that analyzes whether or 
not they are truly established. Therefore, what is the point of being attached to mere 
names without thinking deep ly about their meaning.  
J Establishing the validity of that 
In Sixty  Stanzas of  Reasoning  it also says: 
Conditioned existence318 and nirv āṇa— 
Neither of these two exists. 
Thorough knowledge of existence That is what is expressed by “nirv āṇa.”  
This is an explanation that both existence and peace do not inherently exist and that 
nirvāṇa is posited as the very object of the knowledge that an inherently established 
existence does not exist. So how could this be a position that asserts emptiness, the non-
true existence of cyclic existenc e, as a nihilistic emptiness?  
K Although emptiness exists, it need not be truly established; that eliminates the alleged contradiction with the 
scriptural passage from Praise of the Sphere of Reality   
The meaning of the scriptural passage from Praise of the Sphere of Reality , too, is: 
In order to avert the apprehension of th ings as truly existent, the root of all 
other mental afflictions, the s ūtras teaching emptiness, the absence of 
inherent establishment, teach that the referent object of that apprehension 
does not exist. They do not teach that emptiness does not exist—the naturally 
pure realm which negates the object of that apprehension of true existence, 
the two types of self. 
Although emptiness exists, it is  not truly established. That is why this scriptural passage 
serves as a source for refuting the propositions “The emptiness that negates the object of 
negation, true existence, does not exist either” and “In order to abandon all the mental 
afflictions, it is not necessary to real ize emptiness, the ultimate suchness.” 
L You cannot avert the apprehension of true existence by making a truly established reality your object of 
meditation 
In fact it says in that very Praise  [336]: 
“Impermanence,” “emptiness,” and “suffering”— 
Those three serve to cleanse the mind. 
The teaching that serves to cleanse it best is the Absence of inherent existence. 
And: 
The lack of inherent existence of dharmas
319— 
Meditate on it as expanse of reality. 
The fact that these phenomena lack an inherently established inherent existence is said 
to be the expanse of reality which is the object  of meditation, and just meditation on that 
                                                 
318 Tib. srid pa , usually translated here as “existence.” 
319 Tib. chos, usually translated here as “phenomena.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
275 is said to be the best purifier of the mind. Therefore, how could it be suitable to interpret 
this as the position that the emptiness that is the absence of inherent establishment of 
phenomena appearing inherently established is a nihilistic emptiness and that, therefore, 
a truly established emptiness separate from it should be posited as the emptiness that is 
the object of meditation. That  is like propounding that when  it comes to eliminating the 
suffering of fear arising from apprehendinga snake in the East even though there is none, 
showing that there is no snak e in the east will not serve as an antidote, but that rather 
one needs to show that there is a tree in the west. This is because one would propound 
that when it comes to eliminating the suffering of sentient beings as they adhere to true 
existence with regard to what appears truly existent, the realization that the basis with 
regard to which there is the apprehension of true existenc e lacks true existence will not 
serve as an antidote, but that rather one n eeds to show some other useless basis to be 
truly existent.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B3 Presentation of conventional and ultimate truths 
This has four points:  
A The basis on which the two truths are divided 
B The number of divisions 
C The meaning of dividing them in that way 
D Explaining the meaning of the individual divisions 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B3A The basis from which the two truths are divided 
Earlier scholars had many ways of assertin g the basis of division  of the two truths. 
However, here, objects of knowledge are the basis of division because in the 
Compendium of Trainings  it says: 
Objects of knowledge320 are also exhausted as these conventional321 and 
ultimate truths.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B3B The number of divisions 
According to the Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way  which says: “Worldly 
conventional truths and ultimate truths,” objects of knowledge are divided into the two, 
conventional and ultimate truths. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B3C The meaning of dividing them in that way 
This has two points: 
1 Presentation of earlier positions [337]  
The two that are divided into two must be different, so in what way are they different?  
In this regard, there are three types of difference: A pot and a woolen cloth, for instance, 
are different entities. Product and impermanence, for instance, are one entity and different isolates. With these two types, the constituting causes of the difference are 
both functioning things. When either is not a functioning thing,
322 the difference is a 
difference that negates their being one. Many  earlier scholars propounded that the two 
truths were different in that their being one was negated. On the other hand, some 
asserted that the two were one entity and different isolates.  
2 Proving the validity of our own system 
                                                 
320 The Tibetan word shes bya  literally means “(things) to be known,” i.e. everything there is. 
321 The word kun rdzob  is mostly rendered here as “conventional(ity)” but occasionally as “concea ling” or “concealer” if 
that alternative meaning is felt to be dominant. The same is true for sections where the primary meaning of its near-
synonym tha snyad , “designation,” is stressed. 
322 When either is a non-prod uct, a permanent phenomenon. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
276 The relation of essential identity323 i s  f i n e  a c c o r d i n g  t o  Illumination of the Middle Way 
which says that it is not contradictory even for non-functioning things. Therefore the 
oneness of entity and difference of isolates is not contradictory even if both constituting 
causes of the difference are non-functioning things or if either of them is. In the 
Explanation of Candrak īrti’s “Commentary on the ‘Middle Way’”  it says: 
Two aspects of the own entity of all things are taught: they are the 
conventional and the ultimate. 
Thus, with regard to the entity of each and every object, there is both a conventional and 
an ultimate entity. If the two truths were not one entity, since it would also be very 
unreasonable for them to be different entities, they would be without entity and therefore 
non-existent,324 because whatever exists necessarily exists as either one entity or many.  
In Essay on the Mind of Enlightenment  it says: 
Conventions are explained as emptiness. 
Emptiness only is the conventional,325 
For surely this does not occur without that, 
Just like a product and impermanence. 
If a sprout, for instance, were a different en tity from its own ultimate entity, it would 
also be a different entity from its emptiness of true existence; so the sprout would be 
truly established. Therefore, since it is not a different entity, it is one entity. Although a 
sprout is empty of its own true existence, it is not its own ultimate truth.  
A few texts [338] set forth that the two truths are neither one nor different. Some of 
them are referring to inherently established oneness and difference whereas others are referring to their not being either different entities or one isolate.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B3D Explaining the meaning of the individual divisions 
This has three points:  
1 Conventional truths 
2 Ultimate truths 
3 Indication that the number of the two truths is definite 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B3D-1 Conventional truths 
This has three points:  
A Explaining the meaning of the words conventional  and truth  
B The definition of a conventional truth C Divisions of conventionalities 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B3D-1A Explaining the meaning of the words conventional  
and truth  
This has two points: 
1 Explaining the meaning of the word conventional  
2 Explaining the meaning of the word truth  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B3D-1A1 Explaining the meaning of the word conventional  
This has two points: 
A The actual meaning 
                                                 
323 Tib. bdag gcig , “of one nature,” and ngo bo gcig , “of one entity” are synonyms in this context. 
324 Everything that exists has its own entity, however, none th at subsists only through its own nature. In that respect the 
statement does not contradict the argument presented in the previous paragraphs as it does not refer to an essence 
established by its own nature independently of anything else. 
325 Geshe Thubten Soepa glossed the first two lines in these te rms: “That which is empty is the conventional, and it is 
conventional only due to its emptiness.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
277 In Clear Words  three meanings for the conventional  are explained: “concealers of 
suchness,” “mutually dependent objects,” and “worldly designations.” The latter are said 
to have the characteristics of  objects of expression and means of expression, knowers 
and objects of knowledge and so forth, so they  are not just subjective designations, that 
is consciousnesses and expressions. Also, obje cts of knowledge and ob jects of expression 
should not all be held to be conventional truths.  
In this regard, the convention which is  the concealing consciousness in whose 
perspective form and the like is posited as truly existent is the first of the three. In fact it 
is the ignorance superimposing on phenomena that they have their own inherently 
established entity which does not exist. This is because true establishment is in fact 
impossible, which is why the positing of ob jects as truly existent is in the mental 
perspective. In a mental perspective that does not apprehend true existence there is no 
positing objects as truly existent . That being so, it says in the Commentary on the 
“Middle Way :” 
Delusion is a concealer, for it obscures nature. 
Its fabrications made to seem truly existent 
Were called “conventional truths” by the Capable One326 
And fabricated things he called conventions.  
B Abandoning mistakes about this 
In the Explanation of Candrak īrti’s “Commentary on the ‘Middle Way’”  it says: 
In this way, conventional truths are posited for the time being under the power 
of afflictive ignorance which is included in the limbs of existence. For hearers, [339] solitary realizers, and bodhis attvas who have abandoned afflictive 
ignorance and who see composed things
327 as resembling the existence of 
mirror images and the like, they are fa bricated natures ra ther than truths 
because they do not exaggerate them as truly existent. To children they are 
deceptive, but to others they are mere conventionalities due to their 
interdependent arising similar to that of illusions and the like. 
This statement does not indicate that whenever conventional truths are posited as 
existent, they are posited as existent due to ignorance; nor does it indicate that in the 
perspective of the minds of hearers, solitary realizers, and bodhisattvas who have 
abandoned afflictive ignorance, conventional truths are not posited.  
The reason for the first point is that, as explained earlier, afflictive ignorance is the 
apprehension of true existence, which is wh y the object it apprehends does not even 
exist conventionally. Whatever is a conventional truth necessarily exists conventionally. 
Therefore, if something is conventional in th e sense of a basis for positing phenomena as 
conventionally existent, it must be something that is not taken as conventional with 
regard to afflicted ignorance.  
The reason for the second point is that those who have abandoned the conventionality of 
afflicted ignorance do not have the conventionality of adherence to true existence in 
whose perspective true existence is posited. That is the reason why composed things are 
established as untrue in their perspective, but it does not establish that they are not conventional truths. Consequently the statement that, in their perspective, composed things are mere conventions means that for them, from among the two components, 
conventional and truth , truth328 cannot be posited. So the word mere  eliminates truth , but 
                                                 
326 Tib. thub pa , usually rendered here as “Sage.” 
327 Tib. ‘du byed , usually translated here as “compositional factors.” 
328 The Tibetan term bden pa  can mean “truth” as well as “true.” Likewise, kun rdzob  can mean “conventional,” 
“conventionally existent,” and “convention . ”  T h i s  u n c e r t a i n t y  a s  t o  t h e  g r a m m a tical function of words can lead to 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
278 not conventional truth . The intention of setting forth the two, mere conventions and 
conventional truths, should be understood like that.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B3D-1A2 Explaining the meaning of the word “truth” 
This has two points: 
A The actual meaning 
In Clear Words  it says [340]: 
That which is a truth for the world in a concealing manner is a worldly 
conventional truth. 
This is explained in the Explanation of Candrak īrti’s “Commentary on the ‘Middle Way’” : 
That which appears truly existent and inherently separate due to a concealer 
while not existing inherently is true  for a worldly, mistaken concealer. 
Therefore it is a worldly conventional truth. 
In accordance with this clear statement, worldly conventional truths should be 
understood as truths for the concealer which is the ignorance explained earlier. They should not be understood as truly established conventionally because otherwise it would contradict a system in which establishment by way of own an character is impossible 
even conventionally. Also, the refutation of true existence and the establishment of the 
lack of true existence are performed conventionally. The explanation by Master 
Jñānagarbha of abidance as conventionally true should also be understood in this 
manner.  
B Clearing up doubts about that 
Now then, one may think that for a concealer apprehending true existence, reality and 
the two selves are truths. Therefore they  would be truths for a concealer.  
If that which is merely true for a concealer apprehending true existence were posited as a truth for a concealer, such would indeed be the case. However, that has not been propounded. It was merely expl ained for what concealer the 
truth  of conventional truth  is 
a true convention, and how it is true for it.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B3D-1B The definition of a conventional truth 
This has six points: 
1 How all phenomena have two natures, along with a source  
Each and every external and internal phenomenon has both a conventional and an 
ultimate nature. More specifically, if this is illustrated with rega rd to a sprout for 
example, they are the sprout’s nature found by a reasoning consciousness329 that 
perceives the meaning of suchness, a true object of knowledge, and the sprout’s nature 
found by a conventional cons ciousness that comp rehends a deceptiv e object, a false 
object of knowledge. The former is the nature of the sprout’s ultimate truth and the latter 
is the nature of the sprout’s conventional truth. In accordance with that it says in the 
Commentary on the “Middle Way ” [341]: 
Two natures330 of all things are apprehended, 
By seeing what is real  and what’s deceptive. 
                                                                                                                                                                  
ambiguities, misinterpretations, and exte nsive explanations of how each word should be understood—like the one here. 
329 This does not refer to a conceptual consciousnesses on l y .  D i r e c t  k n o w l e d g e  o f  s u c h n e s s  m a y  a l s o  b e  c a l l e d  a  
reasoning consciousness  (rigs shes) , presumably because such knowledge is also based on reasoning, having arisen 
from logical investigation. (Tibetan-Sanskrit-English Dictiona ry, A project of the Tibetan St udies Institute, Boonesville, 
Virginia, and the University of Virginia Tibe tan Studies Program, © Jeffrey Hopkins 1992).  
330 According to the above explanations the two tr uths are two distinct aspects of one nature (ngo bo) . Here these two 
aspects are being stressed and referred to as two natures (ngo bo) .  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
279 The objects of seeing the real were taught to be suchness, 
Deceptive objects seen ar e conventional truths. 
2 Indication that they are found by dissimilar valid cognitions 
This indicates that with respect to the sprout’s nature, there are two natures, the two 
truths. The ultimate nature is found by the former consciousness (“seeing the real”), and the conventional nature is found by the latter (“Deceptive objects seen”). One single 
nature of the sprout as two truths in dependence on the former and latter consciousness 
is not indicated. In the 
Explanation of Candrak īrti’s “Commentary on the ‘Middle Way’”  it 
says: 
Two aspects of the own nature of all things have been taught. They are 
conventional and ultimate. 
It is saying that the natures of each and every thing having been divided into the two, 
the ultimate ones are found by consciousnesses that perceive the real meaning, and the 
conventional ones are found by consciousnesses that see what is false. 
3 How it is necessary to acquire the Madhyamaka view in order to ascertain the basis as a conventional truth 
Conventional truths are not really true but merely true in the perspective of the 
apprehension of true existence. Therefore, in  order to ascertain their meaning isolates, it 
is necessary to ascertain th em as deceptive. In order to ascertain a basis of 
characteristics, for instance a pot, as a false object, a deceptive object of knowledge, it is 
necessary to acquire a view, with regard to th at basis, that negates the referent object 
apprehended as true by means of a reasoningconsciousness. This is because a falsity is 
not established by valid cognition without its truth having been negated by reasoning.  
4 Even if the meaning of conventional truth  is not established for a mind, that does not contradict its 
ascertainment of the basis of characteristics, such as a pot  
Although a pot, a woolen cloth, and so forth are conventional truths, when they are being 
established by a mind, the mind does not need to establish the meaning of conventional 
truth. Likewise, although pots, woolen cloths, and so forth are not inherently existent and 
accordingly illusion-lik e in their appearance, the minds that establish them need not 
establish their meaning of being illusion-like.  
5 How it is inadmissible to posit pots and the like as co nventional in relation to the perspective of a worldly 
consciousness and as ultimate in relation to āryas  
That is why [342] it is inadmissible to propo und that, in this system, pots, woolen cloths, 
and so forth are posited as conventional truths  for the consciousnesses of ordinary beings 
without the Madhyamaka view, and that they are posited as ultimate truths from an 
ārya’s point of view. That would be the opposite of what is set forth in the Explanation of 
Candrak īrti’s “Commentary on the ‘Middle Way’” : 
T h a t  i s  t o  s a y ,  s o m e t h i n g  t h a t  i s  u l t i m a t e  f o r  o r d i n a r y  b e i n g s  i s  a  m e r e  
conventionality for āryas with the sphere of activity involving appearances. For 
them something that is an emptiness of inherent existence is ultimate. 
Ordinary beings apprehend pots and the like as truly existent, and precisely that is the 
apprehension of ultimate existence. In relati on to their consciousness, pots and the like 
are therefore ultimately established rather than being conventional objects. The bases 
that for them are ultimately established, pots and the like, are conventionalities in 
relation to the vision of exalted wisdom in the continuum of an ārya which comprehends 
illusion-like appearances. Since they cannot be posited as true in relation to that 
consciousness, they are said to be mere conventionalities .  
6 The need to differentiate between pots and the like and their inherent existence 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
280 Since their nature is thus said to bean ultimate truth, you should discriminate and say 
that pots and the like are conventional ities and their nature is ultimate for āryas. You 
should not propound that pots and the like are ultimates for āryas. This is because their 
reasoning consciousness seeing the meaning of  reality does not find pots and the like, 
and because that which is found by a reasoning consciousness seeing the meaning of 
reality is said to be the mean ing of an ultimate truth.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B3D-1C Divisions of conventionalities 
This has six points: 
1 The ways in which Pr āsagika and Sv ātantrika posit the object of negation do not agree, therefore they are 
also not the same in their distinction of real and wrong conventionalities  
The Sv ātantrika-M ādhyamikas ascertain that consciousness which appears to be 
established by way of its own character331 exists just as it appears. Therefore they do not 
distinguish between real and wrong subjects but instead distinguish whether the 
appearances of objects do or do not exist by way of their own character in accordance with how they appear.
332 They assert this in accordance  with the following statement in 
Jñānagarbha’s Distinguishing the Two Truths  (Satyadvay āvibaṅgha): 
They seem the same, but since some can [343] 
And some cannot fulfill a function, 
A distinction is made between real 
And unreal conventionalities. 
This system asserts that whatever appears to the ignorant as established by way of its 
own character is an appearance of that consciousness polluted by ignorance. Therefore 
conventional objects are not distinguished asthe two, real and wrong.  
2 Although the reflection of a face is  not a conventional trut h in relation to a worl dly person familiar with 
words, it is a conventional truth generally speaking  
Now, it says in the Explanation of Candrak īrti’s “Commentary on the ‘Middle Way’” : 
Whatever is false even conventional ly is not a conventional truth. 
For the worldly conventional consciousness of someone familiar with words something 
like the reflection of a face is not true as a face. Hence it is not conventionally true from 
that point of view. While this is so, it is st ill the object found by a consciousness seeing a 
deceptive object, a false object of knowle dge; so it is a conventional truth. The 
consciousness which the reflecti on appears to is mistaken about its appearing object, and 
likewise the ignorant to whom something blue  and the like appears to be established by 
way of its own character are mistaken about their appearing object.  
3 Although that mistaken consciousness does not posit a true object of comprehension, it helps posit a false 
object of comprehension  
When a true object of comprehension is posited, it would be contradictory for a 
consciousness mistaken in that way to posit it. However, precisely that is helpful for 
positing false objects of comprehension. Otherwise something could not be posited as a conventional truth if it had not been establ ished conventionally; so  when illusion-like 
falsities are posited conventionally, they coul d not be posited as conventional truths.  
                                                 
331 The Svātantrika-M ādhyamikas assert that all phenomena exist conven tionally, but not ultimately, through their own 
characteristics. 
332 Appearances that do not accord with reality an d are recognized by the world as deceptive are wrong conventionalities  
according to proponents of Sv ātantrika-Madhyamaka. By contrast, conventi onal phenomena commonly taken to exist and 
certifiable by conventional means are referred to as true conventionalities  in that system. The Pr āsaṅgika-Mādhyamikas 
do not subscribe to the latter view. (Geshe Thubten Ngawang, Systematisches Studium des Buddhismus , semester no. 7, 
unit 16, transcript p. 5) 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
281 4 How real and wrong conventionalities are posited in relation to the world, along with a source 
The Prāsaṅgika system posits six consciousnesses unaffected by temporary causes of 
deception, six consciousnesses that are the opposite of those, six objects apprehended by 
the former six consciousnesses, and [344] six objects apprehended by the latter six. The 
wrong objects and subjects are posited as wrong conventionalities, whereas the objects 
and subjects that are not wrong are posited as real conventionalities. Furthermore, it 
posits them as real and wrong conventionalities in relation to worldly or conventional 
valid cognition rather than in relation to a reasoning consciousness that accords with an 
ārya’s vision. In our Madhyamaka system the two, the appearances of reflections and the 
like and the appearances of blue and the like to someone with ignorance, therefore do 
not differ with regard to whethe r or not he is mistaken in re lation to his appearing object. 
That is why realand wrong conventionalities are not distinguished.333 In the Commentary 
on the “Middle Way”  it says: 
That which the worldly realize, apprehended 
By means of the six non-defective senses Is true from only the worldly perspective. The rest 
Is posited as wrong from that perspective. 
5 The exception that conventional valid cognition cannot posit the opposite of the mode of apprehension 
associated with temporary pollution by bad tenets  
Conventional valid cognition does not establish the opposite of, for instance, one of the 
two apprehensions of persons and phenomena established through their own character: the mode of apprehension arising from the mind’s being temporarily polluted by one’s 
own bad tenets. This is an exception.
334  
6 A consciousness need not be mistaken even though it has dualistic appearance  
Moreover, although dualistic appearances occur for the exalted wisdom knowing the 
varieties free from all causes  of pollution by predispositions of ignorance, it is not 
mistaken with regard to its appearing ob jects. The reason is explained elsewhere.335  
                                                 
333 “That is why the Pr āsaṅgika-Mādhyamikas do not accept the division of conv entional truths into real (flawless) and 
false (wrong) conventional truths, the way Sv ātantrika-M ādhyamikas do: According to the proponents of Pr āsaṅgika 
conventional truths are false conventional truths at any rate . Consequently a conventional truth is always deceptive and 
never unobjectionable and genuine. The only division th ey endorse discriminates be tween phenomena the world 
apprehends as unobjectionable conventional truths and phenomena the world apprehen ds as wrong conventional 
truths.” (Translated from Geshe Thubten Ngawang, Systematisches Studium des Buddhismus , semester no. 9, unit 10, 
transcript p. 5 f.)  
334 This is a departure from the foregoing and an exception in  that, here, one’s perception is impaired by a temporary 
source of deception which is not detected  as wrong by one’s worldly understanding. 
335 The topic is explained in detail in Jé Tsongkhapa’s Illumination of the Thought  (dgongs pa rab gsal ), his commentary 
on Candrak īrti’s Madhyamak āvatāra. There it says: “In the case of a buddha, indirect (implicit) knowledge such that 
something is known without itself appear ing to the consciousness is inconceiva ble. Therefore conventional phenomena 
must also appear to his wisdom consciousness and be apprehen ded in this manner directly (explicitly). It follows that the 
Buddha knows conventional phenomena in a way in which they appear to his wisdom that realizes the multiplicity of 
phenomena, with the duality of object and subject.”  
Guy Newland comments on this in The Two Truths  (Newland 1992: 199): “When a co ncealer-truth appears to a non-
conceptual awareness that explicitly realizes it, it must appe ar in association with dualisti c appearance. This holds true 
regardless of whether the person involved is a Buddha or an ordinary sentient being. However, when sentient beings—
including H īnayāna Foe Destroyers and pure ground Bodhisattvas—see a concealer-truth, the latencies of their own 
ignorance cause the object to appear to be inherently existent. Buddhas, on the other hand, do not have any appearance of inherent existence from their own side. They see the appearances of inherent existence that arise within 
the minds of sentient beings, but see them only through the force of their appearance to those sentient beings. 
Therefore, while buddhas do have dualistic appearance of pu re and impure conventionalities, they have no error or 
imperfections because all phenomena appear to them exactl y as they are, without any superimposed appearance of 
inherent existence. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
282 2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B3D-2 Ultimate truths 
This has three points:  
A Explaining the meaning of ultimate  and truth  
B The definition of an ultimate truth 
C Divisions of ultimate truths 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B3D-2A Explaining the meaning of ultimate  and truth  
This has three points: 
1 The actual meaning 
In Clear Words  it says: 
It is an object and it is ultimate; therefore it is the ultimate object.336 Since it is 
true, it is the ultimate object truth.337 
This asserts that both [345] ultimate  and object  apply to the ultimate object truth . 
2 How it is true  
The way in which an ultimate truth is true is its non-deceptiveness. Specifically, it does 
not deceive the world, abiding in one way and appearing in a different way. In the 
Commentary on “Sixty Stanzas of Reasoning” it says that an ultimate truth is merely 
posited as existent by the power of worldly conventions.338 
3 The different meanings of the word truth  associated with the two truths 
That being so, the meaning of the word truth  in conventional truth , which is a truth in 
the perspective of the apprehension of true existence , and the meaning of the word truth  
in ultimate truth  are not the same. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B3D-2B The definition of an ultimate truth 
This has two points: 
1 The actual definition 
2 Rejecting an objection 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B3D-2B1 The actual definition 
This has nine points: 
A How to identify the definition of an ultimate truth 
The definition of an ultimate truth is as explained above: in the Commentary on the 
“Middle Way”  it is said to be that which is found by  seeing the meaning of a real object of 
knowledge. In the commentary on that it says:  
That is to say the ultimate gains its ow n entity through being the object of the 
special exalted wisdom of those who percei ve reality, but it is not established 
by way of its own selfh ood. This is one nature. 
It is said to be found by the uncontaminated exalted wisdom comprehending suchness 
and not to be established by way of its own entity, so the proposition that something is 
established as truly existent if found by un contaminated meditative equipoise is being 
refuted. The words “special exalted wisdom” indicate that what is found by any wisdom 
of an ārya is not sufficient, and that instead only what is found by a special exalted 
                                                 
336 Tib. don dam pa , usually translated here simply as “ultimate.” 
337 Tib. don dam bden pa , usually translated here simply as “ultimate truth.” 
338 “Without relying on conventions the ultimate cannot be taught.” (N āgārjuna, Root Text on  Wisdom , chap. XXIV, verse 
10, translated from Geshe Thubten Ngawang, Systematisches Studium des Buddhismus , semester no. 9, unit 3, 
transcript p. 3) 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
283 wisdom, the exalted wisdo m that knows the mode,339 is an ultimate truth. The meaning of 
“found” is established as such by that consciousness , like with conventionalities.  
B How it is found by an ārya’s uncontaminated exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise that knows the mode 
Yet how does it find it? While the eyes of so meone with a cataract se e falling hairs on the 
basis of the air around, [346] the eyes of someone without a cataract do not see even an 
appearance of falling hairs on the same basis. Likewise, those who are damaged by the 
cataract of ignorance observe an own enti ty of aggregates and the like. With the 
uncontaminated exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise of those who have exhausted all 
the predispositions of ignorance and of āryas on the path of learning, in terms of the 
mode of perceiving suchness, not even subtle dualistic appearance is perceived, like with 
the eyes of someone who does not have a cataract. The nature perceived through this 
mode of perception is an ultimate truth.  
C A source for that 
In the Commentary on the “Middle Way”  it says: 
Where wrong entities such as falling hairs 
Are imputed through the force of cataracts 
One with pure eyes sees the nature, suchness. 
Suchness should be known here in like manner. 
In its commentary it also says: 
Whatever inherent existence of aggregates and the like, those free from the 
predispositions of ignorance, the buddhas, perceive in the manner of those without cataracts seeing falling hairs; that is their ultimate truth. 
D Indicating that a nirv āa is an ultimate truth 
The ultimate perceived in this manner is the ultimate nature of two natures that each and 
every phenomenon has. More specifically , it is both the naturally pure nirv āṇa, which is 
the emptiness of inherent establishment of phenomena, and just that natural emptiness 
free from all the different seeds of defilements, the nirv āṇa which is a true cessation.  
E It is not the intended meaning of the Commentary on “Sixty Stanzas of Reasoning”  that nirv āa is a 
conventional truth 
In the  Commentary on “Sixty  Stanzas of Reasoning”  it says: 
Is a nirv āṇa also a conventional truth? It is so. 
Also: 
Therefore a nirv āṇa is only imputed as a conventional truth.  
Those statements mean that positing a nirv āṇa, an ultimate truth, as existent, [347] also 
implies positing it as merely existent in the perspective of a conventional consciousness, 
a conventional truth. They do not mean that this system asserts a nirv āṇa as a 
conventional truth because that same commentary also explains that the three truths are 
conventional truths and that nirv āṇa is an ultimate truth. In the Explanation of 
Candrak īrti’s “Commentary on the ‘Middle Way’”  the other three truths are also set forth 
as conventional truths and the truth of cessatio n as an ultimate truth. And in response to 
the objection that if a nirv āṇa were posited as conventionally existent, this would 
                                                 
339 The other distinctive feature of wisdom is knowledge of the multiplicity of phenomena along with their individual 
characteristics. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
284 contradict the statement that it is an ultimate truth, it says that it was taught as 
conventionally true only by worldly designations.340  
F A source for positing all phenomena by the power of designations  
Therefore everything posited as existent is posited by the power of worldly designations. 
In the Śatasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitāsūtra (Sūtra of the  Perfection of Wisdom in 100,000 
Verses)  it says: 
All these phenomena are labeled in depe ndence on worldly designations, they 
are not ultimate. 
And in Seventy  Stanzas  on Emptiness  it also says: 
Abidance, production, destruction, existence, 
Non-existence or low, equal, special 
Were taught by the Buddha by the power of worldly 
Terms and not by the power of reality. 
In other words all the various presentations of production, destruction, and abidance, 
low, supreme, and intermediate, as well as “Thi s exists and this does not exist” that the 
Victor taught, were taught as merely posited by the power of worldly designations. He 
said that they were not posited by the power of appreciating real abidance that is not 
merely posited by the power of designations. 
G Establishing as valid that something need not be truly established if it is ultimately true because of the need 
to differentiate between a truth for a reasoning consciousness and a truth bearing analysis  
Master Jñ ānagarbha explains: 
Since it is a truth for an ultimate consciousness, it is an ultimate truth. 
He thereby also explains that a reasoning consciousness is ultimate and thus says that 
what is non-deceptive for it is a truth. However, [348] the intended meaning is not truly 
existent  in terms of bearing analysi s, because in that text the true establishment of all 
phenomena is refuted. 
Therefore we assert the proposition “If the ultimate were not true for an ultimate 
consciousness, the conventional would not be true for a conventional consciousness.” 
However, to propound that “If the former we re not established for the former, the latter 
would not be established for the latter” is to say that if the negation of a truth were not 
truly established, the phenomena that are the basis of the negation would be truly 
e s t a b l i s h e d .  T h i s  i s  b e c a u s e  a n  u l t i m a t e  t r u t h  i s  p o s i t e d  a s  t h e  m e r e  n e g a t i o n  o f  t r u e  
existence in the phenomena that are the basis of the negation, and because to suggest 
that phenomena are not conventionally established is to suggest that they are not falsely 
established. Thus it would be totally incoherent because it is due to the very fact that the appearing phenomena, which do not exist in a truly established way, are not established 
as truly existent, that the bases of negation must be established as falsities.  
H For something to be posited as conventionally existent it must not be damaged by any valid cognition 
Therefore, although for something to be posited as conventionally existent, it need not 
be established by a reasoning consciousness of suchness, it must not be damaged by any 
valid cognition, that is by a conventi onal or reasoning consciousness. The  Commentary on 
“Sixty Stanzas of Reasoning”  explains that since the appropriated aggregates 
conventionally abide as the four, impermanent and so forth, the apprehension of the four is unmistaken in relation to that, and since the aggregates do not abide even 
                                                 
340 Here the double meaning (convention  and designation)  of Tib. tha snyad  should be kept in mind. In this paragraph 
and the following it is translated as designation  because of the context.  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
285 conventionally as the four, permanent and so forth, the apprehension of those four is 
mistaken in relation to that. In the Commentary on the “Middle Way”  it says: 
The self as imputed by the t īrthikas 
Carried away by the torpor of unknowing 
And what is imputed to magic displays and illusions Does not even exist from a worldly perspective. 
This is saying that the self, the primal matter, and so forth, imputed by the forders, as 
well as the objects conceived as the horses, elephants, and the like of illusions, do not 
even conventionally exist. Therefor e the proposition that it is the Pr āsaṅgika approach to 
posit as conventionally existent what only exists for a mistaken mind [349] is 
meaningless babble. None of the other great M ādhyamikas asserts this either. 
Also, in the 
Commentary on the “Middle Way”  objects and subjects are taken to be equal 
in terms of existence and non-existence; however, not in terms of mere  existence and 
non-existence in general. Rather, the two ar e taken to be equal in terms of inherent 
existence and non-existence.  
I Although phenomena are merely posited by the power of conventions, this does not eliminate their 
establishment by valid cognition and so forth 
That being so, whatever is posited as convention ally existent is posited as existent by the 
power of nominal conventions, but not ever ything posited by the power of these is 
asserted to be conventionally existent. Although phenomena are asserted as merely 
posited by the power of conventions, the word mere  eliminates the meaning that they are 
not subjective conventions. It does not at all eliminate that the objects posited are 
established by valid cognition.  
This system is not dissatisfied with such a way of positing phenomena by the power of 
conventional imputation. What it does not do is search for an imputed object that is not merely posited like that but exis ts in accordance with its meaning and, if it is found, posit 
it as existent whereas otherwis e, posit it is as non-existent . Rather, it asserts that if 
something findable emerged as one searches with this search method , it would be truly 
established. Therefore it does not assert even conventionally that anything is found to exist upon such analysis. From there the dividing line between analyzing and not 
analyzingsuchness is also drawn. So the Pr āsaṅgikas see that if something established by 
way of its own character existed, it would ha ve to exist by way of its own entity as an 
object not merely posited by the power of subj ective designations. Having seen that, they 
do not even conventionally assert inherent existence, existence by way of own character, 
or existence by way of an own entity. This has already been explained in detail elsewhere.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B3D-2B2 Rejecting an objection 
This has two points: 
A Setting out an objection 
B Explanatory answer 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B3D-2B2A Setting out an objection 
If the Buddha’s exalted wisdom knowing the mode of being of phenomena finds ultimate 
truths, then how about the following statement from the Explanation of Candrak īrti’s 
“Commentary on the ‘Middle Way :’” 
I s  s u c h  a  n a t u r e  n o t  i n v i s i b l e ?  T h e r e f ore how do they perceive it? That is 
indeed true, however, [350] it is said that they perceive it by means of non-
perception. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
286 It explains that not to perceive anything at all is to perceive suchness. As a source for 
that Candrak īrti quotes an explanation that ultimate  truths are beyond even the objects 
of omniscient exalted wisdom. He also explains that at the level of buddhahood the 
movement of the mind and mental factors has permanently stopped and that at the time of the ten powers, when a buddha does not perceive aggregates and so forth, he knows 
all phenomena. How are you not contradicting these explanations?  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B3D-2B2B Explanatory answer 
This has fifteen points: 
1 There is no contradiction because the meaning associated with this system is to point out that an exalted 
wisdom knowing the mode does not observe conventionalities in the perspective of perceiving the ultimate 
“They perceive by means of non-perception” does not refer to not seeing any objects at 
all. Rather, it points out that if these objects, observed due to the cataract of ignorance, 
existed in reality, they would have to be observed by the uncontaminated exalted wisdom 
of an ārya’s meditative equipoise; so their suchness is perceived by way of their utter 
non-perception. This is because if the object of negation existed, it would be observable. 
On account of its non-observation, the realization of the negation of the object of 
negation is posited. The meaning of “Seeing wi thout seeing is the most excellent” should 
also be understood in this way. 
2 A source for that 
Thus it also says in the Verse Summary of the Perfection of Wisdom in Eight Thousand 
Lines : 
“Those who don’t see forms and also don’t see feelings, 
Don’t see discriminations and do not see intentions, 
Do not see consciousness nor mind nor intellect, 
See the Dharma,” thus the Tath āgata teaches. 
Sentient beings see space and put that into words. 
Through that way in which space is seen investigate this! 
That’s how the Dharma is seen, the Tath āgata teaches. 
Through other analogies, seeing cannot be expressed. 
What is not seen are said to be the five aggregates, and what is seen is the truth. [351] That is the meaning of suchness just as in  the statement “He who sees interdependence 
sees the truth.” 
3 Elucidating the meaning of that s ūtra passage 
More specifically, in the analogy space is the mere elimination of obstructive, tangible 
objects, and seeing or realizing it is like not seeing the obscuring obstructive objects of negation which would be observable if they were present. What is seen is space and what 
is not seen are obscuring obstructions.  
The last two lines negate that suchness is seen the way you see blue rather than in 
accordance with the analogy. The statement that the five aggregates are not seen 
indicates that in the perspective of suchness perceived by uncontaminated meditative 
equipoise, phenomena are not seen.  
4 The Sūtra on Engaging in the Two Truths  explains that in the perspective of  perceiving the ultimate with an 
exalted knower of all aspects, dualistic appearance disappears, but it does not teach that the ultimate is not 
realized 
In the Sūtra on  Engaging in the Two Truths  it says: 
Son of the gods, ultimate truths are beyond all objects up to and including 
objects of omniscient exalted wisdoms possessing the supreme of aspects; 
they are not like what is expressed by “It is an ultimate truth.”  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
287 It explains that ultimate truths are not seen in accordance with the appearance to the 
mind of object and subject as separate when you say “It is an ultimate truth.” Therefore 
the quotation is a source for the disappearance of dualistic appearance rather than for 
the non-realization of the ultimate by the Buddha.  
5 How such a mode of perception is also set forth in the Explanation of Candrak īrti’s “Commentary on the 
‘Middle Way’”   
In the Explanation of Candrak īrti’s “Commentary on the ‘Middle Way’”  it also says: 
Without touching produced things, he realizes suchness by making manifest 
their nature only. That is why he is called “Buddha.” 
In the perspective of perceiving suchness with a buddha’s exalted wisdom knowing the mode, reality only is said to  be realized without touching
341 that which depends on other.  
6 The s ūtra statement that during meditative equipoise there is no movement of the mind posits that there is 
no movement of conceptual thought 
The movement of the mi nd and mental factors342 coming to an end [352] means that 
when suchness is actual ized, the movement of conceptual thought comes to an end. It 
does not indicate that the mind or mental factors do not exist. In Clear Words  it says: 
If conceptual thought is movement of the mind, suchness is non-conceptual, 
for it is free from it. As is set forth in a s ūtra: “What is ultimate truth? If there 
is not even movement of the mind in it, what need is there to mention letters.” 
The meaning of the statement that there is no movement of the mind is explained as the 
absence of conceptual th ought. Moreover, in the Explanation of Candrak īrti’s 
“Commentary on the ‘Middle Way’”  it is set forth that at the time of an ārya’s meditative 
equipoise on the path of learning, it has not come to a permanent end, whereas at the 
time of buddhahood it has. 
7 How the proposition that an ultimate truth is not an object of knowledge and such like are nothing but wrong 
Apart from that, the Explanation of Candrak īrti’s “Commentary on the ‘Middle Way’”  
establishes with an accompanying source, that if that nature did not exist, the 
bodhisattvas would pointle ssly undergo hardships for the sake of realizing it: 
One may well ask: “What is their nature?” That which is unfabricated about 
them and which does not depend on anything else: their own entity343 that is 
r e a l i z e d  b y  a  c o n s c i o u s n e s s  f r e e  f r o m  t h e  c a t a r a c t  o f  i g n o r a n c e .  W h o e v e r  
wonders whether or not it exists: If it did not exist, then for what purpose 
would bodhisattvas cultivate the path of the perfections, why would 
bodhisattvas undertake hundreds of ha rdships in order to realize reality?  
And as a source for that: 
Child of the lineage, if the ultimate did not exist, pure conduct would be meaningless, and it would be pointless for tath āgatas to come forth. Since the 
ultimate exists, bodhisattvas are call ed “those skilled in the ultimate.” 
If ultimate truths [353] did not exist, it woul d be pointless to engage in conduct for the 
sake of the purity of final nirv āṇa, disciples would not be able to realize it, it would be 
pointless for a buddha to come to the world in order to make them realize it, and the 
great children of the Victors would not be  skilled in ultimate truths. Thus a s ūtra 
                                                 
341 According to an explanation by Geshe Thubten Soepa “without touching” should be understood metaphorically “the 
way you can take an egg from underneath a brooding hen without touching her.” 
342 The expression is taken up from a statement by Candrak īrti quoted above. 
343 Tib. rang bzhin , “nature” and rang gi ngo bo , “own entity” should be understood as synonyms here. (Oral explanation 
by Geshe Thubten Soepa) 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
288 establishing that ultimate truths exist is quoted. Therefore it is simply wrong to say that 
the great master’s system propounds that ultimate truths are not objects of knowledge 
and that the exalted wisdom realizing suchness does not exist in an ārya’s meditative 
equipoise.  
8 In the perspective of an uncontaminated meditative  equipoise, object and subject are not posited as 
separate  
Furthermore it says in the Explanation of Candrak īrti’s “Commentary on the ‘Middle 
Way’” : 
Therefore it is posited from imputation th at suchness is realized, but actually it 
is not that something is known by some thing else because neither the knower 
nor the object of knowledge have arisen. 
The first part means that to posit the realization of suchness, taking exalted wisdom and 
suchness separately as object and subject, is  to posit it merely in the perspective of 
conventional consciousness rather than in the perspective of that exalted wisdom. “The 
knower has not arisen” means that with respect to its object which has not inherently arisen, it is like wate r poured into water. 
9 Suchness is actualized by way of stopping the movement of conceptual thought 
As for the statement: 
Since mind and mental factors do not operate with respect to suchness, the 
object of exalted wisdom, it is actualized only by the body. 
… the object to be actualized is suchness, the subject, exalted wisdom, is that which 
actualizes it, and the complete enjoyment body is the agent of actualization, that is the 
knower.344 The manner in which it is thereby actualized is by way of stopping conceptual 
activity of minds and mental factors as expl ained earlier. From the [354] explanation in 
the Commentary , it is understood that the body by means of which suchness is actualized 
is in the nature of peace because it is free from minds and mental factors. 
10 If a buddha did not perceive the aggregates and th e like, his exalted knowledge of varieties would be 
deprecated 
If a buddha did not perceive the aggregates and the like, his exalted knowledge of 
varieties as well as the varieties of all obje cts would be deprecated because the two, to 
exist and not to be known by a buddha, are contradictory. 
11 The exalted knower of all aspects must know them since they appear to that knower of varieties; hence there 
are two types of appearing objects 
Therefore the varieties of objects must appear to the exalted knower of varieties, and 
since it is not knowledg e without aspects as far as this system is concerned, the aspects 
appear to it. Yet the varieties of appearing ob jects are both that which is unpolluted by 
the predispositions of ignorance such as the major and minor marks of a buddha, and 
that which is polluted by the predispositions of ignorance such as the impure inanimate 
and animate world. As for the first of these, it would be meaningless if they came to an 
end at the buddha level, whereas the latter co me to an end at that level because their 
causes have come to an end. 
12 How the manner in which they appear to an exalted knower of all aspects that realizes the varieties differs 
from the manner in which they appear to other persons 
The mode of appearance is as follows. Wh en a buddha’s major and minor marks appear 
to a person who has not abandoned ignorance, they are not established by way of their 
                                                 
344 “How is it manifested?—Through wisdom. Who manifests it?—The sambhogak āya. That is a description of realization 
and embodiment at the time of buddhahood.” (Oral explanation by Geshe Thubten Soepa) 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
289 own character but still appear to be. The reason for this is not that those objects arise 
due to the predispositions of ignorance. Rather , they appear like that due to the subject’s 
pollution by the predispositions of ignorance. This is not because they appear to that 
subject merely from the perspective of appear ing that way to other persons, but because 
they appear that way from its own perspective. Forms, sounds, and the like, objects that 
are not established by way of their own character but still a ppear that way to someone 
who has not abandoned ignorance, appear to a buddha’s exalted wisdom knowing the 
varieties only by means of their appearance to persons with the pollution of ignorance. 
[355] They do not appear fr om a buddha’s own perspectiv e, independently of their 
appearing that way to others. Therefore a buddha knows forms and the like which are 
not inherently established but still appear to be, yet it is from the perspective of their 
appearing that way to the ignorant. Independently of their appearing that way to those 
persons, from a buddha’s own perspective, he would not know them in the manner of 
their appearing that way. Hence, there is no sense that he is deceived by appearances 
because they do not appear from pollution existing within the exalted wisdom but due to the essential point that the exalted wisdom ne cessarily knows all objects of knowledge. 
That being so, all things appear to be selfless, not inherently existent entities from the perspective of an exalted knower of the vari eties, whereby they appear as illusion-like 
falsities. They do not appear as truths. When they appear to that exalted wisdom in 
terms of their appearance to the ignorant, they merely arise as that which appears true 
to other persons.  
13 It is also set fo rth like this in the Sixty  Stanzas of  Reasoning 
In Sixty  Stanzas of  Reasoning it also says: 
Those who are skilled wit h respect to things 
See impermanent things, deceptive 
Phenomena, made up, empty, and selfless; 
They see them as what is referred to as “void.” 
In the commentary on this it says that those who have completed the deeds perceive 
things in that way.  
14 Although the two truths, their objects, are one entity , it is not contradictory to posit individual exalted 
knowers in relation to them 
Thus it says in the Two Truths : 
Omniscient knowers directly perceive 
All that which arises dependently 
Devoid of imputed entities— Just this, just as it appears. 
They are said to perceive all the variet ies directly and vividly. Furthermore: 
When consciousness and objects of knowledge 
And the self are not perceived, Since signs do not appear to them, 
They do not arise, for they firmly abide. 
What is being explained is that omniscient knowers never arise from the concentration in 
which dualistic appearance has been completely pacified. [356] 
To someone who does not understand the modes of both explanations correctly, it may 
seem contradictory to assert both and no t just one of the two, but there is no 
contradiction. The exalted wisdom perceiving suchness and the exalted wisdom 
perceiving the varieties are one entity, but that  does not in the least contradict the fact 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
290 that in relation to individual objects it becomes the two, a reasoning consciousness and a 
conventional consciousness.  
15 When the two valid cognitions comprehend objects individually on the occasion of the view of the bases or 
on the occasion of the fruit, you need to know which of the two valid cognitions is active 
This depends on knowing well that there is no t the slightest contradiction in there being 
two different modes of finding objects by means of the two, a reasoning consciousness 
and a conventional valid cognition, based on one phenomenon on the occasion of the view of the bases.
345 If you know well not only that ab out the occasion of the fruit, when 
the objects are comprehended by the two exalted wisdoms, but also which of the two 
valid cognitions is active, then you will also be  able to know that they do not become a 
common locus346 even though they do not ascertain their objects separately. Through this 
you will also understand fine details of the definitions of the two truths.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B3D-2C Divisions of ultimate truths 
This has eleven points: 
1 The fact that different ways of dividing ultimate truths have emerged 
When ultimate truths are divided, it is in accordance with the Explanation of Candrak īrti’s 
“Commentary on the ‘Middle Way’”  which sets forth sixteen emptinesses in the case that 
emptiness is divided in detail, four in the case of an intermediate division—the emptiness of things, non-things, self entity, and other entity—and two if it is abridged—the 
selflessness of persons and phenomena.  
Other texts set forth two, actual ultimates and concordant ultimates. In 
Illumination of 
the Middle Way  it says: 
Non-production accords with the ultimate and is therefore called an ultimate , 
but actually it is not because in actuality the ultimate is beyond all 
elaborations. 
And in Ornament for the Middle  (Madhyamak ālaṃkāra) it also says: 
Since it accords with the ultimate, This is [357] called an “ultimate.” 
If it really were, it would be  
Free from all hosts
347 of elaborations. 
In the Two Truths  this is stated similarly, and in the auto-commentary on the Two Truths  
as well as the Ornament for the Mah āyāna Sūtras it is explained that the negation of 
ultimately existent production and the like is conventionally existent.  
2 How masters of earlier generations explain the entity of the ultimate set forth in those texts 
With respect to the meaning of those statem ents, many earlier mast ers differentiate two 
ultimate truths, specified and unspecified on es. They assert that the emptiness which 
negates ultimate production and so forth with  regard to form and the like is the former—
an imputed ultimate truth with the characteri stics of a conventional truth—and that the 
latter cannot be made the object of any mind whatsoever, so that it is not an object of 
knowledge.  
3 Those texts explaining the two ultimates are not meant to refer to objects only 
                                                 
345 The conceptual understanding at a time when emptiness has not yet been realized directly. (Oral explanation by 
Geshe Thubten Soepa) 
346 Tib. gzhi mthun mong ba  
347 Tib. tshogs , usually translated here as “collection.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
291 Since that is not the meaning of those texts, they should be explained like this: the 
object, reality, must indeed be taken as an ultimate, but the subject, a reasoning 
consciousness, is also often explained as such. In the Two Truths  it says: 
Since it is without deception, a reasoning consciousness is an ultimate. 
It is just as stated in Illumination of the Middle Way  as well: 
Propositions such as “Ultimately there is no production whatsoever” are also 
asserted to mean this: all consciousnesses arisen from correct hearing, 
thinking, and meditating are unmistaken subjects and therefore called “ultimate,” because their objects are most superior. 
Of the two types of reasoning consciousness, the non-conceptual exalted wisdom of an 
ārya’s meditative equipoise is without conceptions, whereas the reasoning consciousness 
comprehending suchness based on signs is conc eptual and so forth. The explanation in 
Blaze of Reasoning  that with respect to the ultimate  there is both a non-conceptual 
exalted wisdom and a wisdom that accords wi th it, has the same implications as the 
explanation of two ultimates in Illumination of the Middle Way . Therefore [358] the 
meaning of the texts is not that the explanation of two ultimates should be applied to 
objective ultimates only without applying them to subjects.  
4 How to separately posit the two reasoning consciousnesse s, the actual ultimate and that which accords with 
it  
In this regard the first is an actual ultimate because when engaging in suchness it is able 
simultaneously to eliminate the elaborations of true existence and dualistic appearance 
with respect to its object. That is also wh at is meant by “beyond all elaborations.” A 
conceptual reasoning consciousness is able to  negate the elaboration of true existence 
with respect to its object, however, it cannot eliminate the elaboration of dualistic 
appearance. Therefore it is an ultimate that accords in aspect with the supramundane ultimate. 
5 In relation to the perspective of these minds, it is necessary to explain two modes also with respect to the 
ultimate of objects  
It is necessary to explain two modes also with respect to the ultimate of objects, the 
negation of ultimate production and so forth for forms and the like. For a reasoning non-
conceptual consciousness, that emptiness of an object is the actual ultimate always free from the two elaborations. For a reasoning conceptual consciousness on the other hand, it is not an actual ultimate always free from the two elaborations because it is only free 
from one class of them. Still, this is not to say that in general it is not an actual ultimate 
truth. So, except for some minds from whose perspective all the elaborations of dualistic 
appearance are gone, the emptiness of true existence cannot be free from all 
elaborations. Therefore, the meaning of the texts is not that if something is an ultimate 
truth, it must be free from all elaborations of dualistic appearance.  
6 The ultimate asserted by proponents of the establis hment of illusions by a reasoning consciousness is not an 
actual ultimate 
This being so, proponents of the establishment of illusions by a reasoning consciousness 
assert that a mere object established by an inferential reasoning consciousness, the 
collection of two appearances, that of a basis such as an aggregate and that of its 
emptiness of true existence, is an ultimate trut h. It is a concordant ultimate, but it is not 
an ultimate truth.  
7 It is inadmissible to prove that sprouts and the like appear to lack true existence with their appearing free 
from being one or many  
Also, proving that sprouts and the like appear to lack true existence with their appearing 
free from being one or many [359] does not have the benefit of such a proof for a person 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
292 with understanding who has not eliminated doubt as to whether or not that basis truly 
exists. For those who have eliminated the doubt, this sign, although a sign, is not 
correct.348 In Illumination of the Middle Way  it says that both the sign, free from being 
one or many , and the predicate are mere eliminations and that it is the same if it is 
neither one nor many  or it does not exist as one or many  are taken as signs. From those 
very examples, you can tell that the statements do not refer to affirming negatives.349 
Therefore this is not at all the assertion of Master Śāntarakṣita, his spiritual son 
Kamalaśīla, or Master Haribhadra.  
8 The manner in which M ādhyamika proponents of complete non-abidance assert the ultimate is not in 
accordance with how earlier scholars explain it 
As for the elimination of elaborations that are the object of nega tion with regard to 
appearances, a distinction is made between an elimination and a determining elimination. 
None of the great M ādhyamikas assert that the latter, the mere object comprehended by 
an inferential consciousness, is  an ultimate truth. The explanation of their presentations 
in my extensive lam-rim should be unde rstood in detail along these lines.  
9 Although the negative of ultimate production and so forth is not a conventionality, that does not contradict 
the demonstration that it exists conventionally 
In the course of explaining the negative of production and so forth as a concordant 
ultimate truth, Jñ ānagarbha says in his auto-commentary on the Two Truths : 
Others hold it to be on ly real. Therefore “also”350 has the meaning of and. In 
fact, if analyzed with reasoning, it is only conventional. Why? Since the object to be negated does not exist, it is clear that, in reality, its negative does not exist. 
He is saying that others, Cittam ātrins, assert that the empt iness negating a self of 
phenomena in the basis of negation is estab lished in reality while hisown system teaches 
that since the object of negation, the self of phenomena, does not exist, the negation 
that is its negative is not established in reality. Therefore the explanation that a negative 
of ultimate production and so forth is conventional means that it exists conventionally rather than indicating that it is a conventionality.  
10 The statement that when something blue appears, its emptiness of true existence appears to the eye 
consciousness implies an affirming negative. Therefore it is not contradictory for its emptiness of true 
existence to be an ultimate truth 
In the same commentary it also says: 
“Since real production and the like [360] does not appear when a thing 
appears, it is a wrong conventionalit y. Likewise, the negative of real 
production and the like is a wrong conventionality: when the thing, the basis 
                                                 
348 According to the Tibetan theory of debate, the question as to whether or not something is  a logical sign also depends 
on whether it is suited to the opponent, i.e., whether, gi ven his or her level of understanding, the argument may bring 
about fresh insight. In the former case the reason is given prematurely (since th e person is lacking certain conditions 
that would make it meaningful and thus worth-while). In th e latter case the reason is given too late to spur new 
realizations. (Oral explanation by Geshe Thubten Soepa.) Cf. The note concerning the term (logical) sign . 
349 Affirming negatives are negatives that do not just nega te something but also imply i.e. affirmatively establish 
something else. 
Here is an example of a correct reason according to the Pr āsaṅgika-Madhyamaka system: “The subject, a sprout, is 
without true existence because it is free from being one or many.” In contrast, the reason advanced as part of the 
position criticized here: “The subject, a sprout, appears to be without true existence because it appears to be free from 
being one or many.”—which is not a mere negation because of the manner of appearing. The exponents of complete 
non-abiding mentioned in the next outline also accept an un derstanding which is tied up with appearances and does not 
realize a mere negation. (Oral Explanation by Geshe Thubten Soepa) 
350 The commentary quoted refers to the word “also” in the root text it elucidates. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
293 of negation, appears, it does not appear.” The answer to that: “It is not that it 
does not appear because it is not diff erent from the entity of the thing.” 
The explanation that whenever something like blue appears, its appearance of true 
existence also appears, does not imply that a mere elimination, the negative of true existence, appears to the eye consciousness. Rather, it implies an affirming negative. Therefore something like that has the characteristics of a conventionality, yet it is not 
contradictory for an emptiness, the mere elimin ation of true existence, to be an ultimate 
truth.  
11 The way in which the two reasoning consciousnesse s, non-conceptual and conceptual, along with their 
objects, are posited separately as actual and concordant ultimates is as before 
Ornament for the Middle  explains that although the negative of ultimate production and 
the like is included among real conventionalities, it is a concordant ultimate because it accords with the ultimate. As for the ultimate, it says that the entire web of elaborations 
such as the existence and non-existence of things has been abandoned. As for the web of 
elaborations, it says in the 
Auto-commentary on the  “Two Truths”  
(Satyadvay āvibaṅghavŗtti): 
“It is not empty, not non-empty, 
Not existent nor non-existent, 
Neither produced nor non-produced,” 
Such is what the Bhagavan taught. 
And:  
Why is that? It is without elaborations. Suchness is free from the entire web of 
conceptions.351 
As explained here, the web of conceptions is a web of elaborations. However, since those 
stop in the perspective of the direct realization of suchness, that is the actual ultimate. A 
reasoning consciousness, which is unlike it, al ong with its object, is a similitude of the 
former and so forth as before. With regard to the negative of real production and the 
like, there are also the two, the reasoning consciousness that negates it and its object of 
comprehension; so the way in which it is included among real conventions should also be understood on that basis.  
This manner of explaining freedom from the web of all elaborations that exist in 
association with the two truths is [361] needed on many occasions.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B1B-3B3D-3 Indication that the number of the two truths is 
definite 
This has three points: 
A The actual indication 
If a given basis is positively set off as a false, deceptive object , it is necessarily 
eliminated as being a non-deceptive object. Therefore non-deceptive and deceptive are 
mutually exclusive: their presence is contra dictory. Since they pervade all objects of 
knowledge in a mutually exclusive manner, they also exclude a third group. For that reason you should know that with respect to objects of knowledge, the enumeration as 
the two truths is definite.  
B Sources for that 
In the Meeting of Father and Son S ūtra (Pitaputrasamagamas ūtra) it says: 
                                                 
351 Contrary to our common understanding of conceptions , the Tibetan equivalent  rtog pa  is not restricted to conscious 
thought, but also refers to unconsciou s mental construction—any meaning the mind imputes on its object (and which a 
conventional consciousness would then take to be present in th e object by its own nature). 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
294 In this manner the Tath āgata realizes the two truths, conventional and 
ultimate. Objects of knowledge are also  exhausted in these conventional and 
ultimate truths. 
Thus all objects of knowledge are said to be exhausted in the two truths. In Noble 
Concentration Definitely Showing Suchness ( Āryatattvanirde śasamādhi) the enumeration 
as the two truths is also clearly set forth: 
Everything is a convention or likewise an ultimate; 
A third truth whatsoever does not exist. 
C Establishing the validity of the need to become skilled in the two truths 
It is said that if you know the division be tween the two truths, you will not be confused 
about the words of the Sage whereas if yo u do not know it, you will not know the 
essence of his teachings. Moreover, you need to know it in accordance with how the 
protector N āgārjuna settled it. In Commentary on the “Middle Way”  it says:  
Outside the path of Lord N āgārjuna, 
Methods for pacification do not exist. 
Those are corruptions of truths, of conventions and suchness. 
Through their corruption one cannot attain liberation. 
Once conventional truths have turned into methods, 
Ultimate truths will be produced from them. 
One who does not know this twofold division 
Enters bad paths because of wrong conceptions. 
Therefore it is extremely important for those who want liberation to be skilled in the two truths. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B2 Divisions of special insight 
This has three points: 
A The prerequisites of special insight 
B The special insight to be cultivated by ordinary beings will mainly be explained C The actual divisions 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B2A The prerequisites of special insight [362] 
Once you gain the view realizing the two types of selflessness, having attended to the 
prerequisites of special insight as explained before, you should  cultivate special insight.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B2B The special insight to be cultivated by ordinary beings will mainly be explained 
Now, how many types of special insights are there? Here, not the special insights of exalted levels but the special insights you sh ould cultivate while still an ordinary being 
will mainly be taught.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B2C The actual divisions 
This has three points: 
1 Brief presentation 
2 Extensive explanation 
3 Explanation of condensed divisions 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B2C-1 Brief presentation 
If you carry out an exhaustive division of these special insights, they are the special 
insights of the four natures, the three doors, and the six search modes.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B2C-2 Extensive explanation 
This has three points: 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
295 A Explanation of the four 
B Explanation of the three 
C Explanation of the six 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B2C-2A Explanation of the four 
The four are thorough differentiation and so forth taught in the  Sūtra Unraveling the 
Intended Meaning . In this regard, thorough differe ntiation observes  the varieties. 
Exceedingly thorough differentiation observes the mode. The first has two types, full 
investigation and full analysis. The second also  has two types, investigation and analysis. 
They differentiate coarse and subtle objects. The identification of those four is set forth 
in Śrāvaka Levels , Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom , and other scriptures.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B2C-2B Explanation of the three due to the entrance gates to special insight  
The three doors, arisen from a sign, arisen from thorough searching, and arisen from 
individual inve stigation, are stated in the  Sūtra Unraveling the In tended Meaning . To 
illustrate them with respect to the meaning of selflessness for example, those three are 
identified as follows: The first observes the selflessness already ascertained and attends 
to its signs but does not settle much itself. The second settles the meaning for the sake 
of ascertaining that which has not been ascertained before. The third carries out an 
analysis, as was done before, of the meaning already ascertained.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B2C-2C Explanation of the six 
This has three points: 
1 Brief presentation of the six in terms of the objects of special insight 
The six search modes [363] carry out a thorough research of meanings, things, 
characteristics, sides, time, as well as reasoning and, having sought them, also 
individually investigate them.  
2 Individual explanations 
With regard to those six, the research of meanings is the research “The meaning of this 
word is this.” The research of things is the research “This is an internal thing. This is an 
external thing.” There are two search modes of characteristics: “This is a specific 
characteristic, that is a general characteristic,” or it is common—it is uncommon. The 
research of sides is a research in terms of faults and disadvantages, the black side, and 
in terms of positive qualities and benefits, the white side. The research of time is the 
research “In the past such an d such occurred. In the future such and such will occur. At 
present such and such is occurring.” The research of reasoning is of four types. The 
reasoning of dependency is that the occurrence of effects depends on causes and 
conditions. It is also a reasoning in terms of the conventional, the ultimate, and their bases taken individually. The reasoning of  the performance of functions is this: 
phenomena perform their own functions, such as fire performing the function of burning. 
It is a research in these terms: “This is the phenomenon. This is the function. This 
phenomenon performs this function.” The re asoning of establishmen t through validity is 
to establish a meaning without contradicting va lid cognition. It is a research reflecting 
whether or not direct perceptions, inferences, or reliable scriptures—the three validities—
exist with regard to such and such. The reason ing of nature is dedicated to natures that 
are well-known in the world, such as heat being the nature of fire, moisture being the 
nature of water, and so forth, to inconceivable natures, and to abiding natures. They are sought without thinking of other reasons for their being like that. 
3 Explaining those six as three groups from the point of view of their objects of observation 
Through the sixfold presentation in this way, the objects to be known by a yogi [364] are 
ascertained as three: the meanings of expre ssions, the varieties of objects of knowledge, 
and their mode. The first research is posited in terms of the first object. The research of 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
296 things and the research of specific characteri stics is posited in term s of the second one. 
The remaining three and the research of general characteristics are posited in terms of 
the third one.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B2C-3 Explanation of condensed divisions 
This has two points: 
A The way in which the three doors and the six search modes are included in the four natures  
The gates of the four special insights explained first are three in number while the search 
modes are taught as six. Thus the three doors and the six researches are included in the former four.  
B How there are four types of mental attention with regard to them 
In Śrāvaka Levels  it is set forth that the four types of mental attention explained above, 
tight engagement and so forth, are common to both calm abiding and special insight. 
Therefore the four mental attentions ar e also present in special insight.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B3 How to cultivate special insight 
This has three points:  
A Explaining the meaning of the statement that special insight is cultivated in dependence on calm 
abiding 
B What paths of what vehicle, H īnayāna or Mah āyāna, this system relates to  
C Explanation of the actual way to cultivate special insight in dependence on calm abiding 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B3A Explaining the mean ing of the statement that special insight 
is cultivated in dependence on calm abiding 
This has eight points: 
1 The statement in many texts that they should be practiced in this order 
In the Sūtra Unraveling the Intended Meaning  it says that special insight should be 
cultivated later, after calm abiding has firs t been accomplished. This is also stated 
similarly in many other texts such as those by Venerable Maitreya, Bodhisattva Levels  and 
Śrāvaka Levels , Bhāvaviveka, Śāntideva, Kamala śīla’s three volume Stages of Meditation  
and Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom .  
2 Those texts do not say that after prior generation of calm abiding observing the varieties, special insight 
consists in just sustaining t he observation of selflessness  
The intended meaning of these texts is not that after prior generation of calm abiding 
observing any object without observing the me aning of selflessness, special insight is 
understood as just sustaining  the observation of selflessne ss. [365] This is because the 
two, calm abiding and special insight, are not differentiated by way of their object of 
observation. Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom  also explains that after observing 
suchness, the emptiness of duality between subject and object, and generating calm 
abiding, you generate special insight through analytical meditation observing that same 
object of ob servation. Ārya Asa ṅga also discusses a special insight that observes the 
varieties and says that after calm abiding has been generated, a special insight with 
peaceful and coarse aspects is cultivated in dependence on it. Moreover, he says that it is a path common to both non-Buddhists and Buddhists as well as to ordinary beings and 
āryas.  
3 When calm abiding is initially being accomplished, it is inappropriate to analyze various aspects rather than 
placing the mind single-pointedly on the object of observation 
That being so, it is inapprop riate for someone who has not attained calm abiding and who 
is newly accomplishing it, not to practice placing the mind single-pointedly on whatever 
object of observation it may be, but rather to practice analyzing various aspects with 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
297 r e s p e c t  t o  h i s  o b j e c t  o f  o b s e r v a t i o n .  T h e  r e a s o n  f o r  t h i s  i s  t h a t  i n  t h e  f o r m e r  m a n n e r  
calm abiding is achieved, whereas in the latter manner it is unachievable. 
4 If instead of mere stabilizing meditation analytical  meditation is carried ou t by means of the calm 
abidingachieved previously, very powerful single-pointed concentration is achieved 
If instead of extending your earlier habituation to mere stabilizing meditation, you use 
the calm abiding you achieved previously to carry out analytical meditation that 
individually differentiates with wisdom whiche ver object is appropriate to the occasion—
the mode or the varieties—you can eventually induce a special single-pointed 
concentration. Since the extremely powerful kind of single-pointed concentration 
achieved through that cannot be achieved through the former method of mere 
stabilization, analytical concentration is praised.  
5 The true manner of accomplishing it is the reason why there are the two different modes of sustaining calm 
abiding and special insight even with regard to one object  
The true manner of accomplishing it is to first seek calm abiding and then afterwards 
cultivate special insight in de pendence on it. [366] So that is the general reason why 
there are the two different modes of sustaining calm abiding and special insight even if 
the object of observation, for instance selflessness, is the same.  
6 The great power of cultivating the special insight that has the aspects of peacefulness and coarseness and 
the special insight that has the aspect of selflessness 
In particular, the requirements for the arising of a strong and stable ascertainment are 
the cultivation of the special insight that has the peaceful and coarse aspects of individually analyzing the faults and positive qualities of higher and lower realms, and the 
cultivation of the special insight that has the aspect of selflessness in which the meaning 
of selflessness is investigated and then sustained by means of the wisdom of individual investigation are necessary Therefore they have great power with respect to abandoning their individual objects of abandonment.  
7 How there are still othe r special insights that observe the varieties 
The special insight that observes the varieties is not merely the meditation that has the 
peaceful and coarse aspects of abandoning manifest mental afflictions. According to the 
explanation in Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom  it is also the analytical meditation 
that differentiates the characteristics of the eighteen spheres. Thus, from that 
illustration, you should know th at there are still other specia l insights, meditations that 
differentiate the objects asso ciated with the varieties.  
8 The way in which the order here, while different from that explained in Instructions on the Perfection of 
Wisdom , is in accordance with the assertions of Śāntideva and so forth  
Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom  explains that prior to the generation of calm 
abiding and special insight observing the mode, calm abiding and special insight on the 
level of yoga observing the varieties should be generated. However, here, in accordance with the assertions of Śāntideva, Kamala śīla, and so forth, some kind of calm abiding is 
developed first and then special insight is de veloped. In fact, just  that special insight 
observing the mode w ill be taught here.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B3B What paths of what vehicle, Mah āyāna or H īnayāna, this 
system relates to  
This has three points: 
1 Explanation that this procedure is common to all vehicles, Mah āyāna and H īnayāna, and that it is similar 
even for the three lower classes of tantra  
Now, what does this sequential approach to the generation of calm abiding and special 
insight relate to, Mah āyāna or Hīnayāna, sūtra or mantra? It is common to the vehicle of 
hearers and solitary realizers and the great vehi cle of the perfections, in fact to the four 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
298 tenet systems. In my Great Exposition of the  Stages of the Path of Mantra , I have already 
explained the assertions of individual tantras and their great commentators to the effect 
that it is similar for the three classes of tantra.  
2 Highest Yoga Tantra asserts a mode of attaining calm abiding and special insight through the yoga of 
analysis and stabilization, observing mind only, suchness, and so forth [367] 
With regard to Highest Yoga Tantra it says in Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom  
quoting from the Guhyasam ājatantra :  
When you examine your own mind— 
All phenomena dwell in the mind. 
Phenomena dwell in that vajra of space. 
Phenomena do not exist nor their nature.  
Also, in the Descent to La ṅka Sūtra: 
In dependence on mind only— 
External things are not conceived. 
With these and other statements Ratn ākaraśānti explains that three levels of yoga are 
taught: the one mentioned, observing mind  only, one observing suchness, and one 
without appearance. It appears that the mode of attaining calm abiding and special 
insight on the first two levels through stabilizing and analytical meditation is explained as 
above. Therefore he asserts that the way they are generated in a mind that observes the 
mode is similar.  
3 The requirement that even in the context of Highest Yoga Tantra, the method for developing an 
understanding of the view accords with the Madhyamaka texts, and the subtlety that although it is necessary, 
during completion stage meditative equipoise, to place th e mind within the view, no analytical meditation is 
performed 
Even in the context of Highest Yoga Tantra, our system requires one’s method for 
developing an understanding of the view to  be in accord with what appears in the 
Madhyamaka texts. With respect to how it is  sustained, there is analysis of and then 
mental attention to suchness during some subsequent attainment phases of the 
generation and completion stages. However, those practicing the completion stage who 
have attained the ability to penetrate vital points of the body352 certainly must meditate 
placing the mind within the view when sustaining the meditative equipoise on suchness; 
nevertheless they do not perform the analytical meditation of special insight in 
accordance with what appears in other texts. Therefore, at that point, do not stop your 
single-pointed meditation on suchness within  the view on the occasion of stopping 
analytical meditation. Since this is not the right context to clarify the reasons why 
proceeding like that is sufficient, I will explain here the reasons for proceeding like that 
on the other paths.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B3C Explanation of the actual way to cultivate special insight in 
dependence on calm abiding  
This has two points: 
1 The need to find the view 
2 Summary of the essential points on how to sustain the view  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B3C-1 The need to find the view 
If you have not found the view of selflessness,  no matter what system of meditation you 
perform, [368] that meditation will not rest on  the meaning of suchness. That is why it is 
necessary to find the view.  
                                                 
352 Practitioners of completion stage yoga who can cause thei r energies to enter the central channel. (Oral explanation 
by Geshe Thubten Soepa) 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
299 2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B3C-2 Summary of the essential points on how to sustain the view 
This has three points: 
A The actual way to sustain the view 
B How those ways to sustain the view were set forth by siddha pandits such as Ati śa 
C Specifics—the preparation, conclusion, and so forth of sustaining special insight 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B3C-2A The actual way to sustain the view 
This has six points: 
1 The need for both analytical and stabilizing meditation 
2 The need to alternate analytical and stabilizing meditation 3 How stabilizing meditation is neces sary if the stability as pect of one’s meditati on is lessened due to 
increased analysis and how more analysis is nece ssary if it has been impaired by increased stabilizing 
meditation 
4 It is inappropriate to stop analytical meditation, holding all conceptions to be apprehensions of signs that are 
apprehensions of true existence 
5 Not only that, it is also inappropriate to think that, when the ultimate is taken as the object, anything the 
mind apprehends is an apprehension of signs even though this is not asserted for the apprehension of 
conventional objects 
6 Rejecting an objection 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B3C-2A1 The need for both analytical and stabilizing meditation 
If you have an understanding of the view but are not mindful of it and do not place the 
mind upon it during meditation on such ness, the latter will not be a meditation on 
suchness. Therefore, placing the mind without reflecting on anything at the end of some little preparatory analysis of the view does not constitute sustaining suchness either. 
Becoming mindful of the view and merely familiarizing oneself with placing the mind within it also amounts to nothing more than the above method for sustaining calm 
abiding. Hence, that is not the meaning of the texts explaining a different method for 
sustaining spec ial insight.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B3C-2A2 Th e need to alternate analytical  and stabilizing meditation  
That is why you should individually analyz e the meaning of suchness by means of wisdom 
as explained before and then sustain it. If you only do analytical meditation, however, 
your calm abiding developed before will de teriorate. Therefore you should mount the 
horse of calm abiding, sustai n analysis, and occasionally alternate it withstabilizing 
meditation. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B3C-2A3 If the stability factor lessens through too much analysis, stabilizing meditation is 
needed, and if too much stabilizing meditation damages one’s analysis, more analysis is needed 
More specifically, if the stability factor lessens through increased analytical meditation, you should do more stabilizin g meditation and refresh the stability factor. If you do not 
really want to analyze because of increased stabilizing meditation or if despite analysis 
your mind is not fit to go anywhere and becomes engrossed in the quiescence factor, you 
should do analytical meditation a lot. Since it is very powerful if you cultivate the two, 
calm abiding and special insight, in continuous equality, you should do it that way. In 
Stages of Meditation  III it says: 
At times when wisdom becomes very pr edominant because sp ecial insight has 
been cultivated, calm abiding is lessened . Therefore, since the mind will flicker 
like a butter lamp set in a breeze, it will  not perceive suchne ss very clearly. 
That is why you should cultivate calm abiding at those times. Also, whenever 
calm abiding predominates, like someone asleep [369] you do not see suchness clearly. Therefore, at those times, you should cultivate wisdom. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B3C-2A4 It is inappropriate to stop analytical meditation, holding all conceptions to be 
apprehensions of signs that are apprehensions of true existence 
With respect to sustained analysis in this manner, it is inappropriate to hold all 
conceptions whatsoever to be apprehensions of signs that apprehend true existence, and 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
300 stop them. This is because it was proven se veral times before that conceptions that are 
apprehensions of true existence are only one class of conceptions.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B3C-2A5 Not only that, it is also inappropriate to think that, when the ultimate is taken as 
the object, anything the mind apprehends is an apprehension of signs even though this is not asserted for the 
apprehension of conventional objects 
The view that anything apprehended by conception falls down, a casualty of reasoning, is 
a deprecation whose object of negation is excessive, and it has been proven that this is not the meaning of the scriptures either. Even without making such an assertion about other objects, you may wonder if everything the mind apprehends regarding suchness is 
an apprehension of signs which is an adherence to true existence. This also is a fault, the 
fault of an erroneous mode of apprehension, but it does not concern everything apprehended, for it has been set forth that those who do not see beyond and seek 
liberation need to search for suchness by various means of scriptureand reasoning.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B3C-2A6 Rejecting an objection 
This has two points: 
A The objection 
B The response 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B3C-2A6A The objection 
Now, if meditation on suchness is for the sake  of generating non-conceptuality, it will not 
arise from individual investigation, for cause and effect must accord. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B3C-2A6B The response 
This has ten points: 
1 How non-conceptual wisdom arises from individual investigation  
The Bhagavan himself gave a clear answer to that. In the Kāśyapa Chapter  he says: 
Kashyapa, it is like this. Fire springs up from two trees rubbed together by the 
wind and once it has sprung up, both trees are consumed by it. Likewise, 
Kashyapa, when there is correct individual investigation, an ārya’s wisdom 
faculty develops and through its development that individual investigation itself is consumed. 
Thus, the Buddha [370] says that an ārya’s wisdom arises from individual investigation.  
2 If you analyze in this manner, non -conceptual wisdom will arise; it d oes not arise because you merely 
abandon mental attention 
In Stages of Meditation II  it also says: 
That is how they analyze with wisdom. When yogis definitely do not apprehend 
any entityness of things ultimately, they enter the meditative stabilization of complete non-conceptuality. They also realize that the entityness of all 
phenomena is non-existent. Those who fail to individually investigate the 
entityness of things with wisdom and to meditate on that, who instead 
cultivate just the mere abandonment of mental attention, will never stop 
conceptual thought. They will never realize the non-existence of entityness 
either because they  will lack the light of wisdom. The Bhagavan said: “When 
the fire of knowing reality just as it is thus springs from correct individual investigation, it consumes the wood of conceptions like the fire that springs 
from wood rubbed together.” 
3 It would be very absurd if cause and effect had to be alike in all aspects 
If it were not like that, the uncontaminated would not possibly arise from the 
contaminated, nor the supramundane from the mundane, nor a buddha from a sentient 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
301 being, nor an ārya from an ordinary being, and so forth because the causes and their 
effects are not alike.  
4 The passages where N āgārjuna, in his Essay on the Mind of Enlightenment  and so forth, reproves adherence 
to concepts such as the object of investigation and the investigator indicate a refutation of adherence to true 
existence but they do not refute the wisdom of individual investigation 
In Essay on the Mind of Enlightenment  it says: 
Where conceptual thought appears, 
How could there be emptiness? Tathāgatas don’t perceive minds with aspects  
Of analyzers
353 and objects to analyze. 
Where these agents and objects exist,354 
Enlightenment does not exist. 
What is being pointed out is that someone who apprehends objects of investigation and 
investigators as truly existent has not attained enlightenment. If the wisdom of individual 
investigation were refuted [371] and if the mere objects of investigation and investigators were refuted, this would be in contradiction to the se ttling of suchness, in 
this text, through many avenues of analysis associated with individual investigation. Also, 
if those two were not perceived by buddhas, they would be non-existent.  
And in that same text it says: 
Meditating on emptiness— 
Called 
non-production , emptiness ,  
And selflessness —as inferior nature, 
Is not to meditate on it. 
This does not refute the meditation that observes selflessness, the emptiness which is the 
non-existence of inherent production. Rather, it refutes the meditation on an emptiness 
that is being reproved, an inferior nature apprehended as truly existent. In Praise of the 
Transcendent One  it says: 
When you teach the nectar of emptiness To clear away all conceptual thinking, Whosoever adheres to it, 
Is very much reproved by you. 
In the same way it says in 
Precious Garland : 
Accordingly self and selflessness Are not, as they should, correctly observable. 
The views of a self and selflessness  Were therefore rejected by the Buddha.
355 
It is also saying that since neither self nor selflessness are established in reality, the 
Buddha rejected the view th at the two really exist but did not refute the view of 
selflessness. This is because according to the above quotation from Refutation of 
Objections (Vigrahavy āvartanī), if phenomena were not without the inherent existence of 
inherent establishment, inherent establishment would exist. 
5 Likewise, how s ūtra statements about engaging in signs also imply truly established signs  
In the Verse Summary of the Perfection of Wisdom in Eight Thousand Lines it says: 
                                                 
353 Tib. rtog byed; rtog  is usually translated here as “investigate.” 
354 Literally “Where investigators and objects of investigation exist.” 
355 Tib. thub pa chen po , “Mahāmuni”, “great sage.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
302 Although the bodhisattva thinks “This aggregate is empty,” 
Engaged in signs he distrusts the basis of non-production. 
And in the Perfection of Wisdom in One Hundred Thousand Lines 
(Śatasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā-sūtra):356 
When engaging in what is called empty and selfless form  one engages in signs, 
one does not engage in the perfection of wisdom. 
The meaning of these statements [372] refers to the apprehension of emptiness and so 
forth as truly existent.  
6 Otherwise it would contradict the praise in the s ūtras for the analysis of emptiness with wisdom 
Otherwise the phrase “He distrusts the basis of non-production” would not make sense 
either, for to have trust in it would also  be to engage in signs. In the same s ūtra it says: 
One who thoroughly knows that things357 lack inherent existence 
Is engaged in the supreme perfection of wisdom. 
And:  
When uncompounded, compounded , black, and white phenomena 
Are shattered by wisdom and not even dust remains to be seen, 
In the world this is counted as the perfection of wisdom. 
In the King of Meditative Stabilizations S ūtra it also says: 
If phenomena are discerned358 as selfless, 
And once discerned are meditated on, 
That is the cause for at taining the fruit, nirv āṇa. 
Through any other cause you won’t find peace. 
Also, in Essence of the Perfection of Wisdom  (Prajñāhŗdaya) , Śāriputra asks: 
“How should a bodhisattva who wishes to engage in the profound perfection of 
wisdom train?”  
And Avalokite śvara replies: 
“He should thoroughly and correctly view even these five aggregates asempty of inherent existence.”
 
There are many statements like these which would otherwise be contradicted.  
7 Nāgārjuna and Candrak īrti praise individual investigation and analysis of the meaning of selflessness as the 
cause of complete liberation 
That is why it says in Praise of the Sphere of Reality : 
The Dharma supremely cleansing the mind 
Is the lack of inherent existence. 
And: 
As long as one apprehends “I” and “mine”, One imputes aspects from without. 
When the two aspects of non-self
359 are seen, 
The seeds of conditioned existence360 cease. 
                                                 
356 The sūtra is referred to here as Tib. yum chen mo , “Great Mother.”  
357 Tib. chos, usually translated here as “phenomenon.” 
358 Tib. so sor rtog (pa) , usually translated here as “individually investigate.” 
359 Tib. bdag med , usually translated here as “selflessness.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
303 In Commentary on the “Middle Way”  it also says: 
Therefore, by viewing the self and mine as empty, 
The yogi will be completely liberated. 
You should understand this in accordance with the statements and sustain the continuity 
of ascertaining selflessness and the absence of inherent existence. 
8 The meaning of the Dhāraī of Non-Conception is also not merely to abandon mental activity; it implies 
investigation by means of wisdom follo wed by stabilization of the mind free  from the observed  object of the 
apprehension of true existence [373] 
Here it says in Stages of Meditation I : 
In Dhāraṇī of Non-Conception  (Nirvikalpavataras ūtra) it says: “The signs of 
form and so forth are abandoned by not attending to them.” This implies that 
one does not attend361 to whatever is not observed upon investigation with 
wisdom. It does not imply the mere absence of attention. It is not an 
abandonment through merely abandoning the attention which is the beginningless strong adherence to form and so forth, like in the absorption of non-discrimination.
362 
These passages from the scriptures are saying that the apprehension of signs should be 
abandoned through a meditation in which the mind does not attend to anything. Yet the 
intended meaning set forth is that you corr ectly investigate with analytical wisdom and 
then establish meditative equipoise on the meaning of your realizationthat not even a 
particle of the observed object of the appr ehension of true existence is observed.  
9 In Stages of Meditation  the Cloud  of Jewels of S ūtra is quoted and said to mean that one enters into 
signlessness only through analytical meditation on the meaning of emptiness and not by merely abandoning 
mental attention  
In Stages of Meditation II  it says: 
There is the following statement: “When you search what the mind is, you 
realize that it is empty. When you thoroughly search for the mind realizing 
that, its entityness, you realize that it is empty. Through such a realization you enter the yoga of signlessness.” 
This indicates that preparatory reflection is the entrance to signlessness. It 
very clearly indicates that it is impossible to enter into complete non-
conceptuality by merely abandoning mental attention altogether, without analyzing the entityness of things by means of wisdom. 
This statement from the 
Cloud  of Jewels of S ūtra is saying that if you have not found the 
view of suchness through correct prior analysis, you [374] will not be able to engage in 
the meaning of suchness non-conceptually.  
10 Advice that you need to understand the ways in which Stages of Meditation  refutes the bad propositions of 
the Chinese Hashang, the assertions that one enters complete non-conceptuality by abandoning mental 
attention  
In Stages of Meditation III  it says: 
In order to refute the presumptuous claim that you can then realize what is 
said to be inconceivable, beyond mind, and so forth by merely hearing and thinking aboutthe profound meaning, it was taught that since these are objects 
known by the individual āryas themselves, they are inconceivable by others, 
                                                                                                                                                                  
360 Tib. srid pa , usually translated here as “existence.” 
361 The Tibetan expression yid la byed pa  can mean “attention,” but also, more generally, “mental activity.” It is the 
mental factor directing the mind toward a given object. 
362 A level of the formless realm where the mind is so deeply ab sorbed that it abides in some  kind of unconscious state. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
304 and the like. This was also set forth in order to refute improper reflection upon 
apprehending the profound meaning as truly existent. However, it does not 
refute correct analysis by means of the wisdom of individual investigation. It is 
said that if that were refuted, many reasonings and scriptures would be contradicted. Although it is considered an entity of conceptual thought, non-
conceptual wisdom arises from it becaus e it is an entity of correct mental 
attention. Therefore those who want that wisdom should rely on it. 
It is very important to understand the way in which these statemen ts refute the Chinese 
abbot’s proposition that even without finding the view that settles suchness in 
dependence on scriptures and reasonings, su chness is realized by meditative equipoise 
without any mental attention whatsoever.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B3C-2B How those ways to sustain the view were set forth by siddha pandits of the past 
such as Ati śa 
This has two points: 
1 How the past Kadam masters explained the meaning intended by Ati śa 
These methods of meditation also appear in earlier instructions on the stages of the path. 
In Potowa’s Jewel Box363 it says: 
While hearing and thinking, through reasonings, some say,  
You settle that there is no inherent existence,  
But when you meditate, cultivate non-thought.364 
If you do that, this emptiness, unconnected, 
Cultivated apart, will not serve as antidote. 
Thus even at the time of meditation, 
Investigate365 that which you are familiar with: 
Not one nor many, dependent relation, and so forth. 
Also abide a bit in the non-conceptual.  
If you meditate like that [375] you’ll cure the afflictions.366 
Those who wish to follow the divine one, 
And wish to practice the sy stem of the perfections— 
That is their method for cultivating wisdom. 
Familiarized with the se lflessness of persons 
They should engage in it accordingly. 
2 Between the two, M ādhyamikas and Cittam ātrins, Ati śa praised N āgārjuna and his spiritual son. The 
explanations of his oral instructions are in agreement with Master Kamala śīla 
The Elder also said this: 
Well, through whom is emptiness realized? 
Through him foretold by the Tath āgata, 
Who saw reality, that which is true, 
Nāgārjuna’s student Candrak īrti. 
Through oral instructions transmitted from them, 
The truth, reality, will be realized.  
                                                 
363 The word Tib. be’u bum  refers to a round container, Tibetan Buddhist practitioners use to stow and transport texts as 
well as other precious items. (Oral Explanation by Geshe Thubten Soepa) 
364 Tib. mi rtog , usually translated here as “non-conceptuality.” 
365 Tib. so sor brtag , usually translated here as “individually investigate.” 
366 Tib. de ltar bsgoms na nyon mongs gnyen po , literally “If (you) meditate like that mental affliction antidote.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
305 These instructions set forth by Ati śa in his Madhyamaka Instructions  
(Madhyamakopade śa), and Master Kamala śīla’s intentions which appear to be similar, are 
amplified here. 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B3C-2C Specifics to do with the preparation, conclusion, and so forth of sustaining 
special insight 
In order to sustain special insight in that manner, you should know how to observe the 
six preparatory practices and how to act during the actual meditation session, afterwards, and in between sessions. In particular, you should know the above methods for 
sustaining it free from laxity and excitement.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6B4 The measure of having achieved special insight through 
meditation 
This has five points: 
1 Indication that it has been accomplished when pliancy arises through analytical meditation 
As long as you analyze with the wisdom of individual investigation and the pliancy 
explained above does not arise in your meditati on, it is a similitude of special insight. 
When pliancy has arisen, it is fully qualified special insight. The entity of pliancy and the 
way it arises are as explained above.  
2 The mere pliancy of calm abiding is not enough 
Yet since the calm abiding already accomplished has not deteriorated and also induces 
pliancy, the measure for having accomplished special insight is not the mere presence of 
pliancy. Well then, what is it? When the power of analytical meditation itself is able to 
induce pliancy, then there is special insight. It is the sa me for both the [376] special 
insight observing the varieties and the special insight observing the mode.  
3 The source for the fact that such is the measure for having attained special insight  
In accordance with that the Sūtra Unraveling the Intended Meaning  also says: 
“Bhagavan, as long as that bodhisattva has not achieved physical and mental 
pliancy, what do you call his mental attention that mentally attends to images 
within, to the objects of meditative stab ilization relative to phenomena he has 
properly thought about?” “Maitreya, it is not special insight. It should be 
described as an inclination that corres ponds with special insight, as something 
associated with it.” 
And in Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom  it also says: 
Thereby he abides in that physical and mental pliancy he has attained. He 
should individually investigate, with special aspiration, the meaning of 
precisely what he has reflected on, the object that is the internal image of his 
meditative stabilization. As long as physical and mental pliancy have not arisen, it is a mental attention that accords with special insight. However, 
when they have arisen, at that point it is special insight. 
4 How firm meditative stabilization is in duced when pliancy is in duced by analysis 
When it is able to induce pliancy by its own power, it is also able to induce single-
pointedness of mind. Therefore, inducing ca lm abiding like this through the power of 
analytical meditation that individually inve stigates is a positive quality of having 
accomplished calm abiding before.  
5 How misconceptions about this are therefore inappropriate 
Through the analytical meditation practice of someone well-accomplished in calm abiding, 
the calm abiding thus becomes more excellent. That is why you should not hold that if 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
306 you practice the analytical meditation of individual investigation, the stability factor of 
your meditation will lessen. 
Explanation of how calm abiding and special insight unite 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6C How calm abiding and special insight unite 
This has two points: 
1 The actual explanation 
2 Advice on the need to abandon errors and come to an understanding in accordance with authentic texts as 
well as a summary of the general path contents 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6C1 The actual explanation [377] 
This has six points: 
A For calm abiding and special insight to unite, both calm abiding and special insight must have been achieved 
If calm abiding and special insight have not been achieved as explained in the context of 
the measure for their accomplishment, there will be no cause for their union. That is why, 
for their union, both must have definitely been achieved.  
B The achievement of special insight and the achievement of the union are simultaneous 
Now, from the point where specia l insight is first achieved, the union is also achieved. It 
is therefore like this: When mental attention is achieved by the power of analytical 
meditation in dependence on prior calm ab iding, that attentio n operating naturally 
without actual application as explained before in the context of calm abidingbecomes the 
union.  
C A scriptural passage concerning the union of calm abiding and special insight, saying that the two need to be 
united equal in strength 
In Śrāvaka Levels  it says: 
To what extent do calm abiding and special insight mix and unite evenly, and 
why is it called the path where they enter into union ? 
From the nine mental abidings onward it is like this: One attains that which 
constitutes the ninth abiding associated with meditative equipoise, and in 
dependence on that full accomplishment of meditative stabilization one puts 
great effort into higher wisdom, the thor ough differentiation of phenomena. At 
that point, the path of that thorough differentiation of objects will operate 
naturally and effortlessly. Since it is wit hout actual application just like the 
path of calm abiding, the special insight will be completely pure and 
completely refined; it will follow calm ab iding and will be completely conjoined 
with a sense of bliss. This is why calm abiding and special insight mix and even 
out and why it is called the path where calm abiding and special insight enter 
into union . 
D A source for the time when the union is accomplished 
In Stages of Meditation III  it also says: 
When [378] the mind is balanced due to freedom from laxity and excitement 
and becomes extremely clear with respect to suchness because it operates 
naturally, at that point you should esta blish equanimity by letting go of the 
effort. You should know that at that point you have accomplished the path of 
union between calm abidin g and special insight. 
It is as stated: from the juncture where fully  qualified special insight has been achieved 
there is union.  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
307 E A source saying that at the time when investigation induces calm abiding, calm abiding and special insight 
simultaneously unite in mutual association  
In Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom  it also says: 
Then you observe that very image connected with the analysis. When you 
experience both of them in your mind  through the continuum of uninterrupted 
and unobstructed mental attention, it is called a path of union between calm 
abiding and special insight . That is to say calm abiding and special insight are 
a pair and their relation is one of co njunction: they operate bound to each 
other. 
“Unobstructed” means that there is no need to  stop the process of analytical meditation 
and place the mind in non-conceptuality. Non-conceptuality is induced by that analytical meditation itself. 
F Although analysis and stabilization were sequential, not simult aneous, they operate in correlation once 
united 
To “experience both” is to experience both the calm abiding that observes the non-
conceptual image and the special insight that observes the image connected with analytic 
conceptions. “Through the cont inuum” should be understood fr om the point of view that 
the analytical special insight and the calm abiding at the end of the analysis do not arise 
simultaneously. However, when there is actual calm abiding induced by the power of 
analysis, both special insight, the intense di fferentiation of phenom ena that observes the 
mode, and calm abiding, the meditative stabilization that firmly and single-pointedly 
abides on the mode, operate in association. At  such time calm abiding and special insight 
are mixed and operate equally.  
For that, it is [379] necessary to gain a realization arisen from meditation. Therefore a 
collection of the two that allows one to individually investigate the meaning of selflessness from within a non-conceptual state of firm stability—like a little fish moving 
through water that remains still—may be posited as something that corresponds with 
calm abiding and special insight. Yet this is not the meaning of the actual union of calm 
abiding and special insight.  
2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C2B-6C2 Advice on the need to abandon errors and come to an understanding in accordance 
with authentic texts as well as on the need to get to know the extensive explanation of the stages of the path 
from the Great Exposition of the Stages of the Path  
You should understand this manner in which calm abiding and special insight unite in 
accordance with what appears in those authentic texts rather than trusting explanations 
that fabricate367 it in some other way.  
Reasoned conclusions, scriptural source pa ssages, and detailed me thods for cultivating 
the stages of the path to enlightenment should be known from the Great Exposition of 
the Stages of the Path . 
2B4B-2B Brief summary of the topics of the general path368 
This has three points: 
1 General procedure 
Now I will present a brief summar y of topics of the general path. Before anything else: 
the root of the path rests on the way you rely  on a spiritual teacher, so you should be 
clear and decisive about that. Then, if an uncontrived wish to take the essence of your leisure has arisen, it will urge you on to prac tice from within. Therefore, in order to 
                                                 
367 Tib. sgro btags , usually translated here as “superimpose.” 
368 T h i s  o u t l i n e  b y  T r i j a n g  R i n p o c h e  o c c u r s  i n  t h e  fi r s t  chapter under 2B4B-2. Jé Tsongkhapa however appends this 
paragraph here without setting it off from the foregoing, and then continues with the outline:  “In particular how to train 
in the Vajray āna”, due to which the numbering of th e outlines is not sequential here. 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
308 generate it, you should meditate on the topi cs of the leisures and endowments. Then, if 
your endeavor for things of this life is not inverted, a serious endeavor for future lives 
will not arise. Therefore apply yourself to medi tation on impermanence , the fact that the 
body you have obtained will not last long , and the way you will wander in the lower 
realms after death. At that time a natural attitude369 of conscious fear will arise, so you 
should sincerely develop certainty about the positive qualities of the Three Refuges, 
abide by the vow of common refuge, and train in its trainings. Then you should develop—
from many angles— the faith of conviction in actions and their effects, the foundation of 
all white dharmas. Having made it firm, you should try hard to engage in virtue and 
counteract non-virtue, always entering the path of the four powers. [380] 
Once you have thus garnered the cycle of te achings of lesser beings, you should think 
about the general and specific disadvantages of cyclic existence a lot and turn your mind 
away as much as you can from cyclic existence in general. Then identify the causes from 
which cyclic existence arises, karma and ment al afflictions, and develop the uncontrived 
desire to abandon them. Apply yourself to the three trainings in general, the path of 
liberation from cyclic existence, and in partic ular to the vow of individual liberation which 
you yourself have taken. 
Once you have thus garnered the cycle of tr aining of intermediate beings, contemplate 
that just like you yourself have fallen into the ocean of existence many others have. Train 
in the mind of enlightenment  which has its root in love and compassion. You need to try 
as hard as you can for it to arise; without it the six perfections, the two stages, and so 
forth are like a roof without foundations. When you have had some little experience of it, you should assume it through the ritual and apply yourself to its trainings so that you 
make the aspirational mind as stable as you can. Then hear about the great waves of 
bodhisattva conduct. As you get to know the boundary between what you should counteract and what you should engage in, generate the desire to train in it. When that 
has arisen, take the engaging vow through the ritual. Train in the six perfections that 
ripen your own continuum and in the four mean s of gathering disciple s and so forth that 
ripen the continua of others. In particular, risk  your life to avoid a root downfall. Try hard 
not to be tainted by small and medium contaminations or infractions either. If you are, 
try hard to restore your vow.  
Then you need to train in the last two perfections in particular. Therefore become skilled 
in the method for sustaining concentration and accomplish meditative stabilization. Do 
everything you can for the pure view of the two selflessnesses to arise in your mind. 
Having found it, understand how to sustain it by placing the mind in the context of the view and sustain it. Such concentration and wisdom are designated with the names of 
calm abiding  and special insight . However, since they are not different from these two, 
they come within the points of training of the bodhisattva vow once it has been taken.  
2 The difference between meditation that does or does not hit home and how to pierce through to the core 
through detailed thought 
Also, [381] cultivating the lower paths, you should grow more and more keen on 
attaining the higher ones, and hearing about the higher ones, you should increasingly wish to accomplish the lower ones. When you meditate on them, you also need to purify your thoughts and balance your mind. Thus, if your respect for the spiritual teacher who 
guides you on the path appears to be low, yo u put effort into your manner of relying on 
him, for the root of your collection of good ness would otherwise be cut off. Likewise, if 
your enthusiasm for practice is little, you shou ld make meditation on the topic of leisures 
and endowments your main thing whereas if your adherence to this life increases, you 
should mainly meditate on the topics of impermanence and disadvantages of the lower 
                                                 
369 Tib. blo, usually translated here as “mind.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
309 realms. If you seem to neglect the ethical boundaries you have accepted, you should 
mainly meditate on actions and their effects. If your disillusionment with cyclic existence 
is little, your endeavor for liberation will be nothing but words, so you should reflect on 
the disadvantages of cyclic existence. If you do not seem to have the great strength of 
mind to make everything you do into someth ing for the benefit of sentient beings, the 
root of the Mah āyāna will be cut off, so you should train in the aspirational mind of 
enlightenment along with its causes. In case you take the vow of the Victors’ children and 
train in their conduct: if the bond which is the apprehension of signs appears to be very 
strong, you should break down the object ai m of that apprehension with a reasoning 
consciousness and train in space-like and illu sion-like emptiness. If your mind does not 
stay on its object of observation and appears to become a servant of distraction, you 
should mainly train in the stab ility factor of your single-poi nted meditation. This is what 
the earlier masters taught.  
3 Advice that your practice should not become one-sided 
From these indications you should also understand situations that have not been 
explained. In brief, you should not become one-sided. Your mind should be serviceable in 
all virtuous directions.  
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
310 CHAPTER 6 
Conclusion 
Explanation of how to train in the uncommon vehicle, the Vajray āna 
2B4B-2A2C-2C3B In particular how to train in the Vajray āna 
This has five points: 
1 The advice to make sure and engage in mantra  
In particular how to train in the Vajray āna: Having thus trained in the paths that the two, 
sūtra and mantra, have in common, [382] you should doubtlessly engage in mantra 
because that path is extremely rare compared with other Dharma teachings and makes 
you complete the two collections quickly.  
2 It is essential to rely on a spiritual teacher when you engage in mantra 
When you engage in it, you should first make  your teacher happy in excess of what was 
explained above according to statements in Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment . It 
should be someone who has at least all the characteristics explained there.  
3 The gateway, receiving an empowerment, and the importance of guarding one’s commitments and vows 
Then you should first have your mental co ntinuum ripened by mean s of an empowerment 
explained in the authentic tantra texts. Then you should hear and understand the 
commitments and vows taken on that occasion and guard them. If a root downfall occurs, 
even if the vow can be taken again, the deve lopment of positive qualities of the path will 
be greatly delayed in your continuum, so ende avor not to be tainted by that. Try not to 
be tainted by a serious downfall and apply the means of restoring your commitments if 
you get tainted by one370 because they are the root for cultivating the paths. Without 
them it will be like a decrepit house whose side walls are collapsing. In the Root Tantra 
of Mañju śrī it says: 
The King of Sages did not teach  Mantra attainments for the immoral. 
Statements such as this are saying that there will be no great, medium, or small 
accomplishments whatsoever. In the Highest Yoga Tantras it also says that those who do 
not guard their commitments, have an inferior empowerment,
371 or372 do not understand 
suchness will not accomplish anyt hing despite their practi ce. Therefore someone who 
claims to cultivate the path without keeping his commitment s and vows is straying far 
from the principles of mantra. 
4 How to train in the paths of ripening and liberation 
That being so, those who guard vows and commitments should gradually [383] train in 
the two yogas with and without signs according to the three lower tantra classes and in 
the two stages of yoga according to the highest one in order to cultivate the paths of 
mantra. 
Here only the side of entering mantra is presented just nominally, so you must get to 
know these in detail from Stages of the Path of Mantra .  
5 How to make your leisures and endowments meaningful in that manner 
                                                 
370 Tib. brgya la gos na , literally “if (you get) tainted with respect to the hundred (commitments).” 
371 An inferior empowerment is one in wh ich either the one giving it or the on e receiving it does not meet all the 
necessary requirements. (Oral expl anation by Geshe Thubten Soepa) 
372 Tib. dang, usually translated here as “and.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
311 If you train in such a way, you will train in  the complete body of the path that 
summarizes all the essential points of s ūtra and tantra, and you will make the leisure you 
have achieved meaningf ul through your training. You will be able to make the jewel of 
the Victor’s teachings develop in your own mind and that of others.  
3 The conclusion of the explanation 
This has three points: 
A How the treatise was composed 
B Dedicating the virtue of its composition C The author who put together the text and how he did it 
3A How the treatise was composed 
This has three points: 
1 Explaining the greatness of the instructions 
2 The purpose of writing a treatise that has such great qualities 
3 Indication of the sources: the instructions from which the subject matter of this treatise was transmitted 
3A1 Explaining the greatness of the instructions  
This has three points: 
A The greatness that, in general, all the scriptures of s ūtra appear as instructions  
The Victor taught the s ūtra and tantra approaches— 
Two aspects of the path. The excellent texts, 
On paths of all the sutric scriptures and treatises, Easily come to be seen as direct instructions Through the fearless faith that one is given. 
B The greatness that, in particular, all the essential points of the paths shared by s ūtra and mantra are made 
clear 
Common great vehicle paths explained in the tantras 
Are all made clear, which supremely trains the mind. 
C The greatness of removing places of error about the meditative stabilization of yogis through a clear 
explanation of how the meditative stabilization co mmon to non-Buddhists and Buddhists is achieved 
Moreover you realize well the errors of paths  
Sought by yogis and correctly explained  According to very clear texts by many scholars 
On stabilization
373 common to Buddhists, non-Buddhists, 
Hīnayāna, both kinds of Mah āyāna, 
Higher and lower tant ras and both stages. 
3A2 The purpose of writing a treatise that has such great qualities 
This summary of the stages of the path374 
I rearranged for those who want liberation, 
3A3 Indication of the sources: the instructions from which the subject matter of this treatise was transmitted [384] 
The path of the view that’s pr ofound and extensive behavior 
Passed on from the Regent, Maitreya, and noble Mañju śrī 
To the protector, N āgārjuna, Asa ṅga,  
And Śāntideva, three rivers that were merged: 
The supreme instructions of Śrī Atiśa. 
                                                 
373 Tib. ting nge ‘dzin , usually translated here as “meditative stabilization.” 
374 Tib. byang chub gyi lam , usually translated here as “path to enlightenment.” 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
312 3B Dedicating the virtue of composing the treatise as a cause for the propagation of the teachings 
Through the merit gained here by my effort 
May the Victor’s teachings, root of all welfare375  
Prosper, uncorrupted, for a long time. 
3C The author who compiled the text and how he did it 
This was a summary of all the scriptures of the Buddha, the tradition of the great trail-
blazers N āgārjuna and Asa ṅga, the Dharma system of supreme beings who progress 
toward the level of omniscienc e. It was a presentation of the stages of the path to 
enlightenment that teaches in full all the stages to be practiced by the three types of 
beings, the meaning of instructions that I have heard and that were transmitted both 
from Gönpawa to Neuzurpa and from Chenng awa, from Potowa to Sharawa, and from 
Potowa to Dölpa. This additional summary of an extensive presentation of the stages of 
the path was composed by the learned and renounced monk Tsongkhapa Lozang Dragpai 
Pal on Mount Géden.  
This text, the Middle Length Exposition of the St ages of the Path to Enlightenment  
composed by the Lord of the teachings of the three realms, the great Tsongkhapa, is also 
known as the Lesser Expositi on of the Path . Its outlines are not restricted to the ones 
found in the original text. Since I had never seen nor heard about a more detailed 
explanatory division, I thought "If only there were a detailed division along the lines of 
the Four Annotations376 on the Great Exposition of the Stages of the Path to 
Enlightenment .” With that pure intention I based myself on points taken from everywhere 
that were clear and matched in the outlines of the Four Annotations . Owing to conflicting 
arrangements and more condensed or more detailed divisions, I left some out and made insertions as appropriate in a given context. The outlines of new divisions that were 
necessary, for instance on the topics of calm abiding and the two truths, were put in 
wherever the argument could be broken up. I received the boon of profound and 
extensive explanations on this middle length exposition of the stages of the path from 
both the exalted master endowed with inconceivable great compassion, Büldü Dorjé 
Chang Lozang Yeshé Tenpai Gyaltsen Pal Zangpo of Drepung Gomang and the sovereign holding the essence of kindness that comprises all the refuge objects of the three times 
till the end of sa ṃsāra, Dorjé Chang Pabongkha Pal Zangpo [385] in that order. Written 
down by the indolent idler lying around and lacking practice, the guise of a teacher, the 
tutor by the reincarnation name of Ganden Trijang called Lozang Yeshé Tenzin Gyatso, in 
the Tibetan year of 2903 and the Western year  of 1966 in Dharamsala, in the state of 
Himalcha Pradesh, India. I kindly request impartial scholars to correct any distortions—
additions, omissi ons, and errors—that I have made.  
Through this virtuous effort may all lives 
Be undivorced from this  supreme, complete, 
And flawless path. May I grasp all the Victor’s teachings, 
And gain the power to guid e all migratory beings.  
Prayer for the purity of publications 
Meant for a multiplicity of good things, either present or future, such as the complete 
propagation of the Śākya lion’s long-standing tradition that points out the path of non-
harm and peace all over the world, the foll owing lines were compos ed as a dedication 
prayer that may be appended to any publication or reproduction of Buddhist scriptures 
                                                 
375 Tib. skye dgu’i phan bde’i rtsa ba , literally “root of the welfare of all living beings.” 
376 W e l l - k n o w n  t e x t  b o o k  b y  s c h o l a r s  o f  S e r a  M o n a s t e r y .  It contains a detailed outline and annotations to Jé 
Tsongkhapa’s Great Exposition of the Stages of the Path . 
FPMT BASIC PROGRAM   Middle Length Lam-Rim   
Stages of the Path  by Lama Tsongkhapa 
 
 
313 associated with non-partisan schools of thought by the Śākya’s monk, exponent of the 
Dharma, the Lord of Speech, Lozang Tenzin Gyatso. 
Of the same taste as that ocean-like peace—liberation: 
The slow-moving river of limitless Dharma that flows there Whose every word component removes some stains Of the three poisons—the nectar of good explanations. 
Through the massive virtue of its publication 
May open the hundreds of thousands of doors of pure Dharma. May all five kinds of beings without exception 
Command the jewel treasure of definite goodness. 
 