Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/SixPerfections/Revision Note for 6perfections.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:54:02.757699
================================================================================


The reason why you must learn the trainings after developing bodhicitta
• Developing bodhicitta alone brings many benefits. But if one does not
  train in the bodhisattva deeds, it is not possible to achieve
  enlightenment even though one has bodhicitta. So one must definitely
  engage in the training of the bodhisattva deeds after one has developed
  bodhicitta.
• Before one can subdue the minds of others, one must first subdue one’s
  own mind. Therefore after having developed bodhicitta, one must train in
  the practice of the six perfections in order to subdue one’s own mind.
• According to the lam-rim teachings:
  ➢ First one generates bodhicitta.
  ➢ Then adopts the vows through the ritual.
  ➢ Then one trains in the six perfections in order to subdue oneself
  ➢ .By doing so, one will achieve full enlightenment to render perfect
    help to all sentient beings.
Demonstrating that you will not become a buddha by learning either method
or wisdom separately
• Lama Tsongkhapa emphasized the need to train in a path that is both
  unmistaken and complete.
• If one trains in a path that is mistaken, one will not achieve
  enlightenment no matter how hard one tries.
• Even if one was to train in an unmistaken path but the path is
  incomplete, with some essential elements are missing, one will not
  achieve enlightenment.
• So in order to achieve full enlightenment, one must train in the path
  that unifies both method and wisdom.
• Wrong concepts that people had about achieving enlightenment:-
  ➢ Posited a path to enlightenment that did not involve the union of
    method and wisdom such as the view that conceptual thoughts (any kind
    of thinking) are a hindrance to enlightenment.
  ➢ Posited that one should focus on nothing, i.e., places one’s mind in a
    state that lacks any kind of thought.
  ➢ Assert that in order to achieve full enlightenment one does not have
    to engage in the practices of the perfection of generosity, the
    perfection of ethics, the perfection of patience and so forth.
    According to them, these are obstacles to achieving enlightenment.
  ➢ Assert that the practices of such perfections are the practices of
    those with dull faculties, not for those of sharp faculties.
• In order to engage in the correct path to enlightenment that involves the
  union of method and wisdom, first one must be convinced that such a path
  is necessary by eliminating all the possible wrong concepts. This
  conviction can only arise by depending on scriptural authority and
  reasoning.
• A buddha neither abide in samsara nor in the peace of individual
  liberation. Full enlightenment or non-abiding nirvana is the final object
  of attainment of someone on the Mahayana path.
• The state of full enlightenment (non-abiding nirvana) is free from the
  extremes of samsara and is also free from the extremes of nirvana
  (individual liberation).
• What prevents someone from abiding in samsara is the wisdom realizing
  emptiness.
• Wisdom realizing emptiness = mind realizing the ultimate truth = the
  collection of wisdom When one generates the wisdom directly perceiving
  emptiness, one no longer accumulates new projecting karma for a samsaric
  rebirth. So the process of liberation from cyclic existence begins.  Only
  the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness, nothing else, will enable an
  individual to be liberated from samsara.
• Of the two practices of method and wisdom, it is the practice of wisdom,
  the wisdom realizing emptiness that prevents or stops one from abiding in
  samsara.
• From the perspective of the CMWS, to achieve even the lower nirvanas—the
  hearers’ enlightenment or the solitary realizers’ enlightenment—one needs
  to destroy the root of cyclic existence, ignorance, by realizing
  selflessness.
Factor of method prevents the extreme of nirvana
• According to the GES, the SS and the MOS, arhats achieve the nirvana with
  remainder and the nirvana without remainder.
• To achieve nirvana with or without remainder, one is achieving a state
  whereby one is at peace with oneself and one remains in that state for a
  very long time.
• The main reason why the arhats abide in the peace of nirvana for such a
  long time is due to the fact that they have not developed great
  compassion and bodhicitta.
• So one will not be able to achieve non-abiding nirvana when one does not
  have great compassion and bodhicitta. This is because one would fall into
  the extreme of nirvana.
• In order to achieve non-abiding nirvana (full enlightenment), one also
  needs the factor of method ( one needs to generate great compassion and
  bodhicitta.
Refuting practice of method is only for those who have not realized
emptiness
Wrong view: The factor of method is the training in the perfections of
generosity, ethics, patience and so forth is only for those who have not
realized emptiness. For those who have realized emptiness, these practices
that constitute the method are not necessary and can be set aside.
• On 1st to 7th grounds bodhisattva accumulate both the collection of
  method and wisdom in order to destroy the afflictive obscurations.
• Only on the 8th ground bodhisattva begins to works on destroying the
  knowledge obscurations.
• On the 8th, 9th and 10th grounds bodhisattva works at overcoming the
  knowledge obscurations.
• The actual antidote that enables the bodhisattva to overcome both the
  afflictive and knowledge obscurations is the same thing ( the wisdom
  directly perceiving emptiness.
• Why is it that the bodhisattva’s wisdom directly perceiving emptiness
     - on the 1st to the 7th grounds can only act as an antidote to the
       afflictive obscurations and not the knowledge obscurations?
     - but after achieving the 8th ground, the bodhisattva’s wisdom
       directly perceiving emptiness can act as an antidote to the
       knowledge obscurations?
     - The thing that makes the bodhisattva’s wisdom directly perceiving
       emptiness on the 8th, 9th and 10th grounds powerful enough to act
       against the knowledge obscurations must be the factor of method and
       not the wisdom itself.
• If the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness is the main factor, then why
  is it that the hearers and the solitary realizers who have the same
  wisdom directly perceiving emptiness cannot achieve full enlightenment as
  buddha but only become an arhat?
     - The arhats lack is the factor of method.
• So in order to achieve full enlightenment (non-abiding nirvana), one
  needs the factor of method.
• The factor of wisdom alone is insufficient and must be conjoined with
  method.
|Factor of wisdom - the wisdom realizing emptiness                            |
|Factor of method - great compassion and bodhicitta                           |


Refuting collection of merit only results in worldly enjoyments
Wrong view: The result of the collection of merit is only experiencing
enjoyments such as long life and so forth. In order to achieve full
enlightenment that is a much loftier goal and higher state, one should do
away with these mundane concerns such as long life, good health and
enjoyments.  Therefore the collection of merit is not important.
• Nagarjuna’s Precious Garland,
      To sum up, the embodiment of form,
      O King, is born from the collection of merit.
• When one achieves full enlightenment, one achieves both the truth body
  and the form body. The form body is the result of the collection of merit
  through practicing such as giving, observing ethics and so forth.
Wrong view: Adhering to the six perfections – generosity and so forth - is
demonic activity
• On face value, it seems to be say that practicing the six perfections is
  an obstacle to full enlightenment.
• So in order to understand and discover the intent of the Buddha behind a
  particular statement, one cannot rely on one text alone and try to
  explain what one thinks the Buddha said.
The need for an object of observation
The Sutra of Showing the Tathagata’s Inconceivable Secret says:
  Children of good lineage, it is like this. Fire, for example, burns from
  a cause and goes out when this cause ceases to exist. Similarly, mind is
  activated by an observed object; without this it is inactive.
• This quotation highlights the need for the mind to focus on an object of
  observation in order for it to improve just as fire needs a cause before
  it can blaze. This means that stabilizing the mind in a state that lacks
  any kind of thought and believing that by not thinking of anything one
  can achieve full enlightenment is nonsense.
• So in order for the mind to improve, it must focus on a certain object of
  observation.
• Even in the case of meditating on emptiness, there is an object of
  observation for that mind; not meditating on nothingness. The object of
  observation here is a non-affirming negative that is a negation of the
  object of negation.  According to the highest school, emptiness is a non-
  affirming negative that is the negation of the object of negation.
The fixed number of perfections
The fixed number of perfections, has six parts:
    1. The fixed number of perfections based on high status
    2. The fixed number of perfections based on fulfilling the two aims
    3. The fixed number of perfections based on perfecting the complete
       fulfillment of others' aims
    4. The fixed number of perfections based on their subsuming the entire
       Mahayana
    5. The fixed number of perfections in terms of the completeness of paths
       or method
    6. The fixed number of perfections based on the three trainings
1. The fixed number of perfections based on high status
• From the paths and grounds, in order to achieve full enlightenment, one
  has to accumulate the collections of method and wisdom over three great
  countless eons.
• Four excellent conditions that constitute high status or good rebirth:
1. perfect resources
2. excellent bodies
3. having companions
4. being able to accomplish whatever activities one has undertaken
• However these excellent conditions that constitutes high status or good
  rebirth can also become the causes for the afflictions to arise.  For
  example, those who have sufficient resources and material, have good
  bodies, have many helpers and are successful in whatever endeavors they
  undertake do not practice the Dharma.
• In general, it is good to have these four excellent conditions: excellent
  resources, excellent body, excellent companions and being able to complete
  whatever activities one undertakes. But, we have to make sure that they do
  not become the causes for us to generate the afflictions.
• Wisdom is the mind that is able to distinguish well what is to be
  cultivated and what is to be abandoned. If one does not have wisdom, one
  will only be depleting one’s merits through enjoying all the good things
  of life.
• With wisdom, instead of depleting one’s virtues while enjoying these four
  excellences, one would continue creating causes to be able to continue to
  enjoy these four things in the future.
• In order to achieve a life that has these four excellences, you need to
  create their causes. Without the causes, the effects would not arise.
|Cause                                                 |Concordant causes       |
|Having wealth, resources and enjoyments is a result of|Practice of giving      |
|its own concordant cause                              |                        |
|To have a perfect body that is not afflicted by       |Practice of ethical     |
|sicknesses and harms                                  |discipline              |
|Having companions who will help you in your work and  |Practice of patience    |
|in accomplishing your wishes                          |                        |
|Able to complete whatever activities you undertake    |Practice of joyous      |
|with a happy mind and enthusiasm                      |perseverance            |
|Not under the influence of the afflictions            |Practice of             |
|                                                      |concentration           |
|Having the wisdom to distinguish between what is to be|Practice of wisdom      |
|cultivated and what is to be abandoned                |                        |


2 The number is definite from the point of view of the accomplishment of
the two welfares
To accomplish the two aims—the aims of oneself and the aims of others—the
number of perfections is fixed as six.
• One accomplishes the aims of others through the first three perfections
|1. Practice of     |Practice of generosity must not be accompanied by           |
|generosity         |harmfulness towards sentient beings. Otherwise your giving  |
|                   |would not be able to accomplish the aims of others          |
|2. Practice of     |Intentionally refrain from harming others                   |
|ethics             |                                                            |
|3. Practice of     |Refrain from giving in to the temptation of harming them,   |
|patience           |especially when they cause you harm                         |


• When one achieves full enlightenment, one fulfills one’s own aims.
• In order to achieve full enlightenment, one definitely needs wisdom. In
  order to generate the (4)wisdom that is necessary for achieving full
  enlightenment, one must first achieve (5)meditative stabilization. One
  can abide and focus one’s mind on any chosen object and stay on it for as
  long as one like.
• One needs (6)joyous perseverance, a mind of enthusiasm, to fulfill one’s
  own aims as well.

3 The number is definite from the point of view of the complete
accomplishment of the welfare of others in all aspects
• First you relieve others' poverty by giving away material goods –
  practice of generosity
• Then you do no harm to any living being - practice of ethics.
• In addition, you are patient when harm is done to you- practice of
  patience
• With the practice of patience, you achieve joyous perseverance, i.e., you
  never give up.
• When you have meditative stabilization, you are able to display
  supernatural powers that will attract sentient beings into your fold
  because of their interest in you.
• Once they are interested, they will listen to you. When they become
  suitable vessels, then with wisdom you give them teachings and through
  that you bring them to liberation.

4 The number is definite from the point of view of comprising the entire
Mahayana
• When you practice giving well, you are generous. Probably you not
  attached to your possessions. When you are not attached to your
  possessions, probably you not going to seek out objects that you do not
  have. As such, you are not falling under the control of attachment.
• What is generosity? Generosity is primarily a mind of giving. With a
  strong wish to give, your attachment to things is probably not a big issue
  for you. When you do not have strong grasping or clinging to your body,
  resources or enjoyments, you would definitely find it much easier to
  practice ethics.
• By practicing patience well, you will find it easier to tolerate the harm
  and suffering inflicted upon you. When you are able to tolerate the harm
  done by others you will not get dispirited or discouraged so easily.  You
  would find it easier to be enthusiastic about virtue and engage in
  meaningful and beneficial activities. When your joyous perseverance is
  sustained, you would easily achieve concentration (meditative
  stabilization) followed by wisdom.

5 The number is definite from the point of view of influencing all aspects
of the path or method: how the six perfections become the method for
accomplishing any of the individual aspects

|Practice of        |The path -i.e., method—for not being attached to the        |
|generosity         |resources that are your possessions is generosity, because  |
|                   |you become free from attachment to your things by becoming  |
|                   |habituated to giving them away                              |
|Practice of ethics |The method for restraining yourself from the distraction of |
|                   |trying to possess what you do not possess is ethical        |
|                   |discipline, for when you maintain a monk's vows, you do not |
|                   |have all the distractions of making a living                |
|Practice of        |The method for not abandoning living beings is patience,    |
|patience           |because you do not despair at the suffering caused by the   |
|                   |harm others inflict                                         |
|Practice of joyous |The method to increase virtues is joyous perseverance,      |
|perseverance       |because you increase them when you joyously persevere at    |
|                   |what you undertake                                          |
|Meditative         |Clears away the afflictions                                 |
|stabilization      |                                                            |
|Wisdom             |Clears away the cognitive obscurations                      |


 6 The number is definite from the point of view of the three trainings
|Three higher      |Six Perfections                                              |
|training          |                                                             |
|Higher training in|The practice of generosity is a       |Practice of joyous    |
|ethics            |precondition for the practice of      |perseverance is       |
|                  |ethics.                               |included in all three |
|                  |The practice of patience assists the  |trainings.            |
|                  |practice of ethics                    |                      |
|Higher training in|The practice of meditative            |                      |
|concentration     |stabilization                         |                      |
|Higher training in|The practice of wisdom                |                      |
|wisdom            |                                      |                      |


An ancillary discussion of the fixed order of the perfections

(a) The order of arising
• When you have a generosity that is disinterested in and unattached to
  resources, you take up ethical discipline.
• When you have an ethical discipline which restrains you from wrongdoing,
  you become patient with those who harm you.
• When you have the patience wherein you do not become dispirited with
  hardships, the conditions for rejecting virtue are few, so you are able to
  persevere joyously.
• Once you joyously persevere day and night, you will produce the
  meditative concentration that facilitates the application of your
  attention to virtuous objects of meditation.
• When your mind is in meditative equipoise, you will know reality exactly.

(b) The order in terms of inferior and superior
Each preceding perfection is inferior to the superior one that follows it.

(c) The order in terms of coarse and subtle
• Each preceding perfection is easier than the subsequent one to engage in
  and perform, so it is coarser than the subsequent one.
• Each subsequent perfection is more difficult than the preceding one to
  engage in and perform, so it is more subtle than the preceding one.
The practice of generosity
• Generosity - is the intention at the time the body and speech engage in
  generosity
• Usually when we talk of generosity, we always think about the physical or
  verbal acts of giving. What you have to understand is that generosity is a
  consciousness. It does not refer to the physical or verbal acts of giving.


• It is the intention while one is giving either material objects or giving
  with one’s speech (such as giving the Dharma)
Completing the perfection of generosity
The measure for its perfection
What is the criterion for having developed this perfection in the mind?
It is not dependent on removing the poverty of all living beings, which is
an impossible task.
• It is dependent on having destroyed our stingy clinging to the things
  that we own, such as our body, resources and merit.
• On top of that, one must be completely familiarized “with the mind of
  giving to others,” and no longer have any issue with giving.
• On top of that, even the effects that you will experience from giving are
  also completely dedicated to others, i.e., you do not cling to the merit
  you accumulate from giving.
Only when all these factors come together, would you have completed the
perfection of generosity in your mind.
1. Divisions of generosity relative to particular persons
In general it is said that lay bodhisattvas make gifts of material things
and renunciate bodhisattvas make gifts of the teachings.
• Generosity is categorized depending on who the practitioner is. A
  layperson primarily makes gifts of material things while the ordained
  person primarily makes the gift of the Dharma.
2. Divisions of actual generosity
   a. The gift of the teachings
   b. The gift of fearlessness
   c. Material gifts
• The gift of the teaching is:
    • teaching the Dharma with a pure motivation
    • educating others knowledge about things that are not harmful
    • encourage others to take precepts or vows and help them to keep their
      precepts
• The gift of fearlessness is protecting sentient beings from the fear of
  humans and non-humans and from fear of the elements such as earth, water,
  fire and wind.

• Pure giving is when one is making the gift of the Dharma or the gift of
  fearlessness without any expectations of receiving anything in return but
  are carried out sincerely from one’s heart.
• When giving material gift to another person, it must be done from the
  heart. One has no more clinging to that object. Once it is given to
  others, it is not yours anymore as you cut your connection with that
  object.
• Two features must be present to be the perfection of giving:
  • No stinginess, attachment or clinging to things
  • One’s mind must have the ability to completely give away whatever you
    own to others.


The faults of attachment
In order to have a good practice of generosity, first one must contemplate
well the benefits of generosity and the faults of holding on to things
without giving them away.

The former are as taught in the Moon Lamp Sūtra (Candrapradīpasūtra):

          Since the body is unclean, and the life force fluctuates like
          water gushing down a steep mountain, and both body and life force
          are controlled by karma thus lacking an independent self, you
          should see them to be false, like a dream or a mirage, and cease
          your attachment to them. If you do not reverse it, you will come
          under the control of attachment, accumulate great faulty conduct,
          and go to the lower realms. (Page 176)[1]


You have to understand that this discussion of the practice of generosity
is in the context of the bodhisattva deeds. Specifically we are talking
about the practice of generosity that is undertaken by the bodhisattvas.
Besides giving away resources and dedicating the merit to others, they also
train in giving their bodies away. In order for the bodhisattvas to be able
to dedicate and give their bodies to others, first they  must overcome
whatever attachment they may have to their bodies. They do that by
realising how the body is unclean by nature and how their lives are
constantly changing and on the move, just like a very fast flowing river.
They also understand that their body and life are under the control of
their karma and afflictions. By realising all this, they are able to stop
whatever attachment they may have to their body and life. By doing so, they
train themselves to get accustomed to the idea of giving away their body.

Here the text states that the bodhisattvas also train in viewing their body
and life to be like a dream or a mirage.[2] They come to realise that their
body and life do not exist in the way they appear. When they realise that,
they are able to stop whatever attachment they have to their body and life
and they would be able to give them away.

This discussion is about the faults of attachment or clinging on to what we
have. In the case of the bodhisattvas, it is talking about the faults of
their attachment to their body and life. Usually we regard our body as very
clean and pure, the most precious thing and we regard our life as something
that is never changing and very stable. This worldview and belief are the
basis for attachment to arise.

Because of attachment, when we meet with something undesirable, when we
feel that our body and life is going to be harmed, naturally there is
aversion or anger towards the source of that harm. Then we engage in all
kinds of non-virtuous actions and accumulate negative karma in the process.
So basically all the problems come from attachment and therefore there is
the need to stop it.

The advantages of generosity
What about the benefits of giving away the things that we own?


The second, the advantages of giving, are as taught in the Compendium of
Trainings:

          In this way my body and mind
          Pass away in every instant.
          If I attain, with this body that is
          Tainted and impermanent,
          Permanent, untainted enlightenment,
          Is it not obtained for free? (Page 176)[3]

This verse is saying that our body and mind are in the nature of
impermanence in that they are changing momentarily in each and every single
moment. Our bodies are also by nature filthy, unclean and impure.  If we
were to give away and dedicate this body, which is by nature dirty, impure,
unclean and impermanent, to others and what we get in return is full
enlightenment, isn’t that an amazing and wonderful thing?

Khen Rinpoche: This is like doing business. You give your poo to others and
in return, you get gold back. That is wonderful. This is something like
that.

(Student’s response is inaudible).

Khen Rinpoche: The question is why are you attached to dirty things?  This
is the big question.

This verse is saying that our body and life, whether we like it or not, is
going to completely disintegrate and fall apart one day. Before that
happens, if we were to do something good with them—let’s say by giving it
away and dedicating it to others—and achieve something marvellous in
return, that will be wonderful. The teachings also say that if we were able
to do all this, in the process, we will also accumulate less negativities.

ACTUAL METHOD OF ENGAGING IN GENEROSITY

       2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1A3C-1  How to actually generate generosity
 This has two points:

          A      The actual topic [215]
Engaging in Bodhisattva Conduct describes how generosity should actually be
generated:

          My body as well as my resources,
          All my virtues of the three times,
          I give away without sense of loss to
          Accomplish the welfare of all sentient beings.

Like that, taking the three—body, resources, and roots of virtue—as your
object, you should familiarize yourself again and again with the thought of
giving them away to all sentient beings. (Page 177)[4]

In order to be able to have an excellent practice of generosity, first we
must train ourselves to have a generous attitude and become accustomed to
such an attitude. We are told to focus on these three things—our body,
resources and roots of virtue— and get accustomed to mentally giving them
away to sentient beings.

As a beginner, one is not able to give away the body and one should not do
so as a beginner. Nevertheless we have to get accustomed to the idea of
giving it away in the future. In order to get accustomed to this idea, we
have to train ourselves by mentally dedicating our bodies to others. When
we do not train our mind in this way, then we will never be able to do so
in reality in the future. Through habituation, when the mind is fully
accustomed to giving away the body to others, then when the time comes, we
will be able to do this without any difficulty.

Just mentally giving away our body, resources and roots of virtue to all
sentient beings brings about immeasurable merit. Why is this so? Because
the number of sentient beings are likewise immeasurable.

Qualms about the practice of generosity
The text then addresses some qualms that people commonly have about
generosity. One may wonder: If I have mentally completely dedicated and
given away my body, resources and roots of virtue to all sentient beings,
am I still allowed to use and enjoy them? When you completely give to
others the things you own from the depths of your heart, those things do
not belong to you anymore. They belong to others. That being the case, can
you use those things that no longer belong to you?  Lama Tsongkhapa had
this to say:


      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1A3C-2   Importance of the inner attitude
This has two points:

          A    The disadvantages of forgetting the welfare of others
Thus, when you use food, clothing, and so forth that you have given away to
sentient beings with a sincere thought, if, having forgotten the thought “I
will use these for the welfare of others,” you instead use them for your
own welfare as a result of craving, it is an afflicted downfall. If,
without this craving, you forget the discrimination that observes all
sentient beings or if you are attached for the sake of another sentient
being, it is a non-afflicted downfall. If you use for your own sake those
things dedicated to others, having discriminated them to be the substances
of others, it becomes taking what has not been given and if it is something
valuable, it becomes a defeat of the pratimokṣa vow. On the other hand, if
you use them thinking: “I will use the resources of this sentient being for
his own welfare,” there is no fault. This is mentioned in the Compendium of
Trainings. (Page 177)[5]

We are talking here about the practices of the bodhisattvas. The only thing
the bodhisattvas are interested in is accomplishing the welfare of all
sentient beings. In order to do that, they undertake the practice of
generosity whereby they completely dedicate whatever they own—their bodies,
resources and roots of virtue—to others from the depths of their hearts.
• Such a person, whose only goal is to accomplish the welfare of all
  sentient beings, for whatever reason, may forget his goal and the
  happiness of sentient beings.  He then uses whatever enjoyments, such as
  food, clothes and shelter, for his own purpose motivated by attachment.
  This goes against the very idea of what the bodhisattva practice should
  be. Therefore it is incorrect.
• If such a practitioner uses the food, clothes and shelter without craving
  but forgets to apply the idea of focusing on all living beings, that is
  also incorrect.
• If such a practitioner uses those resources for a specific sentient being
  out of attachment, this is also wrong.

In order to further clarify this issue, Lama Tsongkhapa says:

           B     Clearing up doubt concerning a defeat
       The way in which it becomes a defeat is when you have dedicated
       something with a sincere thought to a migrating being who is a human
       being, and he, having cognized it, also holds it to be his, if you
       take it for your own welfare with the discrimination that it belongs
       to someone else and if it is of some value, then the factors for it
       to become a defeat are present. That is the intention here. [216]
       (Page 177)[6]

This is a discussion regarding when a defeat (or cardinal transgression)
occurs, specifically in relation to stealing, i.e., taking that which is
not given. We are talking about a bodhisattva or practitioner who has
completely dedicated to others whatever he owns—body, resources and roots
of virtue—from the depths of his heart. In order for stealing and thus a
defeat to occur, the recipient must be cognizant and have the idea, “Now
this object is mine.”
• From the giver’s side, the object has been completely dedicated to others
  and you know the object now belongs to someone else.
• From the recipient’s side, the thought is generated, “Now this is mine.”
When all these factors come together, if you use the object you have given
away for your own purpose, stealing and a defeat occurs.  According to the
Vinaya, to qualify as a defeat of the pratimoksha vows, the recipient must
be a human being.

In the case of the bodhisattva’s practice of generosity here, we are told
that the practice involves mentally giving away all one owns to sentient
beings: one’s body, resources and roots of virtue. Such a practice is done.
But when we mentally dedicate these things to others, we won’t have people
coming up to us and acknowledging this, “Thank you. I have received this
and this is now mine.”

Khen Rinpoche: This means that you can give mentally and you can still use
them.

There is a total value requirement that must be met. What is conventionally
accepted to be stealing? When you take something that is sufficiently
valued for it to be considered stolen, then it is said that the total value
requirement is met. What we have mentioned so far is the position of Lama
Tsongkhapa.

In the Lam-Rim Chen Mo,[7] Lama Tsongkhapa also stated the positions held
by some other scholars. Some scholars say, “Since you have turned over your
possessions to all living beings, it is impossible for the total value of
the portion of any one being to fulfil the total value requirement.
Therefore you cannot commit a cardinal transgression.”

Let us say you dedicate whatever you own—your body, resources and roots of
virtue—and you really give them away to all sentient beings. They then
belong to all sentient beings. Each sentient being would have his or her
share. The portion that belonged to each sentient being will not be enough
to constitute the total value requirement.

There are other scholars who say such a position is wrong. They say, “This
is not correct because you have turned over your belongings as a whole to
each sentient being. When you are giving, you are not dividing them up
before you give them  away. Therefore it is incorrect to say that the total
value requirement is not met.”

Lama Tsongkhapa says this, “Even if you do mentally give away all that you
own to sentient beings, you would not commit the defeat of stealing simply
because others are not cognizant of your giving. They do not generate the
thought that they have now become the owners of everything that you have
given away.

While you are training your mind in giving by mentally dedicating away your
body, resources and roots of virtue to all living beings, the time when you
are actually using and enjoying those resources, you must do so with the
idea that you are doing it for the welfare of sentient beings. When you use
the resources that you have mentally given away with the idea that you are
doing it to accomplish the welfare of others, then there is no fault.”

We are now on the section on the perfection of generosity. As  mentioned  in
the previous lesson, generosity means having this generous attitude  whereby
you completely give whatever you own  from  the  depths  of  your  heart  to
others.
It is taught that there are three forms of generosity:
1. the gift of Dharma
2. the gift of material things
3. the gift of fearlessness

The text says that whenever we  utilise  or  enjoy  something  that  we  had
already dedicated to others from the  depths  of  our  hearts,  it  is  very
important to do so with the thought of benefiting others. At the  time  when
one is utilising those enjoyments, one should think, “I am  doing  this  for
the welfare of others.”

When we partake of the food, drink and other substances that we had  already
offered to the Three Jewels, then it is important to utilise  those  objects
without any craving and with  the  thought  of  benefiting  others.  In  the
tantric context, there are teachings on how to enjoy such food and drink  in
the aspect of burnt offerings.

It is also said in the teachings that there are many living  beings  abiding
inside our body. The  teachings  mentioned  that  there  are  84,000  minute
sentient beings. So whenever we eat or drink, we can also think that we  are
making the offering of food and drink to these living beings  in  our  body.
Through this act of gathering them with the gift  of  material  things,  one
can set the motivation and pray, “Through this connection, may I  bring  all
of you into my fold with the Dharma in the future.”  When you  know  how  to
think properly, every time you eat and drink,  you  can  accumulate  a  vast
amount of merit.

Whenever you eat and drink, you are supposed to make offerings to the  Three
Jewels. When we make offerings to  the  Three  Jewels,  we  will  accumulate
merit. At the same time, if we were to think that we are making  a  gift  of
food and drink to the living beings in our body, we  also  accumulate  merit
and virtue.

In order to practise the Dharma, we need to sustain the physical basis,  our
body, for doing so. At  the  very  least,  the  motivation  for  eating  and
drinking should be the desire to sustain our body so that  we  can  continue
in our learning and practice. It is also very important not to allow  strong
craving and attachment to arise when we eat. This is very important.

Imagine this scenario: from your heart, you  have  completely  dedicated  or
given an object to another person. The  recipient  has  the  idea  that  the
object now belongs to him. He is the owner. As  the  giver,  you  are  aware
that has happened.
• If you are a fully ordained monk  utilising  that  object,  you  commit  a
  defeat of the vows of the fully ordained monk.
• For those who are not fully  ordained  monks,  they  incur  the  fault  of
  taking that which is not given, i.e., stealing.

There may be instances where, from the depths of your heart, you have  given
something to another person but that person is unaware of this and  has  not
generated the thought, “I’m now the owner of this object.” In  such  a  case
when you utilise that object that you have completely  dedicated  to  others
from the depths of your heart, it is most likely that you  do  not  incur  a
defeat (or cardinal transgression).

This is the explanation by Lama Tsongkhapa of  the  intended  meaning  of  a
verse from the Compendium of Trainings:

           B     Clearing up doubt concerning a defeat
       The way in which it becomes a  defeat  is  when  you  have  dedicated
       something with a sincere thought to a migrating being who is a  human
       being, and he, having cognized it, also holds it to be  his,  if  you
       take it for your own welfare with the discrimination that it  belongs
       to someone else and if it is of some value, then the factors  for  it
       to become a defeat are present. That is  the  intention  here.  [216]
       (Page 177)[8]


       2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1A3C    The actual method for engaging in
           generosity
       This has four points:

          1    How to actually generate generosity
          2    Importance of the inner attitude
          3    Generosity that is a mere thought
          4    How to associate generosity with the six perfections (Page
            177)

       2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1A3C-3   Generosity that is a mere thought
      Apart from that, Bodhisattva Levels teaches that the training  in  the
      aspiration to emanate immeasurable varieties of phenomena, objects  to
      be offered, and to give them to sentient beings with clear faith  from
      the bottom of one’s heart increases  immeasurable  merit  with  little
      effort and is the generosity  of  the  wise  bodhisattva.  (Page  177-
      178)[9]

When we make offerings, there are offerings that are mentally imagined.  You
visualise them with your mind and offer them,  for  example,  to  the  Three
Jewels.

Likewise, there is the mental practice  of  generosity  where  you  mentally
construct a range of diverse of gifts and  you  mentally  give  it  away  to
others. Personally I  am  not  sure  exactly  how  that  accumulates  merit.
Perhaps it would be better if we mentally  transform  our  roots  of  virtue
into various offering substances and then give  them   away  to  others.  By
doing this, I think that becomes  a  condition  for  us  to  accomplish  the
welfare of sentient beings in the future. This is just my personal  opinion.


If in the first place, you do not even have the wish to give or you  do  not
even think of giving, generosity will never happen.  Therefore  it  is  very
important to  start  training  like  this:  mentally  constructing  a  large
quantity of various offering substances and giving them away to others.  The
purpose is to cultivate a generous attitude, a  mind  that  is  willing  and
wants to give.

Once you are accustomed to this mental form of generosity, due to the  force
of familiarity, you will be able to give physically and verbally.  One  day,
you will be able to give in the same way as the bodhisattvas. They are  able
to give away  everything,  including  their  bodies—which  is  something  we
cherish the most—without any sense of loss. Their ability comes  from  their
familiarity with a generous attitude.

In order to have a pure practice of generosity,  first  we  must  understand
the benefits of giving. When we are hindered by our attachment, we  have  to
think  about  the  faults  of  attachment.  By  realising  the   faults   of
attachment, the faults of not giving and the benefits of giving, we will  be
able to start the practice of giving.

Even a small practice of generosity will bring about  much  benefit.  It  is
mentioned in the teachings that we should think about the  faults  of  being
attached to the things that we own, such as our possessions,  our  body  and
so forth. By thinking about this, we will be able to  cultivate  a  generous
attitude in relation to them and be  able  to  give  them  away.  We  should
reflect on the impermanent nature of  what  we  own.  They  are  subject  to
change anyway. There will definitely come a time when we will  be  separated
from them forever, be it our body or our possessions.

The text goes on  to  discuss  the  practice  of  generosity  with  the  six
perfections. When generosity is practised with  all  the  other  perfections
present, that makes the practice of generosity very powerful:
• At the time of giving, whether you are making  the  gift  of  Dharma,  the
  gift of fearlessness or the gift of material things, it  is  important  to
  restrain yourself from selfish considerations, i.e., consideration of your
  own purposes and your own welfare.  This  restraint  is  the  practice  of
  ethics.
• During the time when you are practising giving and the recipients  respond
  with an unpleasant demeanour, this is the time to apply patience.
• During the process of giving, one should do  so  enthusiastically,  taking
  great delight in what you are doing. This  is  joyous  effort  (or  joyous
  perseverance).
• When you dedicate the merit that you  acquired  from  the  act  of  giving
  single-pointedly  and  with  concentration  to  the  achievement  of  full
  enlightenment, this becomes the practice of concentration  (or  meditative
  stabilisation).
•  At  the  time  of  giving,  you  should  also  reflect  on  how  (1)  the
  object—whether it be the teachings, fearlessness or  material  things—that
  you are giving away, (2) yourself as the giver and (3) the person that you
  are giving it to all do not exist inherently.  They  are  like  illusions.
  Once you give with such an understanding, this  becomes  the  practice  of
  wisdom.
Whenever you engage in the practice with all the  six  perfections  present,
it becomes a very powerful method to purify the obscurations and to  achieve
full enlightenment.

THE PRACTICE OF ETHICS

      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1B How to train in ethics
      This has three points:

          1    The entity of ethics
          2    Its subdivisions
          3    How to generate ethics in one’s mental continuum


      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1B1         The entity of ethics
      This has two points:

          A    The entity of ethics
      Ethics is the mind of abandonment that is  a  mind  turned  away  from
      harming others together with its basis. This is mainly from the  point
      of view of the ethics of restraint. (Page 178)[10]

When the text talks  about  what  ethics  (or  ethical  discipline)  is,  it
identifies the entity of ethics to be primarily  the  ethics  of  restraint.
What is ethics? In situations where you are about to engage  in  non-virtue,
i.e., just prior to engaging in non-virtue, you have the thought, “I  should
not be doing this  because  this  is  incorrect.”  With  that  thought,  you
restrain and stop yourself completely from  engaging  in  that  non-virtuous
action. This is ethics. So the practice of  ethics  is  not  simply  sitting
around and not engaging in any non-virtue.

         B  The entity of the perfection of ethics
    Through thoroughly completing the familiarity with this mind  more  and
    more, it  becomes  the  perfection  of  ethics.  It  is  not  that  you
    externally establish all sentient  beings  in  freedom  from  all  harm
    without exception. In Engaging in Bodhisattva Conduct it says:

         Achieving the mind of abandonment
         Is taught as perfection of ethics. (Page 178)[11]


      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1B2       Its subdivisions
      This has three points:

          A      The ethics of restraint
          B    The ethics of accumulating virtuous qualities
          C The ethics of bringing about the welfare of sentient beings
            (Page 178)[12]

      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1B2A     The ethics of restraint

      This has two points:

          1 General presentation

  The ethics of restraint, [217] from the point of view of its being
       accompanied by a motivation, is the ten abandonments that abandon the
       ten non-virtues.

          2 Precise features
      This is the intention of Bodhisattva Levels in stating that the ethics
      of restraint in the continuum of a bodhisattva is the seven  types  of
      vows of individual liberation:  When  those  possessing  the  vows  of
      individual liberation possess the  bodhisattva  vows,  the  ethics  of
      restraint is the actual vows of individual liberation of the class  of
      the laity or the ordained and  the  abandonments  and  vows  that  are
      common to them in their continua. When those who are unsuitable  as  a
      support for the vows  of  individual  liberation  possess  bodhisattva
      vows, the ethics of restraint is the abandonments  and  restraints  of
      abandoning either the natural misdeeds or the formulated misdeeds that
      are common to individual liberation. Although the vows  of  individual
      liberation in the continuum of a bodhisattva are vows of ethics in the
      continuum of a bodhisattva, they  are  not  actual  bodhisattva  vows,
      whereas the rest have a common basis with the bodhisattva vows. (Pages
      178- 179)[13]

There are two kinds of faults:
   1. a deed that is wrong by nature
   2. a deed that is wrong by prohibition
There are those actions that are  wrong  because  they  are  prohibited  but
there are also actions  that  are  wrong  regardless  of  whether  they  are
prohibited or not. Those actions are wrong by nature.

With regard to deeds that are wrong  by  nature,  it  does  not  matter  who
commits them, whether one is a lay person or renunciate. Whoever engages  in
them creates negative karma. For example,  the  ten  non-virtues  are  deeds
that are wrong by nature and whoever engages in the ten non-virtues  creates
negative karma.

With regard to deeds that are wrong  by  prohibition,  an  example  will  be
drinking of alcohol. This is not a deed that is wrong by nature  but  if  an
ordained person were to drink alcohol,  he  or  she  would  create  negative
karma because drinking  alcohol  is  prohibited  for  the  ordained  by  the
Buddha. If an ordained person were to drink  alcohol,  he  would  transgress
what was prohibited by the Buddha. The drinking of alcohol in this  case  is
a deed that is wrong by prohibition.

There are three categories of vows:
1. the pratimoksha vows[14]
2. the bodhisattva vows
3. the tantric vows
These vows are not the same. These different categories of  vows  are  taken
by different people:
• The basis or the person who takes the pratimoksha vows  must  be  a  human
  being.
• The basis for taking the bodhisattva vows can be any of the six  types  of
  migratory beings.
• The basis for taking the tantric vows

Khen Rinpoche: I am not sure whether the sentient beings of the  six  realms
can take the tantric vows.

The ethics of restraint is present in both the pratimoksha  and  bodhisattva
vows. The pratimoksha vows are ethics of restraint. There is  also  part  of
the bodhisattva vows that fall under the ethics of restraint. While that  is
so, the pratimoksha vows and the bodhisattva  vows  are  distinct  from  one
another. One is not the other.

You can say that bodhisattvas necessarily have the bodhisattva vows but  you
cannot say that bodhisattvas necessarily have the pratimoksha vows. Are  the
pratimoksha vows in the continuum of a bodhisattva the bodhisattva vow?  The
answer is no.

You should read the quotation again and if there is anything that you  still
do not understand, you should bring it up.

       2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1B2B    The ethics of gathering virtuous
           qualities
       The ethics of gathering virtuous qualities is to observe virtues such
       as the six perfections and to generate that which has not yet  arisen
       in one’s own continuum, to not degenerate that which has arisen,  and
       to increase it more and more.


       2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1B2C    The ethics of bringing about the welfare
           of sentient beings
       The ethics of bringing about the welfare of  sentient  beings  is  to
       accomplish the welfare of sentient beings in this  and  future  lives
       through ethics without any misdeeds as appropriate. (Page 179)[15]

Whenever we talk  about  ethics,  it  primarily  refers  to  the  ethics  of
restraint. With that as the foundation or basis comes the  other  two  forms
of ethics:
1. the ethics of gathering virtuous qualities
2. the ethics of bringing about the welfare of sentient beings

How to generate ethics in one’s mental continuum
The way to do this is to reflect on:
• the grave consequences or faults of not safeguarding ethics
• the benefits of safeguarding ethics

When one has a good understanding of the faults of not  safeguarding  ethics
and the benefits of doing so,  one’s  practice  of  ethics—cultivating  what
needs to be cultivated and abandoning  what  is  to  be  abandoned—would  be
stable and very good.

A quotation from The King of Concentration Sutra  says  that  if  one  makes
offerings of umbrellas, victory banners, light and ornaments of jewels to  a
hundred billion buddhas for eons equal to the number of sand grains  in  the
River Ganges, a great deal of merit is acquired. However, if,  during  these
degenerate times, a person keeps just one precept or vow for  a  day  and  a
night, the merit acquired is  far  greater  than  that  of  giving  so  many
offerings to countless buddhas over such a long period of time.

It was stated  earlier  in  the  text  that  each  preceding  perfection  is
inferior to the perfection that follows it. This means that  the  perfection
of ethics is superior to the perfection of generosity. You can see why  from
the above quotation.

By safeguarding one’s ethics, one experiences  joy  and  happiness.  By  not
safeguarding one’s ethics, one  will  experience  suffering.  With  such  an
understanding, one would be able to generate a very strong and  stable  wish
to safeguard one’s ethics.

      2B4B-2A2C-2C3A-3C1A-1B3B     The entity of ethics
      This has three points:

          1 Instruction on the importance of how you train in ethics
      Although  there  are  three   kinds   of   ethics,   the   ethics   of
      restraint—practicing the engagements  and  avoidances  concerning  the
      formulated rules of individual liberation or what is common to them—is
      itself important for bodhisattvas in the beginning. If it is  guarded,
      the others will also be guarded, whereas if it  is  not  guarded,  the
      others will  not  be  guarded  either.  Therefore  the  Compendium  of
      Determinations says  that  if  the  ethics  of  the  bodhisattva  vows
      degenerates, all the vows are degenerated.  Whoever  thinks  that  the
      vows of individual  liberation  are  for  hearers  and  rejects  their
      formulated rules of engagement and avoidance saying: “I must train  in
      the other bodhisattva trainings” has thus not  grasped  the  essential
      point of the training in ethics of bodhisattvas, for it is taught many
      times that the ethics of restraint is the basis and  province  of  the
      two subsequent ethics.


         2  The main ethics of restraint: how the mind of restraining from
           natural misdeeds should be generated again and again
    The main ethics of restraint is to abandon the  natural  misdeeds.  The
    synthesized essential points of the great disadvantages of the  natural
    misdeeds are to abandon the ten  non-virtues.  Therefore  the  mind  of
    restraint that does not even move toward their  motivations  should  be
    generated again and again. [220] (Page 180)[16]

If one thinks, “The pratimoksha vows  are  only  for  the  hearers.  I  have
something else to practise. I am going to keep the bodhisattva  vows,”  that
is a sign that one has not grasped the essential points of the  training  in
the vows.

When the training of ethics is condensed, it  is  the  ethics  of  restraint
from the ten non- virtues. Apart from not committing  the  ten  non-virtues,
the  text  says  that  we  must  mentally  restrain  ourselves   from   even
entertaining the mere motivation of wanting to engage in these  non-virtues.


           3     Summarized presentation
       In brief, to take this as the basis and train again and again in  the
       mind of restraint that trains in the trainings of whatever ethics one
       has promised is the practice of ethics. (Page 181)

Like the perfection of generosity, when we practise the perfection of
ethics with all the other perfections present, that will make the practice
of ethics very powerful. You should write out, on your own, how the
practice of ethics can involve all the other perfections. There is no great
rush to do it right away. You can do it at your own leisure.

-----------------------
[1] Ibid., 115-116.
[2] “Mirage” is translated as “magician’s illusion” in the LRCM.
[3] Ibid., 116.
[4] Ibid., 119.
[5] Ibid., 119.
[6] Ibid., 120.
[7] This discussion can be found in pages 119-120.
[8] LRCM, 120.
[9] Ibid., 140.
[10] Ibid., 143.
[11] Ibid., 144.
[12] Ibid., 148.
[13] Ibid.
[14] Also translated as the vows of individual liberation.
[15] Ibid., 148.
[16] Ibid., 148-149.

