Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/BP2 M09 L28V.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:56.375607
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen  Rinpoche  Geshe  Chonyi  on  The  Eight
Categories and Seventy Topics

Root Text:  The  Eight  Categories  and  Seventy  Topics  by  Jetsün  Chökyi
Gyaltsen, translated by Jampa Gendun. Final draft October 2002, updated  May
2011. © Jampa Gendun & FPMT, Inc.

Lesson      28                                                            27
September 2016


Importance of preliminary prayers. Importance  of  exerting  effort  in  our
studies. Review: The seven branches  of  enlightenment.  Eight  branches  of
aryas paths: Path of meditation  abandonments  that  are  innate  afflictive
obscurations & path of meditation abandonments  that  are  innate  knowledge
obscurations. Relation to the seven royal possessions.


IMPORTANCE OF PRELIMINARY PRAYERS

At the beginning of the class, all of you chant  the  Praise  to  Shakyamuni
Buddha. Thereafter, we chant the Heart Sutra. This  has  been  part  of  the
practice of this class.

In the monastery, before debate, we  will  recite  prayers  for  almost  two
hours. Sometimes, we even chant the Heart Sutra  21  times.  Sometimes,  the
long tune of the Heart Sutra is  used,  which  takes  about  45  minutes  to
complete. We also do Praises to the 21 Taras  70  to  80  times.  Therefore,
normally before debate, we will do almost two hours of prayers.

Here, we only do about 10 to 15 minutes of prayers. Even then, you  have  no
energy to chant. You should put some energy into it as it is  part  of  your
practice. You should do it with joy.

When reciting Buddha’s prayers, you think of  Buddha  Shakyamuni,  put  your
palms together, remember his kindness and qualities  and  praise  Shakyamuni
in each verse. If you do this well  from  your  heart,  you  know  how  much
benefit you will get. You know this is important.

You will get the benefit by doing prayers in the beginning.  You  will  have
peace in your mind before listening to the teachings. So do  the  meditation
of visualizing Buddha Shakyamuni. The nectar coming from  Buddha  Shakyamuni
will purify your negative emotions, negative mind, difficult  mind,  jealous
mind, angry mind and whatever else you need purified. This  meditation  will
calm you down and bring about the individual  and  group  energy  needed  to
listen to the teachings.

The Heart Sutra is an extremely powerful wisdom  sutra.  You  can’t  find  a
more powerful sutra than the Heart Sutra.  We have gone through  this  topic
before. It talks mainly  about  emptiness,  i.e.,  looking  at  oneself  and
everything else to be empty. As much as  possible,  understand  impermanence
and emptiness. Contemplate that while you  recite  this  sutra.  Or  if  you
don’t want to recite, just think that you are listening to the  Heart  Sutra
from Buddha Shakyamuni himself. You can visualize like that  and  understand
the meaning. It is very, very powerful. One creates so much merit simply  by
reciting the Heart Sutra. After that, you contemplate its meaning. Then  you
will get much more benefit.

In the monastery, the teachers used to say all the  time,  “You  don’t  need
any separate pujas for yourself if you chant well when you  come  to  class.
Think well.  Chant well. That becomes the best puja for yourself.  Then  you
don’t have to ask the monastery for somebody to do pujas for  you  to  clear
obstacles. You can do that yourself.” This is what I mean.

When you chant the prayers as a group, it should be  a  little  bit  louder.
When you are alone in the house, whether you make noise or not,  it  doesn’t
make any difference. As a group, however, you should chant  louder  for  any
prayers you may do. Not only in class. You should also chant  loudly  during
pujas as group energy is needed. When I say louder, it means  matching  your
voice within the group. You should bring your voices together and  make  the
group energy as pleasant as possible. Chanting has some  kind  of  power  to
bring peace to your mind if you chant well. At the same time, you will  also
think well. It works like that.

There is a very, very long tune for the Heart Sutra in  Tibetan.  In  Tibet,
they said that when one starts with the Heart Sutra, one can walk from  Sera
to Lhasa and back again. Only then will one finish the Heart  Sutra.  Maybe,
that means it takes one and a half hours or two  hours.  I  don’t  know  how
long it takes. Anybody knows where Sera and Lhasa are? This is the  kind  of
distance they mentioned in the past.

We did this version only once in Sera when the  chanting  master  came  from
Tibet. He did that one time. It took a long time to do it. We were not  used
to it. We just making one word. (Khen Rinpoche  demonstrates,  “Thus  I  …”)
How long did that take? About three seconds!

There could be some reason for this. It is  not  just  for  the  purpose  of
killing time or passing time. I don’t think so. For those who  have  a  good
understanding, “Thus did I heard at one time” can mean many things. You  can
contemplate just this one sentence in  many  different  ways.  If  you  know
emptiness, you can contemplate that.

I don’t want to repeat this again and again. Sometimes, it is good  to  say,
good to tell, to remind you all. For  group  energy,  please  chant  loudly.
This is important.

It is also good to chant when you do  the  mandala  offering.  You  are  not
making the mandala offering to me. It has nothing to do  with  me.  You  can
visualize Guru Shakyamuni or His Holiness to  create  merit  if  you  do  it
well. It has nothing to  do  with  me.  Think  well  and  create  merit  for
yourself.

As the class is finishing  soon,  I  think  from  every  perspective,  group
energy is important for success in completing the classes. I cannot do  much
by myself. We all need this energy to get through these classes.


IMPORTANCE OF EXERTING EFFORT IN OUR STUDIES

Rinpoche  and  His  Holiness  have  mentioned  that  studying  is  the  most
important thing. For those of you who have been to Dharamsala, His  Holiness
always mentions this. Rinpoche always mentions this  too.  ABC  exists  here
for Dharma studies to take place. Of course, Dharma  studies  boil  down  to
Dharma practice. From every angle, the students also need  to  put  in  some
effort to learn, to listen and to do prayers.

As I have  mentioned  before,  studying  Buddhist  philosophy  is  extremely
challenging. I have gone through this myself. I studied full time for 19  to
20 years. It was not easy. I have mentioned before that there were about  30
monks in my class but not everybody can study and  complete  their  studies.
Not everybody can become a Geshe. It is challenging. There were 36 or 37  of
us and only four of us completed our studies!

This is not a joke. It was really difficult to complete all  the  exams  and
so forth. About half of them disrobed. The  others  didn’t  really  complete
their studies. Some didn’t study well. I mean they would come to class,  sit
there and debate a little bit here and there. But  as  time  went  on,  they
didn’t learn much.

I could see the challenges. Of course, it  could  be  individual  karma.  It
could be their own effort and interest. There are many things that  have  to
come together to complete the studies. It is not easy.

We studied full time. Here, we are talking about part-time studies.  I  know
you work from 8am in the morning  till  6pm.  I  can’t  expect  much.  After
coming home, you are tired and have no time to read. Or you  take  a  little
time for your  dinner  and  you  come  to  class.  That  is  wonderful!  Not
everybody can do that.

Sometimes, I look at this in a different way. People come  and  just  listen
to the teachings. How wonderful! Just come and listen.  That  is  wonderful!
Sometimes, I think about the two pigeons.  You  know  the  story.  I  really
think about that. So it is wonderful! It is better  than  sitting  at  home.
Come here and listen to one or two words and leave some  imprints.  Or  just
come here to recite the Heart Sutra together. That is wonderful!

On top of that, if you read, you think and you study, then you gain so  much
benefit and you understand the Buddha’s teachings so much better. Then  that
may help you change your mind. I have mentioned before, studying is to  gain
the knowledge but knowledge alone doesn’t mean much.

Definitely, it is helpful. Having all that knowledge is helpful.   Even  for
myself, when I have difficulties or problems,  I  have  ten  ways  to  think
about the problem. If I really practise deeply, there is no question that  I
will be able to change myself. But I am  talking  here  about  how  powerful
just hearing is. It is extremely powerful. I see the benefit there.  I  have
mentioned before. When I was young, I  didn’t  know  what  was  killing.  My
parents didn’t kill. They said it was not good. Only that.  I  had  no  idea
but because of what they said, it helped me to not kill from an  early  age,
even before I became a monk. I didn’t know much about what happens when  you
kill. But that is the power of hearing. I am giving you  just  one  example.
It is extremely powerful.
I also mentioned this before. In the last Basic Program, we did some  pujas.
We collected a small amount of money to do  Hayagriva  puja  every  year.  I
think we did that for the first Basic Program. But during the second  round,
we didn’t do that much. That is OK.

What I am saying here is that when you do the prayers, do them with joy  and
happiness.  Even when you do three prostrations, do them with  joy.  Believe
in the benefits and generate some kind of feeling in  your  heart.  I  think
that is important.

Praising Buddha Shakyamuni, reciting the Heart  Sutra,  making  the  mandala
offering, and doing the seven-limb practice by depending on  the  object  of
the merit field can be really very  powerful  if  you  can  do  that  before
class. Then your mind becomes more purified and subdued.

Use  the  Dharma  in  accordance  with  the  lam-rim  by  setting  up   your
motivation. The whole point is to subdue your own mind, not  so  much  about
anything else. Whatever topics that you have learnt, as  much  as  possible,
try to fit these topics into the lam-rim and try to meditate on  them.  This
is extremely helpful.

So group energy is needed when you  do  the  prayers.  Do  the  prayers  and
request for success to complete the classes. From  every  angle,  energy  is
needed to complete the classes. If you want to continue  the  classes  after
this, you also need energy.

Otherwise, we can just do the practice of  the  35  Buddhas  or  Vajrasattva
practice once a week. This is easy for everyone. We can come together to  do
some puja or some practice once a week if this is what suits people.  It  is
much, much easier. Then you don’t have to squeeze your brain  so  much  over
this topic or that topic. You just do your simple practice.  We  can  do  35
Buddhas practice.

But this is not Rinpoche’s wish. He wants the  students  of  the  centre  to
study more deeply. He has mentioned three times about studying the  Master’s
Program. I haven’t started that yet. But for those who want to  study  more,
please generate some kind of encouragement  for  yourself  and  make  strong
prayers. If you wish to learn more, we all need that. It is important.  This
is what I want to you tell now.

As I mentioned earlier, it is not easy. What you are learning  now  is  real
learning. Sometimes, I feel that if you were to  go  to  the  monastery  and
study to become a Geshe, you  will  study  the  same  thing.  Nothing  more.
Sometimes, I feel that you are even better than some of  the  Geshes.  I  am
not kidding you.

I mentioned that I had 37 or 38 classmates. They came to class. If you  were
to ask them questions, do they know? Not  everybody  knows.  So  it  is  not
easy. In one way, I really appreciate what you are doing here. After a  long
working day, coming to class and putting in some effort to listen. I  cannot
hope for much.

My job is that I need to push. But I don’t know  how  much  I  can  push.  I
cannot push you with a cane. You have the PSLE.[1] It is not only the  kids.
The exam is like an exam for the mother. The parents get  so  stressed.  The
children are stressed and the parents are stressed. Anyway, one still  needs
to work harder. That is the most I can say.

When you do the prayers, sometimes, it sounds a little  bit  down.  So  when
you chant, please chant loudly. When you chant loudly, it is like some  kind
of exercise. Normally, the chant leaders chant very  loudly  and  they  live
very long. It is true. All the chant masters normally live quite long.  They
put in a lot of energy into their chanting. When you chant “Awwww …”  for  a
long time, your lungs expand and then you can live longer.  If  I  know  the
long tune of the Heart Sutra that lasts for one or two hours,  we  will  sit
here and “Awwww …” for two hours!

I don’t know the tune myself. We only did it  one  time.  It  was  extremely
boring. At that time, we were young. We didn’t know what was  going  on.  We
didn’t even know the  tune.  We  didn’t  even  know  which  word  they  were
chanting. We didn’t know where  the  sentence  was.  Actually  when  we  are
reciting quickly, we know the sentence but when they go, “Awwww …”  then  we
lose the sentence! When the umze goes, “Awww …” we couldn’t really hear  the
words. We didn’t know the meaning. There was  no  meditation,  no  chanting,
nothing there.  It was very long and boring.

So make your prayers enjoyable. Before the teachings,  put  everything  else
aside.  Bring your  mind  here,  put  in  some  energy  and  listen  to  the
teachings as much as possible. Of course, sometimes, you are tired  and  you
can’t do much. But try to be a little alert, “What  is  he  trying  to  talk
about today?”

Of course, as for myself, I never think that I am a good  teacher.  I  never
ever thought this in my life. What I do feel though is that I have tried  my
best. I have no regrets. So what I want to say to you  is  the  same  thing.
From your side, never have regrets for not putting in the  effort  when  you
have the opportunity. This is what I want to say.

Of course, everybody has  different  levels  of  intelligence.  Some  people
learn by hearing  the  teachings  just  one  time.  Some  people  learn  the
teachings through constant  repetition.  I,  myself,  am  also  not  a  fast
learner. I am a very slow learner. For me, according  to  my  own  level  of
wisdom, I need to work hard.

If you have intelligence, maybe you don’t have to work hard  because  it  is
so easy to learn. For me, I don’t have that much intelligence so I  have  to
put in more effort to learn. Because of your own effort, you can learn  some
small thing. Therefore, put in some effort. Don’t have regrets  at  the  end
of the day, “Oh, I didn’t put in enough effort.”

Sometimes, when you come to class or attend  teachings,  this  does  happen.
When it becomes a regular class, then we really don’t think so much.  Today,
it may go like that. Your mind doesn’t want to listen, “Maybe  in  the  next
class, I will listen” or “Maybe next year, I will put  in  more  effort  and
study more deeply.” Over time, it goes like that.

So sometimes, we really need to tell ourselves, “Today, right  now,  I  must
do something!” Don’t wait until next time. When  you  have  the  opportunity
now, as much as possible, put in effort and learn even if it  is  just  some
words. Even if you don’t know their meaning, learn the words.

You know about the 37 topics that we were talking about,  for  example,  the
four mindfulnesses. Then you go deeper, “What are they? How  do  I  meditate
on them?” You should be able to explain that. This  is  the  way  to  learn.
Otherwise, it is not easy.

Sometimes, when we are not mindful, then we think, “Oh, this  is  difficult.
That is difficult.” Then your mind just shuts down. Then you go  to  another
topic. Of course, it is difficult. Then you shut down and go  on  like  that
until you get totally tired.

At the same time, understanding this topic is extremely  difficult.  We  all
want to learn something new. You don’t want to just learn the lam-rim  every
year, do you? If I were to repeat the lam-rim every year, I don’t think  you
want to learn it. You want something new. Sometimes, the topic can  be  very
difficult. But if you really want to learn, then  put  in  some  effort.  At
least, you must be able to say the names.

Also at the same time, work hard, pray and bring your own mental  energy  to
the table. Only then can you succeed and achieve  something.  Otherwise,  it
will be difficult.

This module is coming to an end and I want to say this  as  you  still  have
another module to complete. So think about that and  do  your  prayers  with
joy. Also listen to the teachings as much as possible with a  sense  of  joy
and put in some effort.

What is this topic about? Ask questions if you don’t understand  or  discuss
with each other. This approach will help you succeed in your  studies.  This
is what pleases Rinpoche. This is what pleases  His  Holiness.  So  you  all
need to think well about this. It is not an individual  thing.  We  are  all
working for  Rinpoche’s  centre,  to  please  Rinpoche  and  to  please  His
Holiness. The only way we can do that is by studying.  That  is  their  main
goal. It is always the same advice all the time. So we  should  not  disturb
but  only  work  to  please  and  fulfil   Rinpoche’s   wishes.   Therefore,
everybody’s energy is needed to succeed in your studies. Please think  about
this. Everyone, including myself,  have  to  take  note  of  this.  This  is
important. I don’t want to repeat this over  again  and  again.  So,  please
keep this in mind. Study with a sense of joy. Everything that you do, do  it
with a sense of joy. Otherwise, it is not easy.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~

REVIEW: THE SEVEN BRANCHES OF ENLIGHTENMENT

The seven branches of enlightenment are:
1. the branch of enlightenment of perfect mindfulness
2. the branch of enlightenment of perfect fine discernment of phenomena
3. the branch of enlightenment of perfect joyous effort
4. the branch of enlightenment of perfect joy
5. the branch of enlightenment of perfect pliancy
6. the branch of enlightenment of perfect meditative stabilization
7. the branch of enlightenment of perfect equanimity
The seven branches of enlightenment are said to be principally meditated  on
the path of seeing. The purpose of  meditating  on  the  seven  branches  of
enlightenment is to abandon the path of seeing abandonments.

As  we  saw  in  the  last  lesson,  with  regard  to  the  path  of  seeing
abandonments, there are:
1. the path of seeing abandonments that are afflictive obscurations
2. the path of seeing abandonments that are knowledge obscurations

According to the Autonomy Middle Way School (AMWS):
 • The afflictive obscurations are primarily posited as the apprehension  of
   a self-sufficient substantially existent person together with its seeds.
 • The knowledge obscurations  are  posited  as  the  apprehension  of  true
   existence and its seed.

When the two obscurations are further elaborated into coarse and subtle:
 • The coarse apprehension of the self of persons is the apprehension  of  a
   permanent, unitary and independent self.
 • The subtle apprehension of the self of persons is the apprehension  of  a
   self-sufficient substantially existent person.

With regard to the self of phenomena, there are both coarse  and  subtle  as
well:
 • The apprehension of the coarse self of phenomena is the  apprehension  of
   subject and object as different substantial entities.
 • The apprehension of the subtle self of phenomena is the  apprehension  of
   truly existent phenomena.

Because there are both coarse and subtle forms  of  the  apprehension  of  a
self of persons and phenomena, as such there are:
 • the coarse self of persons
 • the subtle self of persons
 • the coarse self of phenomena
 • the subtle self of phenomena

With regard to the afflictive obscurations:
 • There are afflictive obscurations that  are  abandoned  on  the  path  of
   seeing
 • There are afflictive obscurations that  are  abandoned  on  the  path  of
   meditation

There are 112 afflictive obscurations that are  abandoned  on  the  path  of
seeing and there are 108 knowledge obscurations that are  abandoned  on  the
path of seeing. This is just telling you how  many  afflictive  obscurations
and knowledge obscurations are abandoned on the path of seeing. As  for  the
specific breakdown, we have already talked about this in the last lesson.

When we talk about the path  of  seeing  abandonments  that  are  afflictive
obscurations, we are primarily talking  about  the  intellectually  acquired
(or artificial) afflictive obscurations (or artificial  conceptions).  There
are also innate afflictions as well but the path of seeing abandonments  are
primarily the artificial ones.

Of the 112 intellectually  acquired  afflictive  obscurations,  40  of  them
belong to the desire realm. Why are there 40? This explanation  is  done  in
relation to the four noble truths.

Take true origins as an example. There are ten afflictions that are path  of
seeing abandonments that focus on true origins. If you understand this,  you
just have to apply it to the rest of the noble truths. The ten are:
1. attachment
2. anger
3. pride
4. afflicted ignorance
5. afflicted doubt
6. view of the transitory collection
7. view holding on to an extreme
8. conception of bad views as supreme
9. view holding bad ethics and modes of conduct as supreme
10. wrong view

These are the ten afflictions that are the path of  seeing  abandonments  of
the desire  realm  that  focuses  on  true  origins.  Then  there  are  true
sufferings, true  cessations  and  true  paths.  There  are  10  afflictions
focussing on each of them as well. So,  altogether  there  are  40  path  of
seeing abandonments of the desire realm that are afflictive obscurations.

Khen Rinpoche: OK?

(Students nod their heads).

Khen Rinpoche: You are so intelligent! I explain just once, you say that  it
is OK.

When we were young, my teacher would tell us  ten  times.  We  still  didn’t
understand. Of course when we were kids,  the  studying  was  different.  We
didn’t know anything. We could say the words but we had no idea  at  all  of
their meaning. What is  ignorance?  What  is  the  view  of  the  transitory
collection? We had no idea. We could  debate.  We  could  say  we  knew  the
words. But you all have some idea of their meaning.

It also depends on age. The older you are, you have more knowledge  and  you
can think better. When you are a child, somehow, you are not able to  think.
Also, my teacher who has passed away, when we went to his  class,  he  would
repeat so many times. Sometimes, we felt it was very boring,  “I  know  this
already. Why is he repeating again?” He repeated many times. At  that  time,
we knew some topics already but he thought they were important so  he  would
repeat again and again.

Now I know why. At that time, I didn’t know why he  kept  on  repeating  but
because of his  repetition,  they  are  still  in  my  memory.  Some  of  my
teachers, they don’t repeat. They would teach once,  “OK.  You  understand.”
At that moment, you may understand, but after one or two  years,  you  would
forget.

Only this teacher would repeat and repeat. For me,  because  I  was  not  so
intelligent, that was why I could only keep in my memory  when  he  repeated
ten times. Some of the topics he thought were  important,  he  would  repeat
and repeat and repeat. Some of those teachings are still in my  memory.  Now
I see why. But at that time, I didn’t see the point.

Since there are three realms in cyclic existence, as such,  there  are  also
afflictions of the form realm and afflictions of the formless realms.  There
are 36 afflictions each for each realm, giving a total of 72.

If there are 40 afflictions of the desire realm, how  come  it  is  not  the
same for the form and formless realms? Why are there only 36  for  the  form
realm and 36 for  the  formless  realm?  The  reason  is  because  anger  is
excluded.
 • There is no anger of the form realm that is observing true origins.
 • Likewise, there is no anger of the form  realm  that  is  observing  true
   sufferings.
 • There is no anger of the form realm observing true cessations.
 • There is no anger of the form realm observing true paths.
It is the same with the formless realm.

This  is  how  you  end  up  with  112  intellectually  acquired  afflictive
obscurations that are path of seeing abandonments.

According to the AMWS, there are also path of seeing abandonments  that  are
acquired knowledge obscurations. They posit 36 of  these  for  each  of  the
three realms, making a total of 108 path of  seeing  abandonments  that  are
acquired knowledge obscurations.

What makes up the 36 acquired knowledge obscurations of  the  desire  realm,
form and formless realms? They are:
 •  the  nine  conceptions  of  the  apprehendeds  of  thoroughly  afflicted
   phenomena
 • the nine conceptions of the apprehendeds of completely pure phenomena
 • the nine conceptions of the apprehenders of substantial existents
 • the nine conceptions of the apprehenders of imputed existents

In general,  we  can  look  at  existents  or  phenomena  in  terms  of  two
categories:
1. thoroughly afflicted phenomena
2. completely pure phenomena

Let’s give an example of a conception of the apprehendeds  of  a  thoroughly
afflicted phenomena. There is the artificial conception of a truly  existent
ignorance focussing on ignorance.
 • Ignorance is the object of observation.
 • Then you have an intellectually acquired apprehension of  true  existence
   apprehending that ignorance to be truly existent.

Between  the  two   obscurations—afflictive   obscurations   and   knowledge
obscurations—this   is   a   knowledge   obscurations.   Within    knowledge
obscurations, this is an intellectually  acquired  or  artificial  knowledge
obscuration.

Why are there nine of such conceptions? Because this is what is said in  the
sutra.  The  sutra  gave  nine  examples  and  posited  their   objects   of
observation.

Why are there not more than nine conceptions? Again, the answer  is  because
this is what is said in the sutra.

There are nine objects  of  observation  that  are  posited  in  the  sutra.
Because there are nine, there  are  nine  apprehensions  of  true  existence
apprehending those nine objects of observation to be  truly  existent.  This
is  how  we  arrive  at  108  because  there  are  36  artificial  knowledge
obscurations  of  the  desire  realm  because   there   are   36   different
conceptions. Likewise, there are  36  of  the  form  realm  and  36  of  the
formless realm.

EIGHT BRANCHES OF ARYAS PATHS

These are primarily meditated on the path of meditation for the  purpose  of
abandoning the path of meditation abandonments.

According to the AMWS, the path of meditation abandonments are also  divided
into two:
1.  the  path  of  meditation  abandonments  that  are   innate   afflictive
   obscurations
2.  the  path  of  meditation  abandonments  that   are   innate   knowledge
   obscurations.

Path of meditation abandonments that are innate afflictive obscurations
Let’s look at the afflictive obscurations. There are 16  of  these.  So  the
path of seeing abandonments that are afflictive obscurations number 112  but
the path of meditation abandonments that are afflictive obscurations  number
only 16.

Khen Rinpoche: Many are already reduced. Only 16 left!

These 16 innate afflictive obscurations abandoned on the path of  meditation
belong to the three realms.

Six of them belong to the desire realm and they are:
1. attachment
2. anger
3. pride
4. Ignorance
5. view of the transitory collection
6. view holding to an extreme

Unlike the 10 path of seeing abandonments that are afflictive  obscurations,
why are there only six left now? What are missing?
1. Afflicted doubt is missing as it is already  abandoned  on  the  path  of
   seeing.
2. The conception of bad views as supreme is missing as it has already  been
   abandoned.
3. There is no view holding bad ethics and modes of conduct  as  supreme  as
   that is has also been abandoned.
4. There is no wrong view as that is also abandoned.
These were abandoned on the path  of  seeing,  which  means  that  they  are
artificial  afflictive  obscurations.  We  can  probably  say   that   these
four—afflicted doubt, the conception of  bad  views  as  supreme,  the  view
holding bad ethics and  mode  of  conduct  as  supreme  and  wrong  view—are
artificial afflictive obscurations. This  means  that  there  is  no  innate
forms of these afflictive obscurations.

 • There are six afflictions of the desire realm that are path of meditation
   abandonments.
 • There are five afflictions of the form realm that are path of  meditation
   abandonments.
 • There are five afflictions  of  the  formless  realm  that  are  path  of
   meditation abandonments.
Why are there only five? Similar to what we saw on the path  of  seeing,  on
the form and formless realms, anger is excluded. So these are the 16  innate
afflictive obscurations abandoned on the path of meditation.

Path of meditation abandonments that are innate knowledge obscurations
There are 108  innate  knowledge  obscurations  abandoned  on  the  path  of
meditation. The enumeration is the same as before:
 • 36 of the desire realm
 • 36 of form realm
 • 36 of the formless realm

It is exactly the same thing. It  is  just  that  the  artificial  knowledge
obscurations are abandoned on the path  of  seeing  while  on  the  path  of
meditation,  the  innate  knowledge  obscurations  are  abandoned.  This  is
according to the AMWS.

In short,
 • there are path  of  seeing  abandonments  that  are  acquired  afflictive
   obscurations and acquired knowledge obscurations,
 • there are path of meditation  abandonments  that  are  innate  afflictive
   obscurations and innate knowledge obscurations.

Relation to the seven royal possessions
Here is an explanation of the  symbolism  of  the  seven  royal  possessions
linked to the seven branches of enlightenment.

1. Precious wheel
The branch of enlightenment of perfect  mindfulness  is  symbolised  by  the
precious wheel. Just as the precious wheel overcomes or is  victorious  over
that which is to be conquered by revolving  and  moving  forward,  likewise,
with mindfulness, one is able to overcome that which is to be overcome.

2. Precious elephant
The branch of enlightenment of perfect fine discernment of phenomena,  which
is wisdom, is likened to the precious elephant. Because this wisdom is  able
to  overcome  the  apprehension  of  signs  or  the  apprehension  of   true
existence, it is just like the precious elephant that is  very  powerful  in
overcoming many discordant factors.

3. Precious horse
It may be interesting for us to look  at  the  individual  meanings  of  the
seven royal possessions as they have their own characteristics.  Since  they
are trying to draw the link between the  seven  royal  possessions  and  the
seven branches of  enlightenment,  how  do  these  seven  royal  possessions
symbolize these seven branches of enlightenment?

Here, the branch of enlightenment of perfect joyous  effort  is  likened  to
the precious horse. It is said that  this  precious  horse  can  travel  the
world within one  morning  and  return.  In  order  to  do  that,  there  is
striving, so you need joyous effort. Here, joyous effort refers to  striving
to develop the different concentrations.

You need perfect joyous  effort  to  actualize  the  different  supernatural
powers, the different concentrations, clairvoyance and so  forth.  In  fact,
to achieve enlightenment quickly, joyous effort is needed.  The  explanation
of this is related to the precious horse.

4. Precious jewel
Next, there is the branch of enlightenment  of  perfect  joy.  There  is  an
explanation relating that to the precious jewel. With perfect joyous  effort
as a condition, one is able to  develop  the  concentrations,  clairvoyances
and so forth. One is able to  engage  in  many  aspects  of  many  different
Dharmas, thus bringing joy to benefit the body and mind. It  is  likened  to
how the precious jewel is said to be able to give people  happiness.  It  is
said that just the light emitted from the  precious  jewel  is  able  to  do
that.

5. Precious queen
Next is the  branch  of  enlightenment  of  perfect  pliancy.  With  perfect
pliancy,  one  is  able  to  pacify  mental   and   physical   dysfunctional
tendencies. Due to that pacification, one comes to experience great joy  and
bliss. This is symbolized by the precious queen who is said to  be  able  to
bestow uncontaminated bliss.

6. Precious householder
Next is the branch of enlightenment  of  perfect  meditative  stabilization.
When  one  has  meditative  stabilization,  one  is  able  to  achieve  many
different  goals.  Among  the  seven   royal   possessions,   the   precious
householder symbolizes this as it  is  said  that  he  is  able  to  satisfy
whatever necessities, needs or desires we may have.

I remember reading in one text but I don’t remember which text now. I  could
be wrong but I remember it was mentioned in a text that  when  one  achieves
the Mahayana path of seeing, one achieves the space or  sky  treasury.  When
one achieves that, henceforth, there is no way one will  be  poor.  I  guess
there is no poverty of material.

Khen Rinpoche: When you achieve that, you become a real Dzambhala!

The first ground is called Very Joyful. The bodhisattva on the first  ground
is so happy and joyful because at that time,  he  sees  that  soon  he  will
achieve enlightenment and will be of benefit to many sentient  beings.  This
is why the first ground is called Very Joyful  because  the  bodhisattva  is
very happy as he will achieve enlightenment soon.

7. Precious minister
The branch of enlightenment of perfect equanimity is linked to the  precious
minister among the seven royal possessions. How does the  precious  minister
go with equanimity?

Khen Rinpoche: The last one is equanimity. How do  these  two  go  together?
Democracy? Then they all become ministers?

The earlier reference to meditative stabilization is more in the context  of
meditative equipoise. Here, equanimity is probably  what  happens  when  you
arise from meditative equipoise. In post-meditative equipoise, you  have  to
continue to realize the things that are not  yet  realized  through  knowing
what to be abandoned and what is to be cultivated. One  strives  to  abandon
what needs to be abandoned and cultivate that which needs to be  cultivated.
I guess this is what ministers do. Ministers do what they have to do.

 Next, we have the eight branches of the aryas'  path.  We  will  just  list
them for now:
1. correct view
2. correct thought
3. correct speech
4. correct aims of action
5. correct livelihood
6. correct exertion
7. correct mindfulness
8. correct meditative stabilization

These eight  branches  of  aryas  path  are  also  emphasized  in  the  Pali
tradition where they are  called  the  eightfold  noble  path.  These  eight
branches of aryas path are the explanation of true paths.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~

As I mentioned earlier, when you come to these kind of classes, at the  very
minimum, you should be able to say individually what  the  37  harmonies  of
enlightenment  are.  When  we  were  looking  at  the  seven   branches   of
enlightenment, what are those seven branches?

With regard to the eight branches of aryas paths, you  should  be  able  say
what they are: correct view, correct thought, correct speech,  correct  aims
of action, correct livelihood, correct  exertion,  correct  mindfulness  and
correct meditative stabilization.

At the very minimum, you should be able to say  what  the  37  harmonies  of
enlightenment are. If you know what they mean, then that is very good.  That
is perfect. That is excellent. But at the minimum, you have to  be  able  to
enumerate them. You must put effort into this.

Remember when we talked earlier about  the  symbolism  that  is  related  to
mindfulness. The point about mindfulness is becoming victorious over  things
that you were not victorious over before. When you  become  victorious,  you
win and you become the conqueror. That is  done  through  mindfulness.  What
was unconquered before, you now conquer with mindfulness.

Mindfulness is very important. You see it everywhere.  Right from  the  very
beginning, you have the close placements of mindfulness. After  that,  again
in the other  categories  such  as  the  five  powers  and  five  strengths,
mindfulness comes up at the end.   Mindfulness  comes  up  among  the  seven
branches of enlightenment. Here in the  eightfold  path  of  the  superiors,
mindfulness is also there. So mindfulness is very important. You  just  have
to work at it.

With regard to the material, at  the  minimum,  you  have  to  memorize  the
words. If you remember them, then the next  day,  you  refresh  your  memory
again and through your own power, you think about them. This is  how  things
stick in your mind, day after day after day.  Because  of  mindfulness,  you
get used to it and it sticks in your mind.

Some people ask me, “Why do I forget things so easily?” The answer  is  very
simple. It is a sign that you are not mindful, that you have not  relied  on
mindfulness and that you have not done your memorization. This is clear.

When you recollect and memorize the material  by  putting  in  effort  every
day, reviewing it over and over again, then there is no way you can  forget.
Because when you review repeatedly and rely on  mindfulness  over  and  over
again, the imprint that is left in your mind is very strong.  Otherwise,  if
you look at the text only once or twice, of course it  slips  away  quickly.
This is evident from our experience. All of us are like that.

In general, with regard to the topics that we have already learnt,  we  have
to review them every now and then so that we  don’t  forget.  Otherwise,  we
won’t remember anything. Whatever has been covered, you have to review  with
mindfulness, i.e., by   recollecting it over and over again.

When you start accumulating your knowledge over  time,  then  your  interest
will come because you see the connection, “Yes, it is like that.”  You  will
be more interested and feel more encouraged. Then you really want to do  it.
This is how you start to be able to learn more. You will  be  able  to  keep
the information in your head. So there is no way  out  other  than  applying
effort.

Like what I have said, if you are coming to  class,  then  you  have  to  do
something. The minimum you have to do is to put in the  effort  to  memorize
the material. I am not talking about their meaning. I am talking  about  the
words themselves. You have to put in effort to memorize the words.

If you don’t do  that,  then  coming  to  class  is  just  that.  Are  there
imprints? Of course, there are imprints. But in order for  the  imprints  to
be strong, you have to work  at  them.  You  really  have  to  remember  the
material. So first, as a minimum, memorize the words.

Khen Rinpoche: Then in the next life,  it  is  much  easier.  If  there  are
strong imprints, then the next life will be easy. You just listen once,  you
will understand. No need to work hard like now.

We will go through the eightfold noble path in the next class.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee and Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
-----------------------
[1] The PSLE or Primary School Leaving Exam is a national exam for all
schoolchildren in Singapore to move from primary school to secondary
school. They sit for these exams when they are 12 years old.

