Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/BP2 M09 L15final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:50.913408
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen  Rinpoche  Geshe  Chonyi  on  The  Eight
Categories and Seventy Topics

Root Text:  The  Eight  Categories  and  Seventy  Topics  by  Jetsün  Chökyi
Gyaltsen, translated by Jampa Gendun. Final draft October 2002, updated  May
2011. © Jampa Gendun & FPMT, Inc.

Lesson                                                                    15
        28 July 2016


Presentation  of  homework  from  Lesson  13.  Review.  37  harmonies   with
enlightenment. Overview. The four close placements of  mindfulness:  Objects
of observation. Manner of meditation. Four characteristics of true  origins.



PRESENTATION OF HOMEWORK FROM LESSON 13

Possibilities between the three knowers
Student 1: The possibilities between the exalted knower of all  aspects  and
the knower of paths. First, something that  is  an  exalted  knower  of  all
aspects but not a knower of paths. This is not possible because  an  exalted
know of all aspects exists in the continuum of a buddha  superior.  As  long
as it is a path in the continuum of a Mahayana superior, that  is  a  knower
of paths.

Khen Rinpoche: What is the example?

Student 1: The wisdom directly realizing emptiness in  the  continuum  of  a
bodhisattva superior.

Khen Rinpoche: First, you give the four possibilities. Then you state  which
one is the first possibility. Then you make it clear, one by one.

Student 1: The first is something that is an exalted knower of  all  aspects
but not a knower of paths.

Khen Rinpoche: Now give the example.

Student 1: This is not possible.

Khen Rinpoche: OK. This is not possible.  Yes, this is correct.

Student 1: Something that is a knower of paths but not an exalted knower  of
all aspects.

Khen Rinpoche: For example?

Student 1: The wisdom directly realizing emptiness in  the  continuum  of  a
bodhisattva superior is a knower of paths. It is not the exalted  knower  of
all aspects because that knower only exists in the  continuum  of  a  buddha
superior.
Khen Rinpoche: Correct.

Student 1: Something that is both an exalted knower of  all  aspects  and  a
knower of paths is the  great  compassion  in  the  continuum  of  a  buddha
superior.

Khen Rinpoche: One example?

Student 1: The great compassion in the continuum of a buddha superior is  an
exalted knower of all aspects because  it  exists  in  the  continuum  of  a
buddha superior. It is a knower of  paths  because  it  is  a  path  in  the
continuum of a Mahayana superior, which includes a buddha.

Khen Rinpoche: Correct.

Student 1: Something that is neither an exalted knower of all aspects nor  a
knower of paths  is  the  wisdom  directly  realizing  selflessness  in  the
continuum of a Hinayanist because it is a path in a continuum of a  Hinayana
superior.

Khen Rinpoche: Correct.

Student 1: These are the three possibilities in this one.

Khen Rinpoche: All of you must also listen.

Student 1: Stating the possibilities between a knower of paths and a  knower
of bases, there are four possibilities. Something that is a knower of  paths
but not a knower of bases:  the  mind  generation  in  the  continuum  of  a
Mahayana superior is a  knower  of  paths  because  it  is  a  path  in  the
continuum of a Mahayana superior.

Khen Rinpoche: For example?

Student 1: The mind generation in the continuum of a Mahayana superior is  a
knower of paths.

Khen Rinpoche: OK.

Student 1: It is not a knower of  bases  because  it  does  not  fulfil  the
definition of a knower of bases.

Khen Rinpoche: OK. Correct.

Student 1: Something that is a knower of bases but not a knower of paths  is
the wisdom directly realizing selflessness of persons in the continuum of  a
Hinayanist. This is because it is a path in the continuum of  a  Hinayanist.
It is not a knower of paths because the knower of  paths  is  a  path  of  a
Mahayana superior.

Khen Rinpoche: OK. Correct.

Student 1: Something that is both a knower of paths and a  knower  of  bases
is the wisdom directly realizing selflessness of persons  in  the  continuum
of a Mahayana superior. It is a knower of paths because it is a path in  the
continuum of a Mahayana superior. It is  a  knower  of  bases  because  that
realization abides in the Hinayana class of realizations.

Khen Rinpoche: OK. Correct.

Student 1: Something that is neither a knower  of  paths  and  a  knower  of
bases: The wisdom directly realizing emptiness  of  true  existence  in  the
continuum of a hearer’s superior does not fulfil the definition of a  knower
of  bases.  A  knower  of  bases  pertains  only  to  the   realization   of
selflessness, not the realization of the emptiness of true  existence.  Even
though he may practise it but that does not fulfil the  definition  required
for knower of bases. Is that correct?

Khen Rinpoche: Which part of the definition is missing here?

Student 1: Actually, both parts are missing.

Khen Rinpoche: How can that be? You said  both  parts.  The  first  part  is
missing? Conjoined with realizing selflessness …

Student 1: Because this is referring to emptiness of true existence.

Khen Rinpoche: I understand but what is missing here?

Student 1: It is not the  exalted  wisdom  in  the  continuum  of  a  hearer
superior. Am I right to say that? What is your question about? I didn’t  get
your question.

Khen  Rinpoche:  My  question  refers  to  the  example  you  gave—realizing
emptiness directly in the hearer’s mind. This  is  not  a  knower  of  bases
because it doesn’t fulfil the definition. What you said is correct. I  agree
with that.

I’m just asking you now that in the definition, there  are  two  parts.  Are
both parts missing or only one part is missing?

Student 1: Both parts are missing.

Khen Rinpoche: My question is how can both parts  be  missing?  Why  is  the
first part missing?

Student 1: Let me tell you the two characteristics:
 •  One  is  the  wisdom  conjoined  with  the  wisdom  directly   realizing
   selflessness. That is one of the characteristics.
 • The second characteristic is that it has to abide in the  lesser  vehicle
   class of realizations.
To me, the answer does not fulfil these two characteristics.

Khen  Rinpoche:  Doesn’t  the  wisdom  directly  realizing  selflessness  of
persons exist in the continuum of a Mahayana superior?

Student 1: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: Isn’t that a knower of bases?

Student 1:  Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: Isn’t it a knower of paths?

Student 1: The wisdom directly realizing selflessness of persons is  in  the
continuum of a Mahayana superior.

Khen Rinpoche: Isn’t that a knower of bases and a knower of paths?

Student 1: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: Is it a knower of paths?

Student 1: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: Isn’t it because it is conjoined with  the  wisdom  realizing
emptiness?

Student 1: No, no, no.

Khen Rinpoche: Isn’t the wisdom directly realizing selflessness  of  persons
in the continuum of a Mahayana superior a knower of bases?

Student 1: Yes.

Khen  Rinpoche:  Therefore,  it  is  conjoined  with  the  wisdom   directly
realizing selflessness of persons, right?

Student 1: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: Isn’t it the case that if it is a  knower  of  bases,  it  is
necessarily conjoined with the wisdom directly  realizing  the  selflessness
of persons?

Student 1: OK. That is one of the characteristics.

Khen Rinpoche: So  it  is  conjoined  with  the  wisdom  directly  realizing
selflessness of persons. Isn’t it also conjoined with  the  wisdom  directly
realizing emptiness?

Student 1: In the continuum of a Mahayana superior.

Khen Rinpoche: Yes.

Student 1: You are tricking me! But  it  says  it  is  the  selflessness  of
persons.

Khen Rinpoche: No. First, you answer this.   Isn’t  it  conjoined  with  the
wisdom directly realizing emptiness?

Student 1: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: So in  the  case  of  a  hearer  superior  who  has  directly
realized emptiness, why isn’t that mind conjoined with the  wisdom  directly
realizing selflessness of persons. Why?

Student 1: In your last lesson, you say they can practise  it  but  it  does
not mean it fulfils the definition. You said they can  practise  it  but  it
does not mean it is a knower of bases.

Khen Rinpoche: I’m not saying that is a knower of bases.  I  am  not  saying
that.

We said that there are two parts to the definition. You said both parts  are
missing. My question is: How can the first part be missing? I’m  not  saying
it is a knower of bases. I’m not saying that. I said that what you  said  is
correct.

Student 1: So my answer is correct, only that I gave the wrong explanation.

Khen Rinpoche: Your answer is correct. You said it  is  because  it  doesn’t
fulfil the definition of a knower of bases. That is correct.

I’m asking you which part of the definition is missing. You said both  parts
are missing. Then I said, how come the first part is missing.

Student 1: Because when  I  compare  selflessness  of  true  existence  with
selflessness of persons, they are not the same. The exalted  wisdom  in  the
Hinayana superior realizing  emptiness  of  true  existence,  is  that  same
exalted wisdom conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing selflessness?

Ven. Gyurme: The question is quite simple. Why is it not conjoined with  the
wisdom directly realizing selflessness of persons?

Khen Rinpoche: Yes, that is the question.

Student 1: OK. Then I’m wrong. This means the  first  part  of  not  abiding
(with a lesser vehicle class of realisations) is wrong  but  conjoined  with
the wisdom directly realizing selflessness is  correct.  Is  that  what  you
mean?

Khen Rinpoche: Yes. You almost had 100 marks.  Because  of  your  answer,  1
mark is gone. So 99 marks.

Student 1: Never mind. I have room for improvement. It is good. I never  had
99 marks in my life.

Khen Rinpoche: Those who are doing the homework must prepare and be able  to
come up and share. Make it simple and share. If nobody  stands  up,  then  I
will have to ask you to come forward. It is best if  you  can  come  forward
voluntarily. That is the best thing to do.

Student 1: This pertains to Lesson 13. The question is: What is the  measure
of abiding within the Hinayana class of realizations?

You gave the answer: If that exalted wisdom is taken by a Hinayanist as  his
main object of cultivation with a similar observed object and aspect of  it,
then that makes that mind a mind that abides within the  Hinayana  class  of
realizations.

My understanding of the definition was very clear  in  Lesson  12.  It  said
that the wisdom directly  realizing  selflessness  in  the  continuum  of  a
Mahayana superior has a similar observed object and aspect to  that  of  the
main object of cultivation of the Hinayana superior.

But here it is the other way round. Here, it says that the wisdom  taken  by
the Hinayanist as his main object of cultivation  with  a  similar  observed
object and aspect of it. So my  qualm  is:  With  whom  does  he  have  this
similar observed object and  aspect  of  it?   Who  are  we  comparing  this
similar aspect and observed object with?

Khen Rinpoche: I think they both mean the same thing but I  don’t  know  how
the English works. The first one that you read out is  correct.  The  second
one, I don’t know how the English phrasing goes.

For example, the wisdom directly realizing selflessness in the continuum  of
a hearer superior is a realization  abiding  within  a  lesser  vehicle  (or
Hinayana) class of realizations.

It is not a Hinayana path  just  because  it  is  a  path  in  the  hearer’s
continuum.

Student 1: Yes.

Khen  Rinpoche:  So  the  wisdom  directly  realizing  selflessness  in  the
continuum of a hearer superior  is  a  Hinayana  path  because  that  wisdom
abides within the Hinayana class of realizations.

Student 1: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: For  example,  isn’t  there  the  wisdom  directly  realizing
selflessness of persons in the continuum of a bodhisattva superior?

Student 1: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: What is the object of observation of this mind? Isn’t it  the
person?

Student 1: Yes. The self-sufficient, substantially …

Ven Gyurme: No. The person.

Student 1: Person only?

Khen Rinpoche: The observed object is a person. What is the aspect  of  this
wisdom? The selflessness of a person is the aspect of this person.

Student 1: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: This is similar to what a  Hinayana  superior  realizes.  For
example, when a hearer realizes the  selflessness  of  persons,  the  hearer
superior focusses on the observed object, which is the person. What  is  the
aspect of this realization? It is the selflessness of persons.

So in this case, for the wisdom directly realizing selflessness  of  persons
in the continuum of a bodhisattva  superior,  this  particular  mind  has  a
similar observed object and a similar aspect to the hearer superior.

The  selflessness  of  persons  is  the  main  object  of  meditation  of  a
Hinayanist.

Student 1: When you say that the wisdom directly realizing  selflessness  in
the continuum of a Mahayana superior  has  a  similar  observed  object  and
aspect  to  the  wisdom  directly  realizing  selflessness  of  a   Hinayana
superior, I’m very clear with that explanation.

Maybe, I don’t quite understand the English. I was a bit confused about  the
main object of cultivation with the similar observed object and  aspect.  My
question is: Who are you comparing this similar observed object  and  aspect
with? Are you comparing them with a bodhisattva? Because you said  that  the
Hinayanist’s main object of cultivation has a similar  observed  object  and
aspect.

Maybe my English is not good enough to understand this. I’m a  bit  confused
with the way it  is  phrased.  The  first  one  is  very  clear  and  I  can
understand straight away but this one boggles my mind. This is the reason  I
come here to ask. If you say they are the same, I have to accept  that  they
are the same.

Khen Rinpoche: Aren’t you asking about the Hinayanist?

Student 1: Because here, we are only talking about the  Hinayanist,  but  it
doesn’t say comparing with whom. It just says, the exalted wisdom  taken  by
the Hinayanist as his main object of cultivation  with  a  similar  observed
object and aspect of it. Then that is called  abiding  within  the  Hinayana
class of realizations. Never mind.  I  will  go  back  and  think  about  it
because I was a bit confused with this whole phrase. Thank you.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~
REVIEW

We have started the complete aspects application in the last lesson.  Simply
speaking, any path in the continuum of a bodhisattva is a  complete  aspects
application.

In general, a knower-aspect of the antidote class is a path that is able  to
quell its  discordant  class.  In  particular,  in  the  discussion  of  the
complete aspects application, when we talk about the  knower-aspect  of  the
antidote class, we are talking  about  the  knower-aspect  of  the  antidote
class in the continua of bodhisattvas.

In Chapter 4 of the Ornament of Clear Realization,  when  the  knower-aspect
of the antidote class  indicated  in  this  context  is  discussed,  we  are
talking primarily about:
1. the knower-aspect that is a knower of bases
2. the knower-aspect that is a knower of paths
3. the knower-aspect that is an exalted knower of all aspects

In general, when you count  the  number  of  object  aspects  of  the  three
knowers, there are
173 object aspects. Because there are 173 object  aspects,  then  there  are
173 knower-aspects  (or  subject-aspects)  that  meditate  on  those  object
aspects.

How is that meditation done? The 173  knower-aspects  meditate  on  the  173
object aspects through removing all  superimpositions  with  regard  to  the
object aspects. This is why the knower-aspect of the antidote class is  able
to quell its discordant class by  removing  all  the  superimpositions  with
regard to the object that one  is  meditating  on.  Likewise,  one  is  also
cultivating or  meditating  on  the  knower-aspects,  not  just  the  object
aspects.

Of the 173 aspects of the three exalted knowers, 110 of them pertain to  the
exalted knower of all aspects. Of these 110 aspects, there are:
 • 37 aspects of an exalted knower of  all  aspects  concordant  with  those
   existing in the hearers
 • 34 aspects of an exalted knower of  all  aspects  concordant  with  those
   existing in the bodhisattvas
 • 39 uncommon aspects of an exalted knower of all aspects

37 HARMONIES WITH ENLIGHTENMENT

Of the 110 aspects of an exalted knower of aspects, what are the 37  aspects
of an exalted knower of  all  aspects  concordant  with  those  existing  in
hearers? These 37 are called the 37 aspects in general or the  37  harmonies
with enlightenment.  They are:
 • the four close placements of mindfulness
 • the four correct abandonings
 • the four legs of magical emanation
 • the five powers
 • the five strengths
 • the seven branches of enlightenment
 • the eight branches of arya paths.

Overview
The first group of the 37 harmonies with enlightenment is  called  the  four
close placements of mindfulness. They are:
1. the close placement of mindfulness on the body
2. the close placement of mindfulness on feelings
3. the close placement of mindfulness on the mind
4. the close placement of mindfulness on phenomena
Keep in mind that our discussion of  the  37  harmonies  with  enlightenment
here is in the context of somebody who has already entered the  path.  These
37 harmonies of enlightenment are all exalted knowers of  somebody  who  has
entered the path.

 • If we place these 37 harmonies with  enlightenment  in  relation  to  the
   paths where they are primarily cultivated,  from  that  perspective,  the
   four close placements of mindfulness  are  cultivated  primarily  at  the
   small level of the path of accumulation.
 • The four correct abandonings are cultivated at the middling level of  the
   path of accumulation.
 • The four legs of magical emanation are cultivated primarily at the  great
   level of the path of accumulation.
 • The five powers are cultivated primarily at the heat level and  the  peak
   level of the path of preparation.
 • The five strengths are cultivated primarily at the forbearance level  and
   the supreme mundane quality level of the path of preparation.
 • With regard to the seven branches of enlightenment, if you look  at  them
   from the perspective of Maitreya’s Ornament of the  Mahayana  Sutras  and
   Differentiating the Middle from the Extremes, they are cultivated on  the
   path of seeing.
 • Finally, the eight branches of the arya paths are cultivated on the  path
   of meditation.

These  37  aspects  are  called  the  37   harmonies   with   enlightenment,
enlightenment here being posited as the  final  or  ultimate  enlightenment,
the state of buddhahood. These 37 aspects are harmonious,  i.e.,  favourable
or concordant causes, with actualising full enlightenment.

THE FOUR CLOSE PLACEMENTS OF MINDFULNESS

Objects of observation
~ The body
The objects of observation of the close  placement  of  mindfulness  on  the
body are the three bodies:
1. the outer body
2. the inner body
3. the body that is both outer and inner

The outer body here refers to form—all forms that are not conjoined with  or
included in the continuum of a person. The  word  ‘body’  is  used  but  the
outer body here refers to the outer body of  forms.  So  don’t  take  ‘body’
here to mean the physical body that we  have.  In  this  context,  the  word
‘body’ includes all forms.

External forms are the forms that are not conjoined with  consciousness  and
consist of five things: visible form, sound, odour (or  smells),  taste  and
objects of touch. These five forms are  what  we  call  the  outer  body  of
forms.

Next is the inner body. When we studied  Mind  and  Awareness,  for  an  eye
consciousness to be generated, there  are  three  conditions  that  must  be
present, one of which is the uncommon  empowering  condition.  The  uncommon
empowering condition for the generation of an eye consciousness is  the  eye
sense power. The uncommon empowering condition for the generation of an  ear
consciousness is the ear sense power and so forth. These  sense  powers  are
the inner bodies. Therefore, there are the inner bodies of  the  five  sense
powers.

In  order  for  the  eye  consciousness  apprehending  visible  form  to  be
generated, we need three conditions. There are implications to this. We  are
talking about causality  here  because  an  eye  consciousness  apprehending
visible form does  not  arise  from  nothing.  Three  conditions  must  come
together:
1. The observed object condition, an external visible form.
2. The uncommon empowering condition, the eye sense power.
3.  The  immediately  preceding  condition,  a  consciousness  that   exists
   immediately  preceding  the   generation   of   the   eye   consciousness
   apprehending form.

An eye consciousness apprehending visible form can only  be  generated  when
there is a visible form. If we think about this a little bit more,  when  an
eye consciousness apprehending form is generated, that eye consciousness  is
generated into the aspect of form so that consciousness is aspected.

 • When an eye consciousness apprehending  form  is  generated,  why  is  it
   generated into the aspect of form? For example, if it is apprehending the
   colour blue, it is generated into the aspect of blue. What causes this to
   happen? Because the observed object condition is a visible form, as such,
   when an eye consciousness apprehending a visible form is generated, it is
   generated into the aspect of that visible form,  i.e.,  whatever  visible
   form it is apprehending.
 • The  eye  consciousness  can  only  apprehend  visible  form.  It  cannot
   apprehend sound, taste, objects of touch and so forth. Why?  Because  its
   uncommon empowering condition, the eye  sense  power,  only  enables  the
   seeing of form. The eye  sense  power  does  not  have  the  capacity  or
   potential to enable one to smell, taste, touch and so forth.
 • When the eye consciousness apprehending form is generated, it is able  to
   apprehend its object, a visible form clearly. There is  this  element  of
   clarity and luminosity, a knowing awareness. Why is the eye consciousness
   apprehending form able to apprehend or be aware of its object, form? This
   is because of  its  immediately  preceding  condition.  Because  the  eye
   consciousness apprehending form is the continuation of a former moment of
   consciousness that is essentially clear and knowing, therefore,  the  eye
   consciousness apprehending form is clear  and  knowing  and  is  able  to
   cognize clearly or know its object.  Whereas  a  table  or  chair,  these
   external forms, cannot know anything. They  are  not  clear  and  knowing
   because the cause that preceded their existence is not clear and knowing.

We are not just talking about these three conditions. You  may  be  able  to
state what they are but the point  is,  what  are  their  implications.  You
really have to think about this. Here, we are using an eye consciousness  as
an example. Even for the generation of  one  moment  of  eye  consciousness,
many causes and conditions must come together.

I may ask you a simple question, “Why is  it  that  your  eye  consciousness
cannot hear or see sound?” Somebody may say to you, “Your eye  consciousness
is clear and knowing, yet you cannot see or hear sound? Why? So  it  is  not
clear and it doesn’t know.”

Khen Rinpoche: What will be your answer if somebody were to  ask  you  that?
Do you have any reason to explain this?

(Student’s response is inaudible).

The eye sense power that  is  the  uncommon  empowering  condition  for  the
generation of the eye consciousness apprehending form  is  the  inner  body.
The other five sense powers are called the inner bodies of  the  five  sense
powers.

The third object of observation is the body that is both  outer  and  inner.
For example, the form that serves as the basis of the  sense  power  is  the
sense organ itself. I guess it is called inner because if we compare  it  to
the external form that is not conjoined with a continuum and compare  it  to
that, it is inner.

Why is it called outer? Because in relation to the  inner  body,  the  sense
powers that are much subtler, the outer are the  forms  that  serve  as  the
bases of the sense powers. In  relation  to  them,  they  are  called  outer
because they are coarser.

To keep it simple, you can say that there are just  two  bodies,  the  outer
body and the inner body:
1. The body that is conjoined with a consciousness is the inner body.
2. The body that is not conjoined with a consciousness is the outer body.

All forms  are  the  objects  of  observation  of  the  close  placement  of
mindfulness of the body.

~ Feelings
There are three types of feelings:
1. pleasant feelings
2. unpleasant feelings
3. neutral feelings
These three feelings—pleasant, unpleasant and  neutral—are  the  objects  of
observation of the close placement of mindfulness on feelings.

~ The mind
When the mind is divided, there are:
1. the main mind (or primary consciousness)
2. mental factors
Of the two, mind here refers to the primary consciousness.

~ Phenomena
Then there is the close placement of mindfulness on phenomena. What are  its
objects of observation? Phenomena here refer to all mental  factors,  except
feeling. There are 51  mental  factors.  Excluding  feeling,  there  are  50
mental factors that come under phenomena in this context.
Besides all  the  mental  factors  that  are  not  feelings,  non-associated
compositional factors are also classified under phenomena. They include  all
unproduced or non-composite phenomena, i.e., all permanent phenomena.

Just as it is said that all existents are objects  of  observation  for  the
cultivation of calm abiding,  likewise,  all  objects  are  the  objects  of
observation for the close placement of mindfulness on phenomena.

Manner of meditation
~ The body
How does one cultivate the close placement of mindfulness on the body?  This
is done by investigating  both  the  general  characteristics  and  specific
characteristics of the body.

According to  the  Abhidharmakosha,  the  Treasury  of  Knowledge,  when  we
cultivate the close placement of mindfulness on the body, we  meditate  with
the body as its basis and focus on its impermanence, its  suffering  nature,
its being empty and selfless. These four—impermanence, suffering, empty  and
selfless—are  the  general  characteristics  of  the  body.  These   general
characteristics can apply to many other things.

There are also specific characteristics of the body.

With regard to the close placement of mindfulness on feelings, the  specific
characteristic of feelings is the entity  of  experience.  If  that  is  the
specific  characteristic  of   feelings,   what   then   is   the   specific
characteristic of the body? The text says the specific  characteristic  with
regard to the body is the elements of the body and what arises from them.

The objects of observation of the close  placement  of  mindfulness  on  the
body are the three types of bodies that include  the  bodies  that  are  not
conjoined with the consciousness. At the time  of  meditation,  the  primary
object of observation is our own contaminated body that  is  the  result  of
karma and afflictions and which is true suffering.

What is the cause of this contaminated body? Its cause is true origins.

We meditate on  the  four  close  placements  of  mindfulness  in  order  to
overcome the four erroneous conceptions or the four wrong views:
1. conceiving that which is impure to be pure
2. conceiving that which is suffering to be bliss or pleasure
3. conceiving that which is impermanent to be permanent
4. conceiving that which is selfless to be self

In the close placement of mindfulness on the body,  primarily,  we  meditate
on the body being impure. This is to counter  the  erroneous  conception  of
the body as pure.

When we cultivate the close placement of mindfulness on feelings,  primarily
we focus on pleasurable feelings and meditate that they are  in  the  nature
of suffering. This is to overcome the erroneous  conception  that  conceives
of that which is in the nature  of  suffering  to  be  happiness.  The  main
practice here is to continually  realize  and  remember  that  the  pleasant
feelings we experience are actually in the nature of suffering.

The main focus here for the close placement of mindfulness  on  feelings  is
not just feelings per se but primarily  the  feeling  of  pleasure  that  is
actually contaminated pleasure. Why? Because if we look  at  our  life  now,
day in and day out, we are looking for happiness. What we  are  looking  for
is the next experience of pleasure that is actually  contaminated  pleasure.
This is what we are looking for every day. A moment  of  pleasure  finishes.
Then we look for the next moment or  the  next  experience  of  contaminated
pleasure. We work so hard, day and night, for that purpose. In the  process,
we also accumulate a lot of karma in order to experience  such  contaminated
pleasure. It is in the nature of  suffering  but  we  don’t  see  it  to  be
suffering at all. Instinctively, we see it  as  something  very  pleasurable
that we must have.

By meditating on the close placement of mindfulness on feelings, we need  to
come to realize for ourselves  that  these  contaminated  pleasant  feelings
that we seek to acquire every day are in fact the source of suffering.

Four characteristics of true origins
Perhaps it may be useful to know  what  the  four  characteristics  of  true
origins are. Each of the four noble truths  has  four  characteristics.  Why
are there these 16 characteristics of the four noble truths?  Because  these
are the 16 erroneous conceptions that need to be eradicated.

When we talk about true  origins,  we  are  talking  about  ultimately,  the
causes and conditions that bring about our suffering. Primarily, it  is  our
contaminated aggregates, body and mind,  through  which  we  experience  the
suffering of birth, aging, sickness and death.

The cause of the contaminated aggregates is true origins. If  you  look  for
the ultimate root cause, it is ignorance. This is extremely important.  Even
if you didn’t understand what was said earlier, this is something  you  must
get. We are talking about the four characteristics of  true  origins,  which
are:
1. Cause
2. Origin
3. Strong production
4. Condition

1. Cause
How do these four characteristics come about?  Our  contaminated  aggregates
are the result of true origins, karma  and  afflictions.  Ignorance  is  the
main root cause of our contaminated existence. The root cause is how we  get
into the true origins so the first characteristic is the cause.  ‘Cause’  in
this context means the  root  cause  that  brought  about  our  contaminated
existence.


2. Origin
The second characteristic of true origins is origin. In Tibetan, it  is  kun
jung, which means literally the origin or the  source  of  all  things.  The
root cause is ignorance. Based on that, we accumulate  karma  and  when  the
karma ripens, it brings about different  experiences.  All  our  experiences
come from karma. As such, it is the origin of all our  experiences.  Due  to
ignorance, we accumulate karma. Due  to  karma,  we  are  thrown  into  this
contaminated body or contaminated appropriated aggregates.

Origin here refers primarily to karma. Karma here refers to  throwing  karma
or projecting karma because this projecting  karma  projects  all  kinds  of
bodies and it projects all the different kinds of suffering,  starting  with
birth, aging, sickness and death.

3. Condition
The  third  characteristic  of  true  origins  is  condition.  What  is  the
condition for acquiring a contaminated appropriated aggregate? You have  the
causes, the root cause being the ignorance that leads  to  the  accumulation
of projecting karma. But just having  accumulated  the  karma  doesn’t  mean
that the contaminated appropriated aggregates will come  into  being.  Other
conditions must be present.

The condition here refers primarily to the links of craving and grasping  of
the twelve links of dependent origination. It is craving and  grasping  that
nourish the seed of the projecting karma,  giving  it  the  power  to  issue
forth this contaminated appropriated aggregates. The seed of the  projecting
karma is nourished to the point of no return, i.e., the seed  is  definitely
going to issue forth its effect. It is definitely going to project the  next
contaminated body. This is the tenth link of the twelve links  of  dependent
origination, the link of potential existence.

4. Strong production
This is why the fourth characteristic of true origins is strong  production.
This means that it is the point of no return. The result is going  to  come.


When we reflect on the four characteristics of true  origins—cause,  origin,
condition and strong production—we will get a deeper understanding. We  have
to reflect on the twelve links of dependent origination.

Why did we start this discussion? Remember, we were talking about the  close
placement of mindfulness on feelings and primarily,  we  are  meditating  on
how all our experiences of pleasure are in the nature of suffering. What  is
the relationship between that and what we have just discussed? Of  the  four
characteristics of true origins, the third  is  condition.  Without  craving
and grasping,  the  seed  of  the  projecting  karma  cannot  be  nourished.
Therefore, it will not be able to issue forth  its  effect,  a  contaminated
body.

Where does craving come from? It arises in dependence upon feelings and,  in
particular, pleasant feelings. When we have  pleasant  feelings,  definitely
we will get attached to them and cannot bear to be parted  from  them.  When
we get attached in this way, craving arises. Grasping arises  from  craving.
Now you know where that will lead to.

When we are cultivating the close  placement  of  mindfulness  on  feelings,
among   the   three   types    of    feelings—pleasant,    unpleasant    and
neutral—primarily, we focus on  the  pleasant  feelings.  By  realizing  and
remembering that they are in the nature of suffering, then we  are  able  to
overcome the erroneous conception that conceives that which is suffering  to
be happiness.

All our experiences of pleasant feelings are in  the  nature  of  suffering.
What about the things that we use in our  daily  lives?  Our  phone,  house,
furniture, car, food, clothes and so forth? Are they true suffering or  not?
You have to think. Are they true suffering or not?

Khen Rinpoche: Give me your answer in the next lesson. Your homework  is  to
think about this question. If you say yes, you must have a  reason.  If  you
say no, you must also have reason. You can  use  any  tenets.  There  is  no
difference.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.

