Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/BP2 M09 L21Final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:50.831809
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen  Rinpoche  Geshe  Chonyi  on  The  Eight
Categories and Seventy Topics

Root Text:  The  Eight  Categories  and  Seventy  Topics  by  Jetsün  Chökyi
Gyaltsen, translated by Jampa Gendun. Final draft October 2002, updated  May
2011. © Jampa Gendun & FPMT, Inc.

Lesson 21                                                                 23
August 2016


Question & answer session. Is the desire realm support  that  newly  attains
the path of seeing true suffering. Discussion on  the  mental  body  of  the
bodhisattvas.  How  bodhisattvas  take  rebirth.  Discussion  on  generating
renunciation. Accumulation of uncontaminated karma. What determines  whether
one is of definite Mahayana lineage.


QUESTION & ANSWER SESSION

Is the desire realm support that newly  attains  the  path  of  seeing  true
suffering?
Question: It was mentioned that  the  bodhisattva  moves  from  the  supreme
mundane qualities level on the path of preparation to  the  path  of  seeing
within one meditative equipoise using the same desire realm support.

How can this bodhisattva on the path of preparation newly  attain  the  path
of seeing with a desire realm support that is true suffering  due  to  karma
and delusions? Or is the new attainment of the path  of  seeing  necessarily
done with a desire realm support that is due to the power  of  prayers?  Can
it be both?

When he newly attains the path of seeing, he is a superior and has a  mental
body. There seems to be some contradiction  there.  True  suffering  becomes
aggregates that are no longer true suffering as true suffering  becomes  the
mental body. Therefore, I am wondering if this is done based  on  a  support
that is true suffering or is it necessarily  attained  based  on  a  support
that is due to the power of prayers?

Answer: If  you  remember,  the  proponents  of  the  Hinayana  tenets,  the
Vaibashikas,  (the proponents of the  Great  Exposition  School,  the  GES),
assert that the path of preparation all the way  to  the  path  of  no-more-
learning, i.e., enlightenment, is done in one  sitting.  As  such,  for  the
proponents of the GES, a buddha’s body is not the  Buddha  Jewel.  They  are
like you in that they cannot fathom how something that is true suffering  be
otherwise.

Khen Rinpoche: So you still belong to the Vabaishika tenet system. You  have
to upgrade. Don’t live there forever.

When you think about it, you see that the body of a hearer on  the  hearer’s
path of accumulation, the hearer’s path of preparation,  the  hearer’s  path
of seeing and the hearer’s path of meditation is true suffering.

From one of our earlier discussions,  among  the  many  different  kinds  of
hearers on the hearer’s path of meditation, there are some hearer  superiors
who still have to take rebirth in cyclic existence seven more  times.  These
hearer superiors have seen the truth  directly  and  they  no  longer  newly
accumulate projecting karma but nevertheless, they still have  the  imprints
of the karma they have accumulated in the past.  As  such,  there  are  some
hearers on the hearer’s path of meditation who still take rebirth in  cyclic
existence under the power of karma and afflictions.

If you think about it, you can say that the  physical  body  of  the  hearer
superiors on the path of meditation is necessarily  true  suffering  because
it is a product of karma and afflictions.

What do you think? Do you think that it is alright to say that the  physical
body of a hearer superior who is on the path of meditation necessarily  true
suffering? I think perhaps it is alright to say that it is necessarily  true
suffering.

These hearer superiors on the path of meditation then proceed  to  actualize
the hearer’s path of no-more-learning and become  foe  destroyers  on  their
current support, i.e., the body they have while on the path  of  meditation.
On the basis of  that  support,  they  achieve  liberation  and  become  foe
destroyers.

If you look at the assertions of the  tenets  of  the  Autonomy  Middle  Way
School and below, in terms of the order of  actualizing  the  two  different
kind of nirvana, first, the nirvana with remainder is  actualized.  This  is
then followed by the nirvana without  remainder.  So  going  by  the  shared
assertions  of  these  Buddhist  tenets,  nirvana  with  remainder  is  true
suffering.

The hearer superior on the hearer’s path  of  meditation  becomes  an  arhat
with the the physical support that he has, which is true suffering. When  he
actualizes full nirvana, he actualizes nirvana with remainder. Why  is  this
achievement called nirvana with remainder although this arhat does not  have
any  more  afflictions  in  his  continuum,  i.e.,  he  has   achieved   the
abandonment of the afflictions? This  is  because  he  still  possesses  the
aggregates that are  true  suffering.  As  such,  something  is  still  left
behind.

If you are asked, “Do arhats who have achieved the  nirvana  with  remainder
possess true suffering?” you have to say, “Yes.”

Do they possess true origins?  You will probably  have  to  say,  “Yes,”  as
well.

When  this  arhat  achieves  the  nirvana  without  remainder,  then  he  is
separated from the aggregates that are true suffering. As such, it  is  said
that he achieves the nirvana without remainder.

One can actualize the results of the hearer foe destroyers on the  basis  of
a desire realm support, a form realm support and a formless  realm  support.
As such, these three  realms  are  supports  for  actualizing  the  hearer’s
enlightenment.

One achieves the hearer arhatship on the basis of the support he  had  while
he was on the hearer’s path of meditation. As such, when this  hearer  arhat
achieves the nirvana with remainder,  his  aggregates  are  true  suffering.
Having said that, it is also mentioned very clearly in  the  teachings  that
the aggregates of these arhats are not samsara. The support  of  the  hearer
superiors on the hearer’s path of meditation is true  suffering  and  it  is
samsara. But the support of the hearer arhat that has achieved  the  nirvana
of remainder is true suffering but it is not samsara.

Then this question will arise, “Why are the aggregates of the  hearer  arhat
who  has  achieved  the  nirvana  with  remainder  true  suffering  but  not
samsara?”

In general, what is samsara? The factor of having to move from life to  life
under the power of karma and afflictions is posited as cyclic  existence  or
samsara.

The hearer superior on the hearer’s path of meditation still has  karma  and
afflictions in his mental continuum because they have yet to  be  abandoned.
As such, he possesses the potential in his continuum to connect  to  another
rebirth and another existence. As such, his aggregates, the support  of  the
hearer superior on the hearer’s path of meditation  is  samsara  and  it  is
true suffering.

Obviously, a hearer arhat must be someone who  has  liberated  himself  from
cyclic existence. Otherwise, how is  he  going  to  say,  “I  have  achieved
liberation!” They have achieved liberation and have  freed  themselves  from
samsara. Why? Because they no longer possess the potential  in  their  mind,
the cause to take  another  rebirth  in  cyclic  existence  with  a  set  of
aggregates that are due to karma and afflictions.

But we said that these arhats  who  have  achieved  nirvana  with  remainder
possess true suffering and  true  origins.  When  we  are  talk  about  true
origins, generally, true origins means the true origins that  is  karma  and
the true origins that are afflictions.
 • Do the arhats who have achieved nirvana with remainder have true  origins
   that is karma? The answer is, no.
 • Do they have true origins that are afflictions? The  answer  to  that  is
   also, no.

Then what are the true origins that are possessed by an hearer arhat?

Upon achieving the nirvana without remainder, they take on a  body  that  is
in the nature of mind, i.e., literally, it has a mental  nature.  In  short,
we say it is a mental body. It is said that they also possess  the  capacity
to emanate.

Discussion on the mental body of the bodhisattvas
As for the bodhisattva on the supreme mundane qualities (SMQ) level  on  the
path of preparation, one achieves the path of seeing in one  sitting.   When
we say, in one sitting, we mean in one body. In this case, the body  of  the
bodhisattva on the SMQ level of the path of preparation is  true  suffering.
Since the path of seeing is achieved in one sitting, the path of  seeing  is
achieved on the basis of that support.

For someone who is of definite Mahayana lineage, his body on the  SMQ  level
on the path of preparation is necessarily true suffering. On  the  basis  of
that support, he moves on to the path of seeing. When the path of seeing  is
achieved, it is said that that body transforms  into  a  mental  body.  Upon
achieving the path of seeing, the suffering of birth,  aging,  sickness  and
death are abandoned. We are talking about bodhisattvas here.

In terms of mind generation, it can be classified into four divisions.
 • The mind generation on the Mahayana path of accumulation and the Mahayana
   path of preparation is the mind generation of belief or aspiration.
 • When the path  of  seeing  is  achieved,  the  mind  generation  of  that
   bodhisattva is called the mind generation of pure resolve.

When one achieves the Mahayana path of  seeing,  the  bodhisattva  sees  the
truth directly, i.e., he realizes emptiness directly.

When is the hearer’s path of seeing  achieved?  It  is  also  achieved  when
emptiness is realized directly. The manner of seeing the  emptiness  on  the
hearer superior’s path of seeing and  the  bodhisattva  superior’s  path  of
seeing are the same, but there is a huge difference in the  mind  that  sees
emptiness directly. In terms of the quality of the  mind,  those  minds  are
very different.

The difference comes because the bodhisattva superior’s  direct  realization
of emptiness on  the  path  of  seeing  initially  is  accompanied  by  mind
generation.  When  the  Mahayana  path  of  seeing  is  achieved,  his  mind
generation becomes even more exalted  than  before.  Because  of  this  mind
generation accompanying his direct perception of emptiness, the  quality  of
his mind realizing emptiness directly  surpasses  the  mind  of  the  hearer
superior that realizes emptiness directly.

When the bodhisattva achieves the path of seeing for the first time,  it  is
said that this bodhisattva who has just newly seen  emptiness  directly  far
outshines the foe destroyers. Mind you,  the  foe  destroyers  have  already
abandoned the afflictive obscurations, i.e., all the afflictions  have  been
abandoned  together  with  their  seeds.  This  is  not  the  case  for  the
bodhisattva superior who is on  the  path  of  seeing.  But  even  so,  this
bodhisattva far outshines the arhat.

This example is given: no matter how great a minister may be, when  you  put
the minister besides the king, the king always surpasses and  outshines  the
minister simply by dint of the fact that he is the king in  the  sense  that
he is of royal birth.

When the bodhisattva newly achieves the Mahayana path  of  seeing,  he  sees
emptiness directly for the first time. Because of this direct perception  of
emptiness, he also achieves an elevated state of mind generation.  His  mind
generation becomes the mind generation of pure resolve.

Why does his mind generation become more powerful? This is  because  of  his
direct perception of the ultimate nature of reality on the path  of  seeing.
It is said that the bodhisattva superior on the path of seeing achieves  the
mental body as well.

Can we draw a connection between achieving this special mind generation  and
taking on the mental body? I am not sure. Is there a connection? Can we  say
that, the bodhisattva has a mental body and it is not true suffering due  to
his mind generation?
It is said that once one has achieved the Mahayana Path of Seeing, one  will
never ever end up as a senior citizen! So, if  one  doesn’t  want  to  be  a
senior citizen, then one has to achieve the Mahayana path of seeing.


The inconceivable qualities of the Mahayana grounds are said to be  achieved
starting from the Mahayana path of seeing. They go all the  way  up  to  the
tenth ground. It is  very  difficult  to  believe  that  these  bodhisattvas
possess such qualities. They just cannot fit our mind.

For example, on the first ground, the bodhisattvas  can  emanate  a  hundred
bodies; on the second ground, a thousand bodies;  on  the  third  ground,  a
hundred thousand bodies and so forth.

The ten perfections relate to the achievement  by  the  bodhisattva  of  the
surpassing practice of the  different  perfections,  according  to  the  ten
grounds.   Starting  with  the  perfection  of  generosity,  the  surpassing
practice of the perfection of generosity only starts on  the  first  ground,
not before that. It is said that the bodhisattvas on the  first  ground  are
able to give away their own bodies without any difficulty. To  them,  it  is
as easy as giving away a plate of vegetables. These bodhisattvas  will  give
away without any difficulty or pain any body parts asked  for  such  as  the
head, the hand, the leg and so forth.

Prior to the Mahayana path of seeing, a bodhisattva does not have this  kind
of courage or determination. But once the bodhisattva achieves the  Mahayana
path of seeing and enters the first  ground,  with  his  extraordinary  mind
generation, he is able to give in this way. Because the quality of his  mind
is so different, he achieves this surpassing practice of the  perfection  of
generosity where there is no difficulty whatsoever in giving away his  body.
At this stage, his body has already transformed into a mental body.

I would think that the reason the bodhisattva support changes into a  mental
body is because of the extraordinary mind generation that is  attained  when
the path of seeing is actualized. This is what I think but I am not sure.

Generally, the question will arise: What happened to the  body?  What  makes
it change and become a mental body? This is very  difficult  to  explain.  I
guess there is no real explanation.

But what if we were to look at this from the  perspective  of  tantra?  From
the perspective of highest yoga tantra, one  can  achieve  enlightenment  in
one lifetime in one body. So when you achieve enlightenment in one  lifetime
in one body, is that body true suffering or not?

If you achieve enlightenment in one lifetime in one  body  by  depending  on
highest yoga tantra,  then  if  we  were  to  say  that  the  body  is  true
suffering, then a buddha’s body is true suffering!

Student 2: You have mentioned before that you achieve the  mental  body  due
to the level of predispositions of ignorance and uncontaminated karma.

Khen Rinpoche: I think we have talked about  this  when  we  studied  buddha
nature, the Uttaratantra (the Sublime Continuum). The usual presentation  of
the twelve links of dependent origination is  according  to  the  thoroughly
afflicted class of phenomena. But there is also a  subtle  twelve  links  of
dependent origination that is included in the knowledge obscurations.

If you look at the presentation of the  Sublime  Continuum,  the  discussion
about the mental body that arises from the level of the  predispositions  of
ignorance and uncontaminated karma is in the context of  the  discussion  of
the three pure grounds. As such, since that discussion  is  related  to  the
three pure grounds, it is also saying that  it  doesn’t  happen  before  the
three pure grounds.

But it is also said in many texts that upon achieving the Mahayana  path  of
seeing, the bodhisattva takes on a mental body. That  begets  the  question,
“What do you posit as the substantial cause of  the  mental  body  that  the
bodhisattva acquires on the path of seeing?” I believed I have settled  this
issue as I already gave you my opinion.

What are you going to say about the substantial cause  of  the  mental  body
that is acquired on the Mahayana path of seeing?

How bodhisattvas take rebirth
Question:  Bodhisattvas  on  the  seven  impure  grounds  don’t  have   true
suffering, do not take rebirth due to karma and afflictions, yet  they  have
not abandoned the afflictive obscurations. If the  explanation  for  samsara
is the factor of taking rebirth due to  karma  and  afflictions,  where  are
these bodhisattvas? They are neither in samsara nor in nirvana.

Answer: Somewhere in between.

Student 3: So there is a location that is neither samsara nor nirvana?  That
is quite cool. You mean that is the answer?

Khen Rinpoche: Why not?

The bodhisattva superiors  take  rebirth  in  samsara  to  benefit  sentient
beings. That is clear. But they  do  not  take  rebirth  due  to  karma  and
afflictions. Then how do they take rebirth?  They  have  the  wish  to  take
rebirth intentionally. It is said that the bodhisattva  superiors  can  take
rebirth anywhere in samsara according to their wish. As long as  they  think
they can help someone, they  will  take  rebirth  there.  It  is  said  that
bodhisattvas can take all kinds of rebirths such as a bird,  an  animal  and
so forth.  There are many accounts of how the Buddha in his past life  as  a
bodhisattva took rebirth as a monkey, a bird, a deer  and  so  forth.  There
are also accounts of how he gave up his life to help  sentient  beings.  All
this was done intentionally and is within the control of the bodhisattvas.

Discussion on generating renunciation
Question: My second question pertains to the bodhisattva attaining the  path
of seeing based on the desire realm support.  The reason given was that  the
bodhisattva can only attain a path of seeing newly on the  basis  of  desire
realm support because he needs to have this strong disenchantment of  cyclic
existence. My guess is this  is  because  the  desire  realm  body  has  the
suffering of suffering. Is that the reason?

Furthermore, when we say they need strong  disenchantment  of  samsara,  how
strong must this disenchantment be? Why do you need a desire  realm  support
when the form and formless realms also have suffering? After all,  there  is
the suffering  of  change  in  the  form  realms  and  compounded  pervasive
suffering in the formless realms.

If you say that the basis of strong disenchantment  is  based  on  a  desire
realm body, by the time the bodhisattva achieves the  path  of  seeing,  the
bodhisattva already has a  mental  body.  If  that  is  the  case,  then  it
shouldn’t matter what realm is involved. It can be  a  mental  body  of  the
desire realm, form realm or whatever. We don’t need the same reason  of  the
strong disenchantment of samsara in order to attain the path of  meditation.
Basically, I cannot accept the two reasons of why  we  must  have  a  desire
realm body to attain the path of meditation.

Student 2: You mentioned just now the substantial cause of the mental  body.
If we take the level of predispositions of  ignorance  to  be  the  imprints
that are planted by the apprehension of true existence, then these  imprints
will produce the appearance of true existence.

Because there is  an  appearance  of  true  existence,  this  leads  to  the
accumulation of uncontaminated karma and  its  effect  will  be  the  mental
body.  The  cooperative  condition  is  the  level  of  predispositions   of
ignorance.

My qualm is that if bodhisattva acquires  a  mental  body  on  the  path  of
seeing due to the level of predispositions of ignorance  and  uncontaminated
karma, uncontaminated karma is related to the eighth, ninth and  tenth  pure
grounds while the path of seeing is still on the impure ground.

Answer: When bodhicitta is  generated,  one  enters  the  Mahayana  path  of
accumulation. On the path of preparation,  the  bodhisattva  also  has  mind
generation. But it is a different and more powerful  mind  generation.  When
he enters the path of seeing, his mind generation is even more  exalted  and
even more powerful than that. Likewise, we have to say the same  applies  to
his level of renunciation, i.e., his renunciation also increases.

According to Buddhist cosmology, there  are  four  continents—north,  south,
east and west. It is said  that  among  these  four  continents,  our  human
world, which is called the Southern Continent (Jambudvipa or Dzambuling)  is
the best environment for generating  the  paths.  It  is  said  it  is  very
difficult to generate the paths in the other continents.

It is said that the humans in the Northern Continent have  a  definite  life
span of 1,000 years. It is said that they  have  about  the  same  level  of
wealth and enjoyments and that there is no poverty  there.  In  the  Eastern
and Western Continents, the lifespan is fixed for 500 years. They also  have
enjoyments and wealth.  As  such,  it  is  difficult  for  the  path  to  be
generated in the continua in these worlds.

The human and god realm supports included in the desire realm is said to  be
the best support for generating the paths. In particular, the human  support
of the Southern Continent is the basis for  generating  the  paths.  Because
the lifespan here is indefinite, enjoyments are uncertain and the  suffering
of oneself and  others  is  obvious,  as  such,  it  is  easier  to  develop
renunciation.

Also, from the perspective  of  tantra,  the  human  body  of  the  Southern
Continent  is  the  supreme  basis  because  it  is  made  up  of  the   six
constituents.

When it is said one newly attained the path in the form realm but not  newly
attained the supramundane path, that means there is  no  attainment  of  the
path of seeing. In order to newly attain the path of seeing, one  needs  not
just renunciation but a very strong form of renunciation. As such, the  form
realm support cannot be the support for newly attaining a path of seeing  as
there is not enough disenchantment. By  the  virtue  of  that  support,  the
beings in the form realm cannot newly attain the path of seeing, i.e.,  they
are limited by the existence that they have.

Vasubandhu wrote in his Abhidharmakosa that one could not newly  attain  the
path of seeing in the higher realms because of the lack  of  disenchantment.
This is the reason he posits.

Khen Rinpoche: Based on this logic, you have to think deeper, “Why  is  this
so?” You can be cleverer than Vasubandhu!

Accumulation of uncontaminated karma
Question: Is there still contaminated karma on the path of seeing?

Answer: You probably have to say that they accumulate uncontaminated  karma.
 Do they accumulate karma? Yes. Do they accumulate contaminated karma? No.

If we say they accumulate uncontaminated karma, what motivates that? Do  the
bodhisattvas on the path of seeing accumulate uncontaminated karma  that  is
motivated by the level of the predispositions of ignorance?

If you say that the bodhisattvas on  the  seven  impure  grounds  accumulate
uncontaminated karma, you must account for what motivates that  accumulation
of karma. If  you  were  to  say  that  it  is  due  to  the  level  of  the
predispositions of ignorance, is there any fault?

It is clear that at the three  pure  grounds,  the  bodhisattvas  accumulate
uncontaminated karma due to  the  level  of  predispositions  of  ignorance.
There is no argument about that.

We have to think about  whether  the  bodhisattva  superiors  on  the  seven
impure grounds undergo the inconceivable transference of death that  happens
due to the uncontaminated karma, which comes about in  dependence  upon  the
level of predispositions of  ignorance.  You  have  to  think  whether  that
happens or not.

It  is  clear  that  on  the  three  pure  grounds,  they  do  undergo   the
inconceivable  transference  of  death   that   is   the   result   of   the
uncontaminated  karma  accumulated   in   dependence   on   the   level   of
predispositions of ignorance. Can we say the same for all the  seven  impure
grounds? If we say, yes, is there any fault?

What determines whether one is of definite Mahayana lineage
Question: What determines  whether  one  is  of  definite  Mahayana  lineage
because the knower of bases that is distant from the mother is  someone  who
is not of Mahayana lineage?

Khen Rinpoche: Can a senior in the BP class say something? I need  to  think
a little bit about this. While I am thinking, you can talk.

Answer: Firstly, I don’t think  it  is  pre-determined  since  beginningless
lifetimes ago that this person will definitely enter the Mahayana  path  and
not any other paths. It is not that if you have it, it  means  you  have  it
and if you don’t have it, it means you don’t have it. It is not like that.

We talked before about the activation of the  Mahayana  lineage.  When  does
this happen? When great compassion arises and is  generated  in  the  heart.
Then that person’s Mahayana lineage is activated.

As for the persons who have activated the Mahayana lineage,  there  are  two
types. One is of definite Mahayana lineage. But it is possible to  say  that
that the person who has activated the Mahayana lineage could be someone  who
is not of definite Mahayana lineage.

For the person who has awakened the Mahayana  lineage  and  generated  great
compassion, if his determination to achieve full enlightenment for  sentient
beings  is  very  stable,  i.e.,  he  has  irreversible  faith  like   those
practitioners of sharp faculty, he is definite to enter  the  Mahayana  path
and not any other paths. Once he has entered  the  Mahayana  path,  he  will
proceed to enlightenment. So, I  guess  whether  a  person  is  of  definite
Mahayana lineage or not boils down to the  strength  and  stability  of  the
resolve in his heart.

I wonder whether it is sufficient to say that  if  you  generate  bodhicitta
and enter the Mahayana path, then definitely, you are of  definite  Mahayana
lineage. This is obviously not the case because some people may  fall  back.
But I guess if the person’s resolve is very stable, he generates  bodhicitta
and enters the path,  never  giving  it  up,  and  his  mind  is  completely
dedicated to enlightenment,  then  you  can  say  that  this  person  is  of
definite Mahayana lineage.

I think to become a person of definite Mahayana lineage requires  work  over
many lifetimes. It doesn’t come about by  just  thinking  about  it  in  one
lifetime. Rather, it is the result of  training  over  many  lifetimes  that
leads to the planting of many very strong and stable imprints in  the  mind.
I don’t think it is as if you do something in one lifetime and suddenly,  “I
am of definite Mahayana lineage now!” I think  one  of  the  conditions  for
someone to become of definite Mahayana lineage is very  strong  imprints  of
the Mahayana.

So if we make strong prayers, generate strong determination  and  aspiration
for enlightenment, place as many imprints as possible over  time  to  reduce
our self-cherishing and increase more and more  the  thought  of  benefiting
others, then by putting all these conditions together and  working  at  them
for many lives, then there is hope to become  someone  who  is  of  definite
Mahayana lineage. Otherwise, it is very difficult.
                                ~~~~~~~~~~~~

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS FOR SUNDAY, 28 AUGUST, 2016

Note: Khen Rinpoche gave extra questions for discussion including the two
questions given for homework. We are to complete whatever number of
questions we can manage. He also indicated he does not want just ‘yes’ or
‘no’ answers. One must think before one gives one’s answers and explain
one’s reasons for the answers given.

Questions from homework:
 • How do we enter into the four noble truths through the meditation on  the
   four close placements of mindfulness?
 • In particular, how does one engage in true cessations when one  meditates
   on the close placement of mindfulness of the mind?

Questions given in class:
1. Is the knower of paths necessarily preceded by the knower of bases?
2. Of the ten topics that characterize the exalted knower  of  all  aspects,
   why is mind generation the first topic?
3. Are there bodhisattvas that have realized emptiness  who  fall  into  the
   Hinayana path?
4. From the perspective of sutra,  can  one  achieve  enlightenment  on  the
   basis of the desire realm support?
5.  It  is  taught  that  the  roots  of  virtue  of  others  and  ourselves
   accumulated in the three times are the substances to be  dedicated  in  a
   dedication. How does our dedication of the  roots  of  virtue  of  others
   transform those roots of virtue into the cause for enlightenment?
6.  What does achieving mastery of the aspects of the three exalted  knowers
   mean?
7. What does achieving steadiness  of  the  aspects  of  the  three  exalted
   knowers mean?
8. It is taught that all roots of virtue in one’s continuum  is  the  result
   of the wisdom truth body acting as the  empowering  condition.  How  does
   this work? (We are advised  to  use  the  arising  of  our  own  virtuous
   thoughts as the basis for answering this question).
9.  Amongst  the  eight  categories,  is  there  something  that   is   just
   one/two/three/four/five/six/seven or all eight of the  eight  categories?
   (This is to help us get a clearer idea of the eight categories).

Participation  in  the  discussion  is  mandatory.  You  have  to  come  for
discussion. This is why we have BP groups. You are  assigned  to  one  group
and each group is taken care of by one person.

Finish whatever number of questions you can this Sunday.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee and Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.

