Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/BP2 M09 L29V.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:51:04.285592
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen  Rinpoche  Geshe  Chonyi  on  The  Eight
Categories and Seventy Topics

Root Text:  The  Eight  Categories  and  Seventy  Topics  by  Jetsün  Chökyi
Gyaltsen, translated by Jampa Gendun. Final draft October 2002, updated  May
2011. © Jampa Gendun & FPMT, Inc.

Lesson      29                                                            29
September 2016


Significance of reciting the Heart Sutra. Eight  branches  of  aryas’  paths
(cont’d). Three higher trainings. Four branches.


If you compare the merit of making divine  offerings  of  clothes  and  food
equal in number to the  sand  grains  of  the  Ganges  river  to  numberless
sentient beings to the merit of hearing the Buddha’s  name  just  once,  the
merit of hearing the Buddha’s name once surpasses the merit  from  that  act
of giving.

It goes without saying then that if you were to recollect the Buddha’s  holy
body by thinking of the Buddha and visualizing him, the merit will  be  even
greater than hearing the Buddha’s name.

So when you recite the prayer, Praise  to  Shakyamuni  Buddha,  if  you  can
visualize the Buddha and recite  the  prayer  with  devotion,  putting  your
palms together, you only stand to profit.

The idea is that before you  hear  and  study  the  Dharma,  if  you  do  it
enthusiastically with joy, delight and devotion, you  stand  to  benefit  so
much. However, if you were to listen to and learn the  Dharma  without  much
interest, delight, enthusiasm or faith, then it is difficult for the  Dharma
to benefit your mind. So in the beginning, it is important  to  adjust  your
motivation for listening to and  learning  the  Dharma.  We  should  try  to
listen to and learn the Dharma with a good motivation.

When we recite the praises to the Buddha, we should do it with delight,  joy
and faith. Since you are already here,  you  may  as  well  accumulate  some
merit from your presence here. You have to recite the prayers anyway  so  if
you can do that, then you get some merit.

SIGNIFICANCE OF RECITING THE HEART SUTRA

After the Praise to Shakyamuni Buddha, there is the recitation of the  Heart
of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra. This sutra is like  the  essence  of  the
perfection of wisdom. If you recite it well, you will be to  accumulate  the
collections and purify the mind of obscurations and negativities.

You will remember the terminological divisions of the perfection  of  wisdom
are:
 • the natural perfection of wisdom, i.e., the object, emptiness
 • the scriptural perfection of wisdom that are the scriptures or texts that
   teach emptiness as their subject matter
 • When we recite the Heart of  the  Perfection  of  Wisdom  Sutra,  we  can
   meditate at the  same  time.  You  already  have  some  understanding  of
   emptiness. If you can reflect on the meaning of emptiness, then  that  is
   like the path perfection of wisdom.
 • For those who can do that, they will  eventually  achieve  the  resultant
   perfection of wisdom that comes in dependence upon the path perfection of
   wisdom.

 o The generation of the path perfection of  wisdom  in  your  continuum  is
   dependent on the scriptural perfection of wisdom.  Without  depending  on
   the scriptural perfection of wisdom, there is no  way  to  actualize  the
   path perfection of wisdom.
 o Without the path perfection of wisdom, there is no  resultant  perfection
   of wisdom.
 o In the absence of the resultant perfection of wisdom, that means one will
   not be able to do perfect work for all sentient beings.
 o So in order to achieve the resultant perfection of wisdom,  we  need  the
   path perfection of wisdom.
 o For that reason, we need  to  depend  on  the  scriptural  perfection  of
   wisdom.

But relying on the scriptural perfection of  wisdom  does  not  mean  merely
reciting the text. It means that on the basis of learning  and  knowing  the
words of the scriptural perfection of wisdom, the main thing is  to  reflect
on and analyze their meaning. This is  what  is  meant  by  relying  on  the
scriptural perfection of wisdom.

By relying well on the scriptural perfection  of  wisdom,  i.e.,  reflecting
and analysing deeply, you will get a good  understanding  of  and  ascertain
the object, emptiness, correctly. This is the beginning of knowing what  the
tathagata essence, our buddha nature, is.

It is possible for us to come to understand our own buddha nature,  our  own
tathagata essence, by depending on  the  scriptural  perfection  of  wisdom.
This is possible because we possess  the  tathagata  essence  in  the  first
place. It is our deepest nature, which we have possessed since time  without
beginning. Because it has always been there, therefore, it  is  possible  to
realize it and it is possible for our mind to develop.

 • In dependence upon the scriptural perfection of wisdom,  we  can  gain  a
   correct understanding of and some experience of the natural perfection of
   wisdom—the object, emptiness. In this case,  we  arrive  at  the  correct
   understanding of our buddha nature, the tathagata  essence.  It  is  only
   when this happens that we will come to  understand  the  meaning  of  the
   statement,  “The  mind  is  clear   light   and   the   defilements   are
   adventitious.” It is only when we have a good understanding  and  correct
   idea of emptiness that we will see that this is true—the  nature  of  the
   mind is clear light and the defilements, although  they  are  there,  are
   adventitious and can be removed.
 • When one sees that the defilements can be removed, then one will be  very
   interested in working hard to actualize the path perfection of wisdom.
 • Comes the day when one has the path perfection of wisdom, then  achieving
   the resultant perfection of wisdom is only a matter of time.

With a good understanding and experience of the  object,  the  emptiness  of
true existence, in particular,  the  mind’s  emptiness  of  true  existence,
which basically is the real tathagata  essence,  then  one  comes  to  truly
understand how the mind is in  the  nature  of  clear  light  and  that  the
defilements are truly adventitious. It is possible for  the  defilements  to
be separated from the mind.

Due to one’s personal understanding and realization of this,  that  personal
understanding can then be  extended  to  other  sentient  beings.  One  will
understand that other sentient beings also have the  tathagata  essence  and
that their defilements are adventitious.  It  is  just  that  for  the  time
being, sentient beings are under the control of  their  afflictions  because
they have not realized their tathagata  essence.  One  understands  that  if
sentient beings are able to realize their own tathagata essence,  they  will
be able to free  themselves  from  their  defilements  as  well.  With  this
understanding of emptiness, one’s  experience  of  compassion  and  view  of
other sentient beings will be markedly different.

Based on these same reasons, the individuals who have generated the mind  of
enlightenment are able to do so because they see that  sentient  beings  can
free themselves from  their  defilements.  The  individuals  who  have  this
understanding are able to generate the mind of  enlightenment  because  they
see that something can be done. Therefore, they are able to work for  others
as they see this possibility.

The individuals who see that defilements are adventitious due  to  the  fact
that the nature of the  mind  is  clear  light  are  able  to  generate  the
wholehearted  resolve,  the  step  that  comes  before  the  generation   of
bodhicitta. Because they see the possibility, therefore, they take  on  this
personal responsibility, “I will do it by myself alone.”

So when you recite perfection  of  wisdom  sutras  like  the  Heart  of  the
Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, it will be very good if you can meditate on  its
meaning as you go through  the  words.  Primarily,  the  subject  matter  is
emptiness. We take ourselves, the person, as the basis. Try to  get  a  feel
for or understanding of the emptiness of the ‘I’, the  self  or  person.  If
you can really meditate in this way, then you will enjoy a lot of benefit.

You have to try your best. As much as possible, you  have  to  meditate  and
reflect on what you have learnt. Then that makes you want to learn more  and
change will come. Otherwise, just learning the Dharma but not meditating  or
reflecting can lead to the hardening of your mind. Then there is no  benefit
at all.

From your side, you have to try your best. You  have  to  learn  the  Dharma
willingly, happily and with great joy. You have to want  it  from  your  own
side. If you have that attitude, then when  you  learn,  you  will  get  the
benefit.

EIGHT BRANCHES OF ARYAS’ PATHS (CONT’D)

According to the Compendium of Knowledge, the eight branches of  the  aryas’
paths have the four noble truths as their observed objects

What is the manner of meditation?  It  is  similar  to  what  was  explained
during the earlier section on  the  seven  branches  of  enlightenment.  For
example, by focussing on true sufferings and  true  origins,  one  comes  to
generate the wish to abandon them. By focussing on true cessations and  true
paths, one develops the wish to cultivate and actualize them.

The purpose of meditating on the  eight  branches  of  aryas’  paths  is  to
abandon the path of meditation abandonments. As  we  have  seen,  there  are
path of meditation abandonments that are both  afflictive  obscurations  and
knowledge obscurations.

If you were asked what exactly a branch of  an  arya’s  path  is,  what  its
entity is, then basically it is that which is a  cause  of  its  result,  an
arya’s path.

The eight branches of aryas’ paths are as follows:
1. Correct view
2. Correct thought
3. Correct speech
4. Correct aims of actions
5. Correct livelihood
6. Correct exertion
7. Correct mindfulness
8. Correct meditative stabilization

By coming to class, the minimum is that you  should  be  able  to  say  what
these eight branches are. You have to put in the effort to be able  to  list
them out.

Khen Rinpoche: Can you do it? You  must  be  able  to  list  out  the  eight
branches.

Three higher trainings
These eight branches of aryas’ paths can be condensed into the three  higher
trainings.
According to my text:
 • Correct view, correct thought, correct exertion and  correct  mindfulness
   are condensed into the higher training of wisdom.
 • Correct speech, correct  aims  of  actions  and  correct  livelihood  are
   condensed into the higher training of ethics.
 • Correct meditative stabilization is condensed into the higher training of
   concentration.

~ Higher training of wisdom
It is quite  straightforward  why  correct  view  and  correct  thought  are
condensed into the higher training of wisdom. But how  is  it  that  correct
exertion  and  correct  mindfulness  are  also  condensed  into  the  higher
training of wisdom? This is the question.

Correct meditative stabilization is  included  in  the  higher  training  of
concentration. This is straightforward.  There is  no  quarrel  about  that.
Likewise, one can see how  correct  speech,  correct  aims  of  actions  and
correct livelihood are condensed into the higher training of  ethics.  There
is no quarrel about that as well.

Earlier on, when we looked at the  four  close  placements  of  mindfulness,
they were essentially classified as wisdoms.  If  that  is  the  case,  then
condensing correct mindfulness into the  higher  training  of  wisdom  makes
some sense.

How do  we  explain  correct  exertion  being  condensed  under  the  higher
training of wisdom? Maybe, we can look at it in this  way.  When  you  exert
yourself and put in the effort, you are striving for a goal because you  see
the point of doing so. You must see the point and what  is  in  it  for  you
before you will work hard.

When we are talk about exertion, we  are  not  talking  about  blind  faith,
i.e., just doing something because somebody says so  and  not  being  really
sure why we need to do it.  This is not real exertion. This is  not  effort.
Correct exertion comes from the faith that is engendered  through  knowledge
and understanding. Having generated the belief,   therefore you work  at  it
because you see the reason and the point of doing so. As such,  it  involves
thinking. I guess this is how it is like wisdom. You  need  to  think  about
it. Maybe we can explain it in this way to account for why correct  exertion
is condensed under the higher training of wisdom.

There may be other ways of condensing these eight branches of  aryas’  paths
into the three higher trainings. I have  not  been  able  to  consult  other
texts.

~ Higher training of ethics
 • Correct speech is the verbal karma.
 • Correct aims of actions is bodily karma.
 • Correct livelihood is  talking  about  behaviour,  which  is  why  it  is
   included under ethics.

In the context of the three higher trainings, it is  always  explained  that
the former acts as the basis for the latter. In order for you  to  have  any
training of concentration, first, you  must  have  a  strong  foundation  in
ethics. Therefore, the higher training  of  ethics  is  the  basis  for  the
higher training of concentration. The higher training  of  concentration  is
the basis for the higher training of wisdom.

Four branches
The eight  branches  of  aryas’  paths  can  also  be  subsumed  under  four
branches.

~ 1.  The branch of affirmation
Correct view, the first of the eight branches, is included in the branch  of
affirmation. In  general,  correct  view  refers  to  the  wisdom  realizing
emptiness. But in  this  context,  it  refers  specifically  to  the  wisdom
directly realizing  emptiness.  This  is  the  view  that  is  sustained  in
meditative  equipoise.  When  an  individual  arises  from  the   meditative
equipoise directly realizing emptiness, he continues to analyse during post-
meditative equipoise.

Of the two  mental  factors  of  investigation  and  analysis,  analysis  is
thinking about something in a more refined way or  checking  things  out  in
more detail. In post-meditative equipoise,  the  detailed  analysis  of  the
view and sustaining the view  that  was  realized  in  meditative  equipoise
continues. As such, this  correct  view  is  subsumed  into  the  branch  of
affirmation. In Tibetan, this branch is literally  the  branch  of  thorough
analysis.

~ 2. The branch of engendering understanding
Correct thought is included under the second branch  called  the  branch  of
engendering understanding.

We are talking here about the correct view.  In  post-meditative  equipoise,
the bodhisattva analyzes in detail the truth, emptiness. He has a very  good
understanding of and true experience of emptiness. So he has the  motivation
to engender the same realization and understanding in others.  This  is  why
it is correct thought. I think ‘thought’ here refers to the motivation  that
makes the bodhisattva want to teach or share his realization of  the  truth,
emptiness, with others.

~ 3. The branch of engendering belief in others
With the correct view, the bodhisattva is  able  to  have  correct  thought.
Based on that, there is the branch of engendering belief  in  others.  Three
out of the eight branches of  the  aryas’  paths  are  subsumed  under  this
branch. They are  correct  speech,  correct  aims  of  actions  and  correct
livelihood.

 • Correct speech is with reference to others. When people  listen  to  this
   bodhisattva’s explanation of the truth, emptiness, they believe that what
   he is saying is right and makes sense. He must know something as  he  has
   the correct  view  and  correct  thought.  Correct  speech  can  also  be
   understood to be the four virtues of speech that are the opposites of the
   four non-virtues of speech.
 • Correct aims of actions mean not doing things that  are  to  be  avoided.
   There are many things that shouldn’t  be  done  as  they  are  not  good.
   Correct aims of actions mean not doing them. Essentially, it is referring
   to bodily karma or pure actions of  the  body.  This  means  having  pure
   ethics. Because of abandoning certain non-virtues,  others  believe  that
   this person has ethics, the correct aims  of  actions.  Correct  aims  of
   actions are basically the virtues of the body, i.e.,  abandoning  killing
   and so forth. It refers to having abandoned the three bodily non-virtues.

If you were to analyze further, is correct speech speech or not?

Khen Rinpoche: Do you know why I ask this? What is my  purpose  behind  this
question, “Is correct speech speech or not?”?

The point is this: the eight branches of aryas’ path are  all  paths,  i.e.,
they are all exalted knowers. If we say  that  correct  speech  and  correct
aims of actions are physical actions, then how do you explain  that  correct
speech and correct aims of actions are exalted knowers?

The definition of a branch of aryas’  paths  is  an  exalted  knower  in  an
arya’s continuum that is a cause of its result, an arya’s path.  This  means
it is an exalted knower.
There is bodily karma and verbal karma.  This  is  in  the  lam-rim  in  the
section on the ten non-virtues. In the section on  karma,  they  talk  about
bodily karma and verbal karma. Was there any mention of mental karma?

In the lam-rim, the ten non-virtues are:
 • three bodily non-virtues
 • four verbal non-virtues
 • three mental non-virtues

What did they say about the last three? The  last  three—covetousness,  ill-
will and wrong views—are not karma because they are afflictions.

Khen Rinpoche: You have completed the lam-rim already!

Let’s say we have the thought wanting to harm somebody. Is that  thought  an
affliction?

Khen Rinpoche: The  thought  to  harm,  the  harming  thought,  is  that  an
affliction? Say something. Then I will say something else. Otherwise …

Student 1: The malicious thought is a thought to harm others.

Khen Rinpoche: Let’s say you have a motivation to  harm  somebody.  Is  that
motivation an affliction or not?

Khen Rinpoche: What is an affliction?

(Student’s response is inaudible).

I think maybe you should revisit the material that has  been  covered.  That
will be beneficial. We have discussed this in class already.

This  is  based  on  what  Vasubandhu  said  in  his  Treasury  of  Manifest
Knowledge:
 • the first seven are both karma and paths of action
 • the last three are not karma but they are paths of action

The first seven are the three bodily non-virtues and the  four  verbal  non-
virtues. There are instances of those seven that are both  karma  and  paths
of action.

The last three—covetousness, ill-will and wrong views—are not karma.  It  is
clear. They are paths of action.

 • Correct livelihood means sustaining life without wrong  livelihoods  that
   involve the body and/or speech. So, correct livelihood is guarding  one’s
   body and speech from non-virtue. You already know this but  there  is  no
   harm in repeating it. These are listed in the lam-rim.

There are five wrong livelihoods:
1. Hypocrisy or pretension is pretending to be holy. You are  not  holy  but
   motivated by the desire to get something from the benefactor, in front of
   that person, you act holy. You are showing a false aspect of yourself.
2. Flattery is a verbal  non-virtue  motivated  by  attachment.  Because  of
   wanting to get something, you say sweet words.
3. Hinting is also a  verbal  non-virtue  driven  by  attachment.  With  the
   thought of wanting something, one says to the potential benefactor, “This
   person has that very nice object. It will be good if I can have it too.”
4. Again driven by attachment, baiting works like this:  You  give  a  small
   gift to someone to make that person happy with the expectation of getting
   something better or more in return from the  recipient.  Another  way  of
   looking at baiting is that you have already gotten  something  from  that
   person but you want more. You tell the benefactor, “Remember, you gave me
   this thing last time? It was very useful and very good!”
5. Pressuring is being very insistent and making your demands over and  over
   again.

Essentially, correct livelihood is to guard the body and  speech  from  non-
virtue.

~ 4. The branch of antidotes
The remaining  three  branches—correct  exertion,  correct  mindfulness  and
correct meditative stabilization—are included in the branch of antidotes.

In this context, maybe correct exertion refers to a  never  say  die  mental
attitude with regard to abandoning  the  path  of  meditation  abandonments.
This involves not only abandoning the afflictions  but  also  the  knowledge
obscurations. A very long time is needed in order to  abandon  the  path  of
meditation abandonments that are afflictions.  The  bodhisattva  must  apply
exertion, i.e., the spirit that is prepared to  work  for  a  long  time  to
abandon them. Likewise, he also has the spirit of wanting to  work  hard  to
overcome the knowledge obscurations.

In essence, correct exertion here refers to the exertion of cultivating  the
antidotes to the afflictions and the knowledge obscurations.

Next is correct mindfulness. When one notices excitement is  arising  or  is
about to arise, correct mindfulness here directs the mind to reflect on  the
faults of cyclic existence or the ugliness of  the  object.  These  are  all
antidotes to counteract excitement. In  this  context,  mindfulness  is  not
forgetting these antidotes.

If laxity is arising or has arisen, mindfulness  directs  the  mind  to  the
benefits  of  having  concentration,  keeping  the  mind  on  them  and  not
forgetting them.

When the mind is not affected by excitement or laxity,  correct  mindfulness
here means not forgetting  to  keep  the  mind  in  its  natural  state  and
desisting from applying any antidotes.

Correct meditative stabilization is for the purpose of  achieving  qualities
like clairvoyance and so forth. There are discordant factors to be  overcome
in the  process  of  achieving  clairvoyance.  In  order  to  achieve  these
qualities, one has to rely on  the  antidotes  to  overcome  the  discordant
factors.

This is how the eight branches of aryas’ paths are subsumed under  the  four
branches:
1. The branch of affirmation or branch of thorough analysis
2. The branch of engendering understanding
3. The branch of engendering belief in others
4. The branch of antidotes

This explanation is according to the higher Abhidharma,  The  Compendium  of
Knowledge.

The  eight  branches  of  aryas’  paths,  in  the   context   here,   refers
specifically to the path of meditation. This is  the  real  meaning  of  the
branches of aryas’ paths. But we don’t have to limit our perspective of  the
eight branches of aryas’ paths just to the path of meditation.

If you think about it in a general way, perhaps, we can regard correct  view
as not being restricted to just emptiness. It could also mean:
 • having a correct understanding of impermanence
 • having a correct understanding of the four noble truths
 • having conviction in and a correct understanding of karma and its effects

The point here is that correct view refers to wisdom, i.e., the wisdom  that
is able to discriminate between what is true and false, what is correct  and
wrong. You can refer it to an understanding of:
 • what is harmful and what is not harmful
 • what is harmful to oneself and what is harmful to others
 • what is beneficial for oneself and what is beneficial for others

Definitely, people have their own views as to what is good and bad, what  is
harmful and beneficial. Then it becomes very complicated.  Wisdom  is  being
able to know what to do and what not to  do,  what  is  right  and  what  is
wrong. If you have wisdom, then  you  will  be  able  to  have  the  correct
motivation. With the correct motivation, it  is  possible  to  have  correct
speech and correct aims of actions and to  engage  in  appropriate  physical
and verbal conduct.

With correct speech and correct aims of actions, you are able to guard  your
body and speech from non-virtue. Then you are able to live a  correct  life,
a good life with a correct livelihood. With that, you  are  able  to  strive
appropriately and correctly in whatever you do.

If there are correct aims of actions, there will be correct  exertion.  Then
it is much easier to cultivate or maintain mindfulness.  If  you  have  some
kind of mindfulness, it is easier for you to focus you  mind  and  for  your
mind to be stable.

If there is correct meditative stabilization, this will help  in  developing
a wisdom that is much more powerful—something different  and  more  special.
In this context, the culmination leads to the correct view,  which  in  this
case is the direct perception of emptiness.

Correct meditative stabilization leads  to  the  correct  view,  the  direct
perception of emptiness. People who have reached this  point  in  the  path,
when they emerge from that correct view, because  of  their  experience,  it
enhances their motivation.  They  will  develop  a  higher  version  of  the
correct thought. It will also affect their speech in a  much  more  positive
way and so forth. So, their qualities are ever-increasing.

In this context, we shouldn’t think that the eight branches of aryas’  paths
only happen on the path of meditation and  therefore,  have  no  bearing  or
influence on us.  When we look at it in a  generic  way,  we  can  see  some
relevance to ourselves, at our level.

We start with the correct view, which is essentially wisdom. When viewed  in
a positive way in terms of generating a positive  result,  it  is  the  mind
that has the ability to know what is good  and  what  is  bad.  This  wisdom
enables the individual to have a better motivation and will also affect  his
speech in a positive way.

 • We can also look at this in terms  of  the  consequences  of  not  having
   wisdom, i.e., not knowing how to think.
 • If you don’t know how to think, if you don’t have that wisdom, then it is
   difficult for you to have a good motivation.
 • Without a good motivation, you will not have good speech. You will engage
   in non-virtuous speech.
 • You will engage in non-virtuous actions of the body.
 • Most likely, you will have a wrong livelihood.
 • You are not going to work hard and exert yourself in virtue.
 • You are not going to have any mindfulness.
 • You are not going to have concentration.

Then one circles in samsara over and over again.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.



