Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/BP2 M09 L30V.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:50.759516
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen  Rinpoche  Geshe  Chonyi  on  The  Eight
Categories and Seventy Topics

Root Text:  The  Eight  Categories  and  Seventy  Topics  by  Jetsün  Chökyi
Gyaltsen, translated by Jampa Gendun. Final draft October 2002, updated  May
2011. © Jampa Gendun & FPMT, Inc.

Lesson  30                                                                 4
October 2016


Resultant  truth  body.  Overview  of  the  eight  categories.   Examination
questions. Examination process.


We have been looking at the 37 harmonies  with  enlightenment.  How  did  we
arrive  at  them?  Because  we  were   looking   at   the   subject-aspects,
specifically the 110 aspects of an exalted knower  of  all  aspects.   Among
these 110 aspects, there are 37 aspects of an exalted knower of all  aspects
that are concordant with those existing in hearers.

We are have almost  completed  the  eight  branches  of  the  aryas’  paths.
Perhaps you can think about whether the correct aims of actions and  correct
livelihood are forms?  There are two different views  as  to  whether  karma
can be form. The Great Exposition School (GES or the  Vaibhasikas),  asserts
that there is karma that is form. It seems that the Consequence  Middle  Way
School (CMWS or the Prasangikas), also asserts karma is form.  The  rest  of
the Buddhist tenets assert that karma is necessarily the  mental  factor  of
intention.

RESULTANT TRUTH BODY

We have already gone through the eight categories where there are the  three
knowers and the four applications. The last category is the resultant  truth
body or resultant dharmakaya. Here there is  the  explanation  of  the  four
bodies of a buddha.

What are the result of cultivating the four applications? The result is  the
dharmakaya.
What is the resultant truth body?

Nature body
Here, there is an  explanation  of  the  two  nature  bodies  according  the
Autonomy Middle Way School (AMWS):
 • The naturally pure nature body refers to  the  emptiness  of  a  buddha’s
   mind.
 • The adventitiously pure nature body  is  the  factor  of  purity  of  the
   adventitious  stains.  The  purity  of  the  adventitious  stains  is   a
   conventional truth, not an ultimate truth.

Complete enjoyment body
The complete enjoyment body  is  explained  as  the  final  form  body  that
possesses the five certainties:
1. Certainty of  abode:  It  is  certain  and  definite  that  the  complete
   enjoyment body resides only in Akanishta.
2. Certainty of body: The enjoyment body  is  definitely  adorned  with  the
   signs and exemplifications.
3. Certainty of retinue: The complete enjoyment body is surrounded  only  by
   bodhisattva superiors, not ordinary beings.
4. Certainty of doctrine: The  complete  enjoyment  body  teaches  only  the
   Mahayana doctrine.
5. Certainty of time: The complete enjoyment body exists as long  as  cyclic
   existence remains. As long  as  cyclic  existence  exists,  it  will  not
   display the aspect of passing away into the sorrowless state.

Is Amitabha Buddha a  complete  enjoyment  body?  If  you  were  asked  this
question, what will be your answer?

Emanation body
The practice of the seven branches of worship is normally done  in  relation
to the emanation body. In  that  practice,  there  is  the  request  to  the
buddhas to turn the Wheel of Dharma and imploring them not to pass  away  to
parinirvana. This is done in relation to the  emanation  body  and  not  the
enjoyment body.

There is no need to do that in relation to the enjoyment body. They are  not
requested to not pass away into parinirvana and there is  also  no  need  to
request them to turn the Wheel of Dharma. These practices are  not  involved
in the practice of tantra.  This is one difference.

The  enjoyment  body  is  the  final  form  body  that  possesses  the  five
certainties while the emanation body is a form body that  does  not  possess
the five certainties.
 • It is not definite that the emanation body will reside in Akanishta.
 • It is not definite that an emanation body will have  the  aspect  of  the
   signs and exemplifications.
 • It is not definite that  the  emanation  body  is  always  surrounded  by
   bodhisattva superiors.
 • It is not certain that the emanation body will teach the Mahayana Dharma.
 • It is not certain that the emanation body will remain forever.
As such, in relation to the emanation  body,  there  are  the  practices  of
requesting the emanation body to turn the Wheel of Dharma and  imploring  it
not to pass away into parinirvana. This makes a difference  in  relation  to
the emanation body.

An emanation body is  a  final  form  body  that  is  distinguished  by  not
possessing the five certainties. When divided,  there  are  three  emanation
bodies:
1. supreme emanation body
2. birth emanation body or incarnate emanation body
3. artisan emanation body

An  illustration  of  the  supreme  emanation  body  is  the  kind  founder,
Shakyamuni Buddha. It is the form body that performed the twelve deeds  such
as the descent of Shakyamuni Buddha into this world and the display  of  the
twelve deeds.

A buddha and the resultant truth body are mutually inclusive.

OVERVIEW OF THE EIGHT CATEGORIES

We are now done with this module. I will give an overview or summary of  the
eight categories so try to pay attention.

These eight categories were taught by the Buddha himself in  the  Perfection
of Wisdom Sutras. There are extensive, middling and short  versions  of  the
sPerfection of Wisdom Sutras. The Buddha taught these  eight  categories  in
those sutras.

The explicit subject matter of  the  Perfection  of  Wisdom  Sutras  is  the
emptiness of true existence. The hidden subject matter taught implicitly  in
those sutras is the various stages of clear realization.

In  Maitreya’s  Ornament  for  Clear  Realization,  these  eight  categories
primarily focus on presenting the implicit subject matter of the  Perfection
of Wisdom Sutras. These are the various stages  of  clear  realization  that
are explicitly taught in the Ornament for Clear Realization. The  stages  of
emptiness are implicitly taught in the same text.

At the beginning of the Ornament for Clear Realization, it  is  stated  that
the perfection of wisdom is perfectly explained  by  the  eight  categories.
Since the words, the perfection of wisdom, appear in the text,  there  is  a
need to explain what the perfection of wisdom is.  When  the  perfection  of
wisdom is terminologically divided, there are four:
1. the natural perfection of wisdom
2. the scriptural perfection of wisdom
3. the path perfection of wisdom
4. the resultant perfection of wisdom

Natural perfection of wisdom
The first terminological  division  of  the  perfection  of  wisdom  is  the
natural perfection of wisdom.  This  refers  to  the  ultimate  and  deepest
nature of every phenomenon, i.e., the final mode of  abiding  of  phenomena,
which is emptiness. The emptiness or final mode of abiding of  phenomena  is
said to be pure by nature. As such, it is explained as perfection.

Scriptural perfection of wisdom
If this is the reality, you need an explanation of that reality. You need  a
text or a teaching to show this final mode  of  abiding  of  all  phenomena.
Therefore, there is the scriptural perfection of wisdom.

Path perfection of wisdom
The practice of taking to heart the meaning of the scriptural perfection  of
wisdom is the path perfection of wisdom. The path perfection of wisdom  only
exists in the continua of bodhisattvas.


Resultant perfection of wisdom
When  this  path  perfection  of  wisdom  is  cultivated  and   brought   to
culmination, then you have the result, which is the resultant perfection  of
wisdom. This exists only on the buddha ground.

The three knowers
At the beginning of the Ornament for Clear  Realization,  in  the  verse  of
homage, you will see that salutations and praise are offered  to  the  three
knowers—the knower of bases, the knower of paths and the exalted  knower  of
all aspects.

 •  The  knower  of  bases  is  primarily  the  wisdom  directly   realizing
   selflessness. This is cultivated mainly for the purpose of achieving  the
   sorrowless state.
 • The knower of paths is primarily the wisdom directly realizing emptiness.
   The knower of paths is taught in order to enable the bodhisattvas  to  be
   able to work for the welfare of and  to  guide  disciples  of  the  three
   lineages. The knower of paths exists only in  the  continua  of  Mahayana
   superiors.
 • However, in order to completely turn the Wheel of Dharma  for  the  three
   types of trainees, one  needs  to  achieve  the  exalted  knower  of  all
   aspects. As such, the exalted knower of all aspects is taught.

One needs to cultivate the  knower  of  paths  in  order  to  actualize  the
exalted knower  of  all  aspects,  enlightenment.  Normally,  one  needs  to
cultivate the path perfection of wisdom in order to  achieve  the  resultant
perfection of wisdom.

The four applications
Now here is the explanation of the four applications.

~ Complete aspects application
The first of the four applications is complete aspects application.  If  you
look at the words, complete aspects application, it means to  cultivate  all
the aspects fully in a complete way.

What aspects are cultivated? They are the aspects of the three knowers.

How many aspects are there? There are a total of 173 aspects  of  the  three
knowers that are cultivated and meditated on in a complete way.

It is said that the complete aspects application is the cultivation  of  the
aspects of the three exalted knowers as a compendium. In the  beginning,  on
the path of accumulation, one cultivates the  complete  aspects  application
for the purpose of gaining  mastery  over  the  173  aspects  of  the  three
exalted knowers.

~ Peak application
By cultivating a  compendium  of  the  173  aspects  of  the  three  exalted
knowers, there comes the time when  the  bodhisattva  attains  the  path  of
preparation. At that time, he achieves the peak application.

Upon  attaining  the  path  of  preparation,  the   bodhisattva   is   still
cultivating the  compendium  of  the  173  aspects  of  the  three  knowers.
However, his manner of cultivating that compendium of  the  aspects  of  the
three exalted knowers is more exalted than the manner of cultivation on  the
path of accumulation. As such, the bodhisattva on the  path  of  preparation
is said to have achieved  mastery  of  the  aspects  of  the  three  exalted
knowers and his cultivation of them on the path of preparation is given  the
name, peak application.

On the path of preparation, the bodhisattva  attains  peak  application  and
achieves the mastery of the aspects  of  the  three  exalted  knowers.  This
mastery  is  a  result  of  the  cultivation  done  while  on  the  path  of
accumulation. It didn’t happen  without  a  cause.  It  is  because  of  his
cultivation on the path of accumulation that he is able to achieve the  path
of preparation. Only then is he able to achieve this mastery of the  aspects
of the three exalted knowers.

~ Serial application
The complete aspects application is a mind that cultivates a  compendium  of
the 173 aspects of the three  exalted  knowers,  i.e.,  it  cultivates  them
collectively. A serial application on the other hand  is  a  knower  in  the
continuum of the bodhisattva that cultivates the 173 aspects  of  the  three
exalted knowers serially.

Even while he was on the path of accumulation, the bodhisattva has two  ways
of cultivating the aspects of three exalted knowers:
 • On the one hand, he has a knower in his  continuum  that  cultivates  the
   aspects of the three exalted knowers collectively, as a compendium.
 • At the same time, he also has a knower that cultivates the aspects of the
   three exalted knowers serially.
In short, he cultivates the  aspects  of  the  three  exalted  knowers  both
collectively and serially.

The purpose of meditating serially on  the  aspects  of  the  three  exalted
knowers is to achieve steadiness with respect to  those  aspects.  As  such,
they cultivate peak application and they also cultivate  serial  application
on the Mahayana path of accumulation, the path of preparation, the  path  of
seeing and the path of meditation, right up to just before the  last  moment
of the path of meditation. This is the wisdom at the end  of  the  continuum
of the sentient being. It is at  this  very  last  moment  of  the  path  of
meditation that the bodhisattva achieves  steadiness  with  respect  to  the
aspects of the three exalted  knowers.  This  means  that  in  the  shortest
moment of a complete action, if  he  brings  to  mind  a  particular  fully-
ripened phenomenon, he also has the power to manifest  all  other  phenomena
that are concordant with it.

To make it simple, at the end of the continuum of a sentient being,  at  the
last moment of the path of meditation, the  bodhisattva  has  the  power  to
meditate on the 173 aspects of the three exalted knowers serially, in  their
correct order, without mixing things up, in the time it takes  to  snap  his
fingers. This duration of a finger snap is called an instance of a  complete
action.

The bodhisattva who is at the last moment  of  the  path  of  meditation  is
about to achieve enlightenment.  Definitely  by  this  time,  he  must  have
achieved the power, potential and ability to be able to meditate on the  173
aspects of the three exalted knowers serially without mixing up their  order
and so forth. He will be able to do all of that in  the  time  it  takes  to
snap his fingers!

Khen Rinpoche: Can you imagine that? (Khen Rinpoche snaps his  fingers).  He
can meditate on the 173 aspects but he is still not  enlightened  and  still
not a buddha yet.

Only after  achieving  this  will  the  resultant  truth  body,  the  eighth
category, happen.

The Buddha is omniscient. He sees every single thing as it  is.  He  doesn’t
need time to look at things. He is just there, seeing everything as it is.

Student 1: Regarding the serial application  that  exists  on  the  path  of
accumulation up to just prior to the end of  the  continuum  of  a  sentient
being. At the end of  the  continuum  of  a  sentient  being,  how  can  the
bodhisattva bring to mind all the aspects serially? Serial application  only
exists prior to the end of the continuum of the  sentient  being.  Just  now
you said that the end of continuum of sentient being is serial  application.
It should be momentary application.

Ven Gyurme: We didn’t say it was serial application.

Khen Rinpoche: You know that serial application exists up to just  prior  to
the last moment. At the last moment of the continuum of  a  sentient  being,
there is no serial application.
                                ~~~~~~~~~~~~

EXAMINATION QUESTIONS

1. Read all the transcripts of the classes in this  module  and  reflect  on
   them. [50 marks]

2. Can the Mahayana path of  accumulation,  Mahayana  path  of  preparation,
   Mahayana path of seeing, Mahayana path of meditation and Mahayana path of
   no more learning be newly attained on the basis of  the  support  of  the
   three realms? [15 marks]

3a. Of the eight categories, is there a phenomenon that is only one  of  the
    eight categories? Please provide an illustration and explain why  it  is
    not one of the other categories. Repeat this exercise, change “one” to:
    3b. “two”
    3c. “three”
    3d. “four”
    3e. “five” [20 marks]

4. What are the 37 harmonies of enlightenment? How does one enter  into  the
four  noble  truths  by  meditating  on  the  four   close   placements   of
mindfulness? [15 marks]


THE EXAMINATION PROCESS

I want to explain about the exams. The exam  questions  are  for  those  who
signed up and want to study. For those who didn’t sign up,  then  you  don’t
have to worry about the questions.

You have to know the purpose of an examination or test.  The  whole  purpose
of taking an examination is for learning, i.e., to  really  learn  what  you
have heard. This is why we have an examination. Please think well  and  then
do the exams. Do it properly with thoughtfulness.

Q1. The first question is an  exercise  where  you  have  to  read  all  the
transcripts. We have spent a fair amount of time  on  this  topic  and  much
explanation has been given. So please read all  the  transcripts  mindfully.
As you read, you have to think about what you have read so as to be able  to
gain an understanding of what has been taught so far. If  you  are  able  to
read all the transcripts and as you read, you  think  about  what  you  have
read and analyze, then you get 50 marks.

Q2. For example, let’s look at the Mahayana path of accumulation. There  are
three realms—the desire realm, the form realm and the formless realm.
 • Can the Mahayana path of accumulation be newly attained on the  basis  of
   the desire realm support?
 • Can the Mahayana path of accumulation be newly attained on the  basis  of
   the form realm support?
 • Can the Mahayana path of accumulation be newly attained on the  basis  of
   the formless realm support?

Whether your answer is yes or no with regard to these three  realms,  please
provide a reason and explain your answer. Likewise,  do  the  same  for  the
Mahayana path of preparation, the Mahayana  path  of  seeing,  the  Mahayana
path of meditation and the Mahayana path of no more learning.

If you are able to answer this question from  your  own  side  without  help
from anyone, that is fine and wonderful. If you  need  to  discuss  it  with
other people, you can go ahead and discuss. The point of  discussion  is  to
gain an understanding and to arrive at your own understanding.   You  should
write down your own understanding as the answer. You should not  go  to  the
discussion and say, “Whatever he is saying sounds good. I am going to  write
whatever he says!” I don’t want that. You  can  discuss  but  based  on  the
discussion, if there is an explanation that  allows  you  to  come  to  your
personal understanding, then you write that down. You should not write  what
somebody tells you or somebody else’s opinion.

You can discuss but the  point  is  that  you  have  to  come  to  your  own
conclusions, based on your own understanding and your own feeling. You  have
to be confident of your answer, i.e., if you were asked about  your  answer,
you should be able to reply with confidence.  It  is  not  because  somebody
said so or you copy or cut and paste it from somewhere. You have to be  able
to say it is an answer from your own side. It has to  be  your  own  answer.
(15 marks)
Q3. We have talked quite a bit about the eight categories. This  is  why  we
have this question here. It is not easy. Answer the question  by  giving  an
example.

You have to provide an illustration and explain  why  your  illustration  is
just one of the eight categories. You also have to  provide  an  explanation
of why your chosen illustration is not in the  remaining  seven  categories.
In this case, if it is one, it cannot be any of the other seven  categories.


Then you repeat the exercise  by  changing  the  ‘one’  to  ‘two’,  ‘three’,
‘four’ and ‘five’.

Is there a phenomenon that is just five out of the  eight  categories?  Will
you be able to find something that is five out of the  eight?  You  have  to
explain why your chosen illustration is five out  of  the  eight.  You  also
have to explain why your chosen illustration is not the remaining three.

You can discuss but the answer you write down should be your  understanding,
i.e., only what you understand. You are certain it is this and not that  and
not just because somebody else said so. Do  not  cut  and  paste  from  your
notes.

You write down your answer after you have thought about it. Please do  that.
Because this is an exam, you have to write what you understand. You  can  go
and discuss. If you don’t understand  but  you  just  write  the  answer  of
someone else who tells you, “It is this,” then this is wrong. If at the  end
of the discussion, you still don’t understand why it is this and  not  that,
then don’t write anything. Just leave it empty.

Q4. What are the 37 harmonies of enlightenment? Of course,  you  cannot  cut
and paste from the notes. That is not the point. You  can  only  write  down
what you are able to say verbally. If you are tested verbally  on  what  the
37 harmonies of enlightenment are, only write down what you will  say.  This
is the point of this exercise.

You should be able to say all the individual names, the close  placement  of
this and that and so forth. So if you are able to say what they  are,  write
them down.

Listen carefully. If you were asked to stand up and say what  they  are  and
you are unable to do that, please don’t write anything. Leave it empty.

The next part of the question is important. We spent quite a bit of time  on
that. It is important and will be helpful to you—how  does  one  enter  into
the four noble  truths  by  meditating  on  the  four  close  placements  of
mindfulness?

You need to think  well  in  order  to  be  able  to  write  down  what  you
understand. It doesn’t really matter how you do it,  whether  you  read  and
then think about it or have discussions with people. The main point is  that
you have to learn.

The aim of this exercise is that you learn something. This is an  exam.  You
cannot cut and paste from  the  transcripts  or  just  copy  word  for  word
somebody else’s notes.  That is not the point.
You can discuss all you like. Read all you like.  Think  all  you  like  but
please write down only from your own side without consulting anything.  When
you write, write down what you know. If you still don’t know anything  after
reading or discussing, then just don’t write anything. Just leave it.

Then you will know what you have been able to understand and what you  don’t
understand. If you just cut and paste or just consult the notes or you  just
write everything, we will not be  able  to  tell.  This  doesn’t  become  an
examination because we will not be able to tell.

Student 2: For Q. 4 with reference to the 37 harmonies of enlightenment,  do
we have to say in detail what they are or we are only required to list  them
out?

Khen Rinpoche: Yes. Not just the  definitions.  For  example,  you  have  to
write what the four mindfulness are. You must write  out  for  each  one  of
them.

Student 2: That is all? No need to elaborate further?.

Khen Rinpoche: No need. I want these are  the  four,  these  are  the  five,
these are the eight and so forth. You don’t need to explain but if you  want
to explain further, I give you 100 marks!

The deadline is March 2017.

You have October, November,  December,  January,  February,  March.  Half  a
year. Enough time? You need one year? Anyway, you have four to  five  months
so you have plenty of time. So just go and study.

Last time we had group leaders. I don’t know how much the group leaders  are
involved here. In this case, invite your own  group  to  meet  together  and
discuss and make sure everybody understands  something.  From  there,  write
down your answer. This is just an idea but you can find out  using  whatever
methods you wish. However you do it, just do it.

The whole point of this exercise is to read and learn.  Whether  the  method
is reading, thinking, coming together to discuss and so forth,  at  the  end
of the day, the objective is to learn something since we have  talked  about
this topic for a fair amount of time. That is the main point. Just try.

How much effort you put in now  and  how  much  you  understand,  this  will
affect your future education as there is something  in  the  future  if  you
were to continue.

If you say you really want to  learn  something  over  time,  that  this  is
lifelong learning for you and you want to continue  learning  and  learning,
then putting in effort is important. It is only when you put in  the  effort
that you will really come to understand something. You feel encouraged  when
you get somewhere. Only then will you have an interest to learn more.

Of course, you can sit and listen and listen and listen, but at the  end  of
the day, if you don’t understand anything,  it  is  difficult  to  have  the
interest to continue in the long run. This is because you  are  just  moving
from one not-knowing-anything to another not-knowing-anything.  Then  it  is
really difficult to learn something in the long run. This is  why  there  is
no other way other than putting in effort.

In the last module on Shantideva’s text, most people did very  well  in  the
exam. It was very good and well done. You wrote very well and the marks  are
also quite good. Everybody put in the effort and wrote something  there.  As
so much was written, it is  impossible  to  mark  in  detail.  Whatever  you
wrote, I hope you understood what you wrote. It was very good.  Some  people
came here and read out their answers. That is very, very good.

Actually, this text is not so challenging. It is OK. One may  need  to  read
up on these 70 topics. Use your brain. What is needed is mainly logic.

Student 3: In one of  the  previous  modules,  Khen  Rinpoche  gave  us  the
opportunity to write down any qualms that we may have.  I  can  foresee  now
that we have more time to go over the module again in greater detail,  there
may be qualms that may come up that we may not have had the  opportunity  to
think about because the lessons are quite hectic.  Should  the  students  be
encouraged then to note write down any questions or qualms that may come  up
while they are doing the revision in preparation to for this exam?

Khen Rinpoche: Of course. If you have any qualms, you can write them down.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee and Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.


