Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/BP2 M09 L26FINAL.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:51.000525
================================================================================



Transcript of the teachings by Khen  Rinpoche  Geshe  Chonyi  on  The  Eight
Categories and Seventy Topics

Root Text:  The  Eight  Categories  and  Seventy  Topics  by  Jetsün  Chökyi
Gyaltsen, translated by Jampa Gendun. Final draft October 2002, updated  May
2011. © Jampa Gendun & FPMT, Inc.

Lesson      26                                                            20
September 2016


The wisdom truth body  as  the  empowering  condition  for  the  thought  of
benefitting others to arise in one’s continuum. Who  is  the  first  buddha?
Five  powers  (cont’d).  Five  strengths.  Is   enlightenment   a   definite
possibility?


THE WISDOM TRUTH BODY  AS  THE  EMPOWERING  CONDITION  FOR  THE  THOUGHT  OF
BENEFITTING OTHERS TO ARISE IN ONE’S CONTINUUM

When great compassion arises in one’s mental continuum, this is  when  one’s
Mahayana lineage is activated. So,  in  order  to  activate  one’s  Mahayana
lineage, one needs great compassion to arise. Before  great  compassion  can
arise, one needs to generate the thought  of  benefitting  others.  However,
the thought of benefitting others can only  arise  when  all  the  different
conditions come together.

How should we go about developing the thought  of  benefitting  others?  The
causes and conditions must come together such as the  immediately  preceding
condition, the observed object condition and the empowering condition.

We need to think along these lines:
 • The empowering condition for the thought of benefitting others is said to
   be the wisdom truth body.
 • Following the arising of the thought  of  benefitting  others  comes  the
   generation of great compassion.
 • On the basis of developing great compassion, the mind of enlightenment or
   bodhicitta arises.
 • When one achieves the mind of enlightenment, one  becomes  a  bodhisattva
   travelling along the bodhisattva path, i.e., one traverses the five paths
   and the ten grounds.
 • At the end of the ten grounds, one actualizes the four bodies.
 • After becoming a buddha, one’s enlightened  activities  engage  with  and
   help sentient beings.
 • One’s wisdom truth body will then be the  empowering  condition  for  the
   arising of the thought of benefiting others  in  the  continua  of  other
   sentient beings.

When one actualizes the four bodies, one can perform enlightened  activities
for  sentient  beings.  The  enlightened  activities  of  the  buddhas   are
effortless and spontaneous as they have removed or  pacified  all  forms  of
exertion or motivation. They have gone  beyond  that.  They  are  free  from
having to think or motivate before doing  anything.  In  that  sense,  their
activities are effortless and spontaneous. So the wisdom truth body can  act
effortlessly as the empowering condition for the arising of  any  virtue  in
the continua of all sentient beings.

Having said that, this is not to say that everything is in the  hands  of  a
buddha, i.e., that the wisdom truth body can do whatever it likes. The  mere
presence of the wisdom truth  body  as  the  empowering  condition  for  the
arising of virtue in the mental continuum of any  sentient  being  does  not
necessarily translate  into  the  arising  of  virtue  in  the  continua  of
sentient beings. Both sentient beings and the  buddhas  must  work  together
hand in hand. From our side, as sentient beings, we  also  need  to  put  in
effort.

This is why in order for any virtue  to  arise,  many  different  conditions
must come together. We never say that  the  empowering  condition  alone  is
sufficient. It is similar to what you have studied in  the  presentation  of
the topic  of  mind  and  awareness.  In  order  for  an  eye  consciousness
apprehending a visible form to arise, just  the  presence  of  the  uncommon
empowering condition—the eye sense power—is insufficient. From the  side  of
the eye sense power, it has the potential to  cause  the  eye  consciousness
apprehending visible form  to  arise.  But  it  alone  cannot  lead  to  the
generation of an eye consciousness apprehending form. There  must  be  other
conditions such as the observed object condition and so forth.

This is one of the questions in our recent  group  discussion—how  does  the
wisdom truth body act as an  empowering  condition  for  the  generation  of
virtue in the continuum of a sentient being? Based on your  discussions,  if
you have come up with an interesting line of thought or something  different
from what I have said, please share with us now.

Khen Rinpoche: Did you discuss this in the Sunday class?  The  question  was
there. What is the outcome?  Can you share? Maybe you  have  something  new.
You discussed so much on Sunday and nothing  came  out  of  it?  Thiam  Teck
(name of Student 1), share what your group said. What is the  conclusion  of
the discussion? What is the answer?

Student 1: Actually, there was no conclusion.

Khen Rinpoche: There is no conclusion? What is your explanation  during  the
discussions?

Student 1: Because we have to think  of  the  non-Buddhists.  All  the  non-
Buddhists accept this.

Khen Rinpoche: It doesn’t matter what  they  accept.  The  reality  is  they
don’t accept this and that is OK. It is not  necessary  that  they  have  to
accept this and it doesn’t  matter  whether  they  accept  it  or  not.  The
reality is like that. There is no issue. Why worry about that?

Why doubt that non-Buddhists also create virtue? Otherwise,  it  means  that
the buddhas help only  bodhisattvas.  A  buddha  helps  everyone,  not  only
Buddhists.  Especially,  the  Buddha  helps  more  the  non-Buddhists   than
Buddhists. I am joking!

WHO IS THE FIRST BUDDHA?

Student 1: So in this case, who is the first Buddha?

Khen Rinpoche: You are asking among us, “Who is the first Buddha?”  I  would
say, “It is Thiam Teck!”

Student 1: The answer is that the Buddha’s wisdom truth body is  for  us  to
create virtue. If you go by this regression, before  this  Buddha  became  a
buddha, who is the dharmakaya that gave him the wisdom truth body?

Khen Rinpoche: There is no beginning and no end. So there is no problem.

Student 2:  Student 1’s question is that  if  a  buddha  is  the  empowering
condition for virtuous activities for the arising of great compassion,  then
for the first buddha, who empowered him to develop great compassion?

Khen  Rinpoche:  For  us,  as  sentient  beings,  our  minds  don’t  have  a
beginning. If our minds don’t have a beginning, why should  the  mind  of  a
buddha have a beginning? Where is there a first buddha?

Student 2:   You are saying that  all  along  there  is  a  dharmakaya  that
empowered even the first sentient being to become enlightened.

Khen Rinpoche: You mean there is a first buddha?

Student 2: You said that the dharmakaya  is  the  empowering  condition  for
great compassion to arise. So, in the first place, the very  first  sentient
being to be enlightened must have the empowering condition to develop  great
compassion.

Khen Rinpoche: So you are saying there is a first buddha there?

Student 2: Yes. The first sentient being to get enlightened  must  have  had
the empowering condition to generate great compassion.  Who  give  him  that
empowerment? There was no buddha before that as he was  the  first  sentient
being. Who empowered the first buddha to develop  that  virtue,  that  great
compassion? How can you say that there is no first  one?  There  must  be  a
first one.

Khen Rinpoche: Then there must also be a first sentient being. If  there  is
a first buddha, then there must be a first sentient being.

Student 2:   I think we have to think about it.  From  our  side,  we  can’t
accept that there is no first buddha. To us, there is no  dharmakaya  before
that because no sentient beings has been enlightened yet.  So  who  was  the
empowering condition for that sentient being?
Khen Rinpoche: I am expecting the answer for that question.

We all have a  mind  that  is  essentially  the  factor  of  luminosity  and
awareness. The mind’s emptiness of true existence is the tathagata  essence.
In a way, both factors are the tathagata essence.

From one perspective, the factor of luminosity and  awareness  is  like  the
wisdom truth body. The mind’s  emptiness  of  true  existence  is  like  the
nature body. As it still has defilements,  it  is  not  the  actual  buddha.
Because  we  have  that  in  the  first  place,  we  always  have  it  since
beginningless lifetimes. It has always  been  there.  Therefore,  virtue  is
possible, transformation is possible and enlightenment is possible. This  is
because we have this quality.

In certain traditions, it is said that we  are  already  buddhas,  i.e.,  we
have always been buddhas. There is some sense to this.  In  the  Guru  Puja,
the words,  “primordial  buddha”  are  used  in  the  verse  for  generating
bodhicitta, suggesting that we are already buddhas. Then there is also  some
sense in saying that the factor  of  clarity  and  luminosity  is  like  the
wisdom truth body and that their emptiness is the nature body.

Because we already have them—they have always  been  there—it  makes  virtue
possible. Since they are there in  the  first  place,  when  the  conditions
come, then it is possible to create virtue. If  the  factors  of  luminosity
and awareness are not there, there is no way for virtue to arise.

In that sense, as long as sentient beings have existed  since  beginningless
time, enlightenment has always been with them.  If you  think  of  what  was
discussed earlier, there is some sense in saying that we  have  always  been
buddhas as long as we have existed, i.e., since beginningless time, we  have
always been buddhas.

Therefore, we shouldn’t be looking for  the  buddha  outside.  There  is  no
buddha out there. The buddha is within us. It has always been there.  It  is
just that we are not aware of it or  we  have  not  manifested  it  yet.  In
reality, we are one with the Buddha.

There is some sense to expressing it in this way. There  will  come  a  time
when the defilements that are covering the mind now are removed. Whether  we
say we have achieved enlightenment or that  our  factor  of  luminosity  and
awareness is now appearing clearly and completely—these are  just  different
expressions. In essence, this is what happens. We become a buddha or we  are
introduced to the complete clear nature of the mind. This  is  what  happens
when the defilements are removed.

Likewise, all sentient beings have always been  like  buddhas.  It  is  just
that they are not aware of this. The Buddha  is  not  somewhere  outside  of
sentient beings. Every sentient being is like a  buddha,  i.e.,  the  Buddha
has always been with them. It is just that sentient beings are not aware  of
this. Comes the day when they recognize and see this and this is  when  they
become buddhas.

Let’s say you have achieved nirvana. Where do you achieve nirvana? It is  in
this world, the environment that is included in samsara. When an  individual
achieves nirvana, all the defilements are  separated  from  the  mind.  That
individual is in the same world as us but for that  individual,  this  place
is not samsara.

For some people, their view of a pure land is only limited to a  place  that
they  can travel to. This is one way of looking at it  but  it  is  not  the
only way. If our mind is purified to the extent whereby  everything  appears
in a pure way, it doesn’t matter where we are.  Comes  the  times  when  our
mind is purified of defilements, wherever we  are  will  appear  as  a  pure
land.

When we talk about samsara, it includes the environment for  the  individual
whose mind is still obscured with defilements. It is  only  so  for  someone
who has not  abandoned  the  afflictive  obscuration.  For  such  a  person,
whatever objects he comes into contact with—forms,  sounds,  smells,  tastes
and objects of touch—inevitably, these objects will  cause  him  to  develop
afflictions such as anger and attachment and bring about suffering. For  the
person whose mind is still not liberated from the defilements, the  external
world with all its forms,  sounds,  smells,  tastes  and  objects  of  touch
becomes true suffering. Because it causes suffering,  it  brings  about  the
generation of afflictions. But when that same individual has  abandoned  all
the afflictions and defilements, those same objects  that  caused  suffering
earlier  on  will  not  bother  him,  bring  about  suffering  or  make  the
afflictions arise. In fact, they cause that person to experience  bliss  and
happiness.

Khen Rinpoche: What do you think? Is it not like that? No? In  order  to  go
to a pure land, must you die and go somewhere? It  is  not  necessarily  so.
This world can be a pure land.  Don’t you want to go to  a  pure  land  with
this body?

Student 3: In the module on the tathagata  essence,  it  is  said  that  the
dharmakaya pervades all. So,  technically,  the  dharmakaya  is  everywhere.
Wherever the dharmakaya is, the form body is also there.  Technically,  that
will also make everywhere a pure land.

Khen Rinpoche: If you can recognize it to be a pure land, then it is a  pure
land.

Student 3: It is said in the text that on the path of  meditation,  wherever
the bodhisattva meditates becomes a place of worship. So wherever  the  form
body is also becomes a place of worship. So, technically,  everywhere  is  a
place of worship. If we realize that,  then  there  is  no  need  to  go  on
pilgrimages. As the dharmakaya pervades all things, when we  don’t  generate
virtue but generate non-virtue instead, does that  mean  the  Buddha  didn’t
work hard enough?

It doesn’t seem fair if the credit always go to the  Buddha  and  the  fault
always lies with us.

Khen Rinpoche: You say that it is not fair but  the  Buddha  will  say  that
what you said is not fair.

Student 3: Actually, what it means is that whatever  kind  of  circumstances
we are in, be it a very  bad  situation  or  whatever,  it  is  already  the
optimum or the best that the Buddha can do. No matter how bad the  situation
may be—you may even end up killing somebody—even in that  situation,  it  is
already the optimal situation that the Buddha can present  to  you  at  that
time. .

It is saying that it takes two hands to clap. One hand is always  there.  If
the situation presents itself to me and I become angry, even at  that  time,
that is the best the Buddha can do. No matter what situation we are  in,  it
is already the optimal condition for one’s virtue to  arise.  It  cannot  be
any better than that. This is what it means  that  the  dharmakaya  pervades
all.

Khen Rinpoche: Of course, the Buddha gives you his best all the time.

Student 3: Another question: It is said that the  bodhisattva  will  not  be
born at the peak of cyclic existence because they feel that it  is  helpless
for them as they can’t do anything to help the beings there. Even the  tenth
ground bodhisattva won’t go to the peak of  cyclic  existence  because  they
can’t help the beings there. So it has to depend on the sentient  beings  to
actually get out of peak of cyclic  existence.  Does  the  Buddha  have  any
influence on sentient beings in the peak of cyclic existence?

Khen Rinpoche: I understand what you are saying.

Whatever bodhisattvas do, they still need to generate the  thought  and  the
motivation.  It is not effortless.  Be  it  coarse  or  subtle,  it  doesn’t
matter. They still need to project the intention, “I am going to  do  this.”
If there is such a thing as going to the peak of  cyclic  existence  in  the
formless realm, they still need to generate the thought or motivation to  do
so.

Before the bodhisattva can be  born  into  a  particular  place  to  benefit
others, they must see the purpose of doing so. When they  see  the  purpose,
they will be motivated to be born there.   When  they  are  motivated,  they
project the intention, “I am going there.”

The bodhisattvas don’t see the peak of cyclic existence to be a place  where
they can be of some benefit to others. As they don’t see the  purpose,  they
won’t be motivated and therefore they won’t go there. The  bodhisattvas  see
that they should go to other more worthwhile places.

Unlike the bodhisattvas, the  buddhas  are  very  different.  They  see  all
phenomena directly.  Whatever  their  mind  perceives,  the  mind  perceives
directly as it is. Wherever the mind is,  the  buddha’s  body  is  there.  A
buddha’s body, speech and mind are  inseparable  and  of  one  entity.  That
means buddhas pervade all phenomena and they don’t need  any  motivation  to
go anywhere. They are everywhere.

Khen Rinpoche: Don’t you see them?

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~


FIVE POWERS (CONT’D)

In relation to the path, the five powers are  primarily  cultivated  on  the
heat and the peak levels of the path of preparation. The  five  powers  have
the four noble truths as the objects of observation. The five powers are:
1. the power of faith
2. the power of joyous effort
3. the power of mindfulness
4. the power of meditative stabilization and
5. the power of wisdom

In this context, a power is defined as  an  exalted  knower  that  is  self-
powered. This means that it is independent, possessing power  from  its  own
side, i.e., it is an exalted knower that is  self-powered  with  respect  to
generating its result, an arya’s path.

1. The power of faith
The power of faith is the faith  of  conviction  regarding  what  is  to  be
abandoned and what is to be  cultivated  with  respect  to  the  four  noble
truths.

Due to extensive learning, listening to and hearing  the  teachings  on  the
path of accumulation, on the path of preparation, the  bodhisattva  achieves
the faith of conviction with regard to what is to be abandoned and  what  is
to be cultivated in relation to the four noble truths. This is  a  faith  of
conviction that arises from knowledge.

2. The power of joyous effort
The bodhisattva on the path of preparation has great  enthusiasm  and  takes
delight in abandoning what is to be abandoned such as  the  true  sufferings
and true origins. She is also very enthusiastic in the cultivation  of  true
cessations and true paths. So this is the second power, the power of  joyous
effort.

3. The power of mindfulness
With the  faith  of  conviction  and  joyous  effort,  the  bodhisattva  has
mindfulness of the objects of observation and the aspects of the four  noble
truths. Because of this mindfulness, he  does  not  forget  the  objects  of
observation and aspects of the four noble truths. This is the  third  power,
the power of mindfulness.

4. The power of meditative stabilization
As for the  power  of  meditative  stabilization,  the  bodhisattva  remains
undistracted and has single-pointedness of mind focussing on the four  noble
truths without any distractions.

5. The power of wisdom
The power of wisdom refers to  the  special  insight  that  is  the  special
ability to discriminate between objects and to analyze them.  This  analysis
happens within calm abiding.


On the heat and peak levels of the path of preparation
What is the boundary of peak application? The boundary of  peak  application
is from the heat level of the path  of  preparation  till  the  end  of  the
continuum of a sentient being.

Why do we cultivate the complete aspects  application?  The  purpose  is  to
gain  mastery  with  the  aspects  of  the  three  exalted   knowers.   Peak
application is when you have achieved mastery with  respect  to  cultivating
the aspects of the traits of the three knowers.

When one achieves the heat level of the path of  preparation,  one  has  now
achieved mastery with respect to the meditation on the aspects of the  three
exalted knowers. You are also allowed to say at this  point  that  you  have
achieved mastery with respect to cultivating the objects of  observation  of
the four noble truths.

On the great path of accumulation, one  would  have  achieved  calm  abiding
focussing on emptiness. Within that concentration,  that  single-pointedness
of the mind, there comes the time  when  one  achieves  the  union  of  calm
abiding and special insight focussing on emptiness.

When one enters the path of preparation, one achieves the heat level of  the
path of preparation. That is when you say you  have  achieved  mastery  with
respect to the cultivation of the aspects of the three exalted knowers.

So prior to the path  of  preparation,  even  if  one  is  on  the  path  of
accumulation, one has not achieved mastery with respect to  the  cultivation
of the aspects of three exalted knowers. It is  said  that  the  bodhisattva
achieves such mastery only when he enters the path of preparation.

When one enters the path of preparation, one  achieves  the  union  of  calm
abiding and special  insight  focussing  on  emptiness.  So  the  difference
between having achieved mastery and not having achieved mastery  comes  down
to whether one has achieved the union of calm abiding  and  special  insight
focussing on emptiness or not. I guess this is what you would have  to  say.
When one achieves the union of calm abiding and  special  insight  focussing
on emptiness, one gains the power to suppress the respective defilements  or
objects of abandonment of the path of preparation. One gains  the  power  to
overcome the respective discordant factors of the path of  preparation  such
as non-faith, laziness and so forth.

On the heat and peak levels of the path of preparation, the bodhisattva  has
the power to overcome the manifest forms of these  discordant  factors  such
as laziness and non-faith during meditative  equipoise.  He  can  stop  them
from manifesting but is not able to destroy them  completely.  It  is  still
possible for the discordant factors like laziness  and  non-faith  to  arise
and manifest.

On the heat and peak levels of the  path  of  preparation,  the  bodhisattva
already has the  special  insight  observing  emptiness,  focussing  on  the
aggregates, the body and the person, the self. Obviously, he has  the  power
of the faith of conviction, in this case, the faith  of  conviction  in  the
lack of true existence of the person and the aggregates.

Is it possible for the bodhisattva at this level to have  non-faith  instead
of faith? There  is  the  non-faith  with  respect  to  the  person  or  the
aggregates, i.e., not having faith that they are not truly existent.

I think you probably can say that it is possible for the bodhisattva on  the
heat and peak levels of the path of preparation to have the  lack  of  faith
of conviction with regard to the lack of true existence of the body and  the
self of a person.

During the meditative equipoise on the heat and peak levels of the  path  of
preparation, the bodhisattva still has the appearance of duality, i.e.,  the
object and subject that are meditated upon still have a  sense  of  duality.
The appearance of duality has not  completely  subsided  so  there  is  this
coarse appearance. The bodhisattva at this point  is  aware  that  there  is
this appearance of duality.

 • The second power is the power of joyous effort, which  means  enthusiasm.
   The opposite of that is laziness. It can also be discouragement.  On  the
   first two levels of the path of preparation, it seems that it is possible
   for the bodhisattva to be discouraged about having  to  meditate  on  the
   aggregates as being empty.
 • The third power  is  the  power  of  mindfulness.  Its  function  is  not
   forgetting the objects of observation of whatever is being meditated  on,
   in this case, possibly the four noble truths. On the heat and peak levels
   of the path of preparation,  it  is  possible  for  that  bodhisattva  to
   forget.
 • The fourth power is the power of meditative stabilization.  Its  opposite
   is distraction.
 • The fifth power is the power of wisdom. The opposite of that is ignorance
   or not knowing.

I think it is possible for the bodhisattvas on the heat and peak  levels  of
the path of preparation to be distracted and for  ignorance  to  arise.  The
bodhisattvas in meditative equipoise still have dualistic  appearance.  They
realize and know that there is dualistic appearance. If that is the case,  I
think that the discordant factors of the  five  powers  such  as  non-faith,
laziness, forgetting, distraction and ignorance can arise.

You really have to focus on what I am saying. Otherwise, it is difficult  to
catch everything.

FIVE STRENGTHS

The five strengths  are  also  translated  as  the  five  forces.  The  five
strengths are similar to the  five  powers.  The  only  difference  is  that
instead of the power of faith, in the context of the strengths,  it  is  the
strength of faith or the force of faith and so on. The five strengths are:
1. The strength of faith
2. The strength of joyous effort
3. The strength of mindfulness
4. The strength of meditative stabilization
5. The strength of wisdom

The five strengths are  discussed  primarily  on  the  forbearance  and  the
supreme mundane quality levels of the path of preparation.

At the heat  and  peak  levels  of  path  of  preparation,  the  bodhisattva
cultivates the five powers. Due to the force of meditating at the  heat  and
peak levels of the path of preparation, the five powers become stronger.  So
on the forbearance and the supreme mundane quality levels  of  the  path  of
preparation, they are called the five strengths or five forces because  they
have become stronger.

These five strengths or five forces  on  the  forbearance  and  the  supreme
mundane quality levels of the path of preparation enable  the  mind  to  see
the truth directly on the path of seeing.

It is said that on the forbearance and the supreme  mundane  quality  levels
of the path of preparation,  while  in  meditative  equipoise  focussing  on
emptiness, while dualistic appearance has not subsided completely, there  is
the appearance of  such  subsidence  although  in  reality  there  is  still
dualistic appearance. The bodhisattva is not really aware of this. He  feels
that dualistic appearance has totally subsided. It is said that perhaps  the
bodhisattva at this level is not even aware of himself as the meditator.  He
feels that there is a complete subsidence of dualistic appearance. His  mind
has become much subtler.

Anyway, it is said that on the forbearance and the supreme  mundane  quality
levels of the path of  preparation,  there  is  the  appearance  of  duality
subsiding. The bodhisattva feels that but  there  is  still  some  dualistic
appearance remaining.

Probably, we can say  that  on  the  forbearance  and  the  supreme  mundane
quality levels of the path of  preparation,  discordant  factors  like  non-
faith, laziness and so forth do not arise.

Let’s say we use the body’s emptiness of true existence as an  example.  The
strength of faith is the faith of  conviction  that  this  is  true.  It  is
empty. It is convinced about that. The  opposite  is  non-faith,  i.e.,  not
believing that the body is empty of existing truly. Such non-faith will  not
arise on the forbearance and the supreme mundane quality levels of the  path
of preparation.

There is a difference between  the  five  powers  and  the  five  strengths.
Although they are similar, there is the difference in that on the  heat  and
peak levels of the path of preparation, although the bodhisattva  gains  the
power  to  suppress  many  discordant  factors  like  laziness,   non-faith,
distraction and so forth, it is still possible for them  to  manifest.  Even
though they have attained the ability to suppress them, nevertheless, it  is
still possible for them to manifest. However, at the forbearance  level  and
the  supreme  mundane  quality  levels  of  the  path  of  preparation,  the
bodhisattva gains the strength to  stop  them  from  manifesting.  The  five
discordant factors such as laziness, non-faith,  distraction  and  so  forth
will not manifest.
In Acharya Haribhadra’s commentaries,  he  said  that  the  five  powers—the
power of faith, joyous effort,  mindfulness,  meditative  stabilization  and
wisdom—mingled with the discordant factors such as non-faith and  so  forth.
This means that during the time of the five powers, the  discordant  factors
can still arise. He goes on  to  say  that  during  the  time  of  the  five
strengths however, only the five strengths such as the strengths  of  faith,
joyous effort, mindfulness, meditative stabilization and  wisdom  can  arise
and  the  discordant  factors  do  not  arise.  What  I  said  is  based  on
Haribhadra’s statements in his commentaries.

Student 4:  This meditator  has  calm  abiding,  which  means  that  he  has
overcome the five faults and obstacles to meditative stabilization.  I  have
difficulty reconciling the fact that for someone who has  calm  abiding  and
who has overcome all these faults,  while  in  meditative  equipoise,  these
faults can still arise. Does that mean someone who  has  calm  abiding  will
have laziness, forgetfulness and so forth?

It was stated earlier that during  meditative  equipoise  these  faults  can
arise because of duality. So someone who has calm abiding but  who  has  yet
to realize emptiness also has appearances of  duality.  Does  that  it  also
apply that when he has the bliss  of  mental  pliancy  upon  achieving  calm
abiding, he still has laziness and so forth?

Khen Rinpoche: Think about this: If you have achieved calm abiding, does  it
necessarily follow that you have abandoned  all  laziness,  all  excitement,
all laxity and so forth?

Student  4:  Of  course  not.  But  it  was  mentioned  that  in  meditative
equipoise, because of the presence of duality, the opposite  of  these  five
powers arises. That was  the  reason  given.   I  have  problems  with  this
reason.

Khen Rinpoche: Let’s think about this. Special insight is not calm  abiding.
Special  insight  falls  under  wisdom.  It  is  an  analytical  mind   that
investigates the object individually. This is special insight. Calm  abiding
on the other hand is a concentration and a meditative stabilization.

The  analysis  done  within  calm  abiding  is  done  within  a   state   of
concentration.  So  within  calm  abiding,  that  state  of   concentration,
analysis and investigation is performed. Is there an appearance  of  duality
to that mind? Yes, there is. So when there  is  duality,  can  we  say  that
there can be distraction? This is something to be discussed.

Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know exactly.

The four levels of the path of preparation are  not  necessarily  meditative
equipoises. You cannot say that  the  entire  heat  level  of  the  path  of
preparation  is  a  meditative  equipoise.  There  is  also  post-meditative
equipoise. Likewise, with the forbearance level of the path of  preparation.


If you have difficulty  conceiving  of  discordant  factors  arising  during
meditative equipoise, then how about during  post-meditative  equipoise?  If
you think about post- meditative equipoise, then it is easy as it  is  quite
straightforward. Yes, you can have laziness, distraction, non-faith  and  so
forth during post-meditative equipoise.

Perhaps, it is good to discuss whether discordant factors can  arise  during
meditative equipoise or not on the heat and  peak  levels  of  the  path  of
preparation.
What do you think? Once you have calm abiding, can laziness still arise?

Khen Rinpoche:  How do you know? Is laziness still arising  after  achieving
calm abiding?  After you have  achieved  calm-abiding,  you  will  still  be
lazy?

(Student’s comments are inaudible).

Following what you said, then everything will not manifest - no  laxity,  no
excitement, no distraction and so forth. Only good  things  are  left.  Then
how?

(Student’s response is inaudible).

Khen Rinpoche: OK. I am just throwing  you  the  questions.  You  can  think
about them.

Student 5: Earlier when we were discussing peak application and the  mastery
of cultivating the aspects of the three exalted knowers, I noticed the  word
‘compendium’ was missing repeatedly. I am wondering whether  just  ‘aspects’
will be be enough or do we have to use the  word,  ‘compendium’,  which  was
missing. Is there any difference?

Khen Rinpoche: If you included the word, ‘compendium’, then  in  debate,  it
is  much  easier  and  less  complicated.  If  you  missed  out  the   word,
‘compendium’ in debate, it becomes a bit more complicated.

Student 5: You have explained that when you  cultivate  the  ‘compendium  of
all aspects,’ it is as if you are on the top of the hill, looking  down  and
seeing an overview rather than  seeing  the  specifics.  So  when  you  say,
‘gaining mastery,’ does that pertain to the overview or  does  that  pertain
to the specifics, which are  cultivated  from  serial  application?   To  my
mind, it will refer to the overview and not the details.

Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know. Maybe we can talk about this some other time.

Anyway, at least, as I have told you all many  times,  at  least,  you  must
know how to say the words. She is very good. At least, she  said,  “This  is
this” without looking at her book.

Many of you come here, you don’t even know the words. You  have  nothing  to
express. This is very basic. You need to be able to  at  least  express  the
words. On top of that, you really need to  know  their  meaning.  She  asked
many things that sounded very good but I  don’t  exactly  get  what  she  is
asking. Anyway, this is good.

You should be encouraged and look up to her  as  an  example.  Put  in  some
effort to remember. Otherwise, time passes. This year then  next  year.  You
think, “I will do better next  year.  I  will  do  better  next  year.”  But
nothing happens and after that, it is just empty.
So at least when one’s has the opportunity, one must hold on  to  each  word
and put in the effort. Try  to  get  just  one  word  into  the  brain.  For
example, in today’s class, what did you get out  of  it?  Today,  at  least,
your mind should focus, “I got this in class today.”  Then  you  discuss.  I
mean that will be wonderful.

Another benefit is the imprints like the story  of  (Vasubhandu’s)  pigeons.
When he was reciting the sutra, the two pigeons sat on  the  rooftop.  Then,
in their next life, they became scholars. That is a good way too.

Let’s put in some effort. There are so many  things  but  you  must  get  at
least some of the points, “Today I got that. I shall put this in  my  notes.
At least, I must know this word.” This is important.

IS ENLIGHTENMENT A DEFINITE POSSIBILITY?

Student 3: If Buddha has maximum power and my ignorance has always won  out,
then my ignorance is actually more powerful than the Buddha!

Khen Rinpoche: Of course. Ignorance is much more powerful than Buddha.  That
is why you are still circling.

But you have to think carefully. At the end of the day,  you  cannot  circle
forever. One day, you will get enlightened. That means the  Buddha  is  much
more powerful than you!

Student 3: It was mentioned in an earlier class that just because  you  have
the potential does not mean it will be activated. It  is  not  like  a  ball
rolling down the hill.

Khen Rinpoche: My point is that one day, you will get enlightened. There  is
no question about that. No matter how powerful you are,  you  cannot  circle
in samsara forever. One day, you will get enlightened.

Student 3: Just because the emptiness of our mind allows us to optimize  and
become enlightened, it doesn’t mean it will happen.

Khen Rinpoche: It will happen definitely! Can you  develop  renunciation  or
not?

Student 3: Can.

Khen Rinpoche: Can you enter the path or not?

Student 3: Can.

Khen Rinpoche: Can you attain the state of an arhat or not?

Student 3: Can.

Khen Rinpoche: Can you get enlightened or not?

Student 3: Can but can does not mean I will because it is just a  potential.


Khen Rinpoche: If it is a possibility, then it is possible for it to  happen
one day. If one day, it can happen, it means it is possible. If one day,  it
cannot happen, that means it is not possible. Possible means  something  has
to happen. End of the day, if nothing happens, then  you  can’t  say  it  is
possible. Something has to happen. Then you can say, ‘It is possible.’
Student 3: Then even if I don’t do anything, it will also happen, right?  It
is a one-hand clap. Only the Buddha’s hand  is  clapping.  My  hand  is  not
doing anything.

Khen Rinpoche: One day, you have no choice. Your hand  will  clap  with  the
Buddha’s hand.

Student 3: Then I don’t have to do anything. I will  just  enjoy  myself  in
samsara for now.

Khen Rinpoche: The Buddha is so powerful, one day, you have  no  choice  but
you will have to clap his hand.

Student 6: Since beginningless lifetimes, Buddha has  been  doing  this  and
still samsara exists. Will it end some day? Why has it not ended yet?

Khen Rinpoche: Too many (sentient beings). He is trying so  hard  but  there
are too many (sentient beings).

Ven. Gyurme: It means the Buddha is not so powerful! If  samsara  has  still
not ended yet, there is no reason for it to do so arbitrarily some  time  in
the future.

Khen Rinpoche: You don’t look  at  it  in  that  way.  You  should  look  at
individual sentient beings. If you can  get  enlightened,  why  not  others?
There is no question about that. If you say you can’t get enlightened,  then
that is different. If you  can  get  enlightened,  then  everybody  can  get
enlightened. We are equal and the same in that we can all  get  enlightened!
It is possible and it will happen one day. You just have to work hard.



Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee and Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.







