Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/BP2 M09 L24vet.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:53.120740
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen  Rinpoche  Geshe  Chonyi  on  The  Eight
Categories and Seventy Topics

Root Text:  The  Eight  Categories  and  Seventy  Topics  by  Jetsün  Chökyi
Gyaltsen, translated by Jampa Gendun. Final draft October 2002, updated  May
2011. © Jampa Gendun & FPMT, Inc.

Lesson      24                                                            13
September 2016


Explaining permanence. Review of four correct abandonings. “Why  do  I  need
the Dharma?” Four legs of magical emanations.   Two  methods  of  developing
calm abiding: (1) Five faults, eight antidotes. (2) Nine mental stages.


EXPLAINING PERMANENCE

Student 1: I would like to clarify whether the true cessation  of  suffering
is an impermanent phenomenon or a permanent  phenomenon.  The  reason  I  am
asking this question is because on the one hand, the cessation of  suffering
is a product. It is the result of true paths that lead to the  cessation  of
suffering.

Khen Rinpoche: So your question is, “Are true cessations impermanent?”

Student 1: On the other hand, when the cessation of suffering  is  achieved,
it is forever. In that way, the true cessation of suffering is  a  permanent
phenomenon. So when we look at these two different perspectives, how  do  we
classify this cessation of suffering? Is it a product or is it  a  permanent
phenomenon?

Khen Rinpoche: I understand your question now.

Student 1: I am also inclined to think that a mental image  is  impermanent.
I find it difficult to accept that one will have a mental consciousness,  an
impermanent phenomenon that arises voluntarily while the mental image  is  a
permanent phenomenon. I thought a mental image should  be  classified  as  a
non-associated compositional factor. It is an appearing object to the  mind.


We have also been told  that  the  emptiness  of  inherent  existence  is  a
permanent  phenomenon.  The  conventional  nature  and  ultimate  nature  of
phenomena are posited as one entity with different isolates.  To  me,  these
two isolates must exist in congruence with each other and  not  as  complete
opposites of each other, i.e., one isolate is  a  permanent  phenomenon  and
the other isolate is an impermanent phenomenon.

Can Khen Rinpoche please explain the different interpretations of the  word,
‘permanent’ in relation to a mental image, the cessation  of  suffering  and
the emptiness of inherent existence.  My  understanding  of  ‘permanent’  is
that it is non-momentary and unchanging.

Answer: The main thing is that you have to think about what is discussed  in
the module on the tathagata essence and what was posited  as  the  tathagata
essence. There are two parts:
 • There is the tathagata essence that  is  the  factor  of  luminosity  and
   awareness, which is the mind.
 • The emptiness of true existence of that  mind  is  also  posited  as  the
   tathagata essence.

So the emptiness of true existence is posited as the tathagata  essence  but
the basis of that emptiness, the factor of luminosity and  awareness,  which
is the mind, is also the tathagata essence.

When the stains or defilements of the mind are removed through the force  of
the antidotes, the absence  of  the  defilements  is  none  other  than  the
emptiness of the mind. The true cessations that  are  achieved  through  the
force of the antidotes are not other than the emptiness of the mind.  It  is
not as if when you have achieved true cessations, there  is  something  that
is not the emptiness of the mind. It is not like that.

The mind has  always  been  empty  of  existing  truly  since  beginningless
lifetimes. For as long as the mind has been in existence, the  final  nature
of the mind is its emptiness of true existence.  It  has  always  been  like
that, pure and undefiled. The emptiness of the mind is not  created  through
causes and conditions. This is why  the  natural  perfection  of  wisdom  is
posited as emptiness because for  as  long  as  emptiness  existed,  it  has
always been undefiled by the defilements.

The factor of clarity (or luminosity) and awareness is the  mind.  When  the
mind is separated from the defilements, that mind becomes the  wisdom  truth
body. The emptiness of that wisdom truth body is the nature body.

When somebody achieves the path of seeing and the path  of  release  of  the
path of seeing, that mind is separated from  a  particular  defilement,  the
intellectually acquired or artificial  conception  of  true  existence.  The
cessation that is achieved is the abandonment of the  artificial  conception
of true existence, which is the emptiness of that mind. It is just  that  at
this point in time, the emptiness  of  the  mind  of  this  person  who  has
achieved this abandonment is called a true cessation.  Come  the  time  when
that person has abandoned the afflictive obscurations,  the  abandonment  of
those afflictive obscurations is still the suchness of that  person’s  mind.
But at this juncture, it is given the name, ‘the  abandonment  that  is  the
abandonment of the afflictive obscurations’.

Then  comes  the  time  when  the  mind  is  separated  from  every   single
obscuration, including the knowledge obscurations,  the  emptiness  of  that
mind is called,  ‘the  abandonment  that  is  the  abandonment  of  the  two
obscurations’. But it is the same suchness of the  mind.  Because  the  mind
has evolved, the  suchness  of  that  mind  that  has  evolved  is  given  a
different name.

During this whole evolution process, the mind is evolving or  changing.  The
suchness of the mind  that  is  going  through  that  process  of  evolution
acquires different names. Different names are acquired because the mind  has
changed, not because the suchness of the mind has changed. The  suchness  of
the  mind  never  changes.  As  such,  the  suchness  of  the  mind  is   an
uncompounded phenomenon.

With regard to the meaning generality or mental image,  it  is  a  bit  more
difficult. When we talk about mental images,  there  is  a  factor  that  is
specifically characterized and there  is  a  factor  that  is  a  conceptual
construct. However, for us, these two are mixed indistinguishably and it  is
difficult for us to see the difference between them.

The point is that the appearances that appear to a conceptual  consciousness
are not necessary conceptual as:
 • there are appearances that are conceptual
 • there are appearances that are non-conceptual
                                  ~~~~~~~~~

REVIEW OF FOUR CORRECT ABANDONINGS

One  of  the  reason  for  understanding  the  four  close   placements   of
mindfulness is that one comes to understand that:
 • the thoroughly afflicted class  of  phenomena—true  sufferings  and  true
   origins— are objects to be abandoned
 • true paths and true cessations are objects to be cultivated

The main point is that one should understand that one has to have wisdom  to
understand what needs to be abandoned and what needs to  be  cultivated.  On
the basis of that, one develops  an  aspiration  to  actually  abandon  that
which should be abandoned and cultivate that which should be cultivated.

What follows after the four close placements  of  mindfulness  is  the  four
correct abandonings, whose entity is joyous effort. It is an enthusiasm  for
abandoning the objects of abandonment and for adopting  the  antidotes  that
are the objects of cultivation.

There are non-virtues that have been generated. One has to abandon the  non-
virtues that one has already generated. To do that,  the  power  of  support
and the power of eradication are very important.

In the previous lesson, I raised the qualm about the power  of  eradication,
i.e., essentially regret. By generating regret alone, does that lead to  the
purification of the negativities that have already been accumulated? Yes  or
no?

I guess probably we have to say that if there is real,  sincere  and  strong
regret, it will lead to the reduction  or  purification  of  the  non-virtue
accumulated. Let’s say, a sincere  apology  after  one  has  said  something
nasty or hurtful to another person. If one apologizes sincerely many  times,
it should work. Then both parties will forget about it.

In the event of the accumulation of non-virtue, if one cultivates the  power
of support, i.e., going for refuge and generating the mind of  enlightenment
and, in particular, generate strong regret, it should reduce or  purify  the
non-virtues that have already been generated.

The first of the four abandonings is called  the  abandonment  of  the  non-
virtues that has already been generated. That abandonment does not refer  to
an action that has already ceased. It doesn’t mean, “The  job  is  done.  It
has already been abandoned.”  It is not to be seen as a past  tense.  Rather
the word ‘abandonment’ is more like a  verb  that  refers  to  a  particular
action that to be done in the future.

Next is the generation of non-virtues that has not been generated. It  means
not accumulating fresh negative karma or not engaging  in  new  non-virtues,
i.e., one does that by applying the power of restraint. If we  are  able  to
apply the power of refraining from doing that action again, it makes  a  big
difference to not generating new non-virtues.

Then there is generating the virtues that  have  not  been  generated.  With
respect to the virtues that have already  been  generated,  one  should  not
have a sense of  complacency.  Rather,  one  should  seek  to  increase  the
virtues that have already been generated.

Whether one is generating the  virtues  that  have  not  been  generated  or
increasing the virtues  that  have  been  generated,  one  needs  effort  to
actively bring that about. One does so with enthusiasm. One  should  not  be
content with doing some  small  little  thing,  thinking,  “This  is  enough
merit!” Rather, one should seek to increase the virtues  that  have  already
been generated.

Among the four powers, the generation of the  virtues  that  have  not  been
generated and the increase of virtues that have been generated go  with  the
power of the antidote. The power of applying the antidote (or the  power  of
remedy) is the condition for the generation of virtues that  have  not  been
generated and increasing the virtues that have been generated. As  mentioned
in the lam-rim literature under the power of applying the antidote, six  are
mentioned:
1. reading or reciting the teachings of the Buddha
2. the recitation of dharanis and mantras
3. making offerings to the buddhas
4. reciting the names of the buddhas
5. erecting holy images
6. meditating on emptiness

It is said that the meditation on emptiness is  the  most  powerful  way  of
applying the remedy. But you have to understand  why  this  is  so.  In  the
beginning  of  Chapter  Nine,  the  wisdom  chapter  in  Engaging   in   the
Bodhisattva Deeds, Shantideva said that  all  the  teachings  that  preceded
this chapter were taught by the  Buddha  for  developing  wisdom.[1]  Wisdom
here refers to the wisdom realizing  selflessness.  So  whether  it  is  the
recitation of sutras or mantras, making offerings and so forth, at  the  end
of the day, they are preliminaries for leading sentient beings  towards  the
development of the wisdom realizing selflessness.

While it is said that the root of our  cyclic  existence  is  the  ignorance
apprehending a self, we have to identify for  ourselves  what  exactly  this
ignorance is. This apprehension of a self is said to be the root of all  our
problems and samsara. The only antidote to  this  ignorance  apprehending  a
self is the wisdom realizing selflessness.  This  means  that  without  this
wisdom realizing selflessness, it doesn’t matter what you do,  there  is  no
way to defeat this ignorance that is the root of all our problems. So it  is
most vital to engage in hearing,  reflecting  and  meditating  in  order  to
develop this wisdom realizing selflessness. At the same  time,  we  have  to
accumulate  a  lot  of  merit  to  purify  our  mind  of  obscurations   and
negativities.

“WHY DO I NEED THE DHARMA?”

We all have to ask ourselves, “Why do I need the Dharma in the first  place?
What am I looking for?” You have to want the Dharma from the depths of  your
heart. For that to happen, you need to know why you need the Dharma.

You are all here to educate yourself about the Dharma. Do you ask  yourself,
“Why am I doing this? What am I looking for?” If you don’t see for  yourself
from the depths of your heart and you don’t really know why  the  Dharma  is
so important, why you really need the Dharma, then  I  think  everything  is
going to be difficult.

At least, until you get some real feeling in your heart of how  samsara  and
normal life are in the nature of suffering, then  just  learning  about  and
studying the Dharma alone will not have much  effect  on  the  mind.  It  is
important to have some sense of renunciation from your heart.  You  need  to
genuinely feel that normal life is suffering.

On top of that, you have to reach a point where you begin to  see  that  the
root of your problems is really your  own  ego,  your  ignorance.  The  only
antidote is developing the wisdom realizing selflessness. It  is  only  when
you gain that understanding that you  will  be  able  to  put  up  with  the
difficulties in your  studies  and  practice.  You  will  then  be  able  to
disregard any physical discomfort or challenges that may arise.

You have to reach that stage where you feel it in your heart. Only when  you
have become such a person, with this minimum level of experience,  will  you
truly start to appreciate your  own  gurus.  If  you  have  become  sick  of
samsara and you  are  looking  for  a  way  out,  looking  for  the  Dharma,
especially looking for the wisdom realizing emptiness, then  when  you  find
someone who is qualified and  who  can  help  you  to  get  what  you  want,
definitely, you will appreciate that person  so  much.  You  will  feel  the
kindness  of  that  person.  At  that  time,  what  is  mentioned   in   the
teachings—that the guru is kinder than the Buddha—makes sense to you.

Let’s say that you are dying of thirst. Then you meet someone who gives  you
a cup of water and  saves  you  from  death.  Of  course,  you  will  be  so
appreciative of that person. You will regard that person to be so kind.  But
this is just for this one life alone.
For the person who feels that samsara is suffering  and  is  really  looking
for a way out, when that person meets his qualified guru who  can  help  him
and gives him what he wants, i.e., freeing him from  samsara  forever,  that
guru’s kindness is beyond compare. An individual who sees all these  points,
obviously, he can feel the kindness of the guru. Because  he  sees  how  the
guru can benefit him in all his lifetimes up to  enlightenment,  it  is  not
difficult for this person anymore to sacrifice for the guru and give up  his
body, possessions and so forth.

I think we have too much learning here but not enough practice. We have  too
much talking  and  learning.   Of  course,  in  one  way,  we  are  planting
imprints. But no matter what imprints are planted, the mind  doesn’t  change
at all from just learning the Dharma. So I think there is too  much  talking
and too much learning. I think it is difficult for us to have  that  intense
interest, of dying to practise the  Dharma.  We  don’t  have  that  kind  of
interest.

We have been talking about the  four  correct  abandonings.  They  refer  to
joyous effort. You cannot have effort  without  heartfelt  enthusiasm  where
you really want to  abandon  the  objects  of  abandonments  and  adopt  the
antidotes to cultivate the practice.

FOUR LEGS OF MAGICAL EMANATION

The set of the four legs of magical  emanation  are  essentially  meditative
stabilizations.

What is posited as the object of observation of the  four  legs  of  magical
emanation? Literally, it is a magical emanation as it is able to  cause  one
thing to become many and causing many things to become  one.   As  mentioned
here in the text, the way to achieve calm  abiding  is  the  cultivation  of
concentration.

Five faults, eight antidotes
In Maitreya’s Distinguishing the Middle  from  the  Extremes,  there  is  an
explanation of how one can develop calm abiding  by  cultivating  the  eight
antidotes that counteracts the five faults.

|Fault                          |Antidote                |
|1. Laziness                    |Faith                   |
|                               |Aspiration              |
|                               |Effort                  |
|                               |Pliancy                 |
|2. Forgetfulness               |5. Mindfulness          |
|3. Laxity and excitement       |6. Introspection        |
|4. Non-application             |7. Intention            |
|5. Over-application            |8. Equanimity           |


Of the eight antidotes, the first four are the antidotes  to  the  fault  of
laziness:
1. faith
2. aspiration
3. effort
4. pliancy

 • The aspiration to achieve calm abiding is important before one  can  have
   any hope of achieving it.
 • But before you can yearn for calm abiding, you first must have  faith  as
   faith is the root of aspiration. You need the faith of conviction,  “This
   is absolutely necessary and beneficial. I definitely need  this.”  It  is
   from this faith of conviction that one generates aspiration or  a  strong
   yearning.
 • If there is such strong yearning, naturally, one would put in the  effort
   and joyously persevere in order to achieve the goal.
 • By applying the correct effort, when one achieves the physical and mental
   pliancies, one will not be overcome by physical and mental challenges.

1.  During  the  actual  process  of  cultivating  concentration,   in   the
   beginning, it  is  extremely  important  to  not  forget  the  object  of
   observation because forgetting the object of observation is a big  fault.
   The remedy to that is mindfulness, i.e., not forgetting.
2. On the basis of not forgetting the  chosen  object  of  observation,  one
   enters into the cultivation of concentration. But  during  that  process,
   many challenges and obstacles  will  arise,  such  as  laxity  or  mental
   excitement. In order to recognize their arising, you  need  introspection
   or vigilance. This is also a wisdom. It is introspection that detects the
   arising of the faults of laxity and excitement.
3. But just detecting their arising is not sufficient. What do you do  after
   you have detected that laxity and excitement are about to arise? You  are
   supposed to immediately apply whatever antidotes that are appropriate  to
   the fault that is arising.  So not applying the antidote when laxity  and
   excitement are arising is a fault.
4. When laxity and excitement are not arising, i.e., when the mind is  in  a
   peaceful, calm and undisturbed state, if one were to apply an antidote at
   that time, that is also a fault. It is the fault of over-application. One
   should not apply any antidote when  there  is  no  laxity  or  excitement
   arising. Rather, one has to leave the mind in a state of equanimity.

We have studied this before. I thought to go through it briefly.  Hopefully,
it can serve as a reminder of what you have learnt.

Nine mental stages
The other method for cultivating calm abiding is  through  the  nine  mental
stages as explained in Maitreya’s Ornament of the Mahayana Sutras.

~ 1. Placement
The first mental stage is called placement. In the beginning,  you  have  to
decide on your object of observation, i.e., the object that  you  are  going
to focus your mind on. Once you have chosen your object of observation,  you
have to stick to that object. You cannot  change  the  object  according  to
your whim and fancy.

On the first stage of mental placement, you fix  your  mind  on  the  chosen
object of observation. At this first stage, probably you  are  not  able  to
stay on the object for even more than a minute or two  as  the  mind  is  so
distracted.

~ 2. Continuous placement
After you have placed your mind on the chosen  object  of  observation,  the
idea is to extend your ability to stay on  that  object  for  a  longer  and
longer period of time, say, at least five to ten minutes instead of  just  a
minute or so.

This is where you have the second  stage  called  continuous  placement.  At
this stage of the development of  the  mind,  one  is  probably  still  very
distracted. The idea is to bring the mind  back  to  the  chosen  object  of
observation and try to develop the ability to  stay  on  the  object  for  a
longer period of time. If you want to develop your mind and  meditate,  then
you have to put in the time and effort.

~ 3. Patchy placement
The third mental stage is patchy placement. When one is at this  stage,  one
has achieved some ability to abide on the object. There  is  some  stability
with regard to  the  mind’s  ability  to  abide  on  the  chosen  object  of
meditation. Nevertheless, the mind can still be distracted.  When  the  mind
is distracted, through the application  of  mindfulness  and  introspection,
one brings the mind’s attention back onto the chosen object  of  meditation.
At this third mental stage, one has a fairly good idea of  both  the  coarse
and subtle forms of laxity.

~ 4. Close placement
On the fourth mental stage called close placement, one improves on what  has
been achieved in the third mental stage, i.e., one  improves  one’s  ability
with the application of mindfulness and introspection.   At  this  stage  of
close placement, one’s ability to stay  on  the  object  of  observation  is
quite stable and there  is  good  clarity  with  regard  to  the  object  of
observation.

~ 5. Taming
On the fifth mental stage called  taming,  one’s  ability  is  stay  on  the
object is stable and good. The object of observation appears clearly in  the
mind but the mind’s grip on the chosen object  of  observation  is  somewhat
loose. This is because there is still subtle laxity at this stage.

Lama Tsongkhapa said in  his  Lamrim  Chen  that  there  were  some  Tibetan
masters of the past who said that when one reaches this level, this is  good
meditation because one has the factors of clarity and  stability  and  one’s
mind is very relaxed. Because of this, these Tibetan masters said that  this
is a good meditation as you can see the object clearly,  your  mind  is  not
distracted, yet you are also relaxed. Lama Tsongkhapa refuted this and  said
this is not a good meditation at all!

I guess we may have similar experiences even when we are not  at  the  fifth
stage. Sometimes when we meditate, our mind is able to stay on  the  object,
the mind is not disturbed and there is some clarity of the object.  Yet,  at
the same time, we do feel very relaxed. We may feel so relaxed that we  fall
asleep after a while! The point is that even if we feel very relaxed in  our
meditation, if that leads  to  our  falling  asleep,  that  is  not  a  good
meditation at all.

Khen Rinpoche: Do you know why it is not a good meditation if  you  were  to
fall asleep?

The main point is that your mind is becoming less and less clear and  duller
and duller. You finally fall asleep, which in  itself  is  classified  as  a
derivative of ignorance.  That being the case, the meditation  cannot  be  a
good meditation. It is a bad meditation because it is making your mind  less
clear and duller. How can it be a good meditation? It is  making  your  mind
worse, not making it better.

We have looked at all this before in the lam-rim module.  You  already  know
this, assuming you have not forgotten it. If you  have  forgotten  it,  this
means that you did not understand it in the first place. There  is  no  such
thing as knowing and ascertaining something and then forgetting it.  If  you
really understood it, you won’t forget about  it.  Here  I  am  saying  that
understanding something and forgetting something are mutually exclusive.

This is why Je Rinpoche Lama Tsongkhapa said that a  meditation  that  makes
your mind less and less clear and duller and duller,  finally  even  causing
you to fall sleep is not a good meditation  at  all.  It  is  a  really  bad
meditation.

A good meditation that helps your mind to develop must  not  only  have  the
factors of clarity and stability—being able to stay on  the  object  without
being distracted—but the manner in which the mind holds  on  to  the  object
must be fairly firm. The mind is very alert and has the strength and  energy
to have a good hold of the object. If  these  characteristics  are  present,
then the meditation will make your mind better and better.

Therefore at this mental  stage,  because  of  the  great  danger  of  being
overcome by laxity, the meditator has to  do  something  to  counteract  the
arising of laxity. The meditator has to uplift the mind  by,  say,  thinking
about the great benefits of having concentration and so forth. In this  way,
the meditator boosts his mental energy such that there are  the  factors  of
stability, clarity and energy in the manner the mind is holding  on  to  the
chosen object of meditation.

~ 6. Pacification
On the sixth mental stage called pacification, there is probably  no  longer
any danger of being overcome by laxity. However, because of having  uplifted
the mind earlier on, there could be instances whereby the mind  comes  under
the influence of excitement and distraction because of overly uplifting  the
mind.

Introspection is extremely important on the fifth and  sixth  mental  stags.
On the sixth mental stage, because there is still the  danger  of  the  mind
being distracted due to the influence of being overly uplifted, one  has  to
be  alert  to  the  arising  of  excitement  and  distraction  with   strong
introspection.  One  counteracts  that  by  thinking  about  the  faults  of
distraction.

~ 7. Complete pacification
The seventh stage is called  complete  or  thorough  pacification.  At  this
stage, there is still the possibility of the arising of  subtle  excitement.
But even if it does arise, one is able to overcome it  easily  without  much
effort.

~ 8. Single-pointed attention
The eighth mental stage is called single-pointed attention. On  this  stage,
I guess there is no danger of  either  excitement  or  laxity  arising.  The
meditator is able to stay on the chosen object for a long time. Even  if  we
were to allow for the arising of excitement or  laxity  at  this  level,  it
will be quickly pacified through strong  mindfulness  and  introspection  on
the part of the meditator.

~ 9. Even placement
The ninth stage is called even or balanced placement.  At  this  stage,  the
meditator only needs to  put  in  a  little  effort  to  enter  a  state  of
concentration where he is able to remain on  the  object  for  a  long  time
naturally and spontaneously.

There will then come a time  when  the  meditator  achieves  mental  pliancy
followed  by  physical  pliancy.  Following  the  achievement  of   physical
pliancy, the meditator experiences the bliss of  physical  pliancy  followed
by the bliss of mental  pliancy. It is said that when  the  bliss  of  these
pliancies are achieved, this marks the attainment of calm abiding.

 • I guess mental pliancy is when the mind becomes serviceable.
 • Due to that serviceability, one achieves the serviceability of the  winds
   in the body. That is physical pliancy. So, first there is mental  pliancy
   followed by physical pliancy. Achieving the serviceability of  the  body,
   physical pliancy, is due to the smooth movement of the winds in the body.


 • After the achievement of physical pliancy comes  the  bliss  of  physical
   pliancy.
 • This is then followed by the bliss of mental pliancy.

When all these are achieved, because of the serviceability of the  body  and
mind, laziness is overcome and the meditator no longer feels tired, lazy  or
bored. That person will have no difficulty engaging in virtue.  When  he  is
engaging in virtue, the mind is  so  enthusiastic  and  happy.  When  he  is
engaging in virtue with his body, say, making  prostrations,  the  meditator
is full of energy unlike us when we are making prostrations.

Khen Rinpoche: If we are like that, how are we to achieve  enlightenment?  I
don’t know.

With some understanding of this presentation, it will help  us  to  see  how
important it is to realise calm abiding. In a way, it  also  shows  us  that
our contaminated  appropriated  aggregates  can  be  transformed.  With  the
attainment of calm abiding, without even talking about enlightenment,  there
will be a huge transformation that happens to not just  the  mind  but  also
the body.

Calm abiding is the basis for the four legs  of  magical  emanation.  To  be
able  to  perform  all  these   magical   emanations,   you   need   perfect
concentration and calm abiding.

It is said that bodhisattvas who have these legs of  magical  emanation  can
travel to the pure lands to receive teachings.

Then on the great path  of  accumulation,  one  achieves  the  concentration
called the stream of Dharma or stream of doctrine  whereby  the  bodhisattva
is able to see the supreme emanation bodies directly and  receive  teachings
from them. All this happens on the basis of the attainment of calm  abiding,
so calm abiding is really important.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee and Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.

-----------------------
[1] “The Muni taught all these branches/ For the purpose of wisdom./
Therefore, those who wish to pacify suffering/ Should generate wisdom.”
Verse 1, Chapter 9.

