Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/BP2 M09 L19final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:51.208471
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen  Rinpoche  Geshe  Chonyi  on  The  Eight
Categories and Seventy Topics

Root Text:  The  Eight  Categories  and  Seventy  Topics  by  Jetsün  Chökyi
Gyaltsen, translated by Jampa Gendun. Final draft October 2002, updated  May
2011. © Jampa Gendun & FPMT, Inc.

Lesson 19                                                                 16
August 2016


Presentation of homework from  Lesson  18:  Possibilities  between  complete
aspects application and serial application. The  four  close  placements  of
mindfulness and the four noble truths.


PRESENTATION OF HOMEWORK FROM  LESSON  18:  Possibilities  between  complete
aspects application and serial application

Student 1: Something that is both a complete aspects application and  serial
application is a bodhisattva who has achieved the peak level of the path  of
preparation who is cultivating the aspects of the three exalted knowers

Khen Rinpoche: Your example is not so clear. Make it clearer. In this  case,
you are talking about the mind or the person, the bodhisattva? It is not  so
clear. This is why you have to be more specific.

Student 1:  So you have to say, “in the continuum of a bodhisattva  who  has
achieved the peak level of path of preparation.” Is that more  specific?  Or
do I have to say, “a bodhisattva who engages in meditative equipoise on  the
peak level of path of preparation, who is cultivating …”

Khen Rinpoche: Again you are saying, “the bodhisattva.” Then it  is  talking
about the bodhisattva. You are not talking about the mind.

Student 1: So you can’t use “a bodhisattva superior”?  You  can’t  use  “the
person”?

Khen Rinpoche: You can use anything but are you talking about the person  or
the mind? You have to be clear.

Student 1: A bodhisattva superior who has achieved the  peak  level  of  the
path of preparation who is cultivating the  aspects  of  the  three  exalted
knowers.

Khen Rinpoche: So you are talking about the bodhisattva as  the  example  in
this case?

Student 1: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: You are saying that the bodhisattva is both (applications)?

Student 1: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche:  You have to think. Her example is a  bodhisattva.  She  said
he is both. You have to think about that.

Student 1: Something that is  a  complete  aspects  application  but  not  a
serial application is a tenth ground superior who is at the last  moment  of
being a sentient being.

Khen Rinpoche: Again here you are saying the bodhisattva.  The  same  thing.
Give an example. You have to think whether it is correct or not.

Student 1: I have to figure out what to say. I mean, you have to  say,  “the
wisdom of a  tenth  ground  bodhisattva  superior  who  has  cultivated  the
aspects of the three exalted knowers who is at the last moment  of  being  a
sentient being.”

Khen Rinpoche: You have mixed up these two—the  person  and  the  mind.  You
have to be specific. Are you talking about the person  or  are  you  talking
about the mind? When you read your sentence, it is confusing. Sometimes  you
are talking about the person. Sometimes you are talking about the mind.

Student 1: Referring to the mind, I don’t know how to phrase it.

Khen Rinpoche: You have to understand. You said a  person—a  bodhisattva  on
the tenth bhumi at the last moment of being a bodhisattva.

Student 1: So can I  say,  a  path  in  the  continuum  of  a  tenth  ground
bodhisattva superior at the last moment of being a sentient being?

Khen Rinpoche: A path, then OK.

Student 1: There is nothing that is a serial application but not a  complete
aspects application because the boundary of serial application does  not  go
up to the last moment of the continuum of a sentient being.

Something that is  not  both  a  serial  application  and  complete  aspects
application— the continuum of an ordinary being  who  has  not  entered  the
path of accumulation. Therefore, the number of possibilities is three.

Khen Rinpoche: Is there something that is all four applications?

Someone come up and answer.

This homework is compulsory. Whether you get it right or wrong, you have  to
do it. You have to try. It is compulsory for all of you.

You know what compulsory means? If you don’t do  your  homework  next  time,
you will be fined $100. I am joking!

All of you are adults. Adults should only be told once. I shouldn’t have  to
repeat things over again and again. You are not kids. So as adults,  when  I
tell you to do something, then you should understand what  you  have  to  do
just by me saying it once.

Student 2: There is nothing that is all four applications because  there  is
nothing that is both a serial application and a momentary application.

Khen Rinpoche: Good. Correct.

That was a very good answer. You could tell that it is a  very  good  answer
because he gave the reason in just a few words. From the words he  used,  it
shows he understood  based  on  the  reason  he  gave  of  why  there  isn’t
something that is all four applications. One can give such a correct  answer
only after one has thought about it. So that was an answer that was  thought
through. This is why I always tell you to think about what you have  learnt.
From your own side, you have to do so voluntarily.

Khen Rinpoche: He answered everything.

If you have questions, just ask one question. Then  I  will  return  to  the
text.

Student 3: In lesson 12 or  13,  you  mentioned,  “Is  the  wisdom  directly
realizing selflessness in the continuum of a Mahayana  superior  a  Hinayana
path?” The answer was yes. Is it also a Mahayana path? Yes, because  if  the
person who possesses this wisdom is a Mahayanist, then  the  knower  in  his
continuum is a Mahayana path.

My question is this: Is the wisdom directly realizing  selflessness  in  the
continuum of a Mahayana superior both a Hinayana path and a  Mahayana  path,
although a Mahayana superior’s main object of meditation  is  the  emptiness
of true existence?

It  was  also  said  that  whatever  abides  within  a  Hinayana  class   of
realizations is necessarily a Hinayana path whereas whatever  abides  within
a Mahayana class of realizations is not necessarily a Mahayana path.

What I understood from the lesson is  that  the  wisdom  directly  realizing
emptiness in the continuum of a Hinayana superior is not  a  Mahayana  path,
but bearing  in  mind  that  this  realization  of  the  emptiness  of  true
existence of the Hinayana superior shares a similar  object  of  observation
of meditation and similar aspect with the Mahayana class of realizations.

I am little confused. With respect to a fully qualified path,  you  have  to
bring into consideration his wishes, goals and  aspirations.  When  you  say
the wisdom directly realizing selflessness in a Mahayana superior is both  a
Hinayana path and a Mahayana path, what makes it  a  Hinayana  path?  Is  it
relating to the main object of meditation that relates it  to  the  Hinayana
path? If that is the case, then a Hinayana superior  who  meditates  on  the
emptiness of true existence also has the same object of  meditation  of  the
Mahayana path, so what makes ...

Khen Rinpoche: Can somebody come and answer? I got the  questions  that  she
was asking.

Student 4: The realization of emptiness  in  the  continuum  of  a  Hinayana
superior is not conjoined with mind generation. This is  why  it  is  not  a
Mahayana path.

Student 3: If that is the case, what makes  a  Mahayana  superior  realizing
selflessness a Hinayana path?

Student 4: Because he has renunciation.

Khen Rinpoche: His answer is very short. Renunciation. I don’t know what  he
means. You have to make it a little longer. Her question is why  is  that  a
Hinayana path? Your  answer  is  renunciation  but  it  doesn’t  answer  her
question.

Student 4: A Hinayana path is defined  as  either  a  path  abiding  in  the
Hinayana class of realization or a  path  abiding  in  the  continuum  of  a
Hinayanist.

Student 3: I totally agree with that but I am asking why one is saying  that
there is a Hinayana path in the continuum of a Mahayana superior? One  could
say that the realization of the selflessness of persons is also  a  Mahayana
path.  The bodhisattva’s goal  is  not  a  Hinayana  goal.  His  goal  is  a
Mahayana goal. Is that what defines the path?

Khen Rinpoche: What she is saying is this: If  it  is  included  within  the
Hinayana class of realizations, then it is necessarily a Hinayana path.  But
if it is  included  in  the  Mahayana  class  of  realizations,  it  is  not
necessarily a Mahayana path. Why? The reason is the same as  they  are  both
included within a certain class of realizations. But that which is  included
in the Hinayana class of realizations makes it necessarily a Hinayana  path.
If that is the case, why is it that when it  is  included  in  the  Mahayana
class of realizations, it is  not  necessarily  a  Mahayana  path?  That  is
basically her question.

Khen Rinpoche: She is asking why? It should be the same.  She  is  following
the same logic but why one is yes and the other is no. She thinks the  logic
should be same.

The reasoning is similar but you cannot say that the  Mahayana  path  exists
in the continuum of a Hinayanist. This is absurd and is not  acceptable.  In
the continuum of a Hinayanist,  it  is  not  possible  for  there  to  be  a
Mahayana path, but in the continuum of Mahayanist, it is possible for  there
to be a Hinayana path.

Let’s say you are asked, “Is there a Hinayana path in  the  continuum  of  a
Mahayanist? Does a Mahayanist possess a Hinayana path?” Yes or no? Yes?

Why is it possible for a Mahayanist to possess a Hinayana path?

Why are they Hinayanists? Because they are on the Hinayana path.

How come the Mahayanists have this additional thing in  their  mind?  Aren’t
they Mahayanists? That is the question. Why is it that the Mahayanists  must
possess the Hinayana path in their continuum?

Student 5: Because the bodhisattva  has  to  teach  disciples  of  different
dispositions and different vehicles so he has to know about that  particular
vehicle. You must have the understanding and  realizations  before  you  can
teach someone else. Without that knowledge, understanding  and  realization,
how are you going to impart your knowledge to people?

Khen Rinpoche: The answer is something like  that.  What  if  somebody  asks
after  this  answer,  “Is  there  self-cherishing  in  the  continuum  of  a
Mahayanist?”

Student 5: Before you enter the Mahayana  path  of  accumulation,  you  must
have uncontrived bodhicitta so you don’t have self-cherishing.

Khen Rinpoche: It follows that they do have self-cherishing. The  Mahayanist
must have self-cherishing because this is why  they  can  teach  people  who
have self-cherishing.

Student 5: Not necessarily.

Khen Rinpoche (addressing the class): We are debating here  so  whatever  is
said is not necessarily true. If you follow  the  debate,  it  follows  that
they  have  self-cherishing,  because  they  teach  people  who  have  self-
cherishing.

Student 5: But they don’t have to have self-cherishing to teach people.

Khen  Rinpoche:  Therefore,  it  follows  that  the  Mahayanist  has   self-
cherishing.

Student 5: I still say no.

Khen Rinpoche: In order to take care of those who have  self-cherishing,  if
you don’t have self-cherishing, how are you going to take care of them?

Student 5: A buddha emanates and teaches people. It does  not  mean  that  a
buddha has self-cherishing.

Khen Rinpoche: In the sutra, it is said that the bodhisattvas need  to  know
the paths of all the disciples that they  have  to  take  care  of.  As  the
people they are taking care of are from all the  three  lineages,  as  such,
they have to know the hearers’ path, the solitary realizers'  path  and  the
Mahayana path. The way to take care of  these  trainees  is  to  teach  them
through knowing these paths themselves. This is the reason why they have  to
generate the hearers’  path  and  the  solitary  realizers’  path  in  their
continua and  why  the  Mahayanists  possess  the  Hinayana  path  in  their
continua.

The main illustration of  this  is  the  wisdom  realizing  selflessness  of
persons. The wisdom realizing  the  selflessness  of  persons  is  the  main
object of meditation  of  the  Hinayana  trainees.  Since  the  bodhisattvas
possess the wisdom realizing the selflessness of persons in their  continua,
as such it is said that some bodhisattvas do possess the  Hinayana  path  in
their continua.

THE FOUR CLOSE PLACEMENTS OF MINDFULNESS AND THE FOUR NOBLE TRUTHS

There is the presentation of the four close  placements  of  mindfulness  in
relation to the four noble truths. One  can  come  to  understand  the  four
noble truths through these four close placements of mindfulness.

 • Through the close placement of mindfulness on bodies,  we  will  come  to
   understand that our contaminated appropriated aggregates are  the  entity
   of suffering. Through that, one comes to understand true suffering.
 • One meditates on the close placement of mindfulness on feelings in  order
   to understand true origins. When  we  experience  pleasant  feelings,  it
   leads to the craving or desire not to be separated  from  those  pleasant
   feelings. When we experience unpleasant feelings, we develop  the  desire
   to be separated from those unpleasant  feelings.  So  both  pleasant  and
   unpleasant feelings lead to craving, the source or origin of suffering.
Through understanding these two noble truths, we will act to abandon them.

Is craving induced by the feeling of equanimity (neutral  feelings)?  It  is
clear that pleasant and unpleasant feelings  do  induce  desire,  i.e.,  the
desire not to be separated from pleasant feelings,  and  the  desire  to  be
separated  from  unpleasant   feelings.   What   about   neutral   feelings,
equanimity? Do they lead to  desire  or  craving  or  do  they  lead  to  no
feelings?

Khen Rinpoche: What do you think? If you have neutral feelings, what do  you
feel after that? Nobody has the experience of neutral feelings?  You  remain
like that for a long time or do you want to look for something else?

In one of the commentaries to the Ornament of the  Mahayana  Sutras,  it  is
said the feeling of equanimity leads to craving to get  something.  Remember
those times when we are not  really  feeling  anything  in  particular,  for
example, when we are just sitting around. The feeling is  neutral.  After  a
while, we get bored and this leads  to  wishing  to  experience  a  pleasant
feeling again. Usually, we will not be content with just sitting around  and
feeling nothing. We usually look forward to  some  pleasant  experience  and
excitement.

I wonder if this  is  what  is  meant  by  this  statement  in  one  of  the
commentaries to the Ornament of Mahayana Sutras, which  says,  “The  feeling
of equanimity induces craving or the desire to achieve or get something.”

Let’s us look at our own life. Day in and day out, we  are  looking  forward
to the experience of pleasure.  For  us,  this  is  definitely  contaminated
pleasure but this is what we are looking forward to all  the  time.  We  are
always looking for the next pleasurable experience.  This  is  what  we  are
working for, day in and day out.

Whatever we are doing in our lives, even if we  have  different  lifestyles,
what we are all working for is  to  have  that  pleasurable  experience,  to
manifest that contaminated feeling of pleasure. Why are we  looking  forward
to it? Because we crave and desire it, we work for it, day in and  day  out.
We do so many things and in the process, we accumulate the  karma  to  cycle
in cyclic existence. If  you  think  about  it,  the  main  reason  that  we
continue to circle in samsara is due to our craving that  is  based  on  our
contaminated feelings of pleasure.

All our experiences of pleasure are  nothing  more  than  pleasant  feelings
during that time. They are brief  experiences,  like  dreams,  because  once
they are over, they are gone and they do not  continue.  We  may  experience
specific feelings of pleasure but they don’t last.

When they stop, what do we hope for? We look forward to the next feeling  of
pleasure. When the next feeling  of  pleasure  comes,  it  is  just  a  mere
experience. When that is gone again, we have the craving and desire for  the
next experience of pleasure. This is our life. If you think  about  it,  you
can see that all our experiences of pleasure are the  main  conditions  that
cause us to continue in samsara because those  experiences  induce  craving.
Craving in turn brings about karma and so forth.

The next one is a tricky and difficult one. It  is  explained  in  the  text
that through meditating on the close placement of mindfulness on  minds,  we
will come to understand true cessations. The question is if we  meditate  on
the close placement on minds, how will  that  lead  us  to  understand  true
cessations?

I have mentioned before that when we meditate  on  the  close  placement  of
mindfulness on minds, we will come to see the momentary nature of the  mind,
how it undergoes  momentary  change.  With  that  realization  of  momentary
change, it will destroy whatever conception we may have  of  the  permanence
of the mind.

We talked about how we regard the body as the  basis  or  residence  of  the
self, i.e., the basis of our self-grasping. Somehow, we  conceive  the  body
as being the place where the ‘I’ resides and regard  the  feelings  as  that
which is to be enjoyed. With regard to the mind, we tend to conceive of  the
mind to be ‘me’, to be the  ‘I’.   Since  we  conceive  the  mind  as  being
permanent and unchanging, then we also conceive the person to  be  permanent
and unchanging.

When we understand that our mind is in the nature of  changing  from  moment
to moment, we can also come to understand that the ‘I’, which we  regard  to
be the mind as impermanent and changing. I guess this  is  how  we  overcome
the wrong conception of the permanent, unitary  and  independent  person  or
self.

Through this, we can see how the mind is changing momentarily  in  each  and
every moment. We can see that the continuum of  the  mind  is  eternal.  Yet
within its existence, it is changing momentarily in each  and  every  single
moment. As such, we can also come to understand that the self,  the  person,
is not self-sufficient. Rather, the person, the ‘I’,  is  dependent  on  the
aggregates.

The mind disintegrates momentarily, yet the mind’s continuum is eternal.  It
goes on forever. Since this is so, one will come to understand that the  ‘I’
that is imputed in dependence upon the  continuum  of  the  mind  will  also
exist forever. One then understands that even though the  continuum  of  the
body may be severed, the mind goes on forever. The  ‘I’,  the  person,  does
not exist self-sufficiently. It exists  in  dependence  upon  the  mind.  As
such, one will understand that the ‘I’ will also continue to exist. In  this
way, one develops the understanding that there is a person who  can  achieve
or manifest true cessations.

This is difficult. I am not sure how to put this across. I  guess,  perhaps,
it may be what I have just said. It is difficult because what  is  mentioned
in the text is just this one paragraph that  says,  “Through  meditating  on
the close placement of mindfulness of mind, the basis of self-grasping,  the
mind, is  analyzed  as  impermanent  and  so  forth,  thereby  stopping  the
conception of that. Then due to the absence of fear of annihilation  of  the
self, we will actualize true cessation.”[1] There doesn’t  seem  to  be  any
other explanation available that is clearer than what I have just read  out.
If you think about it, perhaps, it is like that.
 • When we talk about the close placement of  mindfulness  on  the  mind  we
   meditate on the impermanent nature of the mind.  As  it  is  impermanent,
   that means that it is changing momentarily, from moment to moment.
 • Through that, one also comes to understand that the continuum of mind  is
   eternal.
 • If the continuum of the mind is eternal, then the ‘I’ that is imputed  in
   dependence on the mind  should  also  be  eternal.  Although  it  changes
   momentarily, it has to be eternal too.
 • So even if the body disintegrates, i.e., the continuum  of  the  body  is
   severed, one will not have the fear of the annihilation of a self.
 • From this, one can  come  to  understand  that  true  cessations  can  be
   achieved on the basis of the mind.

We have not realized selflessness. This is one of the  reasons  why  we  are
afraid of death. We have this feeling that somehow we will cease  to  exist.
The words, “annihilation of the self,” suggest our  fear  of  going  out  of
existence. This is because we associate our  existence  very  strongly  with
our body.  We think that when our body ceases to exist, we will  also  cease
to exist. We have this fear because we have not realized selflessness.

However, when we come to understand that the self does not exist in a  self-
sufficient way, that rather, it exists as merely imputed on the  mind,  then
since the basis of the mind will exist forever, as such,  the  person  whose
existence is dependent on the  mind  will  also  exist  forever.  Therefore,
there must be a time when true cessations can be  achieved.  From  this,  we
can see that there is no need to fear the annihilation of the  self  or  the
person going out of existence. This is  especially  so  when  we  understand
that the self exists in dependence on the mind,  and  since  the  mind  will
never cease to exist, then there is no  way  that  the  ‘I’  will  cease  to
exist. As such, we do not need to be afraid.

If we consider the tantric presentation, the ultimate or  final  destination
of the person is the extremely subtle wind and mind.  Since  this  extremely
subtle wind and mind never cease to exist,  as  such,  the  ‘I’  will  never
cease to exist. So when the selflessness of persons is  realized,  one  will
not generate the fear of the annihilation of the self. When  we  talk  about
this subtle self, there is really no thought  of  the  ‘I’  being  born  and
going out of existence as it has always been there.

Khen Rinpoche: So you don’t need to worry. You will never  die.  So  why  be
scared?

I am not sure whether my explanation is  appropriate  or  correct.  This  is
something for you to  think  about.  The  teachings  tell  us  that  through
meditating on the close placement of mindfulness of the mind, we  will  come
to understand true cessations. These  are  my  opinions  but  they  are  not
necessarily the truth.

Next is the close placement of mindfulness  on  phenomena.  Here,  phenomena
include all phenomena. When phenomena are divided, there are:
1. thoroughly pure phenomena—these are minds like  love,  compassion,  faith
   and bodhicitta
2. thoroughly afflicted phenomena—these are like the three  mental  poisons,
   such as jealousy, negative competitiveness, pride and so forth.

You have to understand that thoroughly pure phenomena are the objects to  be
cultivated  and  thoroughly  afflicted  phenomena  are  the  objects  to  be
abandoned. Through understanding this, we enter into true paths.

This is the explanation of how one engages  in  the  four  noble  truths  by
meditating on the four close placements of mindfulness. With  the  exception
of the close placement of mindfulness of  the  mind,  the  other  three  are
easy.
1. Through meditating on the close placement of mindfulness  on  bodies,  we
   come to understand true suffering.
2. Through meditating on the close placement of mindfulness on feelings,  we
   come to understand true origins.
3. Through meditating on the close placement of  mindfulness  on  minds,  we
   come to understand true cessations.
4. Through meditating on the close placement of  mindfulness  on  phenomena,
   we come to understand true paths.

When  we  talk  about  pervasive  compounded  suffering,  the  suffering  of
conditionality, this  refers  primarily  to  our  contaminated  appropriated
aggregates. Our contaminated appropriated aggregates are the vessel  of  all
suffering. It is the  medium  through  which  we  experience  presently  all
suffering. It is also the basis for the suffering that  we  will  experience
in the future. Our contaminated appropriated aggregates are also  the  bases
through which we experience the suffering  of  pain  and  the  suffering  of
change. This is explained extensively in the lam-rim literature.  We  should
use that information here in  the  meditation  of  the  close  placement  of
mindfulness on the body.

All our suffering of sickness, aging and death happen on the  basis  of  our
contaminated appropriated aggregates. Because of having  these  contaminated
appropriated aggregates, there is never a single moment when  we  can  truly
feel at ease and experience real peace and real joy. As long as  we  possess
these contaminated appropriated aggregates, it is like  carrying  a  bed  of
thorns on our bare back.  It doesn’t take much to  experience  the  manifest
suffering of pain. All we need to do is to poke the body and discomfort  and
pain will arise immediately. It is important  to  see  this  for  ourselves.
This is the truth and the reality of our existence.

Our body consists of the four elements. As soon as there is an imbalance  in
the elements, we will get sick and experience discomfort. When there  is  an
imbalance of the wind  element,  for  example,  when  the  wind  element  is
excessive, we experience mental agitation. When  the  fire  element  is  too
strong, we experience heat in the body and we may develop  a  fever  and  so
forth.

The essence of meditating on the close placement of mindfulness of the  body
is to realize that our body, the contaminated  appropriated  aggregates,  is
in the nature of suffering. It is the basis of all present suffering. It  is
also the basis of all suffering in the future.  We  have  to  see  this  for
ourselves. This reflection is  necessary  for  those  who  are  looking  for
liberation and who seek to achieve nirvana. This is why  when  suffering  is
presented in the lam-rim literature, the emphasis is  on  the  suffering  of
conditionality  or  pervasive  compounded  suffering.  This  is   the   main
suffering. It is said that if we are unable to recognize correctly and  well
what pervasive compounded suffering is, there is no way for  us  to  develop
the heartfelt wish for liberation.

When we understand well how our body is contaminated and how it  is  in  the
nature of suffering, then it is also possible to feel, “What is the  use  of
holding on so dearly to this body?” We have this idea that our body is  part
of our existence, i.e., there is this sense of self  related  to  the  body.
When we understand that this body is so contaminated and is  in  the  nature
of suffering, we will no longer have the strong  sense  of  clinging  on  so
tightly to my body.

The more deeply we realize that our body is in the nature of  suffering  and
that it is contaminated, the lesser will be our attachment and  clinging  to
our body. The less clinging we have to our body, the less suffering we  will
experience. Then when we actually experience physical pain or suffering,  it
doesn’t affect us so much. We will not be as bothered by it as  much  as  we
would be if we  had  not  realized  that  the  body  is  in  the  nature  of
suffering.

By understanding suffering well, we come to  understand  what  true  origins
are, and based on that,  we  will  develop  the  desire  to  actualize  true
cessations. If  we  are  able  to  develop  the  desire  to  actualize  true
cessations, we are able to engage in the path.

I think the best object for us  to  focus  on  is  our  own  body.  When  we
meditate on the close placement of mindfulness of the  body,  as  beginners,
we need to pay attention  to  our  physical  conduct  because  our  physical
demeanour has an effect on other people.  We  should  apply  mindfulness  to
avoid a demeanour or physical  conduct  that  would  disturb  the  minds  of
others  and  focus  on  adopting  a  physical  conduct  that  will  not   be
objectionable to others. Then this will be helpful to others.

In Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds,  there  is  a  lot  of  discussion  on
physical conduct.  The example is given that when we point out  a  direction
to somebody, “This is where you should go,” we shouldn’t  do  so  with  just
one finger. Rather with a respective demeanour, we  should  extend  all  our
fingers and gesture respectfully in the direction where  the  person  should
go. We should rely on physical conduct that is not objectionable to  but  is
respectful of others. We should be mindful  and  abandon  whatever  physical
conduct others may  find  objectionable  or  disturbing,  and  adopt  bodily
postures and a physical demeanour that people will not  find  objectionable.
We should think all the time, “As a Dharma practitioner (or  fully  ordained
monk), I have a responsibility not  to  act  in  this  way.”  We  should  be
mindfulness about this.  Verbally, we  should  remind  ourselves,  “I  am  a
Dharma practitioner. I should be mindful to say things that are pleasant  to
others and not to say things that are unpleasant to others.”

Khen Rinpoche: I will tell you about one of my Geshe  friends.  His  parents
and sister came from Tibet to  Delhi  to  meet  him.  In  Delhi,  they  were
waiting for a taxi. Somehow, the taxi either didn’t stop or there were  some
problems with the payment.  Something like that. Then my friend,  who  is  a
Geshe, showed his temper. His mother and sisters were very shocked.

The Geshe told me that his sister was totally shocked. His  sister  said  to
Geshe-la, “You have been in a monastery for thirty  years.  You  have  taken
full ordination and you have graduated. How come you show your  temper  over
such a small thing?” After that, his mind changed totally.

It  is  very  important  to  remind  ourselves.  We   have   been   Buddhist
practitioners for 15, 20 years. I don’t know. Maybe  longer  than  that.  50
years? Or longer than that? I don’t know. Anyway, it  is  a  long  time.  10
years. 20 years. But we cannot be patient even with a small thing. Then  you
have to ask yourself, “What kind of practitioner am I?”

This is very true. Sometimes, people say that the Buddhist  practitioner  is
worse than a non-practitioner. I am not saying that I am perfect. This is  a
reminder to myself, and also  for  everyone  here.  We  really  need  to  be
careful. We study so much. In the end, our  mind  only  becomes  harder  and
harder like a rock. Nothing has changed.

Even when someone says a small thing, we cannot bear it and we blow  up.  We
all need to remind ourselves of this. This  is  what  I  am  talking  about.
Because of that incident, the Geshe was very glad and his mind  really  woke
up, “After being a monk for thirty years, you should be like an  enlightened
being!” So what if the taxi driver made ten or twenty dollars. But it  makes
a lot of difference if one was to blow up over that.

All of us have to try to be mindful as  much  as  possible  with  our  body,
speech and mind. All those actions may impact others in a negative  way.  We
should try to avoid this. We should consider ourselves Dharma  practitioners
and we shouldn’t harm or hurt others. At a practical level, we  have  to  do
something. We should be careful and mindful, and  rely  on  mindfulness  and
introspection in whatever we do.

In the vinaya, the code of discipline, if you look at the rules  of  conduct
for fully ordained monks, there are many  precepts  governing  movements—the
way one walks, the way one  eats,  the  way  one  sits  and  so  forth.  For
example, as a fully ordained monk, one has the precept of  not  walking  and
at the same time, looking here and there in a distracted  way.  Ideally,  if
possible, one should not look beyond a certain  distance,  i.e.,  one  looks
downwards and walks. One is also not supposed to walk and swing one’s  hands
here and there. There are many such precepts. The whole point is  to  instil
this sense of mindfulness and vigilance all the time.

We have to cultivate  mindfulness  and  introspection  with  regard  to  our
bodily behaviour. We should not conduct ourselves physically in a  way  that
is objectionable or harmful to others. Likewise, we should  not  say  things
that harm others. Likewise, mentally, we should not engage in thoughts  that
are not beneficial and that are harmful to others. We have to try.  When  we
find ourselves falling short, with mindfulness and introspection, we  should
catch ourselves and if possible, we should remedy it. We should confess  and
do something about it.

Khen Rinpoche: Sometimes, as Buddhists, we learn so much logic.  This  logic
should help us. But many of us use the logic in different ways. If  somebody
shouts at you, “This is your karma.” When  they  hurt  you,  “This  is  your
karma”. You use that kind of logic. That is  not  good.  We  all  know  this
comes from your karma. When you say some bad things to other  people,  “This
is your karma.” Too much logic is being used in the  wrong  way.  Sometimes,
learning too much philosophy becomes not good. You  have  to  know  that.  I
heard someone like that. They quarrelled so much and fought  so  much.  Then
they say, “Your karma is this  and  that.  You  received  this  because  you
didn’t clear your karma.” So sometimes, you have to be  careful.  You  learn
so much philosophy but you can be a big danger and deceive yourself  if  you
don’t know how to use it.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee and Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
-----------------------
[1] Maitreya’s Ornament of  Clear  Realization,  Chapter  4,  Basic  Program
Study Manual. Compiled by Emily Hsu & Kok Wai Cheong, 2004—2005. Revised  by
Sally Ong & Ven. Sangye Khadro, 2009—2010. p. 180.

