Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/BP2 M09 L16final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:52.823307
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen  Rinpoche  Geshe  Chonyi  on  The  Eight
Categories and Seventy Topics

Root Text:  The  Eight  Categories  and  Seventy  Topics  by  Jetsün  Chökyi
Gyaltsen, translated by Jampa Gendun. Final draft October 2002, updated  May
2011. © Jampa Gendun & FPMT, Inc.

Lesson                                                                    16
2 August 2016


Homework: Is our physical  environment  true  suffering?  Peak  application.
Close placement of mindfulness on bodies. Close placement of mindfulness  on
feelings. Close placement  of  mindfulness  on  minds.  Close  placement  of
mindfulness on phenomena.  The  four  close  placements  &  the  four  noble
truths.


HOMEWORK: Is our physical environment true suffering?

If you have thought about the question that  I  asked  in  the  last  lesson
about whether the physical environment is true suffering,  if  you  have  an
opinion  about  this,   please  come  up  to  the  mike.  Is  the   physical
environment where sentient beings live true suffering?

Khen Rinpoche: The seniors in Dharma  knowledge,  please  come  up  and  say
something. The answer is either yes or not but it is not just that.  Whether
you say yes or not, the ‘why’ is important.

Student 1: Yes, because it is a product of karma and afflictions.

Khen Rinpoche: Can you explain further or is that it?

Student 1: It all belongs to one’s aggregates.  It  is  explained  that  the
aggregates  of  the  environment  belong  to   the   fourth   aggregate   of
consciousness. I am not really sure about this. I am  also  not  sure  where
this was asserted but it is among one of the four aggregates.

Khen Rinpoche: Can you repeat?

Student 1: Appearances to the sentient beings includes the environment  that
he is born into. It is the result of  his  past  actions  –  karma  and  his
afflictions.

Khen Rinpoche: Anybody has any other answer? You agree with that?

Student 2: I think that not all things around us are true  suffering.  Those
that give us feelings, especially pleasant feelings, are the conditions  for
attachment, craving and grasping, which  in  turn  nourishes  the  seeds  of
karma and that gives  them  the  power  to   issue  forth  the  contaminated
appropriated aggregates. So not everything is suffering.
Khen Rinpoche: So only pleasant things are suffering?

Student 2: Anything  that  cause  the  experience  of  feelings,  especially
pleasant feelings. This is true suffering.

Khen Rinpoche: Are you saying anything that causes the arising of  feelings?


Student 2:  Yes.  Not  only  pleasant  feelings  but  pleasant  feelings  in
particular.

Ven. Gyurme: Are you saying that there are  certain  things  that  will  not
cause us to have any feelings?

Student 2: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: Give me one example.

Student 2: Space. Nirvana. No feelings.

Khen Rinpoche: You see a very cloudy, moody day for a whole  month  with  no
sun.  Then one day, the sun shines and you see the blue sky. Won’t you  feel
happy?

Student 2: This is not space. This is weather!

Khen Rinpoche: You don’t see the blue sky?

Student 2: Yes, I have feelings for the sky but not for space.

Khen Rinpoche: Aren’t you seeing the blue space and enjoying that space?

Student 2: I have no feelings for free space. I have feelings for  the  sky,
the clouds, the weather but no feeling for free space.

Khen Rinpoche: When you see the blue sky, aren’t  you  seeing  the  sky  and
enjoying it?

Student 2: Yes, I see the sky. Yes, I do enjoy it.

Khen Rinpoche: When you say you enjoy it, it means you  are  happy.  Doesn’t
being happy mean happy feelings are arising?

Student 2: Yes, but as I said, to me, that is not space. It is sky.

Khen Rinpoche: What is the difference between space and the sky?

Student 2: Space is where nothing exists, where  there  is  nothing.  It  is
empty space. No object at all. That to me is space. No objects, free  space,
no sky, nothing. Space to me is like an abstraction, like a  triangle  or  a
sphere.

Khen Rinpoche: So, you have no feeling for space but you  have  feeling  for
the sky?
Student 2: I have feelings for the sky.

Khen Rinpoche: You feel for the sky but you don’t have feeling for space?

Student 2: Yes, to me, they are different.

Khen Rinpoche: For me, it is the opposite. I enjoy space but  I  don’t  know
how to enjoy the sky. For me, it is like that.

Student 2: I have no feelings towards space.

Khen Rinpoche: You are able to move because of space. It is  not  about  the
sky. Because of space, you are able  to  enjoy  movement.  If  there  is  no
space, you are not able to move. How are you going to enjoy anything?

Student 2: I have never thought  about  it  that  way.  So  now,  I  have  a
feeling. Yes. Now, I am suffering. Space makes me suffer.

Khen Rinpoche: I think for me, it is the opposite. Space is  something  that
we can use. When you say ‘sky’, this  is  just  the  label.  On  space,  you
label, ‘The sky.’ There is nothing else there. We  can  use  space.  Because
there is space, darkness and light happen. If there is no  space,  there  is
no darkness and no light. I don’t  know  whether  is  it  is  an  object  of
attachment. This discussion is all about that.

Student 2: So space is suffering.

Khen Rinpoche: Everything is suffering. Left to right is suffering.  Up  and
down is suffering. Wherever we live, nothing is perfect. No?

Student 2: I have to think about it.

Khen Rinpoche:  Our  contaminated  appropriated  aggregates  are  very  good
examples of true suffering. It is very clear that they are  true  suffering.
On the basis of these contaminated appropriated aggregates, we are born,  we
have to die and we have to experience the suffering of aging,  sickness  and
so forth. This much is clear. There is no dispute about this.

We utilize many things in our lives. Whatever  objects  we  utilize  can  be
categorized under the five types of form—visible form, sound,  smell,  taste
and objects of touch. The main question is:  Are  these  objects  also  true
suffering?

When I think about it, I would say that for  us,  ordinary  beings  who  are
under the control of our karma and afflictions, with regard to  our  objects
of utilization, be it form, sound, smell, taste  or  objects  of  touch,  we
have to say they are all true suffering.
We can think along the lines  that  these  objects  of  utilization  by  us,
ordinary beings, who are under the control of karma and afflictions,  induce
suffering in us whenever we utilize and come into contact  with  them.  They
cause us suffering. For that reason, perhaps, it is better to say  that  the
objects of utilization of us, ordinary beings are all true suffering.

When one is an ordinary being under the control of  karma  and  afflictions,
things that appear to one such as forms and so  forth  are  considered  true
suffering. But when one’s mind is separated from,  i.e.,  purified  of,  the
afflictions, then one can say that the forms that appear to one  whose  mind
has been purified of afflictions are also purified  of  the  afflictions  of
oneself.

Compare the two modes of appearance of any of the five types of  form.  When
an individual’s  mind  is  still  not  purified  of  its  afflictions,  that
particular form has its own way of appearing to that individual.  That  same
form will also appear to that individual when his mind is  purified  of  the
afflictions but although it appears, its mode of appearance is different.

As an ordinary individual whose mind is  under  the  control  of  karma  and
afflictions,  coming  into  contact  with  and  experiencing  forms   induce
suffering in that individual. For that reason, we say  that  they  are  true
suffering. But when that individual’s mind is purified of  the  afflictions,
when he comes into contact with those same forms, those forms do not  induce
suffering. As such, we can  say  that  for  the  individual  whose  mind  is
purified of the afflictions, form is not true suffering.

We can use the example of a practitioner’s experience of a  particular  form
prior to  realizing  emptiness  and  after  realizing  emptiness.  Prior  to
realizing emptiness, whatever appears to that individual  appears  as  truly
existent, existing right there  from  its  own  side.  But  after  realizing
emptiness, that meditator has the experience of viewing things as  illusory-
like. Form appears  as  truly  existent  but  that  meditator  now  has  the
experience of that appearance being like an illusion.

In Asanga’s Compendium of Knowledge, the higher  Abhidharma,  he  said  that
true suffering is divided into two:
1. the world of the impure environment (jig ten in Tibetan)
2. the world of the impure inhabitants

Literally, the environment is called the container and the  inhabitants  are
called the essence. But if one were to do a meaning translation,  then  they
are the environment and the  inhabitants.  Both  the  world  of  the  impure
environment and the world of the impure inhabitants are true suffering.

Where did the world of the impure environment come from? It arises from  the
collective karma of the world of the impure inhabitants.

Perhaps, I think we can think along the lines of the environmental  effects,
one of the effects of karma. We  can  say  that  the  world  of  the  impure
environment that is the result of the collective karma of the world  of  the
impure inhabitants is the environmental effect that we, as individuals  have
to experience.

We say that the environment  in  which  we  have  to  live,  experience  and
utilize are the results  of  collective  karma.  Likewise,  the  objects  of
utilization—things that we use in our  daily  lives,  whether  it  is  form,
sound, smell, taste or objects of   touch—all  arise  from  karma.   So  the
objects of utilization of us, ordinary beings, no  matter  how  we  interact
with them, somehow, they act as the bases for us to experience suffering.

If you accept that the world of  the  impure  environment  is  a  result  of
karma, then you have to say the  objects  of  utilization  of  us,  ordinary
beings  in  our  daily  lives—form,  sound,  smell,  taste  and  objects  of
touch—are all the results of karma.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~

PEAK APPLICATION

The definition of peak application is a bodhisattva yoga conjoined with  the
wisdom highly transformed  from  the  Mahayana  path  of  accumulation  that
cultivates a compendium of the three exalted knowers.

Its boundary is the heat level of the Mahayana path of  preparation  through
the end of the continuum (of the sentient being).

The first of the four applications  is  the  complete  aspects  application.
What does this mind do? It cultivates a compendium of  the  aspects  of  the
three exalted knowers.

|Definiendum |Definition     |Boundary     |No of |Topics (Seventy      |
|            |               |             |Topics|topics)              |
|            |               |             |      |Peak application of  |
|Peak        |A bodhisattva’s|Heat level of|8     |heat                 |
|Application |               |Mahayana path|      |Peak application of  |
|            |yoga conjoined |of           |      |peak                 |
|            |with the wisdom|preparation  |      |Peak application of  |
|            |highly         |through the  |      |tolerance            |
|            |transformed    |end of the   |      |Peak application of  |
|            |from the       |continuum (of|      |supreme mundane      |
|            |Mahayana path  |the sentient |      |quality              |
|            |of accumulation|being).      |      |Peak application of  |
|            |that cultivates|             |      |the path of seeing   |
|            |a compendium of|             |      |Peak application of  |
|            |the three      |             |      |the path of          |
|            |exalted        |             |      |meditation           |
|            |knowers.       |             |      |Uninterrupted peak   |
|            |               |             |      |application          |
|            |               |             |      |Perverse achievings  |
|            |               |             |      |to be eliminated     |
|            |               |             |      |indicated here       |
|            |               |             |      |                     |

On  the  Mahayana  path  of  accumulation,  the  bodhisattva  cultivates   a
compendium of the aspects of the three  exalted  knowers.  That  cultivation
becomes more exalted on the Mahayana path of preparation.

The complete aspects application that is taught mainly in the  Chapter  Four
of the Ornament of Clear Realization is an application,  i.e.,  training  or
cultivation, for the purpose of achieving  mastery  of  the  cultivation  of
aspects of the three exalted knowers.
At the time of peak application, the bodhisattva  has  gained  mastery  over
the aspects of the three exalted knowers. It is not  exactly  clear  in  the
treatises as to what is the definition or measure of  gaining  mastery  over
the aspects of the three exalted knowers. I think you can say that when  one
achieves the Mahayana path of preparation, one achieves the special  insight
focussing on aspects of the three exalted  knowers.  Because  of  that,  the
bodhisattva gains mastery over the aspects of the three exalted knowers.

If we put it simply, on the Mahayana path of accumulation,  the  bodhisattva
cultivates  and  meditates  on  the  complete  aspects  application,   i.e.,
cultivating a compendium of the aspects of the  three  exalted  knowers.  He
trains in this well and then there comes a  point  in  time  when  he  gains
mastery  of  that  cultivation,  which  is  on  the  path  of   preparation.
Henceforth, because  of  having  gained  mastery,  his  cultivation  of  the
aspects of the three exalted knowers is given the name, peak application.

|You will recall that there are four achievings among the topics of the exalted |
|knower of all aspects—achieving through armour, achieving through engagement,  |
|achieving through the collections and definitely issuing achieving.            |

Achieving through armour has  the  same  meaning  as  the  complete  aspects
application.
Achieving through armour means cultivating the sense  of  determination  and
courage.  The bodhisattva mentally puts on this armour in order to  generate
this strong  sense  of  determination  and  courage.  In  achieving  through
armour, for example, when  the  bodhisattva  cultivates  the  perfection  of
generosity, he has this great determination  and  intention  of  wanting  to
include the practice of  all  the  other  perfections  in  his  practice  of
generosity. The bodhisattva makes sure that in his practice of each  of  the
perfections, the practices of the other perfections are always included.

If you understand this, it will give you a better idea of  what  cultivating
a compendium of the aspects of the exalted knowers is and  what  a  complete
aspects application is. A complete aspects application  is  this  mind  that
cultivates, not just aspects of the three exalted knowers, but a  compendium
of the aspects of the three exalted knowers in a collective way.

I am explaining in this way to help you to gain a  better  idea.  I  am  not
following the definition and defining  things  strictly.  This  is  just  an
idea.

While achieving through armour is referring mainly to  this  mental  quality
of strong determination to include  the  practice  of  all  the  perfections
within a practice of a specific  perfection,  when  you  come  to  achieving
through engagement, it is not just that strong determination  alone.  It  is
actual engagement. The bodhisattva actually does it. This  is  roughly  what
happens  during  achieving  through  engagement.   So,   achieving   through
engagement and peak application mean the same thing.

The Mahayana path of preparation is achieved when the  bodhisattva  achieves
a union of calm abiding and special insight  focussing  on  emptiness.  That
mind is a realization of  emptiness.  The  way  that  particular  mind  sees
emptiness is different from the mind that sees emptiness while on  the  path
of accumulation. As such, it is called special insight.  It  is  an  insight
that is more special than something else.

When the bodhisattva enters the Mahayana path  of  accumulation  because  of
that union of calm abiding  and  special  insight  observing  emptiness,  he
gains the ability to be able to start suppressing the manifest  apprehension
of true existence. This ability to suppress  the  manifest  apprehension  of
true existence increases as he progresses on the path of preparation,  which
is divided into four stages—heat,  peak,  forbearance  and  supreme  mundane
quality.

Because of this ability  to  suppress  the  manifest  apprehension  of  true
existence, as such, the afflictions do not manifest  frequently  or  easily.
As such, the bodhisattva does not accumulate much karma  that  is  motivated
by the afflictions. This is what I think you  can  say:  Once  the  Mahayana
path of preparation is achieved, the bodhisattva will not be reborn  in  any
of the inopportune states.

HOMEWORK 1

This is a rough idea of what  the  complete  aspects  application  and  peak
application are.  In  order  to  get  a  clearer  idea  of  what  these  two
applications are, the homework is to  think  about  how  many  possibilities
there are between complete aspects application and peak application.

Khen Rinpoche: This is the homework. To make  things  clearer  for  oneself,
think about that. If you try and do this exercise,  I  think  you  will  get
something out of it.

CLOSE PLACEMENT OF MINDFULNESS ON BODIES

We started on the four close placements of mindfulness last week.  The  four
are:
1. the close placement of mindfulness on bodies
2. the close placement of mindfulness on feelings
3. the close placement of mindfulness on minds
4. the close placement of mindfulness on phenomena

There is the erroneous conception that apprehends this body,  which  is  the
basis of the self, i.e., the body in which the self  resides,  as  pure  and
clean. If the person, the self, does not reside in this body, you  will  not
see this body as pure or clean. An example will be  a  corpse.  Essentially,
the body in which a self or a person resides and a corpse are  the  same  in
being a body. But instinctively, we  think  that  the  body  that  the  self
resides in is pure and clean and a corpse is  impure  and  dirty.  Actually,
the difference between these two bodies is just a single  breath.  When  the
person is breathing, we are attached to the body that  is  still  breathing.
The moment he or she stops breathing, in the next moment, it  is  already  a
corpse. Then you feel, “I don’t want  to  have  anything  to  do  with  this
body.”

Khen Rinpoche: You won’t  sleep  (next  to  it).  You  will  be  so  scared.
Immediately, you will run away. Immediately, within one second, there is  no
longer any feeling of its beauty at all.

So, there is a big difference whether the person  resides  in  the  body  or
not. When the body is the residence of a person,  i.e.,  when  a  person  is
residing in it, the ‘I’ comes into the picture, “This body is mine.”  As  it
relates to the person, attachment arises.  This is why people work so  hard,
day and night, to take care of this body. Because we hold on  to  this  body
to be the residence where the ‘I’ resides, then we apprehend  this  body  to
be clean and pure. Because of that, we crave  for  the  body.  Through  that
craving, we accumulate new karma. This craving also nourishes the  seeds  of
previously accumulated karma.

This is the process when we meditate on the close placement  of  mindfulness
on bodies.
 • First, we have to look into our mind to see how instinctively we view our
   body to be clean, pure and desirable.
 • The second thing is to ask ourselves whether it is really clean and pure.


 • If we discover that it is really not clean and pure  at  all,  the  third
   question is, “What do I need to do to counteract this wrong thought?”
 • Once we understand what we need to  do—what  kind  of  mind  we  need  to
   generate to counteract this wrong thought—we cultivate it.
 • The more we cultivate this correct thought that is the  antidote  to  the
   wrong thought, the less karma we accumulate.

The antidotes  were  already  explained  extensively  in  Chapter  Eight  of
Shantideva’s Engaging in the  Bodhisattva  Deeds.  All  the  information  is
there. What we need to do is to practise. We have to sit down,  think  about
it and see for ourselves.

In particular, in the explanation  of  the  impurity  of  the  body  in  the
Chapter Eight, one of the outlines is not just seeing the body as  dirty  or
impure but also seeing how the body is the source of impurities. We have  to
ask ourselves and think about whether what the text says  is  true  or  not.
Just look at the different orifices of  the  body.  Just  think  about  what
comes out of the nose, the mouth, the ears and so forth.  Can  we  point  to
any of those discharges to be clean or pure? There is no need to talk  about
what comes out of our lower orifices. It is clear that definitely, they  are
impure and filthy. But what about the discharges that come out of the  upper
orifices of the body—the eyes, nose, mouth and  ears?  Are  they  impure  or
pure? Are they clean or dirty? I think the answer is clear.

Khen Rinpoche: It is very interesting when it comes to your own  hair.  When
the hair is with you, it is clean. You know that. You  clean  and  wash  it,
especially when you have long hair. It is so clean that some people  put  it
in their mouths! This is how you feel it is really clean. You don’t find  it
to be dirty because it is still part of you. That’s why it is clean.

When one strand of your own hair drops into your food,  maybe  it  is  still
not too bad.  Because it is your own hair, it is still  clean  and  you  may
still eat the food. But still, you consider it to be dirty. Immediately,  it
doesn’t feel nice.

But if you were to go to a restaurant, sometimes, you may find a  strand  of
hair in the food. Immediately, you reject the food. You complain, “There  is
hair in my food!” So what does the waiter do? He goes back,  takes  out  the
hair and returns the food back to you! Actually, you  are  eating  the  same
food.

It is really interesting. Once it separates from  your  body—the  strand  of
hair falls down—then you never see it as clean.  You  don’t  cherish  it  at
all. You feel it is dirty and throw it in the  dustbin.  You  don’t  put  it
inside your pocket.  I’m just giving you an example.

It is always the self that comes into the  picture.  This  happens  all  the
time. Because we view this body to be the residence of the  ‘me’,  the  ‘I’,
the person, we always think, “My body must be good. My  body  is  clean  and
pure.” It is like the example I gave you about your hair. When your hair  is
still stuck on your head, some of you have  no  qualms  about  playing  with
your hair and even putting it into your  mouth.  However,  the  moment  that
very same hair falls on the ground, you will never pick it up and put it  in
your mouth. When the hair falls and is separated from  the  body,  you  have
this idea, “Now, it is separated from me. It  is  no  longer  part  of  me.”
Because of feeling that the connection to the ‘I’ is cut, you begin  to  see
the hair as dirty.

Khen Rinpoche: It is the same thing. You cut  your  hair.  Still,  you  keep
your hair and you don’t throw it away. Some people really keep  their  hair,
“Because it is my hair, it is still not too bad. It is  my  hair  so  I  can
keep it.” But you won’t keep somebody else’s hair. If somebody were to  give
you her hair, you won’t keep it. But because it is your own  hair,  although
it is now separated from you but you still keep it because it is still  ‘my’
hair.

Basically, it comes back to the connection  with  the  feeling  that  it  is
related to ‘me’, this idea that it is part of ‘me’.

When we talk about the  close  placement  of  mindfulness  on  bodies  here,
first, we look at our contaminated body, how it  is  by  nature  impure  and
dirty and a source of filth and impurities. If we  consider  the  discharges
that come out of our body as impure and filthy, then it goes without  saying
that the origin of those impure substances, the body, must  also  be  impure
and dirty.

Anyway, these are the arguments that Shantideva put forth in Chapter  Eight.

 • This contaminated body of ours is by nature dirty, filthy and impure.
 • It is the source and origin of impurities.
 • Even if you were to examine the cause of our body, it is still dirty.

What is the substantial cause of our body? Do we consider the egg and  sperm
of our parents to be clean or dirty, pure or impure? We  think  of  them  as
impure and dirty. If the cause is dirty, impure and  filthy,  then  what  is
there to be said about its result? It too is dirty and impure. So no  matter
how you think about it, in reality, the entity of the  body  is  impure  and
dirty. Its result is impure and dirty. Its cause is impure  and  dirty.  But
although that is the reality, that is not how we see our body.

Shantideva gave additional advice in Chapter Eight  for  those  whose  minds
may be very stubborn and still not change after  thinking  about  all  these
points. He said that you should visit a cemetery,  a  place  where  you  are
able to see corpses. Just observe how dead bodies decompose  over  time.  By
observing how the corpse decomposes over time, then you will  also  come  to
understand that your own body has the same nature, i.e., one  day  you  will
be like that. By thinking along these lines, maybe you can do  something  to
counteract your attachment to and desire for the body.

You can also mentally dissect your body. Start by taking  off  the  skin  to
expose the flesh beneath. Then you go deeper. You will  find  blood,  bones,
joints, veins and so forth. This is another way to counteract attachment.

In Chapter Eight of Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds, Shantideva made it  a
point to really elaborate on how the body is by nature filthy, dirty and  so
forth. Why is there this emphasis?  Because  all  of  us  are  not  able  to
meditate and practise the Dharma  due  to  our  strong  attachment.  We  are
attached to many  things.  In  this  context  here,  we  are  talking  about
attachment to our body.  Why  are  we  so  attached  to  our  body?  Because
instinctively, we think, “My body is very pleasant, very nice,  very  clean,
very pure and very desirable and it ought to be taken care of.”

There is a very elaborate explanation in Chapter Eight.  We  are  challenged
to question our attachment by checking, “If you are attached to  your  body,
what exactly are you attached to?  Its  colour?  Its  shape?”  There  is  an
extensive examination of this in Chapter Eight. Also, by examining  how  the
cause of the body is impure and how the result of the  body  is  impure,  we
can finally come to understand that the body is indeed impure.

CLOSE PLACEMENT OF MINDFULNESS ON FEELINGS

Essentially, this is an exercise on meditating on how feelings  are  in  the
nature of suffering.

When we talk about the experience of utilizing something,  we  are  enjoying
different things. When we utilize objects, we are not  enjoying  the  object
per se. We say we are enjoying the object or the activity but what  is  that
enjoyment? It is essentially the experience, which are feelings. So what  we
are looking for are feelings and among  feelings,  the  main  thing  we  are
looking for is pleasure.

We work day and night in order to enjoy life. We enjoy doing many  different
things, interacting with different objects  and  people.  We  work  day  and
night to experience pleasant feelings over  and  over  again.  This  is  the
bottom line. It is not so much about the person or object but  the  feelings
themselves, especially pleasure. This is our focus in life. This is what  we
work day and night to achieve.

When we experience  problems,  suffering  or  unhappiness,  we  want  to  be
separated from that suffering and those unpleasant feelings. We want  to  go
back to the pleasant feelings. This is what we do in life.

Furthermore, we regard such pleasant feelings as the  most  important  thing
in life, to be real happiness. Instinctively, those  pleasant  feelings  are
very important and very wonderful. Because of this strong belief  that  they
are the most  important  and  most  wonderful  things,  we  get  emotionally
involved with and attached to them. Because of that, we do  many  things  in
our life to achieve them. This is why we accumulate all kinds of karma.

We need to stop our cravings for feelings. Until we  can  stop  the  craving
for feelings, there is absolutely no way to get out of suffering and out  of
samsara. The antidote is to see for ourselves that whatever feeling  it  may
be, actually, it is in the nature of suffering.

We have this very strong feeling of the self and ‘I’, the person.   We  feel
that there is really something that we can identify as the self at  the  end
of the day. If we were asked or if we asked ourselves, “What is  this  ‘I’?”
we will probably point to our mind as being the ‘I’. Between  the  body  and
mind, we think that the mind has to be the ‘I’. This is ‘me’.  This  is  the
self.

We also conceive that this ‘I’ is permanent and stable. Don’t we  feel  this
way? We feel that the ‘I’ is everlasting and  will  always  be  there.  What
kind of emotion does that induce? Definitely, it is craving. The strong  ‘I’
invokes craving again and again and in the process, we accumulate karma.

CLOSE PLACEMENT OF MINDFULNESS ON MINDS

Therefore, we meditate on  the  impermanence  of  the  mind,  how  the  mind
changes in each and every single moment. It is a  momentary  phenomenon.  By
doing that, we counteract the wrong concept of the  self  to  be  permanent.
This is the close placement of mindfulness on minds.

CLOSE PLACEMENT OF MINDFULNESS ON PHENOMENA

The last one is the close placement of mindfulness of  phenomena.  Phenomena
can be divided into:
 • the thoroughly afflicted class of phenomena
 • the thoroughly purified class of phenomena

If we look at our mind, there are many different kinds of  mind.  There  are
minds that are the thoroughly afflicted class of phenomena. There  are  also
virtuous states of  mind  like  love  and  compassion  that  belong  to  the
purified or pure class of phenomena.

But whatever it is, even if it is an object that belongs to the  pure  class
of phenomena, we think of it as existing in and of itself. It  has  its  own
self, its own core and real identity. We apprehend phenomena  in  this  way.
Because we conceive of a self-identity—literally, there is a  self  in  each
and everything that exists—this also induces craving that then leads to  the
accumulation of karma.

In short,
 • By meditating on  the  close  placement  of  mindfulness  on  bodies,  we
   overcome the erroneous conception of the body as pure.
 • By meditating on the close  placement  of  mindfulness  on  feelings,  we
   overcome the erroneous conception  of  feelings—in  particular,  pleasant
   feelings—to be real pleasure.
 • By meditating on the close placement of mindfulness on minds, we overcome
   the erroneous conception of the self to be permanent.
 • By meditating on the close placement  of  mindfulness  on  phenomena,  we
   overcome the erroneous conception of phenomena possessing a self, whether
   it is  a  thoroughly  afflicted  class  phenomena  or  a  pure  class  of
   phenomena.

THE FOUR CLOSE PLACEMENTS & THE FOUR NOBLE TRUTHS

This is one way of explaining the four close placements of  mindfulness  but
there is also another way of explaining them that is  related  to  the  four
noble truths.

                                    [pic]

Each of the four noble truths has four aspects or characteristics.

The four aspects of true suffering are  impermanent,  miserable,  empty  and
selfless.

Why are there these four aspects  of  true  suffering?  They  are  there  to
counteract the erroneous conceptions of purity, bliss, permanence and  self.


HOMEWORK 2

The homework is  to  explain  how  these  four  aspects  of  true  suffering
antidotes to the four erroneous conceptions  of  purity,  bliss,  permanence
and self.

                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~

Question: In the  Great  Exposition  School  (GES),  permanent  objects  are
considered  non-contaminated  objects.  Does  it  necessarily  follow   that
permanent objects are not true suffering? Because in the  GES,  I  see  that
non-contaminated object are objects that do not increase one’s  afflictions.
Therefore, my qualm is, due to this argument,  can  we  say  that  permanent
objects are not true suffering?

Are the appearance of holy objects or forms of holy objects true  suffering?


If every object you come across  and  every  moment  of  the  mind  is  true
suffering, then how is it possible for the buddhas’  enlightened  activities
to act upon us if samsara is pervaded by true suffering?

Khen Rinpoche: Are you saying that the Buddha cannot help you?

Student 3: If every object that we interact with will only induce in us  the
three types of feelings: pleasant, unpleasant or neutral feelings …

Let’s say my friend and I go to a shop and both of us start fighting over  a
buddha  statue  we  like.  So  even  from  the  side  of  the  Buddha,   the
nirmanakaya, trying to help us, from our side, due to our attachment to  the
form of the buddha statue, attachment and desire arise.

Ven.  Gyurme: So your main  question  is  whether  a  holy  object  is  true
suffering?

Student 3: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: Whatever is the object that  you  are  interacting  with,  in
dependence upon that basis, whether you experience suffering  or  happiness,
you have to think about that. If you experience suffering, then it  is  true
suffering.

Khen Rinpoche: You are fighting  over  the  holy  object.  That  brings  you
suffering, no?

Student 3: Then the buddha statue becomes true suffering!

Khen Rinpoche: You cannot say the buddha statue in general. You have to  say
the  buddha statue that you  are  interacting  with.  In  relation  to  your
experience, it brings about suffering, then it will be true suffering.

Student 3: But Lama Zopa Rinpoche always said  that  even  if  one  were  to
engage in activities with regard to the  holy  object  with  attachment  and
afflictions, due to the power of the holy object, one creates virtue.

So this contradicts my earlier example that if I  develop  attachment  to  a
buddha statue, that buddha statue that is my object of observation  will  be
true suffering.

Ven. Gyurme: So you are  saying  because  it  is  true  suffering  for  you,
therefore you cannot accumulate  merit  in  relation  to  that  object.  You
cannot reconcile these two.

Khen Rinpoche: The answer is given by Lama Tsongkhapa in the Great  Treatise
on the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment. This is  due  to  power  of  the
object.

Student 3: Can I say that due to the power of the prayer of the  Buddha,  we
receive merit. However, from our  side,  when  we  interact  with  the  holy
objects with afflictions, we  do  accumulate  negative  karma.  So  when  we
interact with holy objects, there are two karmas,  both  virtuous  and  non-
virtuous. Can we say that?

Khen Rinpoche: We have to think about this. I don’t have  the  exact  answer
myself. We can think about it. It can be discussed further.

This can be debated. You can think about it and you should think  about  it.
The main point about stating that the world of the external  environment  is
true suffering is to start with the things that  we  interact  with  in  our
daily lives—the things that  we use day in and out, the things in  front  of
us, the things that you find to your left and to your right.   You  need  to
understand that for us, ordinary beings, they induce attachment  and  anger.
Therefore,  they  induce  suffering.   This   extends   basically   to   the
environmental effect, the world that we live in. We need to understand  that
it is in the nature of suffering for the purpose of generating  renunciation
and to generate a sense of  disenchantment  with  life.  That  is  the  main
point.

Question: Just to clarify about the Hinayana path: if the  path  is  in  the
continuum of a Hinayanist, even though it is not within a Hinayana class  of
realizations, it is still a Hinayana path. Is that correct?

For example, the wisdom realizing emptiness in the continuum of  a  solitary
realiser is actually a Hinayana path but  it  is  not  within  the  Hinayana
class of realizations. That is a knower that is none of the three knowers.

Khen Rinpoche: It is a knower of bases.

Student 4: But it doesn’t fulfil the part of the definition that says it  is
a Hinayana class of  realizations.  It  is  definitely  not  the  first  two
because it is not in the continuum of a Mahayanist. So you will have a  path
that is none of the eight.

Khen Rinpoche: What is the definition?

Student 4: It is an exalted wisdom abiding with a lesser  vehicle  class  of
realizations conjoined with the wisdom directly  realizing  selflessness  in
the continuum of the person who possesses it.

Khen Rinpoche: Then you have to say it is not a knower of bases.

Student 4: It is not a knower of bases. It is not a knower of paths.  It  is
not an exalted knower of all aspects. In fact, it is none of the eight.

Khen Rinpoche:  The  main  intended  disciples  of  the  Ornament  of  Clear
Realizations are Mahayanists. So the explanation of the  three  knowers  and
the four applications are mainly for the bodhisattvas.

Question: Can you explain a bit about what  ‘conjoined’  means?  It  is  not
concomitant because that means they will arise at the same time.
Question: Under the knower of  paths,  when  you  talk  about  the  path  of
meditation of belief, dedication  and  so  forth,  all  those  are  actually
subsequent clear realizations.

Khen Rinpoche: They are all post meditative equipoises.

Student 4:  Are they are all subsequent cognizers? There is a reason  why  I
ask  this  question  because  in  the  Yogic  Autonomy  Middle  Way  School,
subsequent cognizers are not valid cognizers. For the  YAMWS,  if  they  are
subsequent cognizers, they would have to say that their paths  are  actually
not valid cognizers.

Khen Rinpoche: I think we talk next time.

The Autonomy Middle Way School didn’t say  that  a  path  is  necessarily  a
valid cognizer. A path is necessarily a mind that realizes its  object,  but
it doesn’t have to be a valid cognizer according  to  what  they  define  as
valid. To be non-valid doesn’t mean it is wrong.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee and Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
