Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/BP2 M09  L20final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:51.010041
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen  Rinpoche  Geshe  Chonyi  on  The  Eight
Categories and Seventy Topics

Root Text:  The  Eight  Categories  and  Seventy  Topics  by  Jetsün  Chökyi
Gyaltsen, translated by Jampa Gendun. Final draft October 2002, updated  May
2011. © Jampa Gendun & FPMT, Inc.

Lesson 20                                                                 18
August 2016


Revisiting  the  close  placement  of  mindfulness  on   bodies.   Different
meditation techniques on the body. Looking  at  it  as  (1)  a  disease  (2)
weapon  (3)  poison  (4)  impermanent,  empty   and   selfless.   Countering
attachment  to  the  colour,  shape  and  touch  of  the  body.   Countering
attachment to the colour of the body. Countering attachment to the shape  of
the body. Countering attachment to the touch of the body.
Countering  attachment  to  being  served,  honoured   or   respected.   The
meditations on viewing the body as a skeleton. The  value  of  the  precious
human rebirth.


REVISITING THE CLOSE PLACEMENT OF MINDFULNESS ON BODIES

We have been talking about the four close  placements  of  mindfulness.  The
object of the close placements of mindfulness is  known  by  wisdom  and  is
held closely by the mental factor of mindfulness.  As  such,  there  is  the
close placement of mindfulness.  In order to  be  mindful,  to  be  able  to
remember, first, one must already know the object that one is  going  to  be
mindful of and  remember  or  recollect  it  without  which  one  cannot  be
mindful. As such, it is said  that  mindfulness  is  a  mental  factor  that
brings to mind a valid object that one already knows.

The close placement of mindfulness on bodies is also taught in  the  vinaya,
the ethical code of conduct.  In that context, it  is  taught  primarily  to
the ordained community. Here, one places one’s attention on the impurity  of
the body—how the body is impure, how it is filthy and impermanent.

It is explained in the sutras that the body undergoes  disintegration,  that
it will not abide for a long time and that we will have to leave  it  behind
one day. This is something that we should think about. This  is  the  nature
of the body. This is the reality. First, we understand this reality  through
wisdom. Once this reality is understood  by  wisdom,  we  hold  on  to  this
reality as an object of our memory, our  recollection  and  mindfulness.  We
need to keep this in our mind without forgetting  it  as  we  go  about  our
daily life.  It doesn’t matter what  we  may  be  doing  but  our  attention
should always be focussed on the fact that our body is impermanent, that  it
does not last forever and it is something we have to leave behind.

Many people engage in  wrong  livelihoods  for  the  purpose  of  sustaining
themselves and looking after their bodies. If  we  are  able  to  understand
with  wisdom  the  reality  of  our  body—seeing  that  it  is   by   nature
impermanent, disintegrating momentarily and that  it  will  die  one  day—we
will be able to focus our  mindfulness  on  that  without  forgetting  these
facts  as  we  go  about  our  daily  routines.  With  that   understanding,
recollection and mindfulness in our daily life, it will  contribute  to  the
abandonment of wrong livelihoods. One will not engage in  wrong  livelihoods
just to make a living.

On top of that, if we know and remember well this reality all the  time,  it
will give us the mental strength and desire  to  make  life  meaningful.  It
will be an impetus for us to want to use this body while  we  still  can  to
engage in the practice and to be able to take the essence  from  this  life.
This will help in reducing  any  jealousy  that  may  be  present  and  also
counteract any inflated sense of the self, arrogance and pride we may  have.


It also helps us to view others in the same way,  i.e.,  they  too  are  not
going to live long. As such, we are able to regard them in a positive  light
without feeling arrogant or proud in relation to them. Perhaps, we may  able
be to regard ourselves as lower than them, as their servants.

When we realize that we are not going to live forever, that we will die  one
day, and that our bodies are filthy and  impermanent  in  nature,  this  may
also help us not  to  be  so  attached  to  our  possessions.  Without  such
attachment to  our  possessions,  we  will  want  to  make  our  possessions
meaningful and use them in a beneficial way.

It is not that we don’t know that our bodies are  impermanent  and  that  we
have to die one day. We know this. But the problem comes  from  not  putting
that in the forefront of our mind and being mindful.  We  know  these  facts
but we  don’t  remember  them  mindfully.  We  forget  that  our  lives  are
impermanent and that we are going to die soon. Then many problems  arise  in
our lives.

But knowing this alone will not help. Rather, it is putting  that  knowledge
in the forefront of our mind, without forgetting it. As much as we  can,  we
should focus our mindfulness on it and not forget it all the time. It  is  a
matter of familiarization. It will be helpful if we can do that.

Otherwise, just having the intellectual knowledge that we are going  to  die
is not really useful. Rather, it is the remembrance of  that  fact  that  is
useful. If we don’t remember this, then when things get difficult  in  life,
we may not know what to do and lose our way. For example, when we fall  sick
suddenly, we worry so much about the sickness and  we  don’t  know  what  to
think. But if we recognize the reality of our  body,  and  more  importantly
remember it, we will know that this is just the way life is.  We  are  bound
to get sick and sooner or later, we have to die. If we  can  remember  this,
then having a sickness will not cause us so much worry or difficulty.

Before we can place the attention of our mind  closely  on  the  body  being
filthy, dirty and impermanent, first, we must recognize those facts.  Wisdom
is the mind that recognises, understands and sees reality as it  is.  Wisdom
is not a mind that makes things up, “It is my mind  that  created  the  fact
that the body is dirty and impermanent!” Wisdom is not like  that.  That  is
superimposition. Wisdom is the mind that sees reality  as  it  is.  In  this
case, it is the wisdom that sees the impure body as impure,  exactly  as  it
is. It is also the wisdom that sees the impermanent body as impermanent.

Different meditation techniques on the body
~Looking at the body as a disease
In the vinaya, it is  explained  that  one  should  sit  in  the  seven-fold
Vairocana posture, and look at the body as if it is a sickness  or  disease.
When engaged in the  close  placement  of  mindfulness  on  bodies,  we  are
looking at our own body primarily and not at other people’s  bodies.  As  we
have discussed before, the basic nature of this body is  suffering.  Because
of that nature, the body is like a disease.

It is very much like when we have a disease, such as cancer where  a  tumour
appears on the body and it grows really  big.  With  that  sickness  as  the
condition, then a bodily growth appears, such as a big tumour.  So view  the
body as a disease with a tumour and know that we are  going  to  die.  Here,
the tumour is analogous of pain because the tumour causes pain. So  this  is
the viewing of the body as a disease or sickness.

~Looking at the body as a weapon
There is also viewing the body to be like a weapon with sharp  points.  When
we touch it, it is painful.

~Looking at the body as poison
It is also said that we can view the body to be like poison.  One  will  not
die immediately if one took poison due to its slow reaction.  But  it  is  a
matter of time before the poison takes effect and in the process,  one  will
suffer pain, and eventually one will die.

~Looking at the body as impermanent, empty and selfless
There is also the explanation of viewing the body as impermanent, empty  and
selfless.

This is how it is explained in the vinaya. The purpose of these  reflections
and meditations on how the body is dirty and filthy is to counteract  desire
and attachment. So these meditations are helpful for people  who  have  very
strong desire and attachment.

~ Countering attachment to the colour, shape and touch of the body
There are also other meditations  that  counteract  the  attachment  to  the
body. We may be attracted to another person’s body for various reasons.  One
can be attracted to the person’s  shape,  colour  or  touch.  The  suggested
meditation to counteract this is to imagine the colour,  shape  or  how  the
body will feel if one were to touch it eight or nine days into  its  process
of decomposition.

~Countering attraction to the colour of the body
Let’s say, one is attracted to somebody’s body because of  its  colour.  The
suggested meditation then is to imagine that  the  colour  of  the  body  of
one’s object of attachment slowly turning blue as the person dies.   Imagine
that this is happening to the body of one’s object of attachment.  The  next
step is to imagine boils appearing on the person’s body and  pus  starts  to
come out. The third step is that when the boils dry up  after  the  pus  has
flowed out completely, what is left at the end is just bare flesh.  One  can
imagine that happens to the body of one’s object of  attachment  if  one  is
attracted by its colour, which one finds so  attractive  and  beautiful.  In
place of that attachment, if one were to impute ugliness on  to  that  body,
that will counteract any notion of the body as being attractive.

~Countering attraction to the shape of the body
If we were to find somebody’s body to be attractive because  of  its  shape,
then we can meditate on these two aspects to counteract that attachment.
1.  One  imagines  that  the  person’s  body  is  being  eaten  by  maggots.
   Literally, this is called the meditation on the aspect of eating.
2. Then there is the aspect of breaking down. When  the  body  is  eaten  by
   maggots, after a while, the body breaks up into  different  parts.  These
   various parts are just dispersed.
So these are the two aspects that counteract attachment to the shape of  the
body of one’s object of attachment.

~Countering attachment to the touch of the body
One may be attached to the touch of another’s body. Earlier on,  there  were
the meditations where the body is eaten up and then the body breaks up  into
different parts. Here, to counteract our attachment  to  the  touch  of  the
body, even though the body has broken down into various parts,  now  imagine
that those individual parts are also eaten by maggots. Then,  one  meditates
on the end result after the maggots have eaten up everything. What  is  left
is just the skeleton.

~Countering attachment to be served, honoured or respected
If our attachment is towards wanting ourselves or for the body of others  to
be served, honoured or respected, then imagine  that  the  body  is  like  a
corpse as a corpse has no reaction and is not moving.

The meditation on viewing  the  body  as  a  walking  skeleton  engaging  in
various activities is an antidote to the various forms that  our  attachment
may take in relation to the body. These meditations can counteract  manifest
forms of desire and attachment. When desire  and  attachment  manifest,  for
the time being, these meditations are helpful in that they  can  reduce  our
desire and  attachment  or  at  least,  make  them  non-manifest  but  these
meditations alone cannot stop attachment completely. In  order  to  overcome
attachment completely, there  is  only  one  way  and  that  is  to  realize
selflessness.

Khen Rinpoche: I haven’t seen this for myself but I heard that  in  Thailand
in the Theravadan tradition, they really go to this extent.  They  keep  the
body there and bring all the novice monks to look at how  the  body  decays.
One day, two days, three days … after five days, to see  what  happens.  You
want to go?

I mean, that is the reality of  our  body.  It  is  exactly  like  that,  no
difference. I heard that this still exists there but I haven’t seen  it.  To
train your mind to reduce attachment. I think it is very helpful to do  this
meditation. Now we only talk and we only imagine.  We don’t see  it  and  we
don’t think that our body is disgusting, that there  is  nothing  to  be  so
cherished and attached to. This was explained in the vinaya.

~ The meditations on viewing the body as a skeleton
With regard to the meditation on viewing the body as a skeleton,  there  are
different ways in which we can do this. We can talk about  it  now  and  you
can think about it. In  the  Abhidharmakosa,  there  is  an  explanation  of
viewing the body—be it your own body or the body  of  someone  that  we  are
attached to—as a skeleton.
 • In your mind, you visualize that the  body  you  are  attached  to  is  a
   skeleton.
 • You visualize that certain parts of the body are being eaten by  maggots.
   You can visualize the tip of your big toe being eaten by maggots till you
   can see the bone. This is how it is explained—we  start  with  a  certain
   part of the body like the tip of our big toe or the point of our mid-brow
   where the maggots start to eat the flesh till some bone is exposed.
 • From there, you can imagine that more and more bone is  revealed  as  the
   flesh is eaten up by the maggots to the point  where  all  the  flesh  is
   eaten and what is left is just the skeleton.
 • Likewise, imagine that happening to everyone and viewing the whole  world
   to be filled with skeletons.
 • Perhaps, we start with ourselves in this meditation here. After that,  we
   can imagine that our one skeleton multiplies, becoming more and more till
   it fills up our room or house. Then it goes out of the house and fills up
   the country, the world. I am not sure but I guess maybe it is like that.
 • After that, the skeletons absorb into one another.
 • Finally, it absorbs into the original skeleton and we place our attention
   on that one skeleton. This is prescribed for beginners.
 • The second stage of the meditation is similar.  The  only  difference  is
   that after one has absorbed  all  the  skeletons  back  to  the  original
   skeleton, instead of viewing the entire skeleton, the  original  skeleton
   becomes half its size.
 • In the third stage, we start off in the same  way  and  at  the  end,  we
   withdraw all the skeletons back into our body. The difference between the
   second and third stages is that instead of focussing on just half of  the
   body, we now focus on our skull. What remains is only the skull. Then  we
   place our attention on this.
 • The fourth stage is again similar. The only difference  is  that  at  the
   end, we withdraw the skeletons back into our body. What is  left  of  our
   body is the bone at the area of the mid-brow.  We  don’t  even  have  the
   skull here, just the bone near the mid-brow  that  is  the  size  of  the
   thumb. This is all that remains.  At  the  end,  all  the  skeletons  are
   withdrawn into that and we place our attention there.

In Chapter Eight of Shantideva’s Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds,  it  was
explained  that  the  main  obstacle   for   developing   concentration   is
attachment. In particular it was explained that the attachment to  the  body
is the main hindrance. This is why there is so much emphasis  on  presenting
all these antidotes to counteract attachment to the body.

When we are not able to practice the Dharma, such as not being able  to  sit
down and meditate on the Dharma, the main  problem  is  attachment  and,  in
particular, strong attachment to the body. This is why there are  all  these
antidotes. If we fail to counteract attachment  to  the  body,  real  Dharma
practice  will  be  very  difficult.  Pure  Dharma  practice,  real   Dharma
practice, real reflection and real meditation  will  not  happen  unless  we
work at counteracting our attachment.

Most of us have a lot of  difficulties  because  of  attachment,  especially
attachment to the body, be it our own body or somebody else’s body. It is  a
difficult  and  challenging  issue  for  everyone  unless  we  are  able  to
counteract this attachment. If we are able to place  our  attention  on  the
fact that our bodies and the bodies of others are  filthy  and  impermanent,
and that we will decay and die one day, that is very helpful for  the  mind.
Only with this mindfulness will we be able to make our life meaningful.

The value of the precious human rebirth
On the one hand, we are told how extraordinarily precious the human life  of
freedoms and endowments is. A human life of freedoms and endowments is  even
more precious than the life of a god. So, although the human body is  dirty,
filthy and impermanent and it will decay and we will  die  one  day,  it  is
also emphasized that a human life is very precious.

The reason why our human life of freedoms and endowments is so  precious  is
because we can achieve many goals with it—the goals of  this  life  and  the
goals  and  happiness  of  future  lives,  including  the   achievement   of
liberation and enlightenment. All these goals are achieved on the  basis  of
the human life of freedoms and endowments. There is no other reason  why  it
is so precious other than this.

We had discussed earlier that on the basis of this human  life  of  freedoms
and endowments, it is possible to newly achieve the path of seeing and  path
of meditation, which  cannot  be  achieved  even  with  rebirth  as  a  god.
Although this human body is filthy, dirty and impermanent, it is still  very
precious as we can do many things with it. Therefore, we have to  take  care
of it, use it well and not let it go to waste.

Khen Rinpoche: In my hometown, people keep all the cow  dung.  It  is  dirty
but they cherish it so much. Why? Because they know it  is  useful  although
they know it is dirty. Even for cow poo, immediately, many people will  rush
there, put their hands in it and take it home. They use  it  as  fertilizer.
Also, after they have used it as fertilizer, they flatten the cow dung  with
their hands and put on the wall for it to dry up.  After  one,  two  months,
the cow dung is totally dried up. Then they use it as fuel for  cooking.  It
makes a very powerful fire and the food they cook with it is delicious!

This human life of freedoms and endowments is precious. Therefore,  we  have
to take care of it. We must know how to  do  this.  Otherwise,  it  is  just
taking care of something that is very dirty and filthy, like taking care  of
a bag of filth. Our life is already difficult enough. If we were to  lead  a
life motivated by attachment and desire, we are just making life  even  more
difficult. It will be the same as going out and collecting a  huge  pile  of
excrement! Then you leave it in your room for you  to  smell.  As  we  don’t
know what to do with the excrement we have collected, we put  it  there  and
it stinks.

Anyway, these are the various antidotes that are taught  to  those  who  are
very desirous of  counteracting  their  attachment.  It  is  said  that  the
meditations on the body as a skeleton act as the antidotes  to  the  various
aspects of attachment for the body. If we find ourselves  having  a  lot  of
desire or attachment for a body, whether it is  our  own  body  or  somebody
else’s body, then these meditations will be helpful.

You have to see for yourself whether they work or not. When  you  experience
strong desire or attachment, think of  these  meditations  and  try  to  see
whether they work or not. They do help to  counteract  any  manifest  desire
and attachment but you have to try them out for yourself.

I mentioned the close placement of mindfulness of our bodily conduct in  the
last class. The essence is that we have to check whether we  are  using  our
body to harm or hurt others. So, continuing  to  place  our  mindfulness  on
that, we don’t use our body to harm others.  It is not as if we  don’t  know
all this. We know all these information. We have studied all these.

When we create non-virtue with our body, speech and  mind,  there  are  four
ripening effects. All these come about if we engage in any action  with  our
body, speech and mind that is harmful or hurts others. If we  do  that,  the
damage is done. There are these four results. We know all this.  It  is  not
that we don’t know of these ripening effects. But whether  we  remember  and
act on them, the idea is to apply the close  placements  of  mindfulness  to
remember to stop ourselves as much as possible from  harming  others.   When
we are mindful  of  not  hurting  others  physically  or  verbally  and  not
creating non-virtue, then there is also the  added  element  of  benefitting
others, especially if we act  physically  or  verbally  in  a  way  that  is
beneficial to others. On top of the earlier benefit of not  harming  others,
there is also the benefit of creating the merit of benefitting others.

Khen Rinpoche: How we behave makes a big difference. It  is  important.  One
day, in Singapore, I went to a shop to look for shoes. In one of the  shops,
there was a lady who was helping there. I tried on the shoes but she  didn’t
give me any socks. So I asked for socks. She brought the socks. How did  she
bring the socks? She brought the pair of  socks,  not  new  ones,  with  two
hands. She is not a Buddhist. She is Malay. She doesn’t know anything  about
me, about respecting me. Nothing like that.  But she gave me the socks  with
her two hands together.

In some shops, they give you the socks  with  one  hand,  like  this.  (Khen
Rinpoche demonstrates).

If  it  were  you,  how  would  you  feel?  Somebody  gives  you   something
respectfully with two hands. Of course, you feel happy. Somebody  gives  you
something, maybe with no respect or the  way  they  behave,  immediately  in
your mind, you are not angry but you have the idea that this person  is  not
so good. Or immediately, you project that this person  is  arrogant  or  not
nice. Immediately, some unhappiness is created.

So, whatever you wanted to buy, you won’t buy  because  of  this  unpleasant
feeling. You don’t like it. This is not good so you don’t want to  buy.  You
go off. If the person behaves respectfully, you will  buy  the  thing.  Then
both of you get the benefit. I get the benefit as the person makes me  happy
with just this small action.

I am telling you this that as a Buddhist, I think we need  to  do  something
so that our actions are not so hurtful  to  others.  As  much  as  possible,
smile with respect. Don’t be so arrogant. Always act as low as  possible.  I
mean that really brings so much joy to others.

I am just giving you a small example. If you  do  that,  then  you  get  the
payback immediately. People will respect you in return. They won’t show  you
a black face. So, it is extremely important for  ourselves  how  we  behave,
how you show your face to others. I am not saying that I am always  perfect.
I also have a lot of difficulties myself.

But it is extremely important for everybody to try to do that. Try  to  talk
to people, smile and say hello to them. When you see each other,  it  should
not be like not seeing each other at all.  Being  unhappy  with  each  other
will create so much negative energy.

We talk about how life is not too long. It is short. How long can you  live?
One year? Two years? One month? Ten years? I mean, nobody can predict  this.
This is something we need to remind ourselves all the time.

I think it is extremely important to be mindfulness in your  bodily  contact
and speech. It is the same thing when you speak to people. The way you  talk
can bring so much happiness and joy for the other person. But with the  same
words, same speech, you can also bring so much pain or suffering to  others.
Therefore, always be mindful about how you communicate and how you  talk  to
people. This is extremely important.

I mentioned this before. A long time ago, I think it was  1986  or  1987,  I
was in Dharamsala at Tushita for two months memorizing some  texts.  It  was
December or January. It was very cold there. In the morning, about 9:30  am,
the sun rises. I had come out from my room and was sitting in the garden  to
get some heat from the sun.

That morning, a group of people  with  a  nun  were  visiting.  I  knew  the
Western nun. She had come up from below Dharamsala with five or  six  people
to visit Tushita. I have never talked to her before but I knew her.

I was outside the gompa. She came up and asked me where  Ven.  Roger’s  room
was. I was so cold and had just come out to sit  there.  I  pointed  to  the
room. Of course, I can see the room as it is not so far way.  I  just  said,
“That room.” She got so mad and upset and angry with me. She shouted  at  me
and said, “Why don’t you stand up and show me the room?”

Of course, I was upset and angry too so I didn’t move at all. I said,  “Just
in front. The window there. That is the room. Go there.” I didn’t  move.  If
you think about it, it was my own problem. If I had stood up and showed  her
the room, “Come, this is the room,” I think it would  have  solved  all  the
problem. But I didn’t do that and she was so upset and she told  the  French
nun there.

Then I went to His Holiness’ teachings.  When she saw  me  there,  she  just
didn’t want to look at me. It was as if she had seen a ghost. This  went  on
for almost two or three weeks. She told  another  monk,  “That  monk  is  so
arrogant!” She told so many bad stories about me. After that, one  nun  that
I knew talked to me, “Why don’t you go and apologize  to  her.  Go  and  say
sorry. It will be OK after that.” But I didn’t go.
Then one day, this nun arranged a dinner for the two of us to  be  together.
The nun organized it. We sat down and talked.  After  that,  there  were  no
more problems. She knew I was a Kopan monk. She said, “Last  time  I  helped
Kopan so much. I did so much. I did this and I did that. Now I am not  going
to help Kopan.” She said so much to me.  That  she  was  going  to  talk  to
Rinpoche and so on and so forth.

Actually, it was a very small matter but it became a very big  issue.  After
a while, one month later or something like that, then it  was  OK.   We  had
dinner, which another nun organized. We didn’t say sorry. Anyway, there  was
talking and after that, it was OK.

She had walked from lower Dharamsala all the way up to Tushita and she  must
have been tired and cold. She didn’t know that I had come out from  my  room
for the sun. When she asked me, if I had been able to respond  respectfully,
then I think there won’t be any issue at  all.  So,  when  you  think  about
that, who really created the problem? It is me. I started the  problem,  not
her.

Sometimes, it is really important to recognize that for oneself.  Sometimes,
you are unhappy with this and that  but  look  deep  down.  If  you  are  so
wonderful and did everything correctly, who  would  be  upset  with  you?  I
think no one will be upset with you. If you smile, people will  smile  back.
If you are not smiling, then people will not smile back.  Therefore,  if  we
really think deeply, we always put the blame on others, “This person  is  so
… I am perfect. I didn’t do anything wrong. I  am  so  good.  Why  did  this
person do that? Why is this person so upset? …”   In  reality,  it  is  like
that but we never think of it in that way. We  always  think  that  problems
come from the other side. You are never the cause of the problem.

So, that is why I am talking here. It is really important to be  mindful  of
how we speak and how we behave.  It makes a huge difference for oneself  and
it can bring about so much happiness. I just mentioned this example  of  the
person who gave me the socks with both hands. It was such  a  simple  action
but it made a difference.

You go to a restaurant and some waitress serves you. They talk to  you  very
pleasantly. They serve so well. They are so pleasant and they  smile.  As  a
business, of course, that is the best thing to do. You attract customers  to
your restaurant because of how you serve them.

As Buddhists, we have so  many  commitments—refuge,  not  to  harm  sentient
beings, taking bodhisattva vows. After that, taking tantric vows and  making
so many promises to our gurus, the Buddha and all  mother  sentient  beings.
But in reality, you cannot stand even one sentient being.

What I am saying is that you really need  to  think  deeply.  You  have  all
learnt so much but you really need to think about how  to  behave  yourself.
Nobody else is to blame.

I mentioned once in the Chinese Lam-rim class,  you  should  become  like  a
compassionate buddha. Once you behave well, you talk nicely, your manner  is
very pleasant—then you are like little compassionate buddhas.  What  is  the
difference? Everybody loves you, there is real  caring  and  less  problems.
Sometimes, we learn so much. This topic and that  topic.  We  know  so  much
Dharma knowledge but action is zero!

One of the Kadampa masters said something like this,  “You  know  everything
but you don’t know one thing.” Therefore, it is important that we learn  the
four close placements of mindfulness and, at the same time, practise how  to
be mindful of our body, speech and  mind.  Always  remember  that.  This  is
really important.

As mentioned in the lam-rim, among all the awarenesses or recognitions,  the
supreme recognition or awareness is that of death and  impermanence.  If  we
can, we should remember that at the back of our mind  all  the  time—we  are
definitely going to die and the time of death is uncertain.  That  attitude,
that remembrance and awareness is said to be the best of all awarenesses.

When the Kadampa master said, “We know a hundred things but we miss out  one
thing,”  that  one  thing  is  death  and  impermanence.  Because   of   not
remembering to recall death and impermanence,  we  are  like  a  person  who
actually doesn’t know anything although we know one  hundred  other  things.
If we don’t remember death, it is pretty much the same as  not  knowing  the
other hundred things.

For those whose minds are always very busy, thinking of this, that  and  the
other, having a lot of discursive thoughts, then  the  recommended  antidote
is mindfulness of the breath, i.e.,  breathing  meditation.  There  are  six
points with regard to the meditation for counteracting discursiveness.  This
is found in the auto commentary to the Abhidharmakosha.

In the present day, in the Theravadan tradition, there are sutras,  many  of
which are not available in Tibetan but  appear  in  the  Pali  canon,  where
there are many  explanations  on  how  to  cultivate  mindfulness  in  daily
activities while walking, sitting, lying down, eating and  so  forth.  There
is also a lot of explanation on the mindfulness of the  breath.  I  think  I
will talk about this in the next lesson. Perhaps, you  may  find  it  useful
for your own reflection. As I explain, you can also think about it as  I  go
along. Perhaps, that might be useful.

HOMEWORK

We have talked about the four close placements of mindfulness.  Think  about
how through the meditation on the four close placements of  mindfulness,  we
enter the four noble truths. That is the question.

The second part is this: In particular, how  does  the  close  placement  of
mindfulness on the mind lead us into engaging in true cessations?  This  one
is challenging but think about it and see whether you have any opinion.  “If
I think about the close placement of  mindfulness  on  minds  in  this  way,
because of that, this is how we can engage the  true  cessations.”   If  you
have an opinion, thinking that maybe this way  of  thinking  is  good,  then
that will be good.

Khen Rinpoche: Anyway, the idea is to be able to get  a  better  explanation
from you on the third topic—mindfulness on minds—on how that leads into  the
understanding of true cessations. If you think, maybe you may have a  better
idea. That day, I talked but I am not sure what I said made sense or not.  I
don’t know.  I am not confident myself  of  what  I  said.  I  have  to  say
something so that was what I said but I am not really confident  about  what
I was saying about that also. It was not 100% correct. I didn’t get that.

Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
