Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/BP2 M09 L09final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:50.453403
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen  Rinpoche  Geshe  Chonyi  on  The  Eight
Categories and Seventy Topics

Root Text:  The  Eight  Categories  and  Seventy  Topics  by  Jetsün  Chökyi
Gyaltsen, translated by Jampa Gendun. Final draft October 2002, updated  May
2011. © Jampa Gendun & FPMT, Inc.

Lesson                                                                     9
          7 July 2016


Exam Presentation for Module 8. Discussion: How far can  the  six  types  of
the migrators of the desire realm progress on  the  path.  The  support  for
Hinayana arhathood.


EXAM PRESENTATION FOR MODULE 8

I mentioned the four reliances in the  last  session,  especially  where  it
says, “Do not rely on the person but rely on the  doctrine.”  In  this  case
here, you are not looking at who the  speaker  is.  Rather  you  should  pay
attention to what the person says and why he is saying certain things.

(A student presents his chosen verses from Chapter Eight of Engaging in  the
Bodhisattva Deeds).

                                ~~~~~~~~~~~~

DISCUSSION: HOW FAR CAN THE SIX TYPES  OF  MIGRATORS  OF  THE  DESIRE  REALM
PROGRESS ON THE PATH

Student 1: In the last class, it seems that we have come to  the  conclusion
that the gods and  humans  in  the  desire  realm  are  suitable  bases  for
entering the path of seeing. However, all the beings of the six  realms  are
able to develop bodhicitta and enter the path of accumulation.  If  that  is
the case, which is the highest path they can attain until their  basis  will
not allow them to carry on any further?

Khen Rinpoche: Do you understand what she’s asking? Do  you  understand  her
question? No?  First,  you  must  understand  the  question.  If  you  don’t
understand the question then there is no point in me giving  the  answer.  I
think if I’m not wrong, I do understand a little of what she is asking.

All the six types of migrators in the desire realm can  generate  bodhicitta
and enter the path of accumulation. The basis for newly generating the  path
of seeing is the support of either a human or a desire realm  god.  We  have
looked at this already.

Her question is that if all  the  six  types  of  migrators  can  enter  the
Mahayana path, how far can they go with their individual  support?  How  far
can a hell being go after generating bodhicitta? How far can a preta  or  an
animal go? Can they enter the path of seeing or the path of meditation?
Khen Rinpoche: Now  that  you  have  got  the  question,  come  up  and  say
something. How far they can go?

Student 2: If  they  are  not  humans  or  gods,  then  once  they  generate
bodhicitta while they are in the lower realms, their negative  karma  should
be exhausted. They should no longer be in the lower realms. They  should  go
up. Because their bodhicitta is so powerful, they will get  a  good  rebirth
and maybe go further. Maybe, to the path of accumulation and so on.

Khen Rinpoche: I understand what you are saying. Great! Good. Anybody  agree
with what he said? You understand what he is saying? He said that  once  you
develop the bodhicitta mind, you won’t stay long as a hell being.  You  will
come up from the hell realm and take a better rebirth. He  doesn’t  have  to
stay for a long time in the hell realm.  It is a very good idea.

Anybody else? What do you think? Is he right? How long will you stay  there?
Everybody is free to come up and say your piece.

Student 3: I generate bodhicitta for the first time as a hell being.  I  see
so much suffering around me and I want to help them. I want  to  stay  until
they are all liberated from the hell realms.

Khen Rinpoche: He is saying that the  bodhisattva  will  stay  in  the  hell
realm for a longer time. He is saying something  like  that.  His  idea  and
logic is that you stay for a long time there because you want  to  help  all
the other hell beings. This is why you stay for a long  time.  That  is  his
reason, isn’t it?  Student 2 said you will  come  out  quickly.   Student  3
said he will stay for a long time.

Anybody else? This is very good. You should exercise  your  mind.  Then  you
will have a lot  of  ideas.  Otherwise,  I  just  say  the  six  realms  and
bodhicitta. That’s it. It’s finished. You  don’t  really  get  to  use  your
brain. So here, there are two different ideas. What do you think?

Student 4: You are saying that actually, you will stay as long as  you  want
because as a bodhisattva, you want to alleviate the suffering of  the  other
hell beings. But isn’t it the case that at a certain point, the  bodhisattva
will not fall into the lower realms? My thinking is similar to what  Student
2 said earlier.  Once  you  generate  bodhicitta,  you  enter  the  path  of
accumulation and you will free yourself from  the  lower  realms.  When  you
start to practise and enter the medium level of the  path  of  accumulation,
you will not fall back into the lower realms.

Khen Rinpoche: The medium level of which path?

Student 4: The path of accumulation.

Khen Rinpoche: What did you say  about  not  falling  back  into  the  lower
realms?

Student 4: It is supposed to be like this according to  the  chart  (on  the
Mahayana paths and grounds).
Khen Rinpoche: According to your chart, what does it say?

Student 4: The chart actually said that at point C (the middle level of  the
path of accumulation) it is not possible to fall … Oh sorry, I see  wrongly.


Khen Rinpoche:  You have to read your chart carefully.

Student 4: It only happens at point F (the level of forbearance of  path  of
preparation).

Khen Rinpoche: Points C and F are different. Not point C, right?

Student 4: No, not point C.

Khen Rinpoche: Hup Cheng, if you come to class every day, you  will  be  the
best student. He is very good. He comes only for a few classes but I  notice
his mind works differently compared to the rest of you. Really, it is  true.
You all come to every class but your brains are not working.

Student 5: When a person dies,  he  goes  to  the  hell  realms  during  the
intermediate state. Then we make a lot of prayers and accumulate  a  lot  of
merit for him. There was a discussion that that person, due to the power  of
merit, the karma of him going to the hell realms is exhausted.  He  finishes
quickly his karma to remain  in  the  hell  realms.   He  then  has  a  good
rebirth. So when Student 3 said, “I generate bodhicitta in the  hell  realms
and due to my bodhicitta, I want to stay in the hell  realms,”  even  if  he
wanted to remain in the hell realms, due to the merit  accumulated  and  the
power of his bodhicitta, maybe that bodhisattva  will  totally  exhaust  the
karma to remain in the hell realms. Due to the power of his  karma,  without
choice, he actually takes a good rebirth.

Khen Rinpoche: She is saying the same thing. The  bodhisattva  doesn’t  stay
for a long time as a hell being. As  a  bodhisattva,  the  bodhisattva  will
come up quickly. She doesn’t agree with what Student 3 said.

Student 6: Technically, I think they  should  only  be  able  to  reach  the
border of the path of accumulation. I think these hell  beings  and  animals
cannot develop calm abiding because they can’t sit still  on  the  hot  iron
ground!

Khen Rinpoche: What?

Student 6: I think hell beings and animals cannot develop  calm  abiding  so
they can only reach the border of the path  of  accumulation  even  if  they
don’t die and continue practising.

Khen Rinpoche: OK.

Student 7: I don’t think that if they develop bodhicitta they can choose  to
stay in the lower realms to help others because it  would  imply  that  they
can choose their rebirth. I think to choose their  own  rebirth,  they  will
need bodhicitta plus the realization of emptiness and  not  just  bodhicitta
alone.
Khen Rinpoche: So what are  you  trying  to  say?  The  conclusion  is  that
bodhisattvas go up faster and they don’t stay for a long time  in  the  hell
realm because …

Student 7: Because if they only have bodhicitta but not the  realization  of
emptiness, they cannot choose to stay in the hell realm.

Khen Rinpoche: In other words, they can’t choose to come up  either  because
they don’t have the wisdom realizing emptiness. How can they choose  another
rebirth? They have no choice but have to stay (in  the  hell  realm)  for  a
long time.

Student 7: But they have bodhicitta.

Khen Rinpoche: Why does that make them come up faster?

Student 7: Why can’t that make them come up faster?

Khen Rinpoche: Because of the same reason…

Student 7: Because they have too much merit to stay in the hell realm.

Khen Rinpoche: It is the same reason. Student 3 says  that  mind  makes  him
stay for a long time. Using the same reason, you say that  this  mind  makes
him come up faster. So two things. It is very interesting. Think  carefully.
You are saying the same thing. Because of this reason, Student 3 says,  stay
longer. Because of this reason, you say come up faster.

Student 7: Maybe I should try one more time. I understood the  situation  to
be like an animal developing bodhicitta.

Khen Rinpoche: Huh? An animal developing bodhicitta?

Student 7: An animal develops bodhicitta. The  question  then  is:  Does  it
stay for long as an animal or can it go up to the next level? I say that  it
automatically goes up because it has bodhicitta and it has  too  much  merit
to stay as an animal. If it  were  to  stay  as  an  animal  to  help  other
animals, it would have to choose to do so and the only way that it can  make
that choice is if it also has the realization of emptiness. But  it  doesn’t
have this realisation. It only has bodhicitta. Does that make sense?

Khen Rinpoche: When you say  choose,  then  I  don’t  understand.  It  can’t
choose. That part is a little bit … So  two  persons  against  one.  Anybody
else?

Student 8: I have the same question in my mind  as  Student  5.   I  have  a
question.
Khen Rinpoche: Are you asking a question?

Student 8: I want to ask a question before  I  answer.  Can  the  six  realm
beings other than the humans and the gods realize emptiness? Can an  animal,
hell being or hungry ghost have an inferential realization of emptiness?

Khen Rinpoche: OK. I will answer that later. What do you want to say?
Student 8: If the answer is no, then to answer  Student  5’s  question,  the
rest of the six migrators other than the humans and gods will  not  be  able
to pass beyond the small level of the path of accumulation.  Because at  the
medium level of the path of accumulation, beings  on  the  path  would  have
necessarily realized emptiness.

With regard to whether they will stay long or not, I don’t know. It  depends
on their karma.

Khen Rinpoche: OK. That is good. Basically, she is saying that the  path  of
accumulation has three divisions—the small, medium and great. At  the  small
level of the path of accumulation, one can be in  the  lower  realms.  After
that, one has to come up. On that basis,  no  hell  being  can  develop  the
medium level of the path of accumulation because  of  the  need  to  realize
emptiness.

I don’t have the exact answer. I need to think about whether the hell  being
is able to realize emptiness. I mean  the  text  is  very  clear.  They  can
develop the bodhicitta mind in the six  realms.  Many  sutras  mention  hell
beings, hungry ghosts, animals and  some  nagas  developing  the  bodhicitta
mind. This is very clear in the sutras. The Buddha  mentioned  this.  But  I
haven’t seen any quotations that hell beings can realize emptiness.  So  I’m
not sure. Also you have to ask, “Why can’t hell beings  realize  emptiness?”
Many questions will come up.

Student 9: Student 6 talks about calm  abiding.  Technically  to  enter  the
path, you need calm abiding. So for that  person  to  be  able  to  generate
uncontrived  bodhicitta  even  as  a  hell  being,  he  has  to  have   calm
abiding—calm abiding and special insight focussing on bodhicitta. So if  you
can have calm abiding focussing on  bodhicitta,  why  can’t  you  have  calm
abiding focussing on emptiness?

Khen Rinpoche: OK. This is a good exercise for your mind.

                                  ~~~~~~~~~

It is said that if one generates bodhicitta, there is  almost  no  way  that
one can fall to the lower realms. Even if there is a possibility of a  being
who has bodhicitta falling into the lower realms, he would stay  there  only
for a very short time, i.e., he won’t stay long. I think this  is  mentioned
in Chapter One[1] of Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds.

I’m inclined to think that they will not stay  a  long  time  in  the  lower
realms after bodhicitta is  generated.  Even  if  the  hell  being  who  has
generated bodhicitta makes the prayer to live  in  the  hell  realm  forever
until each and every single hell being is freed, they will not stay  in  the
hell realms for a long time. In fact, because of making such a  prayer  with
this kind of strong aspiration, it purifies so much negativities. That  hell
being bodhisattva will be liberated very quickly from his hell rebirth.

In general, one ends up in the hell realms because one has  accumulated  the
karma to be born in the lower realms, in this case, the hell realms.  As  to
how long one will stay in the hell realms or how quickly one will  be  freed
from the hell realms, it all depends on how much negativities  are  purified
and how much merit is accumulated. I’m more inclined to take this  position.
Perhaps it is better to say that once bodhicitta is generated with  a  lower
realm support, that individual will not remain in that support  for  a  long
time.

It is stated quite clearly in the teachings that once the forbearance  level
of the path of preparation is achieved, there is no going back to the  lower
realms. Of course, people would ask: Is it possible then for the  individual
on the heat level and the peak level of the path of  preparation  to  go  to
the lower realms? This is something you have to think about.

In the previous lesson, it was stated that  it  is  not  possible  to  newly
attain the path of seeing and the path  of  meditation  with  a  form  realm
support. But at the same time, we have to say  that  there  are  bodhisattva
superiors with a form realm support.

As for the formless realm, it is stated clearly in  the  sutras  that  there
are no bodhisattva superiors in the formless realm.

In Asanga’s Compendium of Knowledge, the Abhidharmasamuccaya, he  said  that
there are bodhisattvas superiors who take rebirth in the  desire  realm  and
the form realm but they do not take rebirth in  the  formless  realm.   Why?
Because it is not an abode  where  one  can  ripen  sentient  beings.  Since
bodhisattva superiors have control over where they want to be born to be  of
benefit to others, the bodhisattva superiors do not choose  to  be  born  in
the formless realm. Instead, they choose to be born within the desire  realm
or the form realm.

Since bodhisattva superiors have control over where they  wish  to  be  born
and they choose to be born in the desire realm, this means we  have  to  say
that the bodhisattva superiors can choose to be  born  as  any  of  the  six
types of migrators, including to be born as a hell being in the hell  realm.
Their being born in the hell realm is not due to karma and  afflictions  but
is done intentionally, out of choice. But they are not  lower  realm  beings
because that rebirth is made out of choice. They take on a support  that  is
similar to the support of a hell being but  they  are  not  an  actual  hell
being. This means they may look like actual hell beings  but  they  are  not
hell beings.

Because bodhisattva superiors have abandoned  all  negativities,  they  will
not experience physical suffering.  Because  they  have  realized  emptiness
directly, they will also have no  mental  suffering.  Remember  there  is  a
quotation in Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds? What we have just  said  can
be found in Engaging in  the  Bodhisattva  Deeds.  As  such,  there  can  be
bodhisattva superiors who take on a form realm support.

The support for Hinayana arhathood
What about the Hinayana arhat? What are the  supports  or  realms  in  which
they can manifest the state of becoming  an  arhat  achieving  the  Hinayana
nirvana? It is said clearly in the teachings that it is the support  of  the
three realms. One can become a Hinayana arhat and  achieve  liberation  from
cyclic existence on the basis of  a  desire  realm  support,  a  form  realm
support and a formless realm support.

The support for achieving a Hinayana nirvana on  the  basis  of  a  formless
realm support must be the same support prior  to  achieving  nirvana,  i.e.,
when he was on the Hinayana path of meditation.

Similarly, if you say that one can achieve nirvana on the basis  of  a  form
realm  support,  this  support  must  be  the  same  support  as  when  that
individual was  on  the  Hinayana  path  of  meditation,  which  necessarily
precedes the achieving of nirvana.

Earlier on, we talked about how  one  cannot  newly  generate  the  path  of
seeing and the path of meditation in the form realm. This is  talking  about
the Mahayana path of meditation.

We also talked about the  Mahayana  path  of  seeing  in  which  it  is  not
possible to newly generate the path of seeing on the basis of a  form  realm
support. It doesn’t matter whether it is the Mahayana path of seeing or  the
Hinayana path of  seeing.  The  basis  for  newly  generating  the  path  of
seeing—be it the Hinayana or Mahayana path of  seeing—has  to  be  a  desire
realm support. Within the desire realm, we say that the supreme  support  is
that of a human being but there are also desire realm  gods  who  can  newly
attain the path of seeing. This being the case, we can  establish  that  the
desire realm support has to be the support for newly generating the path  of
meditation, be  it  the  Mahayana  or  Hinayana.  It  doesn’t  matter  which
vehicle.

Are there bodhisattva superiors with a form realm support? Yes.

Are there bodhisattva superiors in the formless realms? No.

Back to what I said earlier. I am  saying  that  there  are  people  with  a
formless realm support who have achieved the path of meditation.  So,  there
is a Hinayana superior on the path  of  meditation  with  a  formless  realm
support. Why do we say that there are Hinayana  superiors  on  the  path  of
meditation with a  formless  realm  support?  It  is  said  clearly  in  the
teachings that one can achieve nirvana—let’s say the  hearer’s  nirvana  and
becoming a hearer’s arhat—with a formless realm support.

Remember, in the context of the eight freedoms, one of the freedoms  is  the
freedom from being a long-life god. One of the long-life  god  here  is  the
ordinary being of the formless realm. It  doesn’t  say  all  beings  in  the
formless realm. This is the reason why a long-life  god  is  posited  as  an
ordinary being in the formless realm. It doesn’t say every being who  has  a
formless realm support.

 • There are individuals who attain the Hinayana  path  of  seeing  and  the
   Hinayana path of meditation with a desire realm  support  and  with  that
   support, manifest the state of arhathood by attaining the  Hinayana  path
   of no more learning.
 • But there are individuals who attain the Hinayana path of seeing and  the
   Hinayana path of meditation with a desire realm support but are unable to
   manifest the Hinayana path of no more learning on the basis of  a  desire
   realm support.
 • For such individuals, they reach the Hinayana path of meditation  on  the
   basis of their  desire  realm  support  but  they  cannot  actualize  the
   Hinayana path of no more learning with that support. So they take rebirth
   in the form realm and  with  a  form  realm  support,  they  achieve  the
   Hinayana path of no more learning.
 • However, there are some individuals with the form realm support  who  are
   still unable to achieve the Hinayana path of  no  more  learning.  Again,
   they take rebirth in the formless realm where they achieve  the  Hinayana
   path of meditation with their formless  realm  support.  Then  with  that
   formless realm support,  they  achieve  the  Hinayana  path  of  no  more
   learning and become an arhat.

Actually in the second topic that characterizes the exalted  knower  of  all
aspects called precepts, when divided  in  a  certain  way,  there  are  ten
divisions. The third division is called the precepts that  instruct  on  the
basis, the Three Jewels. At this point in the  treatise,  there  is  a  very
extensive explanation on this topic called the Twenty Sangha.  The  detailed
explanations of the different kinds of Hinayana  superiors  and  the  realms
where they can be found are in the Twenty Sangha. Perhaps in the future,  if
there is interest and the determination to learn, then maybe we can look  at
this topic.

There is no limit when it comes to  learning  the  Buddhadharma,  especially
these philosophical subjects. Actually, it is not the  case  that  the  more
you learn the easier everything becomes. This is not how I see it. In  fact,
when you learn more and more things, then  things  get  deeper  and  deeper,
subtler and subtler, more and more profound, and more and more difficult.

Just to give you an example. If you manage to get an understanding of all  I
have said so far together with your prior understanding  of  the  paths  and
grounds—how to achieve  liberation,  who  can  achieve  what,  the  kind  of
support required to realize emptiness and so forth—then  when  you  look  at
the lam-rim topic of a human life of freedoms and  endowments,  you  have  a
far better understanding of what a freedom is.  You  can  really  feel  that
this precious human rebirth is indeed truly precious.

Otherwise, without studying in-depth and  gaining  an  understanding  of  so
many other topics, when you look at the lam-rim, you will just tick off  the
checklist. “Yes, I am free from this and that. I am a  human  being  and  so
forth.” Then you just sit there and think, “So what is the  big  deal  about
all this?” You don’t get have any feeling and understanding  (of  the  value
of the precious human rebirth).

However, when you have an overall understanding of  many  things,  you  know
the importance of the precious human rebirth in order to  realise  emptiness
directly. You cannot do that with the formless realm support nor can you  do
so with the form realm support. To see the  truth  directly  for  the  first
time, you need to be a human being of the desire realm. Based on this  fact,
then it is not so special to be a god, be it a  desire  realm  god,  a  form
realm god or  a  formless  realm  god.  After  seeing  all  this,  you  will
understand that having this precious human rebirth makes a  big  difference.
This is an example of how knowing and learning  many  topics  reinforce  and
help our understanding of the lam-rim.

This human life of freedoms and endowments that we  have  achieved  did  not
happen without  causes  and  conditions.  There  were  so  many  causes  and
conditions that must come together before  we  can  achieve  this  extremely
rare and precious human rebirth. We had to work so hard in our past life  to
accumulate so much merit.
The cause for the opportunity that we have  now  is  our  practice  of  pure
ethical discipline. Somehow it happened and along the way, our practice  was
supported by the practice of generosity and so forth. At the same  time,  we
made many stainless, pure aspirational prayers. We took a very long time  to
gather all these  causes  and  conditions.  Now,  we  are  experiencing  the
result.

But just having a human life of freedoms and endowments  in  itself  is  not
the point. We have to use it well. Only then does it become  meaningful.  If
we put together what  we  have  learnt  about  how  we  cannot  achieve  the
realization of emptiness  with  any  other  support,  we  will  realise  how
precious this human life is. At the same time, if we were  to  look  at  how
difficult it is to get such a rebirth,  then  perhaps  there  is  some  real
feeling in the mind that what we have now is  very  special  indeed  and  we
should use this opportunity to do something meaningful with it.

There is an analogy that appears in the teachings. There  is  a  person  who
travels to a treasure island with the help of a guide. This  person  reaches
the treasure island with the help of this guide. But although  there  is  so
much treasure there for the taking, he returns empty-handed.  He  found  the
right person to guide him and he took so much effort to reach  the  treasure
island. Yet somehow, this person didn’t take advantage  of  the  opportunity
and returned empty-handed. This person is really foolish!

Likewise, we have  worked  so  hard  and  have  created  all  the  necessary
conditions in the past. We  have  the  guide.  Now  we  have  achieved  this
perfect human rebirth  that  is  likened  to  having  reached  the  treasure
island. If we were to do something with this precious human rebirth, we  can
even realize emptiness and see the truth directly. If we don’t practise,  we
will  return  empty-handed.  Where  do  we  return  to?  We  return  to   an
inopportune state, a rebirth where there is none of the opportunity we  have
now. That indeed is very foolish.

For those of you who consider yourself to be  practitioners,  you  must  put
aside some time to think about this  topic.  It  is  very  important.  After
having achieved this precious human rebirth, we  should  not  waste  it.  We
should use it to practise the Dharma. In fact, if we  put  effort  into  the
practice, we may attain a path, perhaps, even the path of seeing.

But even if we do not manage to achieve  a  path,  at  the  very  least,  we
should work hard, practise and plant as many imprints  as  possible  in  our
mind. At the same time, we should make aspirational prayers to  be  able  to
actualize the path in our future life.

When we realize for ourselves that we have  this  precious  opportunity,  we
should motivate ourselves, “Now I have this opportunity. What  should  I  do
with it? As much as possible, I am  going  to  aim  to  generate  the  three
principal  aspects  of  the  path  in  my  mind—first,  renunciation,   then
bodhicitta and the wisdom realizing emptiness.”

We have to think about this topic. We have to be  able  to  feel  that  with
each and every moment and every single day that passes, if we do not use  it
to learn and practise the Dharma, that is a wasted day. We need  to  develop
this kind of feeling, “It is such a waste that I didn’t  get  to  learn  the
Dharma. I didn’t get to practise.” This is what we really need to  work  at.

In the practice of rejoicing in our own merit, we rejoice in the merit  that
we have accumulated in the past. This precious human rebirth we have now  is
the special basis that came from its own cause. We  did  something  positive
in the past. We have accumulated a lot of merit and all the causes. This  is
the reason why we have achieved this basis. We need to have  the  conviction
that the precious human rebirth we are experiencing now is  incontrovertibly
and without doubt the result of the positive actions we did in the past.  We
need this  kind  of  ascertainment.   It  is  only  on  the  basis  of  such
ascertainment that we can rejoice in  our  merit  of  the  past.  Otherwise,
there is no real rejoicing when we don’t cherish the result of  that  merit.
There is no way to say sincerely, “I  rejoice  in  the  merit  that  I  have
accumulated in the past.”

The  study  of  the  deeper  aspects  of  Buddhist  philosophy,  the   great
treatises, is very helpful as it aids our understanding of the  practice  of
lam-rim. We can use  what  we  learn  in  Buddhist  philosophy  to  help  us
understand and practise the lam-rim better. What is the lam-rim  after  all?
It is the stages of the path that gathers  the  essence  of  all  the  great
treatises.

It is very important to know how to use what we have  learnt  in  the  great
Buddhist philosophical treatises and use them to improve  our  understanding
and practice of the lam-rim. This is very important.  Otherwise,  we  become
like the example I gave you before. You don’t  have  many  containers.  With
only one or two containers, when somebody  gives  you  a  gift,  either  you
don’t know where to put it or you may just throw it away.

One of the greatnesses of the lam-rim is that if you know the lam-rim well:
 • You will be able to see every single  scripture  as  instructions  to  be
   practised and not merely as intellectual knowledge. This will not  happen
   to you.
 • You will know how to apply everything you have learnt in the lam-rim.
 • You will know how to apply everything  you  study  in  the  philosophical
   subjects and where they fit in.
But if you do not know the lam-rim well, I think it may  be  very  difficult
for you to apply what you have learnt in Buddhist philosophy.

I guess there are many people who think that there is  no  real  purpose  to
studying all these Buddhist philosophical treatises. They  think,  “What  is
the point of studying all this? It has nothing to do with  my  practice.  It
has nothing to do with the lam-rim.” But how can that  be?  The  lam-rim  is
the very essence of all the great treatises but we  don’t  see  that.  In  a
way, this is understandable because the great treatises are  both  extensive
and very profound.

You know I have been saying this over and over again. You should not  be  so
easily and quickly discouraged when you find the going tough and when it  is
difficult for you to understand some of these topics. If you don’t have  any
real interest in the Dharma in the  first  place,  of  course  this  doesn’t
matter. But I am not talking to such people. If you have a sincere  interest
in and really want to know the Dharma well, then you must  remember  not  to
be discouraged easily and quickly because when you are discouraged, you  are
only blocking your own progress. Nobody  else  is  blocking  your  progress,
only you.

You have to know clearly that what we are undertaking here  are  not  short-
term studies.  We  are  not  here  to  find  out  a  little  bit  about  the
Buddhadharma or doing this for just one month or  a  year.  These  are  very
long-term studies.

For those of you who are engaged  in  long-term  studies,  if  you  want  to
continue with them, then it is  extremely  important  to  be  consistent  in
coming to class. If you come to class once and then skip classes,  returning
after some time and so forth, you are not going to  learn  because,  in  the
first place, the subject matter is really challenging. So, it is  not  going
to work if you are inconsistent in coming to class. For  those  of  you  who
really want to learn, you have to be consistent in coming to class.

You also have to be consistent in your studies. You have to  learn  all  the
different subjects. I guess by now you should be able to see  that  all  the
different subjects are similar but not the same in the sense that  they  are
interconnected. When I am teaching you, one of the difficulties  I  find  is
that there is no consistency. Some of you know this topic  while  others  do
not so it  becomes  very  difficult  to  teach  since  the  topics  are  all
interconnected.

For example, we have been going over this small little topic over  and  over
again. In fact, this shouldn’t happen and it won’t happen if  you  had  been
consistent in your studies. We have been going over this repeatedly and  are
stuck.  I have been explaining the same thing over and over again.

Khen Rinpoche: Sometimes I am a little confused myself as to  how  to  teach
and what will be most beneficial for you. I don’t know. Today, we didn’t  go
to the root text.

Anyway, in the next class, I  will  finish  the  knower  of  paths.  I  will
complete that section. Then I will see whether I will go over all the  other
topics one by one. I am not sure. If you are really interested,  I  will  do
that. We will take a longer time and it is challenging.  Otherwise,  I  just
make it short and sweet.

Ask one or two questions if  you  don’t  understand.  I  won’t  repeat  this
again. I have only repeated this three times. If you notice, I repeated  the
same topic in three classes.

                                ~~~~~~~~~~~~
Student 3: Does  the  Yogic  Autonomy  Middle  Way  School  assert  a  post-
meditative equipoise after the path of  release  of  the  Mahayana  path  of
seeing before initially entering the meditative equipoise  of  the  path  of
meditation? In other words, between the path  of  seeing  and  the  path  of
meditation, does the  Yogic  Autonomy  Middle  Way  School  assert  a  post-
meditative equipoise or subsequent attainment?
Khen Rinpoche: I can find  out  more  but  for  now,  I  guess  perhaps  not
necessarily so from the perspective of the paths and grounds  of  the  Yogic
Autonomy Middle Way  School.  I  think  perhaps  it  is  just  a  meditative
equipoise.

Student 3: If it is only meditative equipoise and  there  is  no  subsequent
attainment, if that is the case, then you can assert  that  you  don’t  need
the rest of the meditative equipoise to accumulate the merit  to  make  your
mind more powerful to enter into your next  level  of  meditative  equipoise
for the rest of the grounds.  Because you need the subsequent attainment  to
accumulate merit to make your mind more powerful in order to enter the  next
level of meditative equipoise to overcome the afflictions. If there isn’t  a
subsequent attainment here, the consequence is that  the  same  reason  will
apply and there is no need for the rest of  the  subsequent  attainments  on
the other grounds either.

Khen Rinpoche: If we assert that there is a subsequent attainment,  a  post-
meditative equipoise, it will be difficult  to  account  then  for  why  you
cannot  newly  generate  the  paths  in  the  higher  realms.  This  is  the
consequence. This is something to think about.

I will check again because there is a presentation of the paths and  grounds
according to the Yogic Autonomy Middle Way School. It is different  and  not
what we have studied in class.

Student 3: Can I say that the bodhisattva superior, when  they  manifest  in
the six realms, will take on the aspect of the support  of  that  particular
realms? But  by  conventional  nature,  they  have  mental  bodies.  I  have
problems reconciling the fact they have mental bodies with the  aspect  that
they will manifest.

Ven. Gyurme (clarifying student’s question):  What  the  entity  of  support
does the bodhisattva superior take if he manifests, say, as  a  hell  being?
Does he have the aspect of the hell being?

Khen Rinpoche: It is said clearly that when the bodhisattva  superior  takes
rebirth in the hell realm, he takes on the  support  of  a  hell  being.  He
looks and behaves exactly like a hell being. When the  bodhisattva  superior
takes on the support of, for example, the body of a dog,  if  we  happen  to
see a bodhisattva in that aspect, we would not be able to tell  that  it  is
not a dog. They will do whatever a normal dog does. This  is  what  we  will
see—it is born, grows and dies in the same manner as a normal dog.  If  they
take on this aspect, they will behave exactly like a dog.

So, they will behave exactly according to  whatever  aspect  they  take  on.
This is how people would expect them to behave. Of course,  the  bodhisattva
superior may be in the aspect of an animal but he is not a real animal.

Student  9:  This  is  a  question  about  subsequent  attainment.  If   the
Consequence Middle Way School asserts  a  subsequent  attainment,  then  the
basis  that  we  have  been  talking  about  will  no  longer  follow.   The
requirement for a desire realm basis would  not  hold  for  the  Consequence
Middle Way  School,  invalidating  the  position  regarding  generating  the
superior path in the higher realm.

Khen Rinpoche: We are talking here about moving from path to  another.  When
you  are  moving  from  one  path  to  the  next,  there  is  no  subsequent
attainment. It is from meditative equipoise to meditative equipoise.

Khen Rinpoche: You read from the chart on the paths and grounds. Last  time,
we gave out the chart on the paths and grounds.

Student 11: With regard to the path of seeing and the  path  of  meditation,
from the path of release, then there is a subsequent attainment followed  by
the  next  uninterrupted  path.  Student  3  was  asking  whether  it  is  a
meditative equipoise all the way through?  It  was  said  that  it  is  most
likely a meditative equipoise throughout because otherwise, the  explanation
with regard to saying that it must be on  the  basis  of  the  desire  realm
being and not on the form realm being will not hold. But if the  Consequence
Middle Way School posits a subsequent attainment, then it will not hold.

Basically, this is to extrapolate from what  Student  3  was  asking  about.
Just now it was according to the Yogic Autonomy Middle Way School.

Khen Rinpoche: OK. We talk about this the next time. I  don’t  know  how  to
read the chart.

Student 7: It is said in the lam-rim if we were born as a  human  being  and
we die, we will not come back  as  a  human  being.  If  we  don’t  generate
bodhichitta or realize emptiness in this life, then in  our  next  life,  we
will fall into the lower realms. I don’t understand why this is so.

Khen Rinpoche: Which lam-rim did you read? Go back and you read it again.

If you look at the path of the person  of  small  capacity—somebody  who  is
looking for a good rebirth in future lives—the main method to  achieve  that
is to practise the  ethical  discipline  of  restraint  from  the  ten  non-
virtues. As a Buddhist, that practice ties  in  with  refuge  in  the  Three
Jewels. Since you have these two, you will achieve the goal  of  the  person
of small capacity, a good rebirth.  It  doesn’t  say  that  right  from  the
beginning, you will need bodhichitta, you will need wisdom.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.


-----------------------
[1] Verse 13.

