Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/BP2 M09 L17final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:52.812626
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen  Rinpoche  Geshe  Chonyi  on  The  Eight
Categories and Seventy Topics

Root Text:  The  Eight  Categories  and  Seventy  Topics  by  Jetsün  Chökyi
Gyaltsen, translated by Jampa Gendun. Final draft October 2002, updated  May
2011. © Jampa Gendun & FPMT, Inc.

Lesson                                                                    17
4 August 2016


Presentation of homework from Lesson 16: How are  the  four  characteristics
of true suffering antidotes to the  four  erroneous  conceptions.  The  four
close placements of mindfulness (cont’d). Close placement of mindfulness  on
bodies. Close placement of  mindfulness  on  feelings.  Close  placement  of
mindfulness  on  minds.  Close  placement  of  mindfulness   on   phenomena.
Accepting life is true suffering.


PRESENTATION OF HOMEWORK FROM LESSON 16: How are  the  four  characteristics
of true suffering—impermanent, suffering, empty  and  selfless—antidotes  to
the four erroneous conceptions?

Khen Rinpoche: Maybe someone can come up and give his or her answer  to  the
homework from the last lesson.  You must come up  immediately.  Don’t  wait.
If you wait, somebody will take your opportunity. Then  that’s  it.  So  you
must come up as quickly as possible.

Student 1: By realizing how  our  aggregates  are  impermanent  and  undergo
momentary change, we  dispel  the  misconception  of  holding  on  to  these
aggregates as permanent.

Khen  Rinpoche:  So  the  antidote  to  permanence  is  the  meditation   on
impermanence. OK. Next?

Student  1:  By  meditating  on  how  our  aggregates  are  the  bases   for
experiencing the three types of suffering, we dispel the misconception  that
holds on to contaminated pleasurable feelings as bliss and the  contaminated
body as pure. Meditating on suffering dispels the  misconceptions  of  bliss
and purity.

Khen Rinpoche: As for the second feature, you are saying that meditating  on
suffering is the antidote to two erroneous conceptions? OK. Good.

Student 1: By  meditating  that  how  our  aggregates  are  empty  of  self-
sufficient, substantial existence and lack an inherently existent  self,  we
dispel the misconception of conceiving these aggregates as  having  a  self.
So the aspects of empty and selfless dispel the misconception of self.

Khen Rinpoche: What you are saying is correct. Does  anybody  disagree  with
what he said? If you have any  disagreement,  then  come  up  and  say  your
piece. I think what he said is correct.
Student 2: Then how does the lower schools use  the  four  aspects  of  true
sufferings to overcome the four erroneous conceptions?

Khen Rinpoche: No. He is not talking about the higher schools or  the  lower
schools. He’s speaking in general so all the tenets are covered.

You mentioned emptiness of inherent existence. Of  course,  that  goes  with
the Prasangika view. If you have to say something that  fits  all  the  four
tenets, then you would have to say empty of …?

Student 2: Empty of being permanent, unitary, independent and so on.

Student 1: If one follows the lower schools, then  that  ‘empty’  refers  to
the  emptiness  of  a  permanent,  unitary  and  independent  existence  and
‘selfless’  refers  to  being  empty  of  a   self-sufficient,   substantial
existence.

Khen Rinpoche: That is correct.

(Addressing the class) Do you understand what we are talking about?

Each of the four noble truths has four characteristics. This makes  a  total
of 16 characteristics.

The four characteristics of true suffering are  impermanent,  suffering  (or
miserable), empty and selfless. Therefore,
 •  true suffering is impermanent
 • true suffering is suffering
 • true suffering is empty
 • true suffering is selfless

I mentioned the four erroneous conceptions in  the  last  lesson.  The  four
features of true suffering are taught to dispel the four specific  erroneous
conceptions. They are:
 • the erroneous conception of conceiving the impermanent as permanent
 • the erroneous conception of conceiving suffering as bliss
 • the erroneous conception of conceiving the impure to be pure
 • the erroneous conception of conceiving the selfless as having a self

In one of Asanga’s texts, he said that one aspect of true suffering acts  as
an antidote to one erroneous conception. Following that sentence is  another
sentence that says, “One aspect of true suffering acts  as  an  antidote  to
two erroneous conceptions.” This is then followed by another sentence,  “Two
aspects of true suffering act as antidotes to one erroneous conception.”

In one of his texts, Khedrup Je clarified what Asanga said. Khedrup Je  said
that:
 • the meditation on the aspect of impermanence acts as an antidote  to  the
   conception of permanence
 • the meditation on suffering, the second aspect of true suffering,  is  an
   antidote to the erroneous conceptions of purity and bliss.
 • the meditations on empty and selfless, the third and  fourth  aspects  of
   true suffering, are the antidotes to the  conception  of  that  which  is
   selfless as having a  self.

In one of Jetsun  Rendawa’s  commentary,  he  said  very  clearly  that  the
erroneous  conceptions  of  purity  and  bliss  are  counteracted   by   the
meditation on the aspect of suffering.

Why is the meditation  on  suffering,  the  second  characteristic  of  true
suffering, an antidote to the two erroneous conceptions? Because  the  modes
of apprehension—the way these erroneous  conceptions  of  purity  and  bliss
apprehend their objects—are similar in that they  conceive  the  apprehended
objects as pleasant and  attractive.  They  both  have  similar  aspects  of
pleasant objects. As such, the meditation on suffering is  the  antidote  to
these two erroneous conceptions. This is how it is explained.

Why did I bring this up for discussion? Generally, people  are  asked,  “How
are the four  characteristics  of  true  suffering  antidotes  to  the  four
erroneous conceptions?”

More often than  not,  people  will  assume  that  because  there  are  four
erroneous conceptions and four aspects  of  true  suffering,  one  needs  to
meditate on a particular aspect of true suffering as  an  antidote  to  just
one erroneous conception. This means people would probably think that:
 • the meditation on the aspect of  impermanence  is  the  antidote  to  the
   erroneous conception of permanence
 • the meditation on suffering is the antidote to the  erroneous  conception
   of bliss
 • the meditation on the aspect of empty is the antidote  to  the  erroneous
   conception of purity
 • the meditation on the aspect of selfless is an antidote to the  erroneous
   conception of the selfless as having a self

They will say that the meditation  on  the  aspect  of  ‘empty’,  the  third
characteristic  of  true  suffering,  is  an  antidote  to   the   erroneous
conception of purity, and that the meditation on the aspect of  selfless  is
an antidote to the erroneous conception  of  the  selfless  having  a  self.
However, this is wrong.

If you look at what is mentioned in the treatises, they will tell you it  is
not like that, i.e., that the meditation  on  the  aspect  of  empty  as  an
antidote to the erroneous conception of purity is wrong. It is clearly  said
in the teachings that the meditation on the aspect of suffering acts as  the
antidote that counteracts the erroneous conceptions of purity and bliss.  By
meditating on  how  everything  is  in  the  nature  of  suffering,  we  can
counteract the erroneous conceptions conceiving that which is impure  to  be
pure and that which is suffering as bliss.

You need to keep this in mind and not just  regurgitate  what  I  have  just
said. It is important that you understand how the erroneous conceptions  are
counteracted by these different characteristics of true suffering.

THE FOUR CLOSE PLACEMENTS OF MINDFULNESS (CONT’D)

Recently,  we  have  been  talking  about  the  four  close  placements   of
mindfulness on bodies, feelings, minds and phenomena. One way of  explaining
these four close placements of mindfulness  is  linking  them  to  the  four
erroneous conceptions and explaining how they  are  antidotes  to  the  four
erroneous conceptions.

Close placement of mindfulness on bodies
We have this instinctive idea that the body is the residence of the  person,
the self. Based on this wrong way of thinking, misconceptions arise  and  we
generate attachment that leads to  the  accumulation  of  karma.  This  then
gives us suffering, keeping us in samsara. The meditation  on  the  impurity
of bodies counteracts this erroneous conception.

Much has been said about the meditation on  the  impurity  of  the  body  in
Chapter Eight  of  Engaging  in  Bodhisattva  Deeds  that  we  have  covered
recently. You have to take the information from that chapter and use  it  in
your reflections and meditations.

In short, in Chapter Eight, the meditation on the impurity of  the  body  is
done by examining:
 • the very nature of the body itself, i.e., that it is by nature dirty
 • the cause of the body
 • the result of the body, i.e., what it gives rise to

By examining the entity, cause and result of our  contaminated  appropriated
aggregates, we will understand how the body  is  indeed  impure  and  dirty.
Through this, at least we can reduce our attachment to the body  and  subdue
this erroneous conception that conceives of the body as pure and  gradually,
overcome this erroneous conception.

There is also the advice pertaining to meditating on the body of  the  past,
the present and the future as a method to weaken and remove  this  erroneous
conception of the body as pure.

Close placement of mindfulness on feelings
As I have mentioned before, we work day in and day out. What are we  looking
for at the end of the day? When we say that we enjoy  life,  that  we  enjoy
this and that, exactly what are we looking forward to  enjoying?  Basically,
it is experiencing pleasure, which is a feeling. Pleasant feelings are  what
we are working for every day.

But for us, pleasant feelings always involve attachment  and  craving.  When
there is a pleasant experience, pleasant feelings manifest.  Then  emotional
involvement with strong attachment follows and  then  we  accumulate  karma.
This is how we continue to circle in cyclic existence.

In order to stop suffering, we have to stop our attachment  to  and  craving
for feelings and, in particular, pleasant feelings. The  way  to  counteract
this attachment is to reflect on how  even  pleasant  feelings  are  in  the
nature of suffering.
Obviously, we have craving. What do we crave for? We crave for feelings,  in
particular, pleasant feelings so they are  the  conditions  for  craving  to
arise. For us, our feelings or experiences are the  conditions  for  craving
to arise. We follow after that craving, which then becomes grasping.

Within the twelve links of dependent  origination,  there  is  the  link  of
potential existence. From there, when you have birth, you are going to  have
aging, sickness and death. If you analyse in this  way,  then  you  can  see
that the origin of all of our  problems  or  suffering  in  samsara  is  our
experience of feelings.

Birth, aging, sickness and death come  from  potential  existence.  This  in
turn comes from grasping,  which  comes  from  craving.  The  condition  for
craving to arise is feelings.

The other problem is that we think that  feelings,  in  particular  pleasant
feelings, are desirable and good. This is the problem.  They  give  rise  to
craving and very strong grasping. There is  no  denying  that  we  all  have
feelings. The  problem  is  not  so  much  with  feelings  per  se  but  our
attachment to  feelings  gives  rise  to  all  kinds  of  problems.  We  may
experience pleasant feelings but we have to see for ourselves that they  are
in the nature of suffering.

When we meditate on the close placement of mindfulness  on  feelings,  as  I
mentioned earlier, we can use  the  memory  of  our  experiences  that  have
already happened in the past. Then, we can also come to understand  how  our
present feelings and future feelings are also in the nature of suffering.

We all have many experiences of pleasure so when a pleasant  feeling  arises
in the present, instinctively, we do not see it as suffering. We see  it  as
desirable,  something  we  need  to  have  and  something  to  be   pursued.
Nevertheless, we need to counteract this wrong idea about pleasant  feelings
by tapping on our memories of past experiences. If we think  about  all  our
past experiences of pleasure, actually they are nothing and are only in  the
nature of suffering.

That being the case, since we have already experienced them, then no  matter
how our present feelings may appear to us now—even if they should appear  to
be  really  desirable,  wonderful  and  absolutely  not  in  the  nature  of
suffering—we should tap on our memories of our past experiences  and  remind
ourselves that our present experience of pleasant feelings are no  different
from our past  experiences.  In  this  way,  at  least  we  can  reduce  our
attachment to our current experiences of pleasure.

Likewise, all the pleasant feelings that we may experience in the future  is
going to be much the same in nature, i.e., they are actually suffering.

It is important that through these meditations on  the  close  placement  of
mindfulness on feelings, we come  to  understand  that  our  experiences  of
feelings are the very source and origin of all our problems, the  conditions
that lead to suffering. It is important to understand  that  because  if  we
are able to familiarise ourselves with that  understanding  and  internalize
it, definitely, we can counteract and reduce our attachment to feelings.

Shantideva asked in  his  text,  “Why  are  we  still  so  attached  to  our
pleasurable  experiences?”  He  says  that   whatever   pleasures   we   are
experiencing and  will  experience  are  no  different  from  what  we  have
experienced in the past. In fact, there is no  pleasure  that  we  have  not
already experienced in the past. And whatever pleasure we  are  experiencing
in the present and whatever pleasure  we  will  experience  in  the  future,
these will not be any different from what we have already experienced.  They
will not be any better. As such, he questions the reader, “Why are we  still
clinging on to pleasant feelings?”

I think one of the best ways  to  think  about  this  is  to  tap  into  our
memories of all the pleasures that we have experienced  in  the  past.  They
all end up as suffering or unsatisfactory  in  some  way.   This  should  be
quite  evident  from  our  own  experiences.   We  have  gone  through  them
numberless times.

By remembering this, whenever we are absorbed with our  pleasures,  we  need
to remind ourselves that those pleasant feelings will be no  different  from
we have experienced  in  the  past.  We  have  to  see  and  understand  for
ourselves that such so-called happy contaminated feelings are  actually  the
cause of suffering and the products of pain and  suffering.  If  you  are  a
practitioner or meditator, this is how you need to think.

Our past experiences of pleasure are just like dreams. We cannot go back  to
the same dream  once  we  have  woken  up.  Likewise,  with  regard  to  our
pleasurable experiences, there is nothing much we can point to  except  that
we have experienced  them  before,  “I  remember  I  have  experienced  this
before.” That is about it. [1]

Close placement of mindfulness on minds
We all have a very concrete sense of the ‘I’, self or person being  eternal,
permanent, always there, very solid and unchanging. As I  mentioned  before,
if one is  pushed  to  point  to  something  that  is  the  ‘I’  or  person,
instinctively, one would regard that to be the mind.  What  is  ‘I’  or  the
person? It is the mind. There is this concept that the mind is me, the ‘I’.

In order to overcome this erroneous conception of the self as permanent  and
unchanging, we meditate on the momentary nature of our mind. This  is  quite
evident if we simply observe our mind. It is never static. It is  momentary,
changing moment to moment. So with  that  insight,  we  can  counteract  the
erroneous conception of the self as permanent.

We have this solid concrete sense of self-identity, that there is  this  ‘I’
that has always been there and will always be there. Not only  that.  It  is
unchanging and always remains the same. This is a wrong conception but  this
is why we work for this ‘I’. We work so hard, day in and day out,  for  this
unchanging, solid ‘I’. We do so many things in  life,  working  so  hard  to
take care of it. Such an attitude and world-view only leads to  the  arising
of attachment, anger and so forth all the time,  causing  us  to  accumulate
karma. This is how we continue in cyclic existence. So we can  see  how  all
our problems, suffering and our own  samsara  come  from  this  sense  of  a
strong ‘I’ that is unchanging.

By meditating on the  close  placement  of  mindfulness  on  minds,  we  can
counteract this erroneous conception of permanence.

Close placement of mindfulness on phenomena
The  purpose  of  meditating  on  the  close  placement  of  mindfulness  on
phenomena is to counteract the wrong  idea  that  all  thoroughly  afflicted
phenomena and completely pure phenomena are  objects  of  utilization  of  a
self-sufficient, substantially existent person.

By  seeing  how  all  phenomena—both  thoroughly  afflicted  phenomena   and
completely pure phenomena—lack a self, we overcome the erroneous  conception
conceiving the selfless as having a self.

This is how the meditations on the four close placements of mindfulness  act
as the antidote to the four  erroneous  conceptions  explained  in  Gyaltsab
Je’s Essential Ornament.

Khen  Rinpoche:  Any  questions  or  are  you  totally  satisfied  with  the
presentation?

ACCEPTING LIFE IS TRUE SUFFERING

In the last lesson, we discussed that we ourselves are true suffering.  This
also includes everything we enjoy. Then somebody asked that if that  is  the
case, then that is ‘over-renunciation’. Do you understand?   There  will  be
no point in living. That is  an  interesting  question,  “If  everything  is
suffering, there is no point to live. Why do we live  on?”   This  is  over-
renunciation and only leads to more depression! So what are we to do?

Somebody come up and explain. If somebody says that, how are  you  going  to
explain? Does anybody have an answer for that question?

Also, many people say that Buddhists talk only about suffering. Why  go  and
study Buddhism as they talk only  about  suffering,  making  you  feel  more
miserable.

Student 3: I think why people say  that  and  I  myself  feel  that  too  is
because we don’t really see that as suffering. Rather, we see it  as  giving
up happiness. If you really realize that everything is true suffering,  then
you would want to give it up. But that can only happen  after  you  realized
that indeed, even all these objects of  enjoyment  and  our  aggregates  are
true suffering.

Khen Rinpoche: Wee Chiang (Student 3) said that if you know more  suffering,
you are able to work harder. Are you saying something like that?

Student 3: No.

Khen Rinpoche: No? I heard something like that.  If  you  really  understand
true suffering, then you can work harder. You won’t relax. No?

Student 3: Renouncing  what  is  true  suffering  is  not  over-renunciation
because nobody wants suffering. The issue is whether you  really  understand
what true suffering is.

Khen Rinpoche: When you understand everything is suffering, you become  very
tense and very stressed. You will be overwhelmed by the suffering.

Student 3: But you also need to understand that there is a way to  stop  the
suffering. If the Buddha only taught the first two truths, then there is  no
hope.

Khen Rinpoche: Correct!

Student 3: Are you hopeful?

Khen Rinpoche: Of course. You have  to  answer:  Of  course.  Why  is  there
doubt?

Student 4: It is said that pleasant feeling is a cause of suffering  but  it
is a producer of suffering so long as we are attached to  it.  For  example,
if my son scored very well in PSLE,[2] I feel happy but at the same time  if
I am aware of this and I am not attached to it, it is there and it is gone.

Is the subsidence of that happiness suffering? If there is no attachment  to
the pleasant feeling, will it still be the source of suffering?

Khen Rinpoche: I have no answer.  There  is  no  feeling?  If  you  are  not
attached to that feeling, then what?

(Student 4 was trying to clarify if it is OK as long as she  recognises  the
pleasant feeling being there but not being attached to it).

Khen Rinpoche: I understand.

For us, we have the  apprehension  of  the  self,  the  ego  and  ignorance.
Because of this apprehension of the self, then there is the apprehension  of
‘mine’. Anything that belongs to the self, including children, is  mine.  It
is related to the self. Whatever is involved with attachment and as long  as
there is a sense of the ‘I’,  then  there  will  be  a  sense  of  mine,  my
children. For us, whether we feel happy or not, there is attachment.

If we feel happy, then there is  attachment  but  if  we  don’t  follow  and
exaggerate it, that in itself is  good.  Let’s  say,  if  your  children  or
somebody that matters to you did not do well in their  exams,  do  you  feel
happy? Because we still have the apprehension of  self,  it  is  clear  that
definitely, there will be attachment. When  somebody  who  matters  to  you,
such as your children, does well, you are happy. This is due to  attachment.
When your children don’t do well, you feel unhappy.  This  is  also  due  to
attachment.

It is said in the vinaya  that  for  those  who  don’t  realize  things  are
actually in the nature of suffering, they are able  to  relax  when  nothing
seems to go wrong. Everything  is  good.  Such  people  are  considered  the
childish ones because this is how the childish lead  their  lives.  This  is
what they think. This is their worldview.

But there are also superiors who also think everything  is  fine.  They  are
also relaxed. It is the same experience but their reason is  different.  The
superiors see suffering and they realize suffering as suffering. Because  of
that, they are relaxed about it.

Of the two, which do you prefer? In order to see  which  option  is  better,
think of an example first. If you have a sickness, is it better to not  know
that you are sick or is it better to discover it with the help of a  doctor?
The first one is called, “Ignorance is bliss!” Isn’t it better to  know  you
are sick and then to be able to do something about it?

Khen Rinpoche: You don’t think so?

Student 5: With regard to over-renunciation, I think there  needs  to  be  a
balance.  When  I  heard  about  true  suffering  and  that  everything   is
suffering, the idea of over- renunciation came to my mind. At that time,  it
was valid because every single thing is suffering including the pleasure  of
the sweet mango that I had tasted and the pleasant  music  that  I  listened
to. They are all contaminated. Then what is this life for? I may as well  go
and die now. The books that I read in the past,  including  those  from  His
Holiness, were about suffering.

But after I came to this class, it is no longer  just  about  suffering.  If
the Buddha had only taught the first two noble truths  and  not  true  paths
and true cessations, then I might as well go and die. However, this  is  not
the case. Based on your example, if I know I am ill, I rather  know  that  I
am going to die rather than ignorance is bliss because I  can  do  something
about it. Knowing suffering is better than not knowing it. It  can  be  very
liberating.

But for those who don’t come to these classes or read, true suffering  seems
to mean that everything  is  suffering.  But  after  having  attended  these
classes, then I think there is no such thing as over-renunciation.

Student 6: I think the reason why we suffer a lot is because we have  a  lot
of expectations. If we learn to let go of our expectations,  then  our  mind
will be at ease. The more expectations we have, the more we suffer.  So  our
suffering is due to expectations.

Khen Rinpoche: OK. Good.

It is important to understand and  to  accept  that  we  are  changing  from
moment to moment. We are aging. We will get sick. We will die one day.  This
is a fact. It is reality. This can never be changed so it is better to  know
it and, more importantly, to accept it rather than holding on.

The student used the word, expectations. Basically, this is  the  psychology
of most people. They have the idea that  life  has  to  be  good  and  never
change. But this is the  problem.  When  the  world  presents  itself  in  a
different way from what we expect or want it to be, when  change  comes,  we
get a huge shock. When suddenly, you fall terribly ill or you have  to  die,
you are so shocked.

But why? There is no need to be  so  shocked.  This  shock  comes  from  the
expectation that things shouldn’t be like  that.  This  is  where  our  pain
comes from. However, if we were to accept and recognize how life really  is,
that  this  is  its  nature,  then  when  we  do  experience  problems  like
sicknesses or when death comes, there is far less suffering. This is a  huge
difference compared to  knowing  that  we  are  suffering  but  refusing  to
acknowledge it.

We have to understand and accept that the body we have is the basis for  all
the sufferings of this life. If we didn’t have this body, then there  is  no
basis to experience suffering. It is  the  conduit  through  which  all  the
experiences of this life flow. The reason we are  suffering  is  because  we
have this body. We just have to accept that. Then life will be much  easier.
When problems come, we accept them rather than being shocked.

Many people can’t accept  and  don’t  understand  that  the  body  is  aging
momentarily and disintegrating. They  don’t  understand  that  this  is  the
nature of suffering. They don’t understand that  they  will  fall  sick  and
that they will die. We will cease to exist one day.

This is why when people get  into  trouble  or  especially  when  they  have
sickness, they always say, “Why me? Why am  I  sick?”  They  are  unable  to
accept their illness. They are not asking the question  in  a  philosophical
way. It is a complaint. This comes from not being able to accept the  reason
for their sickness. This in turn gives them so much unhappiness and so  much
suffering.

If we understand and accept that that is the nature of life—because we  have
a body, we will suffer—then when problems come, definitely,  the  mind  will
not be so disturbed. If we don’t recognize  and  accept  that  this  is  the
nature of life—there is nothing we can do  as  all  of  us  are  subject  to
sicknesses—when some sickness happens or death approaches, then  there  will
be so much worry, fear and suffering.

On top of that, if we were to add our understanding  of  karma,  that  makes
the whole experience even richer and more profound.  Then  we  are  able  to
deal with it. This is what I think. So there is  a  big  difference  between
knowing and not knowing. There is a big difference if  we  know  and  accept
that our body is disintegrating moment to moment, that it is  aging  and  it
will get sick. We will die. If we know and accept these things, I  think  it
is much better than just pretending that these things don’t  exist  or  just
refusing to accept and think about them.

If we refuse to accept it—we don’t want to look into it—and  our  life  goes
on smoothly, i.e., we don’t get sick and we don’t die, that  is  fine.  Then
there is something to be said for that approach. Unfortunately, like  it  or
not, definitely, we will get sick and we will  die.  That  being  the  case,
then if we can accept that this is the reality— that there  will  be  aging,
sickness and death—definitely, there will be much less  mental  turmoil  and
disturbance when we meet with these different stages of life. It is just  as
what  the  student  said  earlier.  Expectations  really  create  a  lot  of
suffering. This is not talking just about our body when  death  or  sickness
comes but basically everything in life. The more expectations we  have,  the
more pain we will experience. If we are contented, accept the  reality  that
life is suffering, then I think there will be far less mental suffering.

It is important to recognize what we  have  discussed  here—how  samsara  is
suffering, our life is  in  the  nature  of  suffering  and  that  actually,
everything is in the nature of suffering. This is the  truth.  At  the  same
time, we must know how to think. We must know what  to  think  and  when  to
apply such correct thinking. Otherwise, for some people, when they think  of
suffering, it makes their mind very uptight, narrow and  stressed.  This  is
wrong.

We must know how to think and this is why we  need  to  train  our  mind  in
stages. This is why right in the beginning of  the  lam-rim,  there  is  the
topic of the human life of freedoms and endowments. This is one  reason  for
thinking that there is hope. This is why we have to know how  to  think  and
how to train the mind progressively.

When we think of the human life of freedoms  and  endowments  that  we  have
already obtained, we can achieve so many things that we  want  with  it.  We
can choose whatever we want and we can achieve it. We can create the  causes
for it with this human life of freedoms and endowments.

A human life of freedoms and endowments is especially  exalted  compared  to
other kind of rebirths. If we work hard, the  human  life  of  freedoms  and
endowments is one of the best bases for newly attaining paths like the  path
of seeing, the path of meditation and so forth. When we put all  these  bits
and pieces of information together,  we  can  feel  only  happiness  and  be
filled with a sense of enthusiasm and joy.

In one of our earlier discussions, it was said that even a god of  the  form
realm can have calm abiding and special insight. Compared to us, these  gods
have  amazing  mental  qualities,  but  they  cannot   newly   achieve   the
transcendental paths. They cannot newly achieve the path of seeing  and  the
path of meditation on the basis of a form realm  body.  The  human  life  of
freedoms and endowments is one of the best bases for newly  attaining  these
transcendental paths.

On top of that, we should reflect on how hard we must  have  worked  in  the
past. This is why we have this human rebirth now. We had kept pure  morality
and done some practice of generosity and so forth. These are the  favourable
co-operative conditions.  Also, we must have  made  many  stainless  prayers
and dedications. This is why we are experiencing this result now—this  human
life of freedoms and endowments. So, if you put all these  points  together,
it gives rise to a sense of joy.
Dharma practice is never  meant  to  be  done  with  a  depressed,  unhappy,
unwilling mind. That has never been the case and  it  should  never  be  the
case. Dharma practice has to be done happily and willingly with a  sense  of
joy. You know you can do it.

In particular, I think we need to have  self-confidence,  a  positive  self-
esteem. It is very important that we practise with  that  attitude  all  the
time. This is why I think it is very important to  really  meditate  on  the
topic of the human life of freedoms and endowments.

But if we just think of the human life of freedoms and endowments alone,  we
may think then that life is so wonderful and so good. If we just  live  life
thinking that life  is  wonderful  without  doing  anything,  that  is  also
dangerous. This is why we also need to meditate on  death  and  impermanence
to persuade our mind to practise the Dharma.

Anyway, my point is that when  we  train  our  mind,  we  have  to  practise
according to the lam-rim. This is why the  Buddha  didn’t  just  talk  about
suffering. He talked about the source  of  suffering,  the  origins  of  our
problems and he presented  the  cessations.  There  is  the  possibility  of
ending all this suffering. He has the method and the path.

When we have the whole picture, it really makes a difference  to  the  mind.
If there is no solution to our suffering, then it is better to  be  ignorant
and not to think about suffering, not  to  remember  suffering  and  not  to
meditate on it. If there is no way out, then it is pointless to think  about
it. But as there is a way out, this is why it is  very  important  to  think
about suffering and to recognize it.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
-----------------------
[1] “Just like a dream experience,/Whatever things I enjoy/ Will become a
memory./ Whatever has passed will not be seen again.” Engaging in the
Bodhisattva Deeds, Verse 36, Chapter 2.
[2] Primary school leaving examinations (PSLE) is a major exam for  children
in Singapore going from primary school to secondary school.

