Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/BP2 M09 L25vet.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:50.378168
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen  Rinpoche  Geshe  Chonyi  on  The  Eight
Categories and Seventy Topics

Root Text:  The  Eight  Categories  and  Seventy  Topics  by  Jetsün  Chökyi
Gyaltsen, translated by Jampa Gendun. Final draft October 2002, updated  May
2011. © Jampa Gendun & FPMT, Inc.

Lesson      25                                                            15
September 2016


The Buddha’s enlightened activities as  the  empowering  condition  for  all
virtue.  Four  legs  of  magical  emanation  (cont’d).  Five  eyes  and  six
clairvoyances. Five powers & five strengths.


THE BUDDHA’S ENLIGHTENED ACTIVITIES AS  THE  EMPOWERING  CONDITION  FOR  ALL
VIRTUE

Student 1: The dharmakaya, the enlightened activities of the Buddha, is  the
empowering  condition  for  all  virtues.  This  includes  our  contaminated
virtues that lead us to  samsara.  Won’t  that  mean  that  the  enlightened
activities of the Buddha are actually the empowering conditions for our  own
samsara?

Khen Rinpoche: Everyone should also think of an answer  (to  her  question).
Don’t wait for my answer. You must think of your own answer.

Somebody come up and  answer  her  question.  Who  is  ready?  You  got  her
question? Maybe you can come and share your answer first.

Student 2: To take rebirth in this samsara is for  us  to  create  merit  so
that we can be enlightened.

Khen Rinpoche: She said Buddha bring you to samsara to  create  good  karma.
Very good!

Whether it is a contaminated virtue or non-contaminated virtue,  it  is  not
possible for suffering to arise from virtue. It is  not  possible  for  non-
virtue to result in happiness.  Even  though  one  may  be  in  samsara  but
whatever pleasure and  happiness  one  experiences  there  is  a  result  of
virtue. That virtue is said to have arisen with the  wisdom  truth  body  as
its empowering condition.

This is not an easy thing. Perhaps we can  think  along  the  lines  of  the
tathagata essence. The wisdom truth body, if you  think  about  it,  is  not
something different or separate from what we call the tathagata essence.  In
general, when we talk about dharmakaya, the truth body, if you  think  about
it, at the end of the day it is not something  dissimilar  to  or  different
from the tathagata essence. Basically, the entity or nature is the same.

During the  module  on  the  tathagata  essence,  we  saw  how  suchness  is
undifferentiated in that the suchness of the mind  of  the  buddha  superior
and the suchness of our mind are essentially the same nature. They  are  the
same in emptiness. The mind’s emptiness of true existence is  the  tathagata
essence; the tathagatha essence is the mind’s emptiness of  true  existence.
Comes the day when the defilements are separated from  the  mind,  then  the
suchness of that undefiled mind is called the nature body.

But if you look at what the nature body is, it is essentially  the  suchness
of the mind. It is just that the name has changed. Previously,  the  defiled
mind’s emptiness of true existence is called the  tathagata  essence.  Comes
the day when the mind is undefiled, its suchness is called the nature  body.
That nature body is the suchness of the mind. It is not something  else.  It
is the suchness of an undefiled mind.

If you think about the mind itself, that factor of luminosity and  awareness
in a way is the wisdom truth body. It is  just  that  for  the  time  being,
while the mind is still defiled, it is not the wisdom truth body.  But  that
factor of luminosity and awareness has the potential to understand and  know
all phenomena. It is just that for the time being,  it  is  covered  by  the
adventitious defilements. Comes the day when those adventitious  defilements
are removed from the mind, then the mind itself is called the  wisdom  truth
body.

Likewise, the suchness of our defiled mind is called the tathagata  essence.
Comes the day when  our  minds  are  separated  from  the  defilements,  the
suchness of our minds when undefiled is then called the nature body.

So again, whether you are talking about the mind, the factor  of  luminosity
and awareness or the suchness of the mind, at the time of the basis now  and
at the time of the result, essentially they are pretty much the same  thing.
If you think about the ultimate nature of the mind itself,  that  factor  of
luminosity and awareness, and investigate its deepest nature, you will  find
that it is by nature empty. Its ultimate nature is emptiness.

If you think about suchness, the mind’s emptiness of true existence and  the
mind itself, both are essentially one entity. It is just  that  conceptually
you can isolate them into two different  isolates  due  to  their  different
natures, based on the ability of the  mind  to  interact  with  and  cognize
objects. Then that factor of luminosity and awareness  is  given  the  name,
mind. But essentially, at end of the day, the mind and the mind’s  emptiness
of true existence are the same. In simple English, they  are  two  sides  of
the same coin.

In the Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, it  says,  “Form  is  empty.
Emptiness is form.” Instead of “form,” you can substitute it with the  word,
‘mind’ and it  will  arrive  at  the  same  meaning.  “The  mind  is  empty.
Emptiness is the mind.” The mind’s deepest nature is its emptiness. It  does
not transcend that deepest nature. The mind exists  from  within  emptiness.
Within the emptiness of the mind, the mind exists. So we have to  understand
that the mind and its suchness are one entity.

If you were to trace the evolution of  samsara  and  nirvana,  what  is  the
origin of nirvana? What is the origin of samsara? It all comes down to  this
factor of luminosity and awareness. If you  trace  everything  back  to  its
root, it comes down to the fact that the mind is the origin or the basis  of
samsara. It is also the origin and basis of nirvana.

In order for this factor of luminosity and awareness to transform  the  mind
into the entity of virtue, the requisite conditions must  come  together.  I
think we have discussed this in Lorig.
 • In order for the virtuous state of mind to arise, there must first be  an
   immediately preceding condition, the factor of luminosity  and  awareness
   that exists prior to the arising of a virtuous state of mind.
 • There is also the empowering condition for the generation of  a  virtuous
   mind, which is the wisdom truth body of a buddha.
 • You can posit many different things that can act as the  observed  object
   condition for the arising of a virtuous mind such as  the  representation
   of a buddha’s body, speech and mind or hearing  the  Buddha’s  teachings.
   These can act as the observed object condition for the  generation  of  a
   virtuous mind.

The teachings tell us that the empowering condition for  the  generation  of
all virtue in the continua of us,  sentient  beings,  is  the  wisdom  truth
body. We have to think how  can  the  wisdom  truth  body  act  as  such  an
empowering condition?  If you were to say  that  there  is  something  other
than the wisdom truth body that  is  the  empowering  condition,  then  what
would you posit to be the empowering  condition  for  the  generation  of  a
virtuous mind in the continuum of any sentient being?

In the presentation of mind and awareness that you have  studied,  in  order
for  a  sense  consciousness  apprehending  form  to  be   produced,   three
conditions must come together. There must be:
1. the observed object condition, which is form
2. the uncommon empowering condition, which is a sense power
3.  the  immediately  preceding  condition,  which  would  be  a  factor  of
   luminosity and awareness, a previous moment of mind that exists prior  to
   the generation of a sense consciousness apprehending form
When these three  conditions  come  together,  then  a  sense  consciousness
apprehending form is generated.

Likewise, in order for a virtuous mind to arise, these conditions must  also
come together:
1. an immediately preceding condition
2. an observed object condition
3. the empowering condition

If you think about the eye consciousness apprehending a  visible  form,  why
is an eye consciousness able to apprehend form and not  something  else?  An
eye  consciousness  apprehending  form  has  a  factor  of  luminosity   and
awareness. Therefore, it must  have  arisen  from  something  that  is  also
luminous and aware, a prior moment of mind. Although it has  arisen  from  a
previous moment of mind, an eye  consciousness  cannot  apprehend  something
other than visible form. What is it then that makes  the  eye  consciousness
apprehend form? It is its  own  peculiar  sense  power.  In  this  case,  it
happens to be the eye sense  power  that  is  its  own  uncommon  empowering
condition.
The eye consciousness apprehending a visible  form  is  generated  into  the
aspect of a visible form. An eye consciousness apprehending form  cannot  be
generated  into  the  aspect  of  a  sound.  Why  is  an  eye  consciousness
apprehending visible  form  generated  into  an  aspect  of  form?  That  is
determined by the observed object condition.

An eye consciousness apprehending form is not generated into the  entity  of
form. An eye consciousness apprehending form is still a consciousness,  that
which is luminous and aware. This shows that an eye consciousness must  have
arisen from a prior moment of consciousness,  that  which  is  luminous  and
aware. Without that, an eye  consciousness  which  itself  is  luminous  and
aware, cannot be generated into that which is luminous  and  aware.   It  is
important to understand this.

Likewise, if you were to apply the understanding of those  three  conditions
to the arising of a virtuous mind, that  is  the  import.  In  order  for  a
virtuous mind to arise, many conditions must come together.  There  must  be
an observed object condition. By focussing on some observed object,  it  can
cause the virtuous mind  to  arise.  Obviously,  the  immediately  preceding
condition is there, but there must also be the empowering condition.

The mind has no beginning. Neither will the mind or  consciousness  have  an
end. So the mind  is  beginningless  and  it  will  never  cease  to  exist.
Likewise, the suchness of the mind has no beginning and it will have no  end
as well.

Another  thing  we  have  to  think  about  and  should  understand  is  the
concordance of cause and result. A specific result can  only  arise  from  a
concordant cause. An effect cannot arise from a  discordant  cause.  It  can
only arise from a concordant cause.

The point is that a virtuous mind cannot  arise  from  a  non-virtuous  mind
because the result of virtue has to be something pleasant.  If  you  analyse
and think about the effect of virtue, it is  happiness,  something  pleasant
or desirable, something we consider to  be  good.  Something  that  is  good
cannot arise from something that is bad. Something that  is  good  can  only
arise from something that is also good. There must be such concordance.

We need to think and analyse deeply. When we talk about  virtue,  the  first
moment when virtue arises in our mind, it  cannot  arise  without  a  cause.
Furthermore, it must arise from a concordant cause.  If  you  point  to  the
first moment of a particular virtuous mind, because the virtuous mind  is  a
composite (or compounded) phenomenon, therefore, it must  necessarily  arise
from a cause. All composite phenomena necessarily arise from  causes.  Since
we are talking about virtue here, a virtuous state of mind must  arise  from
something that is virtuous or good.

We have talked about the activation of the Mahayana lineage. The  activation
of  the  Mahayana  lineage  is  the  arising  of  great  compassion  in  the
continuum. In order  for  great  compassion  to  arise,  in  order  for  the
Mahayana lineage to be activated, in  the  first  place,  there  must  be  a
reason for it to be activated. There must be  the  presence  of  causes  and
conditions. It is not going to happen without a reason. It  happens  because
of certain causes. Great compassion must arise from something.
We possess the inherent  potential  since  beginningless  time  to  generate
great compassion. The potential is there. It has  always  been  there.  What
makes it possible for great compassion to arise in the first  place?  It  is
because of our tathagata essence, our  buddha  nature,  which  we  have  had
since our beginningless lifetimes.

But just because  we  have  the  potential  doesn’t  mean  great  compassion
necessarily arises. Is it possible because we have the potential that  great
compassion will certainly arise? No, that is not  possible.  Yes,  you  have
the potential, i.e., you possess the seed or the base, but there  are  other
conditions that must be present without which the  Mahayana  lineage  cannot
be activated.

It’s said that the wisdom truth body is the  empowering  condition  for  the
activation of the Mahayana lineage. Without the wisdom truth body,  then  it
is not possible.

Khen Rinpoche: What do you think? What or who activated  that?  Your  answer
must be, “I did it myself. I did everything myself. I  don’t  need  Buddha’s
help.” True? If you think you did everything yourself, then you  don’t  need
the Buddha.

If you don’t think that the wisdom truth body, the Buddha,  has  a  hand  in
the generation of great compassion in anybody’s mind, come the day when  you
generate great compassion, then  it  is  the  same  as  saying  you  did  it
yourself. If we go along the route, “I did  it  myself.  The  Buddha  didn’t
have a hand in it,” then you probably would end up saying that  the  buddhas
don’t have a job. They  are  not  doing  anything  despite  having  achieved
enlightenment to benefit all sentient beings. They are  not  benefiting  all
sentient beings despite having all the power, ability  and  the  omniscience
to know the interests, dispositions,  capacities  of  all  sentient  beings.
They are not doing anything. You would probably be stuck there.

Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know what I’m talking  about  here.  Am  I  answering
your question? I don’t know. It is a difficult issue.

                                ~~~~~~~~~~~~

FOUR LEGS OF MAGICAL EMANATION (CONT’D)

In the last lesson, we looked at the four legs of  magical  emanation.  They
are essentially meditative stabilizations. We will review  briefly  the  way
to generate calm abiding through abandoning the five faults  by  cultivating
the eight antidotes.

In Maitreya’s Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes,  eight  antidotes
are presented to remedy the  five  faults.  These  eight  antidotes  can  be
condensed into the four methods:
   1. Method of striving
   2. Method of benefitting
   3. Method of engaging the object of observation
   4. Method of the antidote


|Fault                          |Antidote                |
|1. Laziness                    |Faith                   |
|                               |Aspiration              |
|                               |Effort                  |
|                               |Pliancy                 |
|2. Forgetfulness               |5. Mindfulness          |
|3. Laxity and excitement       |6. Introspection        |
|4. Non-application             |7. Intention            |
|5. Over-application            |8. Equanimity           |

 • The first three of the eights antidotes are faith, aspiration and effort.
   Because they prepare one to actualize  concentration  quickly,  as  such,
   these three are classified under the method for striving.
 • Pliancy comes under the method of benefitting because when  one  achieves
   both physical and  mental  pliancy,  the  body  becomes  serviceable  and
   greatly beneficial for the individual.
 • Mindfulness and introspection comes under  the  method  of  engaging  the
   object of observation.
 • Intention and equanimity fall under the method of  the  antidote.  As  we
   mentioned before, through mindfulness and introspection, when one detects
   the arising of laxity or excitement, one has to apply the  antidote.  Not
   doing so becomes a fault. However, when the mind is abiding in a pacified
   state, there is neither excitement nor laxity. Then  one  should  not  be
   applying any antidote at all. That in itself is like an  antidote,  i.e.,
   not applying the antidote when it is not time to apply the  antidote.  As
   such, intention and equanimity come under the method of antidote.

Five eyes and six clairvoyances
By cultivating and achieving concentration, one achieves all the  four  legs
of magical emanation. What is the purpose of  doing  so?  Because  one  then
achieves the five  eyes  and  the  six  clairvoyances.  With  these  special
abilities, one can benefit others more effectively.

With the four legs of magical emanation,  one  can  travel  to  many  buddha
fields and one can enter into many doors of concentration. It is  said  that
because of the very strong concentrations that are the four legs of  magical
emanation,  all  aspirational  prayers  made  become   very   powerful   and
effective. In this context here, we are  talking  about  the  four  legs  of
magical emanation in relation to the  continua  of  the  bodhisattvas.  They
make very strong prayers and they actualize those  prayers,  such  as  being
reborn as different kinds of  human  beings  or  different  kinds  of  gods.
Through these rebirths, they are able to benefit many sentient beings.

With their stable concentration and  attainment  of  calm  abiding,  on  the
basis of having attained an actual  concentration,  they  acquire  different
kinds of clairvoyances. One of the clairvoyances is called the  clairvoyance
of the gods. With the clairvoyance of the  gods,  that  individual  can  see
coarse and subtle forms from a great distance, many, many miles away.
On the basis of having actualized one of the  actual  concentrations,  these
individuals can also hear both coarse and subtle sounds that come from  very
far away, i.e., all the sounds in the world.

Khen Rinpoche: You understand what the mosquito is saying to you!

The common cause for these different clairvoyances is the attainment  of  an
actual concentration. But there are also uncommon causes for  the  different
clairvoyances.

1. With regard to the clairvoyance of  the  gods—the  ability  to  see  both
   coarse and subtle forms that are very far away—besides having attained an
   actual  concentration,  the  uncommon  causes  are  making   many   light
   offerings, providing illumination or light to people who  are  living  in
   places that are not illuminated or in darkness and providing  the  causes
   that will lead to the illumination of such these places.  These  are  the
   uncommon causes for the clairvoyance of the eye.

2. What about the clairvoyance of the ear? The clairvoyance of  the  ear  is
   the ability to hear sounds that are very far away.  The  uncommon  causes
   are offering music, instruments, bells and so forth to holy  object  like
   stupas.

3. Then there is the clairvoyance  of  knowing  and  reading  the  minds  of
   others, i.e., the ability to know what others are  thinking.  The  common
   cause is an actual concentration. The uncommon causes for actualising the
   clairvoyance that knows the minds of  others  are  not  speaking  of  the
   mistakes that others have made even though one knows about them  and  not
   talking about the physical impairments of  others.  Some  people  may  be
   physically challenged, such as missing a limb and so forth. One does  not
   point out these faults in a negative way. One also  protects  and  guards
   the minds of others.

4. Next is the supernatural power of magical emanation,  i.e.,  the  ability
   to cause an object to become many or causing many objects to become  one.
   The  common  cause  is  the  same.  One  must  have  attained  an  actual
   concentration. The uncommon cause is  offering  footwear  to  others  and
   offering transport. Literally, the text says offering a  ‘mount’  but  in
   this day and age, it means transport, such as  a  car.  Another  uncommon
   cause is helping those who  are  unable  to  walk  to  move  around,  for
   example, carrying them on your back or helping them to go  to  a  certain
   place.

5. Next is the ability to remember past lives. Besides the common  cause  of
   having attained an actual concentration, the uncommon  cause  is  bearing
   hardship in your Dharma practice or bearing hardship for the Dharma.  One
   of the examples given is putting up with the  challenges  of  building  a
   temple, reading Dharma texts or scriptures,  reflecting  and  remembering
   what you have read and not forgetting it. Giving Dharma to  others  in  a
   proper way is also an uncommon cause for the  ability  to  remember  past
   lives. What is the benefit of remembering past lives?

   Khen Rinpoche: I remember when I went to South India  before,  there  was
   someone called the mirror lady. She would check in the mirror,  was  able
   to see many things in it and then she will explain what she had  seen.  I
   noticed many Singaporean went there. Everybody who went there  asked  one
   question, “What is my past life?” I heard everybody who went asked  about
   that.


   I told them that it is better that you check your future lives, not  your
   past lives. You should ask the mirror lady what your  future  lives  will
   be. That is better. You know your past lives. They do not amount to much.
   But if you know your future lives, that will be more interesting. You can
   do something about them. You cannot do anything about  your  past  lives.
   Somebody says, “You were a cow. You were a bird. You  were  a  yak.”   So
   what?


   The ability to remember previous lives in this context refers  mainly  to
   the bodhisattvas’ ability to see into  the  past  lives  of  oneself  and
   others with whom they have a Dharma connection. The bodhisattvas look for
   those people who they have formed a positive Dharma connection with. They
   then help them according to their needs and  dispositions.  That  is  the
   main purpose.


6. Then there is the clairvoyance or supernatural ability that exhausts  the
   contaminants, i.e., exhausts the afflictions. Basically, this  refers  to
   the realization of the final mode of  abiding  (or  ultimate  nature)  of
   phenomena.

Actually remembering past lives is something that  many  desire  realm  gods
can do. It is also something that many spirits can do. It is said that  even
some hell beings are able to remember many of their past lives.

In this context here, it is about developing the  ability  to  read  and  to
know the minds of others.

As for the  ability  to  perform  magical  emanation,  there  is  a  way  of
performing magical emanation in dependence upon mantras.  There  is  also  a
way of performing magical emanation in  dependence  on  certain  substances,
such as certain medical substances.

Some spirits from birth have  the  ability  to  perform  magical  feats  and
apparitions. As for the ability to  read  the  mind  of  others,  there  are
desire realms gods who can do that.

To a certain extent, we can roughly figure out what a person is thinking  by
looking at his facial  expression  and  how  he  acts.  We  can  make  those
generalizations. But the special ability to read other people’s minds  based
on their facial expressions and so forth can be trained.  There  are  people
who are trained to figure out what other people are thinking. That skill  is
not like our kind of rough estimation. They can be quite accurate.

But even  that  special  ability  is  not  cultivated  on  the  basis  of  a
meditative stabilization. The ability to read people’s  minds  that  we  are
talking about here is primarily an ability that is acquired on the basis  of
having an actual concentration. The ability to read  others  people’s  minds
that is based on an actual concentration is very accurate.

The four legs of magical emanation when divided are:
1. The leg of magical emanation of aspiration
2. The leg of magical emanation of joyous effort
3. The leg of magical emanation of intention
4. The leg of magical emanation of analysis

 • The leg of magical emanation  of  aspiration  refers  to  a  very  strong
   yearning or aspiration to acquire concentration.
 • The leg of magical emanation of joyous effort refers to putting in a  lot
   of effort and hard work that leads to the arising  of  the  concentration
   that one was aspiring to achieve.
 • There are some people who acquire  from  birth  the  ability  to  perform
   magical emanation. That is the result of the ripening  of  imprints  that
   were left, through concentration, in their mental continua in their  past
   lives. Such an ability that is acquired at birth is the  leg  of  magical
   emanation of intention.
 • There is a type of concentration that arises  from  having  analysed  and
   reflected well on the meaning of the instructions that one  has  received
   from others. This concentration is called the leg of magical emanation of
   analysis.

Since the four legs of magical emanation are discussed  in  the  context  of
somebody who has already entered the path, as such,  the  boundary  is  from
the path of accumulation up to the buddha ground.

If we were to relate the four legs of magical emanation to  a  path,  it  is
related primarily to  the  Mahayana  great  path  of  accumulation.  At  the
Mahayana great path of accumulation, one acquires the union of calm  abiding
and special insight. Once the bodhisattva achieves the concentration of  the
stream  of  Dharma  (or  stream  of  doctrine),  he  is  able   to   receive
instructions directly from the buddhas.

In order to achieve this concentration  of  the  stream  of  doctrine,  many
things have to be attained. As explained in the Essential Ornament:
 • The bodhisattvas must have accumulated the collections for many eons.
 • They must be of the Mahayana lineage
 • They must also have heard many teachings and instructions.
 • They must have pure ethical discipline.

One of the causes for achieving the concentration of the stream of  doctrine
is to have heard many teachings and studied well.  When  one  achieves  this
concentration of the stream of doctrine, it is said that the bodhisattva  is
able to remember all the teachings that they  have  received  in  the  past.
This refers not just to teachings but teachings that possess  a  lineage  of
the  transmission,  i.e.,  there  is  a  continuum   of   lineage   of   the
transmission. When the bodhisattva achieves the concentration of the  stream
of the doctrine, he will remember all the teachings that possess  a  lineage
that he has heard in the past. This is why it  makes  a  difference  whether
one receive the lineage of the transmissions of the teachings  because  when
the times comes when we are at that level, then whatever teachings  we  have
received in the past, supposedly, we can remember everything!

I guess this is also one of the reasons why it is important to receive  oral
transmissions. Of course, we can only receive the oral transmission  if  the
lineage exists. This is why it is called an oral transmission in  the  first
place. So, now you know the benefit.  Otherwise,  generally  speaking,  many
people think that it is not so important to receive  oral  transmissions.  I
guess they find it boring, sitting there for hours and  days  on  end.  They
are probably thinking, “I don’t know even know what  he  is  saying.  It  is
just sound.” At least now, you know the benefit of receiving the  lung,  the
oral transmissions.

FIVE POWERS & FIVE STRENGTHS

The five powers are related to the heat and  peak  levels  of  the  path  of
preparation. The five powers are:
1. the power of faith
2. the power of joyous effort
3. the power of mindfulness
4. the power of meditative stabilization
5. the power of wisdom

The five strengths (or the five forces) are tied  in  with  the  forbearance
and supreme mundane qualities level of the path  of  preparation.  The  five
strengths are:
1. the strength of faith
2. the strength of joyous effort
3. the strength of mindfulness
4. the strength of meditative stabilization
5. the strength of wisdom

I will talk about the differences between a power  and  a  strength  in  the
next lesson.



Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.


