Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/BP2 M09 L12final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:51.268521
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen  Rinpoche  Geshe  Chonyi  on  The  Eight
Categories and Seventy Topics

Root Text:  The  Eight  Categories  and  Seventy  Topics  by  Jetsün  Chökyi
Gyaltsen, translated by Jampa Gendun. Final draft October 2002, updated  May
2011. © Jampa Gendun & FPMT, Inc.

Lesson                                                                    12
        19 July 2016


Exam Presentation for Module 8.  The  knower  of  bases:  Abiding  within  a
lesser class of realisations. Nine topics that characterize  the  knower  of
bases:  1.  Knower  of  paths  not  abiding  in  cyclic  existence   through
knowledge. 2. Knower of paths not abiding in peace  through  compassion.  3.
Knower of bases distant from the resultant mother. 4. Knower of bases  close
to the resultant mother. 5. Knower  of  bases  that  is  of  the  discordant
class. 6. Knower of bases of the antidote class. 7. Application of a  knower
of bases. 8. Equality of application of a knower of bases. 9. Mahayana  path
of seeing.


EXAM PRESENTATION FOR MODULE 8

(A student presents her chosen verses from Chapter Eight of Engaging in  the
Bodhisattva Deeds).

THE KNOWER OF BASES

|Definiendum|Definition       |Boundary|No.  |Topics                    |
|           |                 |        |of   |(Seventy topics)          |
|           |                 |        |topic|                          |
|           |                 |        |s    |                          |
| Knower of |An exalted wisdom|Exists  |9    |Knower of paths not       |
|Bases      |abiding with a   |in the  |     |abiding in cyclic         |
|           |lesser vehicle   |continuu|     |existence through         |
|           |class of         |m of all|     |knowledge                 |
|           |realizations     |superior|     |Knower of paths not       |
|           |conjoined with   |s       |     |abiding in peace through  |
|           |the wisdom       |        |     |compassion                |
|           |directly         |        |     |Knower of bases distant   |
|           |realizing        |        |     |from the resultant mother |
|           |selflessness in  |        |     |Knower of bases close to  |
|           |the continuum of |        |     |the resultant mother      |
|           |the person who   |        |     |Knower of bases that is of|
|           |possesses it.    |        |     |the discordant class      |
|           |                 |        |     |Knower of bases of the    |
|           |                 |        |     |antidote class            |
|           |                 |        |     |Application of a knower of|
|           |                 |        |     |bases                     |
|           |                 |        |     |Equality of application of|
|           |                 |        |     |a knower of bases         |
|           |                 |        |     |Mahayana path of seeing   |
|           |                 |        |     |                          |

The definition of the knower of bases is an exalted wisdom abiding within  a
lesser vehicle class of  realization  conjoined  with  the  wisdom  directly
realizing selflessness in the continuum of the person  possesses  it.  Here,
selflessness refers to selflessness of a person  in  the  continuum  of  the
person possesses it.
What are the characteristics that a knower of bases must possess?
 • First, it  must  be  conjoined  with  a  wisdom  directly  realizing  the
   selflessness of a person. However, possessing that  characteristic  alone
   does not make that a knower of bases.
 • It abides within a lesser vehicle class of realizations.

Abiding within a lesser vehicle class of realizations
We  must  understand  what  abiding  “within  a  lesser  vehicle  class   of
realizations” means. First,  you  have  to  understand  what  are  the  main
objects of abandonment and the main objects of meditation for  the  hearers,
solitary realizers and the bodhisattvas.

According to the Yogic Autonomy Middle Way School (YAMWS), the main  objects
of meditation are as follows:
 • For the hearers, it is the selflessness of persons.
 • For the solitary realizers, it is the emptiness of subject and object  as
   being different substantial entities. The solitary  realizers  also  take
   the selflessness of a person as an object of  meditation.  However,  they
   take the emptiness of subject and object as being  different  substantial
   entities as their main object of meditation.
 • For the bodhisattvas, it is the emptiness of true existence.

What are the main objects of meditation for  the  Hinayanist?  According  to
the YAMWS, their objects of meditation are:
 • the selflessness of persons
 • the emptiness of  subject  and  object  as  being  different  substantial
   entities

The hearers realize directly the selflessness of persons. On their  path  of
seeing, the solitary realizers also realize the  emptiness  of  subject  and
object as being different substantial entities. These realizations  are  the
lesser vehicle class of realizations.

Is the  wisdom  directly  realizing  the  selflessness  of  persons  in  the
continuum of a  Mahayana  superior  a  knower  of  bases?  Yes,  the  wisdom
directly realizing the  selflessness  of  persons  in  the  continuum  of  a
Mahayana superior is a knower of bases.

 • Why is the wisdom directly realizing the selflessness of persons  in  the
   continuum of a Mahayana  superior  a  knower  of  bases?  Because  it  is
   conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing  selflessness  and  that  in
   itself abides within the lesser vehicle class of realizations.
 • Why  does  it  abide  within  a  lesser  vehicle  class  of  realizations
   specifically? Because this wisdom directly realizing the selflessness  in
   the continuum of a Mahayana superior has a similar  observed  object  and
   similar aspect  to  the  wisdom  directly  realizing  selflessness  in  a
   Hinayana superior. The observed object would be  the  selflessness  of  a
   self-sufficient substantially existent person.

What is a Hinayana path? A Hinayana path is either:
 • the path that is in the continuum of Hinayanist, or:
 • a path that is included within a lesser vehicle class of realizations.

As such, the Hinayana path  is  not  necessarily  a  path  that  is  in  the
continuum of a hearer or solitary realizer. As such, a Hinayana path  exists
in the continuum of a bodhisattva.
A Hinayana path exists in a continuum of a buddha superior.

What are the illustrations of a Hinayana path that exists in  the  continuum
of a Mahayana superior?
 • The wisdom directly realizing selflessness in the continuum of a Mahayana
   superior.
 • The wisdom directly realizing the emptiness of the subject and object  as
   different substantial entities in the continuum of a Mahayana superior.
These are illustrations of a Hinayana path existing in the  continuum  of  a
Mahayana superior.

Why are these realizations  in  the  continuum  of  a  Mahayana  superior  a
Hinayana path? Why are  these  realizations  such  as  the  wisdom  directly
realizing selflessness and the wisdom directly realizing  the  emptiness  of
subject and object as being different substantial entities in the  continuum
of Mahayana superior a Hinayana  path?  It  is  because  these  realizations
share or have a similar object of meditation with a similar observed  object
and aspect.

Let’s take the wisdom directly realizing selflessness in the continuum of  a
Mahayana superior. This is a Hinayana path.  Why  is  it  a  Hinayana  path?
Because it has a similar observed object and aspect of the  main  object  of
meditation of the hearers.
 • What is the similar observed object? It is a person.
 • What is its aspect? It has the aspect of being empty  of  being  a  self-
   sufficient substantially existent person.
As such, if it abides within a lesser vehicle class of realizations,  it  is
necessarily a Hinayana path.

Is the  reverse  true?  If  it  is  abiding  within  the  Mahayana  path  of
realizations, is it necessarily a Mahayana path?  The  answer  is  no.  Why?
Because we are not saying that the Mahayana path exists in the continuum  of
a hearer.

If you were asked, “Does a  Mahayana  path  exist  in  the  continuum  of  a
Hinayanist?” then you have to say, “No.”

If we  were  to  say,  “The  wisdom  directly  realizing  emptiness  in  the
continuum of a Hinayanist is a Mahayana path,” what are you  going  to  say?
The answer is no. That is not the Mahayana path.

Is the wisdom directly realizing emptiness in the continuum  of  a  Hinayana
superior a Mahayana path? No, it is not a Mahayana path.

If we say that the wisdom directly realizing emptiness in the  continuum  of
a Hinayana superior is not a Mahayana path, somebody may object, “No. It  is
a Mahayana path because that wisdom  directly  realizing  emptiness  in  the
continuum  of  a  Hinayana  superior  abides  within  a  Mahayana  class  of
realizations.”

Then you would have to say, “No. Just because that wisdom  abides  within  a
Mahayana class of  realizations  doesn’t  necessarily  make  it  a  Mahayana
path.”
Question: (Inaudible).

Khen Rinpoche: It is the emptiness of true existence. It is possible  for  a
Hinayana superior to realize the  emptiness  of  true  existence.  From  the
perspective of the YAMWS, there  are  Hinayana  superiors  who  realize  the
emptiness of true existence.

Back to the knower of bases. What is its boundary? Where does it  exist?  It
exists in the continuum of all superiors. If this is the case,  it  includes
the buddha superior and this confirms  that  the  buddha  superior  has  the
knowers of bases in his continuum.

Question: (Inaudible).

Khen Rinpoche: It is not necessarily the selflessness  of  persons.  If  you
are asking about the  definition  per  se,  then,  yes,  it  refers  to  the
selflessness  of  persons.  But  just  because  we  say  that  it   is   the
selflessness  of  persons,  we  are  not  necessarily  talking   about   the
selflessness that is in  relation  to  a  person.  The  Prasangikas  do  not
delineate emptiness by its basis but by its object  of  negation.  So  don’t
think of it in that way.

Khen Rinpoche: If you don’t understand, please ask me. Because I don’t  know
what you don’t understand with regard to the definition. You ask me, then  I
will try to make it clearer. If there is anything about a  knower  of  bases
that you are not sure about, you can clarify with me now.

The knower of bases exists in the continuum of all  superiors  but  this  is
not the same as saying that if it is a path in the continuum of a  superior,
it is necessarily a knower of bases.

Question: If it is a Mahayana path, is it necessarily  included  within  the
continuum of a Mahayanist?

Khen Rinpoche: The answer is yes.

Ven Gyurme: That was not the question  posed.  The  question  is  if  it  is
included within the Mahayana class of  realizations,  is  it  necessarily  a
Mahayana path?

Student 1: And the answer was?

Khen Rinpoche: No.

Student 1: Can you give an example of a Mahayana class of  realization,  for
example, the realization of the emptiness of true existence …

Khen Rinpoche: In the continuum of a Hinayanist.

Question: Just now Khen Rinpoche was explaining that the knower of bases  in
the continuum of a Mahayana superior shares a “similar” observed object  and
“similar” aspect of the main object of meditation. My  question  is  why  is
the expression “similar” used and not  the  “same”  object  and  the  “same”
aspect? There must be a difference in that.
Answer: Here, you can use the word “same” if you want. We mean the same.

If you want to know what the knower of bases is, you have to understand  the
definition. Basically, it is a wisdom that  is  conjoined  with  the  wisdom
that directly realizes selflessness. On top of  that,  that  wisdom  has  to
abide within a Hinayana class of realization. If these  characteristics  are
present, that wisdom is a knower of bases.

What is its boundary? It exists in the continua of all superiors.

Question: Just to clarify the knower of bases. Because in  this  definition,
it is very specific, it talks  about  directly  realizing  selflessness.  In
this context, we have already confirmed  that  it  is  the  selflessness  of
persons that it is being referred to here. Is that correct?

Answer: As long as  you  know  what  is  the  selflessness  of  person,  the
emptiness of duality and the emptiness of true existence, then it is okay.

We have gone through  the  main  objects  of  meditation  for  the  hearers,
solitary realizers and the bodhisattvas. The hearers have  the  selflessness
of persons as their main  object  of  meditation.  This  means  the  hearers
doesn’t necessarily meditate on the emptiness of true existence.

Question: You mentioned earlier the Mahayana class of realizations  existing
in the continuum of a Hinayana superior. Are  all  these  considered  to  be
knower of bases?

Khen Rinpoche: What do you think? I am asking you the question now.

Student 2: I think that they do not seem to be knower of bases.

Khen Rinpoche: Why not? You have to think about this. You  don’t  think  so.
So what is missing?

Student 2: I think it is  because  it  is  not  conjoined  with  the  wisdom
realizing selflessness in the person possessing it.

Khen Rinpoche: Not conjoined or conjoined with that mind?

Student  2:  It  is  not  conjoined  because  if  we   are   talking   about
selflessness, it is talking about the selflessness of persons.

Khen Rinpoche: Why is it not conjoined?

Student  2:  Because  if  you  are  talking  about  the  Mahayana  class  of
realizations, you are talking about the wisdom realizing  the  emptiness  of
phenomena.

Khen Rinpoche: In a Hinayana superior,  that  mind  is  not  conjoined  with
selflessness of persons? Why not? What’s wrong with that?  Is  it  conjoined
with that?

Student 2: There is no problem in saying that.

Khen Rinpoche: So it is conjoined with that? So is this a  knower  of  bases
now?

Student 2: Yes. So it is a knower of bases.

Khen Rinpoche: That is why you are not correct.

Is the wisdom directly realizing emptiness in the continuum of a  Hinayanist
a knower of bases? No, because that realization is not  abiding  within  the
Hinayana class of realizations. A Hinayanist does not take a similar  object
of meditation with this kind of observed object and aspect.

Khen Rinpoche: Is your mind working?

Please give me a few illustrations of a path that is in the continuum  of  a
superior that is not a knower of bases.

Khen Rinpoche: Give me some examples. Then you will have a better idea.

Student 3: The inferential realization of emptiness in the  continuum  of  a
Hinayana superior.

Khen Rinpoche: The inferential realization of emptiness in the continuum  of
a Hinayana superior is not a knower of bases. Why?

To determine whether a wisdom is a knower of bases, you have to see  whether
it possesses the characteristics  of  a  knower  of  bases.  If  it  doesn’t
possess the characteristics of a knower of bases, then it is  not  a  knower
of bases.

(In your illustration), what is missing from the definition?

Student 3: I think selflessness is in the definition and it  is  missing  in
this illustration.

Khen Rinpoche: We are not saying  that  it  has  to  be  a  wisdom  directly
realizing the selflessness of persons. Rather we are saying that it must  be
conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing  selflessness.  These  are  two
different  things—something  that   is   the   wisdom   directly   realizing
selflessness and something  that  is  conjoined  with  the  wisdom  directly
realizing selflessness.

You gave the example of the inferential  realization  of  emptiness  in  the
continuum of a Hinayana superior as not being a knower of bases. If you  say
that that is not a knower of bases, referring to the definition of a  knower
of bases, what is missing?

If nothing is missing from the definition, then it is necessarily  a  knower
of bases. If something is missing from the definition,  then  it  is  not  a
knower of bases. According to you, something must be missing.

Student 3: I don’t know.

Khen Rinpoche: Whether it is an inferential realization of emptiness in  the
continuum of a Hinayana superior  or  whether  it  is  the  wisdom  directly
realizing emptiness in the continuum of a Hinayana superior,  they  are  not
knower of bases.

Why are these two not knower of bases?
 • The inferential realization of emptiness in the continuum of  a  Hinayana
   superior does not abide within the Hinayana class of realizations.
 • The direct realization of  emptiness  in  the  continuum  of  a  Hinayana
   superior does not abide within the Hinayana class of realizations.

Why do the inferential realization  of  emptiness  in  the  continuum  of  a
Hinayana superior  and  the  wisdom  directly  realizing  emptiness  in  the
continuum of a Hinayana superior not abide  within  the  class  of  Hinayana
realizations? The explanation has already been given earlier.

The next illustration please of a  path  in  the  continuum  of  a  Hinayana
superior that is not a knower of bases.

Khen Rinpoche: That is all. No more?

Student 4: The meditation on love and kindness in the  mind  of  a  Hinayana
superior.

Khen Rinpoche: Why is loving kindness in the mind  of  a  Hinayana  superior
not a knower of bases?

Student 4: Because it is not the main object of meditation for those of  the
lesser vehicle.

Khen Rinpoche: Why is loving kindness not the main object of  meditation  of
the Hinayanists?

Student 4: It is not the main object of meditation of the knower  of  bases.
From my understanding of the definition of a  knower  of  bases,  there  are
specific objects of meditation for those of the lesser  vehicle  and  loving
kindness is not one of them.

Khen Rinpoche: Good.
                                 ~~~~~~~~~~~

The explanation of the knower of bases comes after the  explanation  of  the
knower of paths. Why? One of the reasons is that if one does  not  cultivate
or generate the knower of bases well, then one will not  able  to  cultivate
the knower of paths well.

The other reason is that without cultivating well  the  sixteen  aspects  of
the four noble truths—impermanence and so forth—that  are  included  in  the
path that is shared with the persons of medium capacity, one  would  not  be
able to generate well the path of the persons of great  capacity.  For  that
reason, after the presentation of the knower of paths,  there  is  then  the
presentation of the knower of bases.













Nine topics that characterize the knower of bases
1. Knower of paths not abiding in cyclic existence through knowledge.
This is mutually inclusive with the knower of paths that knows the  hearers’
path. The second topic that characterizes the knower of paths is the  knower
of path that knows hearers’ paths, which is the  same  as  the  first  topic
that characterizes the knower of bases—the knower of paths  not  abiding  in
in cyclic existence through knowledge.

The wisdom directly realizing selflessness in the continuum  of  a  Mahayana
superior is the knower of paths not  abiding  in  cyclic  existence  through
knowledge and the knower of paths that knows hearers’ paths.

Are there knower of bases in the continuum of a Mahayana superior?

Khen Rinpoche: Yes, without a doubt. You  shouldn’t  have  any  doubt  about
this.

What about an illustration of this—a knower of bases in the continuum  of  a
Mahayana superior?

Isn’t it easy? You just have to say, “The wisdom that directly realizes  the
selflessness of a person in the continuum of a Mahayana superior.”  That  is
the knower of bases.

Isn’t that a hearers’ path?

Khen Rinpoche: Yes? No? You should  have  no  doubt  about  this.  It  is  a
hearers’ path. You should be able to say, “Yes.”

Is that a hearers’ path? Yes.

Is it a knower of bases? Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: There should be no doubt.

Is it a knower of paths?

Khen Rinpoche: Why do you have doubt? This is very clear.  We  have  already
gone through that topic.

It is a knower of paths because it is a knower of paths that knows  hearers’
paths.

Is it a knower of paths not abiding in cyclic existence  through  knowledge?
Yes, it is just a new term.

The definition of knower of paths not abiding in  cyclic  existence  through
knowledge is a Mahayana  superior  exalted  knower  abiding  in  a  type  of
realizer  that  ceases  the  extreme  of  cyclic  existence  relative  to  a
conventional base.

What is this “extreme of cyclic existence relative to a conventional  base”?
 It refers to a samsara that is acquired through karma and afflictions.

“The extreme of  cyclic  existence”  is  posited  as  the  rebirth  that  is
propelled or  projected  by  karma  and  afflictions.  The  wisdom  directly
realizing the selflessness of persons in  the  continuum  of  a  bodhisattva
superior is the mind that stops this extreme of cyclic existence.

The example of a knower of paths not abiding  in  cyclic  existence  through
knowledge is the wisdom directly realizing selflessness of  persons  in  the
continuum of a bodhisattva superior. Why is this  so?  Because  this  wisdom
directly  realizing  selflessness  of  persons  in  the   continuum   of   a
bodhisattva superior stops  the  extreme  of  cyclic  existence,  i.e.,  the
rebirth in cyclic existence that is projected by karma and afflictions.

2. Knower of paths not abiding in peace through compassion
The second topic that characterizes the knower of bases  is  the  knower  of
paths not abiding in peace through compassion.

Just as the first topic pertains to the extreme  of  cyclic  existence,  the
second topic pertains to the extreme of peace. The extreme of peace here  is
the Hinayana nirvana.

What stops one from abiding in  the  extreme  of  peace?  It  is  the  great
compassion in the  continuum  of  a  bodhisattva  superior.   So  the  great
compassion in the continuum of a  bodhisattva  superior  is  the  knower  of
paths not abiding in peace through compassion. This compassion is a  special
method that makes one not abide in the extreme of peace.

So to recap, there are the extreme of samsara and the extreme of nirvana.
 • The extreme of samsara is the rebirth that  is  projected  by  karma  and
   afflictions. What stops this rebirth? It is the wisdom directly realizing
   selflessness of persons in the continuum of a bodhisattva superior.  This
   wisdom directly realizing selflessness of persons in the continuum  of  a
   bodhisattva superior is a knower of paths not abiding in cyclic existence
   through knowledge.
 • The extreme of nirvana refers to the Hinayana nirvana.  The  bodhisattvas
   do not abide in nirvana. What stops them from  abiding  in  nirvana?  The
   great compassion in the continuum of  bodhisattva  superiors  stops  them
   from abiding in the extreme of nirvana. As such, the great compassion  in
   the continuum of a bodhisattva  superior  is  the  knower  of  paths  not
   abiding in peace through compassion.

3. Knower of bases distant from the resultant mother
4. Knower of bases close to the resultant mother
5. Knower of bases that is of the discordant class
6. Knower of bases of the antidote class

The resultant mother here is the resultant perfection of wisdom.

 • For example, the wisdom directly realizing selflessness of persons in the
   continuum of a Hinayana superior who has not realized  the  emptiness  of
   true existence is a knower of bases that is distant  from  the  resultant
   mother.  Why  is  the  wisdom  directly  realizing  selflessness  in  the
   continuum of a Hinayana superior who hasn’t  realized  the  emptiness  of
   true existence a knower of bases  that  is  distant  from  the  resultant
   mother?
    ▪  Firstly,  because  this  Hinayana  superior  does  not   have   great
      compassion.
    ▪ Secondly, because this particular Hinayana superior has  not  realized
      the emptiness  of  true  existence.  Therefore,  he  still  apprehends
      everything to be truly existent. He is still bound by the apprehension
      of true existence. As such, the wisdom directly realizing selflessness
      in the continuum of a Hinayana  superior  who  has  not  realized  the
      emptiness of true existence is a knower of bases that is distant  from
      the resultant mother.

 • For example, the wisdom directly realizing emptiness in the continuum  of
   a bodhisattva superior is  a  knower  of  bases  that  is  close  to  the
   resultant  mother.  Why  is  the  wisdom  directly  selflessness  in  the
   continuum of a bodhisattva superior a knower of bases that  is  close  to
   the resultant mother? Because this wisdom directly realizing selflessness
   of persons in the  continuum  of  a  bodhisattva  superior  is  not  only
   conjoined with great compassion but it is also conjoined with the  wisdom
   directly realizing  the  emptiness  of  true  existence.  As  such,  this
   particular wisdom directly realizing the selflessness of persons  in  the
   continuum of a bodhisattva superior is a knower of bases that is close to
   the resultant mother.

It may be good to talk a  bit  more  about  being  close  to  the  resultant
mother, the resultant perfection of  wisdom,  and  being  distant  from  it.
There can be these two types of persons:
 • One who initially enters, travels all the way to the end of the  Hinayana
   path and becomes an arhat. After that, he enters the Mahayana path.
 • There are also those who enter the Mahayana path right from the beginning
   without entering the Hinayana path.

Between these two individuals, who is going to  reach  enlightenment  first?
When we talk about being close or distant to the resultant  mother,  we  are
talking about who is going to reach enlightenment first.

Those individuals who enter the Hinayana path, finish it and then enter  the
Mahayana path will take a very long time  to  reach  the  resultant  mother,
i.e.,  to  achieve  the  resultant  perfection  of  wisdom.  Why  are  these
individuals very far away from the resultant mother? Why do they  take  such
a long time to achieve enlightenment?
 • Firstly, they don’t have the thought of benefiting others.
 • Secondly, their main goal in life is to  achieve  the  Hinayana  nirvana.
   After that, they just want to abide in peace and remain in that state for
   eons.

It is said that somehow, the buddhas wake them up and tell them,  “You  need
to achieve  enlightenment.”  Nevertheless,  it  is  said  that  it  is  very
difficult for them  to  want  to  enter  the  Mahayana  path  and  work  for
enlightenment because they are so settled in their  state  of  peace.  After
the buddhas talk to them, they go back to rest again. It is  very  difficult
for them to get moving. Some of them do  wake  up  and  enter  the  Mahayana
path. But due to their strong  habituation  of  abiding  in  that  state  of
peace, it is said that even though they  have  entered  the  Mahayana  path,
somehow, they always like to return to that state of rest.

The knower of bases distant from the resultant mother is mutually  inclusive
or the same as the knower of bases that is of  the  discordant  class.  Why?
Because it is an obstacle to achieving enlightenment quickly. This  is  what
I think. Instead of generating the Mahayana path of accumulation first,  one
enters the Hinayana path, for  example,  the  hearers’  path.  Entering  the
Hinayana path is an obstacle or impediment to generating the Mahayana  path.
As such, it is a knower of bases that is of the discordant class because  it
is a discordant factor with regard to entering the Mahayana path.

If you understand what I have said so far, that is enough for the knower  of
bases that is distant from the resultant mother  and  the  knower  of  bases
that is close to the resultant mother.

7. Application of a knower of bases
8. Equality of application of a knower of bases
In order to achieve the knower of bases close to the resultant  mother,  one
needs to cultivate the application of a knower of bases and  one  needs  the
equality of application.

9. Mahayana path of seeing
In this context, this final topic explicitly indicates the  wisdom  directly
realizing  emptiness  but  implicitly,   the   wisdom   directly   realizing
selflessness is also referred to.

If you look at the topics that characterize the knower  of  bases,  it  ends
with the Mahayana path of seeing but there is no discussion of the  Mahayana
path of meditation. However, when you look at the topics  that  characterize
the knower of paths, there are the discussions on both the Mahayana path  of
seeing and the Mahayana path of meditation. Why is  this  so?  Because  once
the direct realization of the selflessness of  persons  is  actualised,  one
does not  need  to  familiarize  oneself  over  and  over  again  with  that
realization as that wisdom  directly  realizing  selflessness  acts  as  the
antidote to the apprehension of the self of persons. This is the reason  why
the Mahayana path of meditation is not explained  in  this  context  of  the
knower of bases.

The bodhisattva superiors do not take rebirth in cyclic existence  primarily
because  they  have  realized  the  emptiness  of   true   existence.   That
realization is conjoined with the mind generation, bodhichitta.

It is  not  necessarily  so  for  Hinayana  superiors.  There  are  Hinayana
superiors who take rebirth in cyclic existence under the  control  of  karma
and afflictions. It is said that even after achieving the hearers’  path  of
meditation, the hearer superiors  still  have  to  take  rebirth  in  cyclic
existence 14 times, either as a desire realm god or as a human being.  There
are also many hearers on the hearers’ path of meditation  who  take  rebirth
in the form and formless realms due to their karma and afflictions.

Earlier, a student had asked whether  there  is  the  wisdom  of  subsequent
attainment for the Mahayana path of seeing. According to the Yogic  Autonomy
Middle Way School, I think I would have to say yes.

 • There is the supreme mundane qualities level  of  the  Mahayana  path  of
   preparation.  Then there is the Mahayana  path  of  seeing  that  can  be
   divided into the uninterrupted path of the Mahayana path  of  seeing  and
   the path of release of the Mahayana path of seeing. These three occur  in
   one session of meditative equipoise.
 • Then from the path of  release  of  the  Mahayana  path  of  seeing,  the
   bodhisattva superior arises from that meditative equipoise  and  achieves
   the wisdom of subsequent attainment of the path of seeing.
 • When that bodhisattva superior enters into a  meditative  equipoise  with
   sufficient power to act as the direct antidote to the abandonment of  the
   Mahayana  path  of  meditation,  that  meditative  equipoise  becomes  an
   uninterrupted path of the path of meditation.
 • He then achieves the first uninterrupted path of  the  Mahayana  path  of
   meditation and enters into the path of release of the  Mahayana  path  of
   meditation. After that, he needs to arise from that meditative  equipoise
   and enter into the session of post-meditative equipoise where he achieves
   the wisdom of subsequent attainment.

If we say now that there is the wisdom of subsequent attainment of the  path
of seeing, why is it that one cannot achieve the path  of  seeing  with  the
support of the form realm?

Another way of saying this is that based on  what  we  have  discussed  with
regard to the wisdom of subsequent attainment of the path of seeing,  if  we
were to say we can allow for an individual with a form realm support on  the
path of seeing, what is the problem?

Remember what we discussed before? What is the  basis  for  newly  attaining
the path of meditation? It is necessarily a desire realm support.

Khen Rinpoche: Are you getting what I’m trying  to  say  from  the  previous
discussion? I’m trying to get this point inside there. I don’t know  whether
you are getting it.

Student 1: It follows then  that  if  one  can  achieve  a  path  of  seeing
subsequent attainment on the basis of form realm body, one  can  enter  into
an equipoise that is powerful  enough  to  be  the  antidote  class  to  the
abandonment of the Mahayana path of meditation. Thus one can  newly  achieve
the Mahayana path of meditation with a form realm support because it  exists
during the subsequent attainment of the path of seeing.

Khen Rinpoche: I understand what you are saying. Are you asking a question?

Student 1: The consequence of this existence of  the  wisdom  of  subsequent
attainment on the path of seeing  means  that  one  can  newly  achieve  the
Mahayana path of meditation on the basis of  a  form  realm  support,  i.e.,
other than the desire realm support.

Khen  Rinpoche:  It  is  clear  that  there  is  the  wisdom  of  subsequent
attainment on the path of seeing. I don’t remember where I  read  it  but  I
remember reading it somewhere. It is said that the duration of the  Mahayana
path of seeing is very short.

I remember I said something like this before to you? Do you remember?

Khen Rinpoche: Not this time. I think  it  must  have  been  in  a  previous
class.

Since the Mahayana path of seeing is very short, there is no need to  change
life, i.e., to take another rebirth.

Student 1: Nevertheless, how would that  bodhisattva  superior  have  enough
opportunity to accumulate the merit that will be powerful enough for him  to
enter the meditative equipoise that is of the antidote class of the path  of
meditation?

Khen Rinpoche: The obscurations are divided into  nine  levels:  three  big,
three medium and three small. Our presentation says that the big is  divided
into coarse of the big and subtle of the big. It starts with the  coarse  of
the big. As it starts with the coarse of the big, so we don’t need  to  work
very hard and don’t need to accumulate much merit.

Khen Rinpoche: I’m just saying this my way.  I  don’t  know  what  the  text
said. I can say it this way.

Student 1: So they don’t need that time to accumulate enough merit  to  make
it powerful enough to enter into meditative equipoise?

Khen Rinpoche: You need to accumulate the collections in order to  actualize
an uninterrupted path because you need the backing of the  merit  that  will
be strong enough to act as the antidote to its respective obscuration.

Student 1: How short is that period? It is difficult to fathom.

Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know how short it is but I think  I  have  seen  this
mentioned somewhere in the texts. The duration of  the  path  of  seeing  is
very short. That’s it. I don’t know how short.

Question: Is there a difference  in  the  assertions  of  this  school  (the
YAMWS) and the Consequence Middle Way School’s with  regard  to  the  wisdom
inferentially realizing emptiness on the superior’s path?

With regard to the CMWS,  we  were  taught  that  the  wisdom  inferentially
realizing emptiness transforms into the entity of the direct realization  of
emptiness when one newly attains the path of seeing. This  means  that  when
it  is  transformed,  that  inferential  realization  of  emptiness  on  the
superior’s path, I take it that the CMWS will assert it to be  non-existent.
 Maybe in this school (the YAMWS), they assert something different?

Answer: I think the manner of proceeding should be the  same.  But  what  we
need to think about is whether all the conceptual realizations of  emptiness
in the continuum of a person on the path of preparation transform  into  the
entity of direct perception when that person achieves the  path  of  seeing?
This is what we need to think about. It seems that you  would  have  to  say
that not all the conceptual minds realizing  emptiness  transform  into  the
entity of direct perception after achieving the path of seeing.  This  means
that there are superiors who have realizations of emptiness via thought.

Student 1: Is that  necessarily  an  inferential  realization?  Thought  can
arrive  at  a  conclusion  through  a  sign—a  subsequent  cognizer  through
conceptuality conjoined with the wisdom directly  realizing  emptiness  that
is not an inferential realization of emptiness.

Khen Rinpoche: Not sure whether  you  can  say  that  they  are  inferential
cognizers but they are definitely subsequent cognizers.

Student 1: That is no  problem.  The  only  problem  is  whether  it  is  an
inferential   realization   of   emptiness.   Within   the   divisions    of
conceptuality, there can be inferential realizations  and  other  conceptual
consciousnesses other than inferential realizations.

That means that there is  no  inferential  realization  of  emptiness  on  a
superior’s continuum. Or  because  there  are  remnants  from  the  path  of
preparation, they become subliminal  or  non-manifest.  Is  it  possible  to
explain it in this way?

Khen Rinpoche: Whether bodhisattva superiors have the inferential  cognition
of emptiness or not, you have to answer the question by saying whether  they
have inferential valid cognizer realizing emptiness or  not?  Basically,  if
they are bodhisattva superiors who still need to  realize  emptiness  via  a
reason, and in dependence on a reason, then  you  can  say  that  there  are
inferential valid cognizers in the continuum of a bodhisattva  superior.  So
you have to think of the answer by answering this question.

We have now finished the knower of bases.

What you were told will be taught in  this  module—the  37  aspects  of  the
paths of enlightenment—  is  coming  in  the  next  category,  the  complete
aspects application.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee and Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.


