Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/BP2 M9 L1 final (heading).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:50.658663
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen  Rinpoche  Geshe  Chonyi  on  The  Eight
Categories and Seventy Topics

Root Text:  The  Eight  Categories  and  Seventy  Topics  by  Jetsün  Chökyi
Gyaltsen, translated by Jampa Gendun. Final draft October 2002, updated  May
2011. © Jampa Gendun & FPMT, Inc.

Lesson                                                                     1
         7 June 2016


Explaining the verses from the Vajra Cutter Sutra: “This is the teaching  of
the Buddha.” “A star, a visual aberration, a flame of a lamp./  An  illusion
…”


EXPLAINING THE VERSES FROM THE VAJRA CUTTER SUTRA

“This is the teaching of the Buddha.”
      Do not commit any non-virtuous actions,
      Perform only perfect virtuous actions,
      Subdue your mind thoroughly —
      This is the teaching of the Buddha.

We usually recite this verse from the Vajra Cutter Sutra  before  class.  It
says that we should abandon all non-virtues, strive  in  cultivating  virtue
and work to discipline our mind. This is like  a  summary  of  the  Buddha’s
teachings.

Why should we abandon committing all non-virtuous actions even if  it  is  a
small non-virtue? This is because we don’t like suffering. The  only  result
that will arise from non-virtue is suffering.

Why do we need to perform perfect virtuous actions? This is because  all  of
us want happiness. Yet we are not  satisfied  with  just  a  little  bit  of
happiness. If possible, we  want  real,  permanent,  everlasting  happiness,
i.e., a happiness that will not  change.  Since  we  want  real,  unchanging
happiness, then we have to engage in perfect virtuous actions.

What constitutes a perfect virtuous action? This is an action  that  is  not
influenced or motivated by either attachment to the happiness of  this  life
or attachment to the happiness of  future  lives.  It  must  be  a  virtuous
action that is done seeking the happiness  of  nirvana  or  liberation  from
samsara. If we want real, permanent, everlasting happiness and freedom  from
samsara, then we need to create their causes by  engaging  in  such  perfect
virtuous actions.

“Do not commit any non-virtuous  actions,/  Perform  only  perfect  virtuous
actions.” This is where we have the presentation of karma and  its  effects.
Whatever karma or actions we accumulate, on their own, they will never  ever
go to waste.
 • When we  accumulate  non-virtues,  definitely,  we  will  experience  the
   result, suffering.
 • When we engage in virtue, we will experience the result, happiness

It is extremely difficult to understand the workings  of  karma,  especially
the intricacies behind the workings of karma and its effects.  This  is  not
to say that we can’t come to some understanding of  the  workings  of  karma
and its effects through reflection and  analysis  and  by  using  logic  and
reasoning. In fact, we can  come  to  quite  a  good  understanding  of  the
validity of karma and its effects through reasoning, in  particular,  if  we
understand what an enlightened being is and what omniscience means.  As  the
Buddha is the Omniscient One, we can trust the  Buddha’s  proclamations  and
explanations of the workings of karma and its effects.

But even if we  manage  to  achieve  permanent,  everlasting  happiness  for
ourselves and free  ourselves  from  the  cycle  of  death  and  rebirth  by
achieving nirvana, this is not the end of  the  road.  Even  if  we  achieve
nirvana, we still lack the full capacity to work for the welfare  of  others
and  to  benefit  all  sentient  beings.  Achieving  permanent,  everlasting
happiness for ourselves alone is inappropriate and not  correct.  Therefore,
we must strive to attain the ability to do perfect  work  for  all  sentient
beings. In order to  do  that,  we  have  to  overcome  our  self-cherishing
attitude. In terms of the obscurations to be abandoned, we need to  overcome
the knowledge obscurations.

Even if we achieve permanent, everlasting happiness for ourselves,  that  is
only the peace of nirvana. Even our own purposes have not  been  brought  to
culmination, i.e., we have yet to achieve our highest potential. If we  have
not reached our fullest potential, it goes without saying that we  will  not
be able to do perfect work for others. We will not be  able  to  fulfil  the
welfare of sentient beings.  Even  if  we  achieve  liberation  from  cyclic
existence, our mind is  not  yet  completely  separated  from  every  single
defilement or obscuration. Something still obscures the  mind—the  knowledge
obscurations—that prevents us from attaining omniscience. So even though  we
achieve liberation, we have yet to remove those obscurations.  As  such,  it
is said that we have not fulfilled  our  fullest  potential.  If  there  are
still obscurations obscuring our mind, then  there  is  no  way  we  can  do
perfect work for all sentient beings.

As such, we need to enter the Mahayana path, the path to enlightenment  that
is conjoined with the altruistic intention to achieve enlightenment for  all
sentient beings. Then one generates the  wisdom  realizing  emptiness.  Upon
generating the wisdom realizing emptiness, one seeks to develop that  wisdom
to its fullest capacity. That is when one achieves enlightenment.

This is a short verse that many people recite every day. We  can  commit  it
to memory and recite it daily as a way of reminding ourselves of the  points
that I have just talked about.

“Do not commit any non-virtuous actions.” Whenever we meet with problems  in
our lives, if we can remember this line, then we can remind  ourselves  that
all the problems we meet  in  our  lives  are  the  results  of  not  having
abandoned non-virtues in the past. We get into  trouble  because  we  didn’t
follow the Buddha’s advice.

Whenever we meet with difficulties and challenges and our mind  is  unhappy,
we  can  tell  ourselves  that  having  an  unhappy  mind  comes   from   an
undisciplined or unsubdued mind. This is the reality. It is very clear.  The
reason we suffer and are unhappy is because our mind is not  disciplined  or
subdued.  All  our  problems  and  unhappiness  come  from  that.  The  more
disciplined the mind is, the more subdued it is,  we  will  experience  less
unhappiness and problems. When the  mind  is  completely  subdued,  then  it
doesn’t matter what happens, I guess there is really no way for that  person
to be unhappy.  So the extent to which we  are  affected  by  challenges  or
problems depends on whether the mind is subdued or not.

If we really understand and  are  convinced  that  the  main  cause  of  our
suffering lies within us and not outside, this makes a  huge  difference  to
our worldview. Then many things become easier to handle.

Unfortunately, that is not how we see  the  world.  Whenever  we  experience
difficulties, instinctively, we always  think  that  the  problem  lies  out
there: “It has nothing to do with me. It is not my fault. It  is  the  fault
of this situation and/or person.”  The  source  of  the  problem  is  always
outside. We never think that the source of the problem comes  from  our  own
undisciplined mind. We never ever think that we  are  at  fault.  We  always
think that it is the fault of something or someone  outside.  When  we  have
such a worldview, check whether the  problem  or  unhappiness  that  we  are
experiencing becomes bigger or smaller. Not only does  the  problem  not  go
away, it becomes bigger and bigger.

When we put the blame for all our problems, be it  big  or  small,  outside,
blaming the situation or someone else, our problems will not go away or  get
smaller. They only become bigger and bigger. Obviously, that is a sure  sign
that we have gotten it wrong and that  our  belief  that  the  problems  lie
outside is a wrong  belief.  All  this  comes  back  to  not  following  the
Buddha’s advice and not subduing our mind.

We have to be able to see for ourselves  and  be  convinced  that  the  main
cause of suffering lies within us and not outside.
 • Any problem we may experience is the result of  some  non-virtuous  karma
   that we accumulated in the past.
 • Furthermore, we need to generate the heartfelt  admission  that  whatever
   problems we experience, our difficulties and unhappiness  come  from  our
   unsubdued mind.
When we put these  two  understandings  together,  they  will  make  a  huge
difference. They become the bedrock, the very foundation, of  our  practice,
our pursuit of happiness and the way we lead our lives.

Whether  you  are  able  to  study  the  Buddhadharma  extensively  or  not,
recognizing that your problems do not come from the outside but from  within
you should be the foundation for everything else.

      A star, a visual aberration, a flame of a lamp,
      An illusion, a drop of dew, or bubble,
      A dream, a flash of lightening, a cloud—
      See conditioned things as such!

I have explained this verse in the past  but  there  is  no  harm  in  going
through it again.  If you have some idea of the meaning of  this  verse  and
reflect on  it  regularly  on  a  daily  basis,  it  can  be  very  helpful,
especially when you meet with challenges in your life.

“A star, a visual aberration, a flame of a lamp”
~ “A star”
“A star” is the introduction to the two facets of reality, the two truths:
 • a superficial level of reality, the conventional truth
 • a deeper level of reality, the ultimate truth

In the mind of ordinary beings such as ourselves, we  have  different  valid
states of mind  that  are  able  to  understand  the  superficial  level  of
reality, the conventional truth. We  called  these  minds  valid  cognizers.
Specifically, in this case, we call them conventional  valid  cognizers.  An
example will be the mind that realizes a table, a  flower  or  a  cup.  This
mind is able to realize these objects based  on  their  appearance.  Objects
that are realized  by  the  conventional  valid  cognizer  are  conventional
truths. In accordance with their appearance to the  mind,  we  have  to  say
that these objects exist.

How do we posit the existence of a phenomenon—whether a flower  or  a  fruit
exists? It is based on its appearing to the mind that realizes it;  in  this
case, the conventional valid cognizer. As it appears, it is known to  exist.


Is there something more to the flower than what appears to the  conventional
valid cognizer? Is the flower a mere appearance or is  there  another  level
of reality to the flower? This is what we need to think about.

The vast majority of us will not see anything beyond what appears to  us.  A
flower appears to us in a certain way. That appearance is  what  constitutes
the flower and, to us, there is nothing beyond that. It  is  just  that  one
dimension of reality. We don’t think that there  is  something  deeper  than
that, something more than  mere  appearance.  At  the  very  most,  we  only
interact with that appearance of the flower. That is it.

We don’t see another dimension to that flower. In fact, there  is  a  deeper
dimension,   another level of reality that we  don’t  see.  Although  it  is
there, we don’t see it. Why  is  this  so?  This  is  because  our  mind  is
obscured by the latencies of ignorance. As long as our mind is  obscured  by
these defilements, we will not be able to see that deeper level of reality.

All kinds of objects  appear  to  the  conventional  awareness—form,  sound,
smell, taste and  objects  of  touch.  Objects  that  exist  appear  to  the
conventional awareness. But even fabrications of reality, i.e., things  that
do not actually exist, also  appear  to  the  conventional  awareness.  Both
existents and non-existents can appear to the  conventional  awareness  that
is polluted by the latencies of ignorance.

It is said that to the mind polluted by  the  latencies  of  ignorance,  all
kinds of things can appear. The analogy given is of the appearance of  stars
at night where the dark night is likened to the  darkness  or  fogginess  of
ignorance. Just as stars can appear on  a  dark  night,  likewise,  a  whole
variety of appearances can appear to the consciousness that is  polluted  by
the latencies of ignorance.

When we are able to remove these defilements from the mind,  then  the  mind
is able to see the final nature—the deepest level of reality—of  the  object
in question. The object that is ascertained by such a  mind  is  called  the
ultimate truth.

To reiterate, it is said that as long as it is an  existent  or  phenomenon,
it has two levels of reality.
 • The superficial level of reality of the phenomenon that  appears  to  the
   conventional awareness is posited as a conventional truth.
 • The deepest level of reality of the phenomenon that appears to  the  mind
   is called the ultimate truth.

These two truths are realized by their respective valid cognizers:
 • the valid cognizer distinguishing a conventionality
 • the valid cognizer distinguishing an ultimate

Seeing  all  the  stars  in  the  sky  at  night  is  the  analogy  for  the
conventional truth.

In the daytime, we see just the sky, this vacuity or space. The fact  we  do
not see stars in the day is analogous to the experience of a person who  has
directly realized the ultimate nature of all phenomena. In  the  perspective
of the mind of that person, no conventional truths appear.  Nothing  appears
to the perspective of the mind directly realizing  the  ultimate  nature  of
phenomena except emptiness.

Although  a  conventional  valid  cognizer  is  a  mistaken   consciousness,
nevertheless, it is valid or  correct  with  regard  to  what  is  appearing
before it. The object that it realizes, such as the  flower,  is  valid  and
correct. Although a conventional valid cognizer is  valid  with  respect  to
the  object  it  realizes,  for  example,  a  flower,  nevertheless,  it  is
considered a mistaken consciousness. In what way is  it  mistaken?  Although
the flower appears to this mind, at the same time, it appears to  this  mind
to be truly or inherently existent while it is not. The  conventional  valid
cognizer is mistaken in that sense.

So although conventional valid cognizers are valid  cognizers  with  respect
to  what  they  are  realizing,  nevertheless,  they  are  still  considered
mistaken in that whatever they  realize,  that  realization  comes  with  an
appearance that is a fabrication of reality. An apple appears  to  be  truly
existent while it is not truly existent. In  that  sense,  the  conventional
valid  cognizer  is  considered  a  mistaken  consciousness.  This   is   in
accordance  with  the  tenets  of  the  highest  philosophical  school,  the
Consequence Middle Way School (CMWS).

On the other hand, a wisdom directly realizing emptiness is not  a  mistaken
consciousness. Why? Because in  the  perspective  of  that  wisdom  directly
realizing emptiness  or  in  the  perspective  of  a  superior’s  meditative
equipoise, only emptiness appears. Nothing else! No conventional  truths  or
conventionalities appear. Why? Because that mind in meditative equipoise  is
not affected by the latencies of ignorance.

This is why we need to deepen our  understanding  of  the  workings  of  the
mind. At the present time, we only have a conventional awareness. All  kinds
of things can appear to the conventional awareness—things that exist,  i.e.,
existents, and things that  do  not  exist,  i.e.,  non-existents.  This  is
obvious. This  term,  “conventional  awareness”  can  include  both  correct
states of mind and completely illogical and wrong states of mind,  i.e.,  it
includes both right minds and wrong minds. For example, a wrong or  perverse
consciousness is a conventional awareness. It is wrong  because  the  object
that a wrong consciousness believes in actually does not exist.

Whereas based on the appearance of a  phenomenon  to  a  conventional  valid
cognizer, it is able to posit and ascertain its  existence.  The  phenomenon
that appears to the conventional valid cognizer does exist. We  see  apples,
fruits, tables, flowers and so forth. The mind that sees  these  objects  is
valid in that whatever is appearing to it exists.  For  example,  the  apple
that appears to  the  eye  consciousness,  which  is  a  conventional  valid
cognizer, exists and as it appears, it functions.

Another example.  The  mind  thinking  that  a  rabbit  has  horns.  In  the
perspective of that mind, it believes a rabbit has horns.  Although  in  the
perspective of that wrong consciousness, there is a rabbit  with  horns,  in
reality, there is no such thing. As such, the mind  apprehending  the  horns
of a rabbit is a wrong or  perverse  consciousness.  It  is  a  conventional
awareness but it is not a conventional valid cognizer because it is a  wrong
consciousness.

Then it gets a bit complicated. A conventional valid  cognizer  realizing  a
flower is valid with respect to the flower. It realizes the flower,  yet  at
the same time, the flower appears to this mind to be truly  existent.  While
there isn’t such a thing  as  a  truly  existent  phenomenon,  nevertheless,
whatever appears to a  conventional  valid  cognizer  appears  to  be  truly
existent. So there is a part of that cognition that is mistaken, yet  it  is
a valid cognizer.

To the  conventional  valid  cognizer  apprehending  a  flower,  the  flower
appears to be truly existent. In reality, is the flower truly or  inherently
existent? Does it exist from its own  side?  The  answer  is  no.  Yet,  the
flower appears to be truly  existent  to  the  conventional  valid  cognizer
realizing the flower.

If the flower exists in the way it appears, i.e., if the  flower  is  indeed
truly or inherently existent, this would be the deepest final nature of  the
flower. If that is the case, this truly existent flower would appear to  the
wisdom that directly perceives the ultimate nature of  the  flower.  But  in
the perspective of the wisdom directly perceiving  the  ultimate  nature  of
the flower, the flower does not appear at all.

~ “A visual aberration”
To reiterate, if it is an appearance to a conventional  valid  cognizer,  it
is not necessarily an existent. To illustrate such a visual aberration,  the
example of seeing falling hairs or a shimmering  mirage  is  given.  In  the
shimmering mirage, while there is no water out there, it  seems  that  there
is a body of water. People with certain medical conditions may  see  falling
hairs while there are no  falling  hairs.  These  illustrate  that  whatever
appears to a conventional valid cognizer is not necessarily an existent.  If
whatever appears necessarily exists, then even those people whose  eyes  are
not affected by the medical condition would also see the falling hairs.

Khen Rinpoche: Those of you who have been coming to class for  a  long  time
should have no problem with this  material.  The  new  ones  may  have  some
difficulties there. We haven’t started on the module topic yet!

Those of you who are here for the first time, read the handout when  you  go
back after today’s class.

Under certain conditions, a mirage appears. We may be led  to  believe  that
there is an actual body of water when  there  isn’t  any  water  out  there.
Likewise, while everything that appears to  a  conventional  valid  cognizer
appears to be truly existent, that doesn’t mean that the apple, tree,  fruit
and so forth are necessarily truly existent.

~ “A flame of a lamp”
Although apples, trees, flowers and so  forth  appear  to  the  conventional
valid cognizer to be truly existent, they do not exist  truly.  Having  said
that, it does not mean that the apples or flowers do not exist because  they
are not truly existent. We cannot say that. We have to be able to  establish
their existence. How do the apples and flowers exist? They  are  dependently
arisen in that they exist through the coming together  of  their  respective
causes and conditions. They are nothing more than mere appearances.

The example of the flame of a butter lamp is  used  to  illustrate  this.  A
flame of a butter lamp does not exist on its own, in and of  itself.  Rather
it exists through the coming together of many conditions like the butter  or
oil, the wick and so forth. Then the flame comes into being.

Samsara is that we  seek  to  free  ourselves  from  all  the  problems  and
sufferings.

Nirvana is that we seek to achieve permanent everlasting peace.

Both samsara and nirvana are equal in that they have never  existed  in  and
of themselves.
The samsara (or cyclic existence) that we need to free  ourselves  from  has
never and will never exist in and of itself, from its own side or under  its
own power. Rather samsara is a result of our own karma and afflictions.

Likewise, nirvana, the  liberation  from  all  suffering  that  we  want  to
accomplish, also does not exist in and of  itself.  Therefore,  we  need  to
create and  gather  all  the  conditions  together  before  we  can  achieve
liberation. We need to exhaust our karma and afflictions before our  nirvana
can be achieved.

This is a presentation of  dependent  arising  (or  dependent  origination).
Anything and everything that exists,  exists  as  dependently  arisen.  This
directly  contradicts  independent  existence,  i.e.,  something   that   is
dependently originated cannot exist in and of themselves.

Do phenomena actually exist in and of themselves? They may appear  that  way
but do they exist in that way?
If phenomena exist in and of themselves, then when  we  look  for  them,  we
should be able to find them. We should be able to point  to  something  that
is the designated object. But when we look for it, we will not  be  able  to
find the object. We  cannot  point  to  something  that  is  the  designated
object. As such, anything and everything that exists do not exist in and  of
themselves because they are dependently arisen.

So how do we then explain the existence of phenomena? How do they  exist  if
they  don’t  exist  inherently?  They  exist  in  mere  name  and  as   mere
appearances.

At the end of the day, it is a matter of eliminating the possibilities.
 • On one hand, obviously things exist and function. Nobody disputes that.
 • Yet at the same time, things do not have independent existence,  existing
   in and of themselves.
 • Then how do they exist? We cannot say they don’t exist because obviously,
   things do exist.
 • The only alternative left is that they exist in mere name.

Any object in question has a superficial  level  of  reality  and  a  deeper
level of reality.
 • The superficial level of reality of  the  object—its  mere  appearance—is
   called the conventional truth.
 • The deeper level of reality  of  the  object—its  emptiness  of  inherent
   existence—is an ultimate truth.
This is a short explanation of what constitutes reality. When we talk  about
reality, the whole of existence and anything that exists  are  contained  in
these two truths.

But is it enough to just having an understanding of this  basis—the  meaning
of and what constitutes  reality?  The  answer  is  no.  Just  knowing  that
reality is  like  this  will  not  free  us  from  suffering.  Based  on  an
understanding of these two levels of reality, what  can  we  do  to  deliver
ourselves from suffering? What is the method?

Based  on  the  Buddha’s  thorough  understanding  of  reality,  the  Buddha
expounded and gave his first teaching on the four  noble  truths.  The  four
noble  truths  is  essentially  an  explanation  of  the  cause  and  effect
relationship pertaining to the class of thoroughly  afflicted  phenomena—the
causes and conditions that keep us stuck and suffering in samsara—and  cause
and  effect  relationship  pertaining  to  the  class  of  thoroughly   pure
phenomena—the  causes  and  conditions  that  we  need  to  gather  to  free
ourselves from samsara so that we can achieve nirvana.

If reality is what the Buddha has said—that there  is  a  superficial  level
and a deeper level of reality—and if we can understand reality in  terms  of
these two truths, why have we been suffering? Why are we still  in  samsara,
taking rebirth over and over again? To help us understand  what  is  keeping
us in samsara, the next analogy of an illusion is used.

“An illusion”
Illusions can be very attractive or really frightening.
 • If the illusion that is conjured by the  illusionist  or  magician  is  a
   pleasant  aberration,  we  develop  an  attachment  and  liking  for  it,
   believing the illusion to be real. Our mind gets excited.
 • But if the illusionist conjures up something frightening or scary, we may
   develop aversion and fear and be frightened by it. Again, we believe  the
   illusion to be real. Our mind reacts naturally and instinctively in  that
   way.

The illusion conjured up by the illusionist, be it pleasant or  frightening,
is just an illusion. There isn’t an object or  person  there.  Nevertheless,
we are affected by these illusions.  We believe in them and  we  get  sucked
in. We generate either desire and excitement  or  fear  and  aversion,  even
though it is just an illusion.

The illusion is an analogy that can be applied to reality,  especially  when
we meet with problems  and  difficulties.  Whatever  appears  in  our  daily
lives, particularly when we are suffering in an unhappy situation, how  does
that situation appear to us? It appears to be very real, existing in and  of
itself, from its own side. This is how it appears.

While it does not exist in that way, nevertheless, it appears  to  exist  in
and  of  itself,  to  be  solid,  independent   and   inherently   existent.
Furthermore, we assent to that appearance and we believe  that  is  how  the
problem exists in reality. Based on the mind assenting to  that  appearance,
then the  whole  range  of  emotions  are  invoked  in  us,  from  anger  to
attachment. We start to experience problems, unhappiness and  all  kinds  of
sufferings.

This is how we have been responding in our daily lives, from  life  to  life
in  samsara.  And  this  is  how  we  have  been  getting   ourselves   into
difficulties one after another. Based on assenting  to  that  appearance  of
true existence, how do we stop ourselves from experiencing that  again?  The
method to overcome this is explained by the next  few  examples.  After  “an
illusion,” there is “a drop of dew, or a bubble.” We will look  at  them  in
the next lesson.

Khen Rinpoche: If you don’t understand or are  confused,  you  can  ask  one
question. If you are clear, then that is OK. Those  who  are  studying  this
seriously, please read the handout. I’m not going to go through  everything.
I will just give you some idea.

People may be thinking, “What do you study in Buddhism? If you study in  the
Master Program, what is there to study?” The handout is just an outline.  To
understand these two pages, it takes ten years!

So maybe I will go through that to give you some idea. It is  good  to  have
some idea of this topic.


Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Patricia
Lee and Julia Koh; edited by Cecilia Tsong.
