Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/BP2 M09 L13final.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:51.257265
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Khen  Rinpoche  Geshe  Chonyi  on  The  Eight
Categories and Seventy Topics

Root Text:  The  Eight  Categories  and  Seventy  Topics  by  Jetsün  Chökyi
Gyaltsen, translated by Jampa Gendun. Final draft October 2002, updated  May
2011. © Jampa Gendun & FPMT, Inc.

Lesson                                                                    13
        21 July 2016


Exam Presentation for Module 8. The story  of  the  bodhisattva  the  Always
Crying One. The preciousness of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras. The  knower
of  bases.  Review.  Revisiting  the  knower   of   paths.   Exploring   the
possibilities among the three knowers..


EXAM PRESENTATION FOR MODULE 8

(A student presents her chosen verses from Chapter Eight of Engaging in  the
Bodhisattva Deeds).

THE STORY OF THE BODHISATTVA THE ALWAYS CRYING ONE

I thought to speak a little bit about the life story of the bodhisattva  who
was called the Always Crying One.

Khen Rinpoche: Have you heard this story before? Why  was  that  bodhisattva
always crying? So much suffering, then he cries?

(Student’s response is inaudible).

Anyway, it can be a long story but just to make it short. This  bodhisattva,
the Always Crying One, obviously was someone who  had  developed  bodhicitta
and was working  hard  to  achieve  enlightenment.  He  had  a  very  strong
interest in wanting to hear teachings on the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra  and
he was thinking about how he could find someone  who  could  teach  him  the
Perfection of Wisdom Sutras. He went into isolation and  was  wondering  how
he could receive teachings on  the  Perfection  of  Wisdom  Sutras.  He  was
always thinking about this to the extent of crying over the matter.

Then one day, out of the  blue,  a  voice  said  to  him,  “In  the  eastern
direction, there is a land called Incense Smell where a bodhisattva  by  the
name of  Chöpak  resides.  He  is  someone  with  whom  you  have  a  karmic
connection with over many lifetimes. Look for this bodhisattva and you  will
be able to hear teachings on the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras from him.”

Having heard this, he went to look for this  bodhisattva.  He  went  in  the
eastern direction and travelled for a very long time.  Then  he  thought  to
himself, “How much further will I have to travel before  I  could  see  this
bodhisattva?” Having travelled for quite  a  long  time,  he  began  to  get
discouraged as he didn’t know how much further he had to go.

The bodhisattva, the Always Crying One, had already  achieved  concentration
so he went into meditative equipoise and had a vision of  many  buddhas  and
bodhisattvas. They told him to continue going in the eastern  direction  and
that he will meet soon  the  bodhisattva,  Chöpak.  He  was  advised  to  be
determined and not give up. In that vision, those buddhas  and  bodhisattvas
also gave him teachings. He then continued with his journey.

As he continued with his journey, he wondered to  himself,  “Where  did  the
buddhas and bodhisattvas come from? Where  did  they  return  to?”  He  also
started to wonder about what offering he  should  make  when  he  meets  the
bodhisattva, Chöpak. He thought, “I must offer something  when  I  meet  the
bodhisattva, Chöpak but I have nothing to offer. The only thing  I  have  is
my body. I will sell my body and whatever I get in return  from  selling  my
body, I will make that offering to the bodhisattva, Chöpak, so  that  I  can
receive the teachings on the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras.”

After the bodhisattva, the Always Crying One, reached the town, he  thought,
“Finally, I can get somebody to buy my body.” So he shouted  in  the  market
place, “I’m here to sell my body. Are there any buyers?” He  shouted  loudly
but no matter how much he shouted, he could not find any  buyer.  The  maras
knew what he was up to, so with  their  magical  powers,  the  maras  caused
everyone in the market not to hear what he was saying.  The  people  in  the
market couldn’t hear that here was a person who  was  willing  to  sell  his
body. After a while, not finding any buyers,  the  bodhisattva,  the  Always
Crying One, got very worried and thought, “If I do not find any buyers,  I’m
not going to get my teachings on the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras.”

The god Indra knew that the bodhisattva, the Always Crying One,  was  trying
to sell his body so that he could receive teachings  on  the  Perfection  of
Wisdom Sutras. Indra wanted to test his resolve,  whether  he  really  meant
what he said. So Indra manifested himself as a brahmin and went  up  to  the
bodhisattva, the Always Crying One, and said, “I  need  some  items  for  my
rituals. I need blood, a human heart, human bones, marrow and  human  flesh.
Are you willing to sell me what I need?”

The bodhisattva, the Always Crying One, agreed and cut off a piece of  flesh
from his leg for the human flesh. He bled himself for the  blood.  He  broke
his leg bone with a rock for the human bone.

When it came to the bone marrow, when he was about  to  break  the  bone  to
extract the marrow, a queen with an entourage of  500  women  saw  what  was
happening. Out of curiosity, the queen asked  the  bodhisattva,  the  Always
Crying One, what he was doing. The bodhisattva replied that he  was  selling
his body so that he can make offerings to bodhisattva, Chöpak, in  order  to
receive teachings on the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras.  After  hearing  this,
the queen and her entourage felt very inspired and  generated  great  faith.
The queen said to the bodhisattva, “You  don’t  have  to  do  that.  I  will
provide you with whatever you need. You do not have to break your leg.”  The
queen and the entourage made many offerings and  gave  many  things  to  the
bodhisattva, the Always Crying One. It is said that then they rode  together
in chariots to look for the bodhisattva, Chöpak.

Indra was not an ordinary god. He possessed  the  speech  of  the  power  of
truth so that whatever prayers he uttered can be actualized.  As  Indra  was
convinced that the bodhisattva, the  Always  Crying  One,  was  resolved  to
receive the teachings on the Perfection of Wisdom  Sutras,  he  uttered  the
phrase to invoke the  power  of  truth  and  the  health  and  body  of  the
bodhisattva, the Always Crying One, was fully restored.

As the bodhisattva, the Always Crying One, together with the queen  and  her
entourage of  500  people,  approached  the  place  where  the  bodhisattva,
Chöpak, was residing, the bodhisattva,  the  Always  Crying  One,  said,  “I
think we had better stop here and get off our  chariots  and  horses  as  it
would be inappropriate to ride all the  way  in.”  So  they  got  off  their
chariots and horses and walked the remaining distance  to  where  the  great
bodhisattva, Chöpak, resided.

When they reached the place  called  Incense  Smell,  the  bodhisattva,  the
Always Crying One, saw that that place was like a pure land. He saw  a  very
beautiful house, a pavilion- like structure and a  celestial  mansion  where
the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras were housed and worshipped. He also saw  the
place where the bodhisattva, Chöpak, stayed. There is an account of how  the
bodhisattva, the  Always  Crying  One,  together  with  the  queen  and  her
entourage went to the place where  the  Perfection  of  Wisdom  Sutras  were
placed and honoured. The bodhisattva,  the  Always  Crying  One,  made  many
wondrous offerings in honour of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras.

Finally, the bodhisattva,  the  Always  Crying  One,  met  the  bodhisattva,
Chöpak. It is said that the bodhisattva, Chöpak, was not in the aspect of  a
fully ordained person but in the aspect of a lay person  with  an  entourage
of many females around him. The bodhisattva, the  Always  Crying  One,  paid
homage, made prostrations and offered his  body  and  entire  being  to  the
bodhisattva, Chöpak.

The bodhisattva, Chöpak, asked  the  bodhisattva,  the  Always  Crying  One,
“With you are the queen and an entourage of 500  people.  Are  you  able  to
offer all of them to me as well?”  The bodhisattva, the Always  Crying  One,
replied, “Of course. If I can offer you my body, what else is there  that  I
cannot offer?” So he offered everything. I seemed to remember  that  at  the
end of all this, the bodhisattva, Chöpak, offered back to  the  bodhisattva,
the Always Crying One, everything he had offered.

However, the  bodhisattva,  Chöpak,  did  not  give  the  teachings  on  the
Perfection of Wisdom Sutras  right  away.  That  night,  before  he  entered
meditative equipoise, he said, “I will remain  in  concentration  for  seven
years.” For seven years, he remained in concentration and did not  give  the
teachings that the bodhisattva, the Always Crying One, was looking for.

During those seven years, day and night, the bodhisattva, the Always  Crying
One, the queen  and  her  entourage  circumambulated  the  place  where  the
bodhisattva, Chöpak, was absorbed in concentration.  After seven  years  had
passed, the bodhisattva, Chöpak, gave teachings on the Perfection of  Wisdom
Sutras to the bodhisattva, the Always Crying One. As a result  of  receiving
those teachings, the  bodhisattva,  the  Always  Crying  One,  was  able  to
realize emptiness directly.

This is not a fairy tale or just a story. It  is  a  historical  account  of
what happened. In fact, if you look in the last  few  chapters  towards  the
end of the short Perfection of Wisdom  Sutra  in  8000  stanzas,  this  long
story is mentioned in the sutra.

THE PRECIOUSNESS OF THE PERFECTION OF WISDOM SUTRAS

What is the point of me narrating this account to you? From this story,  you
can see how precious the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras are. The Perfection  of
Wisdom Sutras are precious because of  their  subject  matter,  the  natural
perfection of wisdom.

What keeps us suffering day in and  day  out?  What  binds  us  to  our  own
samsara? You really have to think about this. If  you  see  that,  then  you
will  know  that  it  is  only  through  realizing  emptiness,  the  natural
perfection of wisdom, that can free us  from  our  own  samsara.  Therefore,
when we have the opportunity to learn about emptiness, we should do so  with
joy and enthusiasm. You must see the purpose behind  this.  Only  then  will
you be able to engage in your studies with joy and enthusiasm.

In order  to  realize  the  perfection  of  wisdom,  besides  the  teachings
themselves, you also need a teacher, i.e., somebody who can  teach  you  the
perfection of wisdom. If  you  can  find  someone  who  you  have  a  karmic
connection with, then it makes it easier. Because of  that  karmic  affinity
and connection, his explanations will be clearer to you,  making  it  easier
for you to understand.

This historical account is of a bodhisattva who has mind  generation,  i.e.,
he possesses  bodhicitta.  Look  at  how  hard  he  worked  to  realize  the
perfection of wisdom. If he needed to make that much sacrifice  and  put  in
so much hard work, then what about us? We don’t have any bodhicitta at  all.
We are nowhere near it. Obviously, we have to work even harder. We  have  to
put in the hard work and we should never be discouraged.

What we are trying to do here in this module is to start  looking  a  little
bit at the subject matter of Perfection of Wisdom Sutras,  i.e.,  the  eight
categories and 70 topics are the  subject  matter  that  is  taught  in  the
Perfection of Wisdom Sutras.

Yes, it is not easy. It is not a walk in the park! Therefore,  you  have  to
work hard and never give up.

Khen Rinpoche: Never give up!

In order to really understand and realize the Perfection of  Wisdom  Sutras,
we need a lot of merit and we need so much purification.  As  such,  in  the
Perfection of Wisdom Sutras,   it is said, "Therefore,  honour  and  worship
the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras by  writing  them  out,  make  offerings  to
them, prostrate to them and so forth.” The reason for doing  so  is  because
we need a lot of merit and a lot of strong purification.

Earlier on, when we were looking at the knower of paths, we  looked  at  the
path of meditation of belief. This belief refers  to  the  belief  that  the
mothers are the source of one’s and other’s aims. At that  time,  we  looked
at how making offerings to the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra  is  the  same  as
making offerings to the buddhas themselves. You have to understand why  this
is so.

The main point is: Where did the buddhas come  from?  They  originated  from
actualizing the perfection of wisdom. In order to actualize  the  perfection
of wisdom, they have to depend on  the  Perfection  of  Wisdom  Sutras,  the
subject matter of which is emptiness.   Even  the  buddhas  themselves  came
about in dependence upon  the  Perfection  of  Wisdom  Sutras,  the  subject
matter that is contained in those sutras. As such, when we worship  or  make
offerings to the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras, the merit is  similar  to  the
merit we receive if we were to make offerings to the Buddha himself.

For that reason, whether it is the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras or any  other
sutras and Dharma text, including the one that we are studying  so  that  we
can practise, we have to respect all these texts. It  is  mentioned  in  the
trainings that after one has taken refuge in the Three Jewels,  one  has  to
respect Dharma texts and regard  them  as  the  Dharma  Jewel.  We  have  to
respect Dharma texts by putting them in a clean, high and  respectful  place
and, if possible, also make offerings to the texts.

Of course that depends on whether we have belief in the first place. If  you
have belief, then you will be able to respect  all  Dharma  texts,  worship,
honour and make offerings to them.  When  we  make  offerings,  worship  and
prostrate to the scriptures and texts, we will accumulate a  lot  of  merit.
It is said that with that merit, we will come to understand and realize  the
emptiness of the perfection of wisdom.

It is not as if you don’t know what I have just told you. You  already  know
all this but knowing is one thing and doing is another.  Just  knowing  that
there are benefits and what ought to be done alone do not bring any  benefit
at all. Only when we do it, then we will get the benefit. As it says in  the
teachings, the whole point of knowing and the whole point  of  studying  are
to put into practice what we have studied. As mentioned in the  lam-rim,  if
we don’t practise what we have heard  and  learnt,  then  that  hearing  and
learning have no benefit whatsoever.

It is clearly mentioned in the lam-rim that  there  isn’t  a  Dharma  to  be
learnt and studied and another Dharma to  be  practised.  To  think  of  the
Dharma in this way is wrong. It is a huge mistake. So if we think that  what
we have learnt is not meant to be practised and when it comes  to  practice,
there are some other special instructions, that  is  wrong  and  a  mistake.
Whatever we have learnt is meant for practice and whatever  we  practise  is
what we have learnt.
                                ~~~~~~~~~~~~

THE KNOWER OF BASES

Review
Now I am going to talk about the knower of bases. In order to  know  what  a
knower of bases is, we have to think  about  the  definition.  There  is  no
other way out.

The definition of the knower of bases is an exalted wisdom abiding within  a
lesser vehicle class of realizations  that  is  conjoined  with  the  wisdom
directly  realizing  selflessness  in  the  continuum  of  the  person   who
possesses it.

Have any of you here successfully memorized the definition of the knower  of
bases?

Khen Rinpoche: Can you put your hand up? Does anybody  know  the  definition
by heart without reading the text? You know how to read but do you know  the
definition by heart?

In the definition of a knower of bases, it says  it  is  an  exalted  wisdom
abiding within a lower vehicle class  of  realizations  conjoined  with  the
wisdom directly realizing selflessness in the continuum of  the  person  who
possesses it. We have  to  understand  that  this  definition  is  from  the
perspective of the Yogic Autonomy Middle Way  School  (YAMWS).  Selflessness
here is not talking about  emptiness  but  refers  to  the  selflessness  of
persons. When we talk  about  the  selflessness  of  persons  here,  we  are
talking about the selflessness of persons that is asserted by the YAMWS  and
the tenets below it because their  way  of  asserting  the  selflessness  of
persons are pretty much the same.

|Definiendum  |Definition    |Boundary  |No.   |Topics                   |
|             |              |          |of    |(Seventy topics)         |
|             |              |          |topics|                         |
|             |              |          |      |Knower of paths not      |
|Knower of    |An exalted    |Exists in |9     |abiding in cyclic        |
|Bases        |wisdom abiding|the       |      |existence through        |
|             |with a lesser |continuum |      |knowledge                |
|             |vehicle class |of all    |      |Knower of paths not      |
|             |of            |superiors |      |abiding in peace through |
|             |realizations  |          |      |compassion               |
|             |conjoined with|          |      |Knower of bases distant  |
|             |the wisdom    |          |      |from the resultant mother|
|             |directly      |          |      |                         |
|             |realizing     |          |      |Knower of bases close to |
|             |selflessness  |          |      |the resultant mother     |
|             |in the        |          |      |Knower of bases that is  |
|             |continuum of  |          |      |of the discordant class  |
|             |the person who|          |      |Knower of bases of the   |
|             |possesses it. |          |      |antidote class           |
|             |              |          |      |Application of a knower  |
|             |              |          |      |of bases                 |
|             |              |          |      |Equality of application  |
|             |              |          |      |of a knower of bases     |
|             |              |          |      |Mahayana path of seeing  |
|             |              |          |      |                         |
|             |              |          |      |                         |

Just because  a  mind  is  conjoined  with  the  wisdom  directly  realizing
selflessness, that alone does not qualify  that  mind  to  be  a  knower  of
bases. In order to be a knower of bases, on top of it being  conjoined  with
the wisdom directly realizing selflessness, it has to be a mind that  abides
within the Hinayana class of realizations. So, in order  to  understand  the
definition fully, you have to understand what abiding  within  the  Hinayana
class of realizations means.

Khen Rinpoche: Are you  following  me?  I  am  repeating  what  was  covered
before.

What  is  the  measure  then  of  abiding  within  a   Hinayana   class   of
realizations? If that exalted wisdom is taken by a Hinayanist  as  his  main
object of cultivation with a similar observed object and aspect, this  makes
that mind a mind abiding within the Hinayana class of realizations.

 • If you were asked, “Is the wisdom directly realizing selflessness in  the
   continuum of a Mahayana superior a knower of bases?” you have to say yes.


 • Is that wisdom directly realizing selflessness  in  the  continuum  of  a
   Mahayana superior that is a knower of bases a Hinayana path? Yes.
 • Is it a Mahayana path? Yes.

If you heard the subject of the enquiry here, you  will  automatically  know
that it is a Mahayana  path  because  we  said  that  the  wisdom  realizing
selflessness is in the  continuum  of  a  Mahayana  superior.  That  is  the
subject so it is a Mahayana path.

Is  the  person  who  possesses  this  wisdom  a  Mahayanist?  If  he  is  a
Mahayanist, the knower in his continuum is a Mahayana path.

Is the wisdom directly realizing  selflessness  in  the  continuum  of  this
Mahayana superior a Hinayana path? Yes, because the  Hinayana  path  is  not
necessarily a path that is included in the continuum of a Hinayanist.

Revisiting the knower of paths
In our discussion of a knower of paths, what is its boundary? Where does  it
exist? The knower of paths only  exists  in  the  continuum  of  a  Mahayana
superior. What is a knower of paths? If you look at its etymology,  not  its
definition, a knower of paths is a knower that knows all the three paths  in
their entirety:
1. It is the knower of the hearers’ path.
2. It is the knower of the solitary realizers’ path.
3. It is the knower of the Mahayana path.

Why  is  there  a  need  for  a  Mahayana  superior  to   know   everything?
Bodhisattvas work for all sentient  beings,  i.e.,  everyone,  and  not  all
sentient beings are Mahayanists, i.e., not all sentient beings  are  of  the
Mahayana lineage. Here, everyone means the disciples or the  objects  to  be
subdued of the three lineages—the hearers, solitary realizers and  those  of
the Mahayana lineage. So, bodhisattva works for the disciples of  the  three
lineages. In order to work for the disciples  of  the  three  lineages,  the
bodhisattva has to  show  the  Dharma  that  is  in  accordance  with  their
respective dispositions and aspirations. In the continuum  of  the  Mahayana
superior, there are the hearers’ path, the solitary realizers’ path, and  it
goes without saying, definitely, there is the Mahayana path.

When the bodhisattva achieves the Mahayana path of seeing,  the  bodhisattva
sees the truth directly and realizes the selflessness  of  persons  directly
as well. From then onwards, he doesn’t need  to  go  over  that  realisation
repeatedly because there is no need to do so. The purpose of going over  and
over again a realization is either to abandon  the  afflictive  obscurations
or the  knowledge  obscurations.  But  as  we  have  seen  earlier  on,  the
bodhisattvas do not take the abandonment of the afflictions  as  their  main
task. As such on the path of meditation, they do not put in  special  effort
to go over the realization of the selflessness of persons  again  and  again
in the YAMWS.
Of course, the wisdom directly realizing the selflessness of persons  exists
on the Mahayana path of meditation.  We  are  not  saying  that  it  doesn’t
exist. The bodhisattva superiors possess the wisdom directly  realizing  the
selflessness of persons in their continuum as do the buddhas.

The wisdom directly realizing selflessness in the continuum of the  Mahayana
superior is a Hinayana path. This means the  Hinayana  path  exists  in  the
continuum of the Mahayana superiors.

Why is it a Hinayana path? Why is it a hearers’ path? It is a Hinayana  path
because  it  is  a  wisdom  that  abides  within  the  Hinayana   class   of
realizations. Since that exists in the continuum of a hearer,  then  we  say
that it is a hearer’s path.

Khen Rinpoche: This should be clear. I don’t know. You should cry every  day
over not understanding the knower of bases. The bodhisattva cried  over  not
hearing  the  Perfection  of  Wisdom  Sutras.   You   can   cry   over   not
understanding this!

In order to know what a knower  of  bases  is,  you  have  to  look  at  its
definition. There are two parts to the definition.  If  the  two  parts  are
present, you can call them the definiendum—the thing that is defined by  the
definition—a knower of bases. So if the thing possesses  the  two  parts  of
the definition, it is a knower of bases.

If you really have the interest to learn and you want to know, if  you  want
to discuss or debate, you have no choice but  to  memorize  the  definition.
Not only that. You also have to have some idea of what  the  definition  is.
However, if you don’t have any interest, then it is OK. There is nothing  to
be done.

We have already gone through the definitions of the exalted  knower  of  all
aspects, the knower of paths and the knower of bases. If you  want  to  know
this topic, then you have to approach it by starting with  the  definitions.
You have to understand the definition, memorize the definition and know  the
definition.  You can write it out on your own and think about it.

You also have to know their boundaries. For  the  time  being,  don’t  worry
about the topics that illustrate or characterize those topics. For the  time
being, just  think  of  the  definition  of  the  three  knowers  and  their
boundaries. This is the homework. You have to do this.

Exploring the possibilities among the three knowers
One of the techniques for us to understand a subject matter  is  to  explore
its possibilities in relation to another object.  Now,  we  have  the  three
knowers—the exalted knower of all aspects,  the  knower  of  paths  and  the
knower of bases. For example, first, you compare the exalted knower  of  all
aspects and the knower of paths. How many possibilities  are  there  between
the two?
 • Is there something that is an exalted knower of all  aspects  but  not  a
   knower of paths?
 • Is there something that is a knower of paths but not an exalted knower of
   all aspects?
 • Is there something that is both an exalted knower of all  aspects  and  a
   knower of paths?
 • Is there something that is neither an exalted knower of all aspects nor a
   knower of paths?

Among the maximum of  four  possibilities,  how  many  apply  here?  Of  the
possibilities that do exist, you have to give an illustration of  each.  You
cannot just say yes or no. For example, if you say that there is an  exalted
knower of all aspects but not a knower of paths, then give an illustration.

Khen Rinpoche: You have to write it down. Next  time,  when  I  ask  you  to
read, you read whatever you  have  prepared.  If  possible,  you  should  be
prepared with examples as well. In this way, you can learn more.

Likewise, do the same for the knower of paths and the knower of  bases.  How
many possibilities exist between the knower  of  paths  and  the  knower  of
bases? Whatever number of possibilities you come up with, you have  to  give
an illustration for each possibility. It requires thinking on your  part  in
order for you to be able to give an illustration. If you  don’t  think,  you
will not be able to come out with any illustration at all. For  example,  if
you say something is A but not B and you give an illustration, you  must  be
able to explain why your illustration is A and not B. In  the  first  place,
without any understanding,  there  is  no  way  you  can  come  up  with  an
illustration. So, that is the exercise.

For example, if you find something that is A but not B, then write  down  an
illustration. There must be a  reason  why  you  are  choosing  that  as  an
illustration. You must have something in your mind that is telling  you  the
illustration is definitely A but not B.  You  are  able  to  write  it  down
because you are clear about it and you are able  to  find  an  illustration.
Then you will find it easy in the future as you don’t have  to  think  about
it again. Because you have thought about it, then if  someone  were  to  ask
you, it will just come out, “It is like that!” What is the basis to be  able
to come out with the number of  possibilities  between  A  and  B  and  give
illustrations? It is the definitions of  whatever  you  are  comparing  plus
their respective boundaries.

Do  you  understand  what  I  mean  when  I  say,  “Explore  the  number  of
possibilities”? It is about permutations.

For example, how many  possibilities  are  there  between  a  phone  and  an
iPhone?

Khen Rinpoche: How many possibilities are there for phones? Are  there  four
possibilities? Three? Which one is missing?  From  the  four  possibilities,
which one does not exist?

(Student’s response is inaudible).

Is there such a thing as an iPhone but not a phone? If you don’t  understand
this, then it is pointless to do the exercise.

Khen Rinpoche: It is very simple. You understand? It is like A,  B,  C  now.
It is like teaching A, B, C, D.

Is there something that is both an iPhone and a phone?

Students (in unison): Yes, an iPhone!

Ven Gyurme: That is not the way to give an illustration! You cannot use  the
thing that you are comparing as an illustration.

Khen Rinpoche: For example, Ven Gyurme’s  iPhone.  Now  it  is  clear.  Same
thing. You are compared the meaning. I just give the example.

Is there something that is an iPhone but not a phone? There is nothing  that
is an iPhone but not a phone. That is impossible.  So,  there  is  something
that is both (an iPhone and phone) but there  isn’t  something  that  is  an
iPhone but not a phone. That possibility has been eliminated.

Is there something that is a phone but not an iPhone?

Students: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: An illustration?

Students: Samsung.

Khen Rinpoche: Samsung is not a  phone.  Don’t  just  say  Samsung.  Say,  a
Samsung phone.

Is there something that is not both?

Students: Yes. A pager.

Khen Rinpoche: That is the example.

You compare an exalted knower of all aspects and a  knower  of  paths.  Then
you compare a knower of paths and a knower of bases. How many  possibilities
exist? If there is a possibility that does not exist, you have to know  why.
If you think about this in terms of the  possibilities,  your  understanding
of the individual categories will become clearer. Your understanding of  the
knower of paths, the knower of bases and the exalted knower of  all  aspects
will become clearer.

How many possibilities are there between a sentient being and a  person  who
has entered a path?

Khen Rinpoche: How many possibilities are there? You already  know  what  it
means to enter and not to enter the path. You  know  this,  right?  So,  now
just compare.

Student 1: Four.

Khen Rinpoche: Four? Some say four, some say three. Four  or  three?  Three?
How many fingers do you have? Five? How many?  We  just  do  this  exercise.
Then you will know what to do. How many? Somebody says three, somebody  says
four. Somebody says three. What is missing?

(Student’s response is inaudible).

Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know what happened. You must listen to  the  question
carefully. I think it is a very simple thing. I am just  wondering  why  you
don’t understand. Just now, the iPhone is such a simple example. It  is  the
same logic.

Now, we are comparing this person who has  entered  the  path  and  sentient
beings. How many possibilities are there? It is the same technique. Now  you
trying to compare these two different  things—the  sentient  being  and  the
person who has entered the path. How many possibilities are there?  Four  or
three? Then you give the example. Like the iPhone. One by one.

Student 2: I think it is four. A sentient being  who  has  not  entered  the
path—me.

Khen Rinpoche: For example, Swee Kim.

Student 2: Both a sentient being and a person who has  entered  the  path—an
arhat. A person who has  entered  the  path  only  and  is  not  a  sentient
being—Buddha. Not a sentient being and not a  person  who  has  entered  the
path—a paper bag.

Khen  Rinpoche:  You  understand  what  he  said?  Yes,   there   are   four
possibilities. You have to compare in the same way. I  am  just  giving  you
the idea. You have to go back to the topic and find out for yourself.

How many possibilities are there between a  Hinayana  path  and  a  Mahayana
path?

Khen Rinpoche: This is not homework. This is just  to  help  you  understand
how to go about your homework. If you work like this every day,  there  will
be no dementia!

How many? Come, come, come. Kelvin said four. Give examples. Speak clearly.

Student 3: Both are Mahayana path and  Hinayana  path—the  wisdom  realizing
selflessness  of  a  self-sufficient  substantial   existence   within   the
continuum of a Mahayana superior is both a Hinayana path because  it  abides
in the lesser vehicle class of realizations and a Mahayana path  because  it
is also in the continuum of a Mahayana superior.

Khen Rinpoche: Correct.

Student 6: Something that is a Mahayana path but not  a  Hinayana  path.  An
example is the mind generation in the continuum of a bodhisattva.

Khen Rinpoche: Correct.

Student 6: Something that is a Hinayana path but not  a  Mahayana  path.  An
example  is  the  wisdom  realizing  the  selflessness  of   self-sufficient
substantial existence within the continuum of a Hinayana superior.

Khen Rinpoche: Correct.

Student 6: Something that is neither can be non-mind, person or form.

Khen Rinpoche: Correct. These examples are OK.

Now back to the knower of paths and the knower of bases. Compare  and  write
down the examples. Make clearer, like that. OK.

We will start with the complete aspects application in the next  lesson.  It
is a bit tough but just to give you some idea  about  the  complete  aspects
application. After that, we will move into  the  four  close  placements  of
mindfulness. They are useful. The four close placements of mindfulness are:
1. the close placements of mindfulness on bodies
2. the close placements of mindfulness on feelings
3. the close placements of mindfulness on minds
4. the close placements of mindfulness on phenomena
“Phenomena” basically refers to what we should abandon and  what  should  be
cultivated. Those points are very useful for reflection and meditation.




Interpreted by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek,  Vivien  Ng
and Aki Yeo; edited by Cecilia Tsong.



