Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Definition for Ornaments.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:52.646655
================================================================================

 
 
FPMT  BASIC PROGRAM  
 
Maitreya’s 
Ornament for Clear Realizations 
Chapter 4 
 
DEFINITIONS  
BASIC PROGRAM STUDY MANUAL  
 
based on Gyaltsab Je’s 
Ornament of the Essence  
 
Translated by Toh Sze Gee 
2008 - 2009 
 
 
 
 
A MASTERS PROGRAM MATERIALS PROJECT  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
© Toh Sze Gee & FPMT, Inc. 
2009 
 
 
All rights reserved 
 
No part of this work may be reproduced in any form  or by any  means, el ectronic or mechanical, 
including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system or 
technologies now known or later developed, without permission in writing 
 from Toh Sze Gee &FPMT, Inc. 
 
1 Maitreya’s 
Ornament for Clear Realizations 
Chapter 4 
 
DEFINITIONS  
 
 
1. The definition of an application in complete aspects  is: a bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined 
with the wisdom cultivating the aspects of  the three exalted knowers collectively. 
2. The definition of a knower-aspect of the antidotal class in the continuum of a 
bodhisattva  is a bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined with th e wisdom that cultivates any aspect of 
the three exalted knowers by way of it dawning [to the mind]. 
3. An exalted knower that is able to destro y its discordant class is the definition of a 
knower-aspect of the antidotal class indicated in this context   
4. The definition of an antidote to a superimpositio n (that is a wrongly directed 
superimposition with respect to a phenomenon  that is the observed object of a knower 
of bases) in the continuum of a bodhisattva  is: a bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined with a 
wisdom cultivating an aspect  of a knower of bases. 
5. The definition of a knower-aspect of a knower of bases  is:  
(1) an exalted knower in the continuum of an ar ya (that is an aspect) that is an object of 
cultivation of a knower of bases and  
(2) that which abides in a class of Hinayana realizations.  
 6. The definition of 
an afflictive obscuration  is: that which is either an afflictive 
obscuration or a knowledge obscuration, and abid es in a class of obscurations that mainly 
obstruct the attainment of liberation.
Maitreya’s Ornament for Clear Realization - Chapter 4 
                D e f i n i t i o n s  
                  Translation Toh Sze Gee 2009 
 
2 7. The definition of a knowledge obscuration  is: that which is either an afflictive 
obscuration or a knowledge obscuration, and abid es in a class of obscurations that mainly 
obstruct the attainment of omniscience. 
8. The definition of an antidote to a superimpositio n (that is a wrongly directed 
superimposition with respect to a phenomenon  that is the observed object of a knower 
of paths) in the continuum of a bodhisattva  is: a bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined with a 
wisdom cultivating an aspect  of a knower of paths. 
9. The definition of a knower-aspect of a knower of paths  is:  
(1) a knower-aspect of the antidotal class in  the continuum of a Mahayana arya that is 
attained through the force of cultivating an a pplication of a knower of paths that is the 
method for attaining it, and  
(2) that which is able to fulfill the wished-f or aims of its children, the bodhisattva aryas. 
 10. The definition of 
a knower-aspect of an exalted knower of all aspects  is:  
(1) a final knower-aspect that is attained thro ugh the force of cultivating an application of 
an exalted knower of all aspects that is the method for attaining it, and  
(2) that which is able to fulfill the wished -for aims of its children, the buddha aryas. 
 
11. The definition of an antidote to a superimpositio n (that is a wrongly directed 
superimposition with respect to a phenomenon that is the observed object of an exalted 
knower of all aspects) in the continuum of a bodhisattva  is: a bodhisattva’s yoga 
conjoined with a wisdom cultivating an aspe ct of an exalted knower of all aspects. 
12. The definition of a close placement of mindfulness  is: an exalted knower (of one who 
has entered a path) included within either mi ndfulness or wisdom, that meditates on the 
four—bodies, feelings, minds, and phenomena— through examining the general and specific 
characteristics of each of them. 
13. The definition of a correct abandoning  is: an exalted knower (of one who has entered 
a path) that is a joyous effort of enthusiasm  for discarding the objects of abandonment and 
adopting the antidotes. 
Maitreya’s Ornament for Clear Realization - Chapter 4 
                D e f i n i t i o n s  
                  Translation Toh Sze Gee 2009 
 
3 14. The definition of a leg of magical emanation  is: an exalted knower (of one who has 
entered a path) that is a meditative stabil ization supported on the eight abandoning 
applications, these being the antidotes to the five faults. 
15. The definition of a power within the thirty-seven  harmonies of enlightenment  is: an 
exalted knower that is self-powered with resp ect to generating its result, an arya’s path. 
16. A strength of the completely pure cla ss within the thirty-seven harmonies of 
enlightenment  is: an exalted knower that cannot be surmounted by its discordant classes. 
17. The definition of a branch of enlightenment  is: an exalted knower in an arya’s 
continuum that acts as a cause of th e enlightenment that is its result. 
18. The definition of a branch of aryas’ paths  is: an exalted knower in an arya’s continuum 
that is a cause of its result, an arya’s path. 
19. An exalted knower that is  distinguished by being able to destroy the superimposition 
that is its object of elimination, by way of realizing the non-existence of the adhered object 
of the superimposition that is its object  of elimination—is the definition of a path of 
antidotes indicated here  
20. The definition of a path of emanation indicated in this context  is: an exalted knower 
that is distinguished by: (i) being free from ce rtain types of obscurations to absorption in 
dependence on a final concentration that is it s empowering condition and (ii) being able to 
display various emanated transformations. 21. The definition of 
a path of abiding happily in the present life  is: an exalted knower 
(that is not polluted by coarse afflictions) in  the continuum of a person who has attained a 
liberation. 22. The definition of 
an absorption of cessation  is: a non-associated compositional factor 
(that is an absorption in an arya’s continuum ) abiding in a class distinguished by having 
ceased the coarse concomitants, the objects to be ceased, with respect to the subtle mental 
primary consciousness, the basis of cessation. 23. The definition of 
an uninterrupted path  is an uncontaminated exalted wisdom that 
acts as the direct antidote to the obscur ation that is its corresponding object of 
abandonment. 
Maitreya’s Ornament for Clear Realization - Chapter 4 
                D e f i n i t i o n s  
                  Translation Toh Sze Gee 2009 
 
4 24. The definition of a liberated path  is an exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise that is 
liberated from the corresponding object of ab andonment of the uninterrupted path that is 
its direct substantial cause. 
25. The definition of a path of buddhas  is: an exalted knower abiding in a class of paths 
that cause one to proceed to the buddha ground. 
26. The definition of a strength of buddhas  is: a final exalted knower distinguished by 
being able to outshine its discordant classes, in dependence on a final concentration that 
serves as its empowering condition. 
27. The definition of a fearlessness  is: a final exalted knower distinguished by the absence 
of anxiety in the midst of a retinue with re gard to teaching the excellent Dharma, in 
dependence on a final concentration that  serves as its empowering condition. 
28. The definition of an individual correct knowledge that is a knower-aspect of an 
exalted knower of all aspects  is: a final exalted knower distinguished by having abandoned 
the grasping and obstruction with respect to  the subject matter to be explained and the 
means of explaining it, in dependence on a final concentration that serves as its 
empowering condition. 
29. The definition of an unmixed quality of buddhas  is: a final exalted knower 
distinguished by classes and sets of excellent qu alities that are not even slightly mixed with 
those of lesser aryas, in dependence on a fina l concentration that serves as its empowering 
condition. 30. An exalted wisdom set in meditative equip oise on thusness in a manner of not arising 
again—is the definition of 
an aspect of thusness that is a knower-aspect of an exalted 
knower of all aspects 
31. A self-arisen aspect that is an knower-a spect of an exalted knower of all aspects  is a 
final exalted wisdom distinguished by having attained mastery over the turning of all the 
wheels of Dharma without exception. 
32. An aspect of buddha itself indicated here  is a final exalted wisdom that clearly (i.e., 
manifestly) and completely (i.e., perfectly) real izes (i.e., is enlightened with respect to) all 
aspects of all phenomena that are the modes and varieties. 
Maitreya’s Ornament for Clear Realization - Chapter 4 
                D e f i n i t i o n s  
                  Translation Toh Sze Gee 2009 
 
5 33. The definition of a person (that is a support) who is a cultivator of the applications 
explicitly taught in this context  is: a bodhisattva explicitly taught in this context who 
possesses the two outer and inner conditions. 
34. The definition of an application that is the principal object to be indicated (explicitly 
indicated in this text)  is: a bodhisattva’s yoga (explicitly indicated in this context) that is 
conjoined with a union of calm abiding and special insight observing emptiness. 
35. The definition of an excellent quality of a Mahayana application  is: an excellent 
quality attained through the force of cultivatin g a Mahayana application that serves as the 
method for attaining it. 36. The definition of 
a fault of an application  is: a mara’s action that interferes with the 
production, abidance, or completion of an application. 
37. The definition of an application of a knower of bases in the continuum of a 
bodhisattva  is: a bodhisattva’s yoga that abides in  a class of Hinayana realizations that 
observe any of the aspects of a knower of base s: the arisal of a tathagata and so forth. 
38. An application of a knower of paths  is a bodhisattva’s yoga that observe any of the 
aspects of a knower of paths: em ptiness, signless, and so forth. 
39. An application of an exal ted knower of all aspects  is a bodhisattva’s yoga that observes 
any of the aspects of an exalted knower of all aspects: the abiding in happiness of the 
present life of the tathagatas and so forth. 
40. The definition of a partial concordance with liberati on explicitly indicated in this 
context  is: a clear realization of the doctrine  of a bodhisattva who is skilled in 
accomplishing an exalted knower of all aspects in his continuum. 
41. The definition of a Mahayana partial concordance with definite discrimination 
explicitly indicated in this context  is: a bodhisattva’s clear realization of the meaning 
(explicitly indicated in this context) that is  mainly qualified by the factor of method. 
42. The definition of a bodhisattva sangha who has attai ned a sign of irreversibility  is: a 
bodhisattva who has attained in his continuum an y of the forty-four signs, such as having 
turned away from manifest adherence to forms and so forth as truly existent. 
Maitreya’s Ornament for Clear Realization - Chapter 4 
                D e f i n i t i o n s  
                  Translation Toh Sze Gee 2009 
 
6 43. The definition of a sign of irreversibility of on e on the path of preparation  is: a pure 
proof that causes conviction that the bodhis attva on the path of preparation who possesses 
it is irreversible. 
44. A sign of irreversibility of one on the path of seeing  is: a pure proof that causes 
conviction that the middling faculty bodhisattv a on the path of seeing who possesses it is 
irreversible from unsurpassable complete enlightenment. 45. The definition of 
a bodhisattva on the path of medita tion who has attained a sign of 
irreversibility  is: a bodhisattva abiding in subsequent clear realization who has attained the 
special conducts of body and speech of subs equent attainment that are induced by the 
understanding of the eight types of profundities. 46. The definition of 
a sign of irreversibility of one on the path of meditation  is: a pure 
proof that causes conviction that the bodhis attva on the path of meditation who possesses 
it is irreversible from unsurpassable complete enlightenment. 47. The definition of 
an application of the equality of cyclic existence and peace  is: an 
exalted wisdom of the pure grounds that has exhaustively destroyed the opportunity for a 
manifest conception of true existence to be  produced on the occasions of subsequent 
attainment, by means of being conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing that cyclic 
existence and peace are empty of true existence. 
48. The definition of an application in a pure land  is: a yoga of the pure grounds in which 
the potency of causal roots of virtue—prayers  and so forth that will establish a special 
buddha land where one will become a buddha—has become powerful. 
49. The definition of an application in skillful means  is: a yoga of the pure grounds that 
spontaneously accomplishes excellent exalted acti vities by means of having pacified coarse 
exertion. 