Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/lesson12.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:52.799968
================================================================================

Now we will look at the knower of bases. 
Definition of the knower of bases:  An exalted wisdom abiding within a lesser vehicle class of realization conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing selflessness in the continuum of the person possesses it. Here is the selflessness of a person in the continuum of the person possesses it.
What are the characteristic of a knower of bases must possess? 
First, it must be conjoined with a wisdom directly realizing the selflessness of a person. However, possessing that characteristic alone does not make that thing a knower of bases.
What other characteristic must exist on top of this? 
It abides within a lesser vehicle class of realization. 
We must understand what does “abiding within a lesser vehicle class of realization” means?
You have first need to understand what is the main object of abandonment and main object of meditation. 
What is the main object of meditation of hearers, the solitary realizers and the bodhisattvas? According to the Yogic Autonomy Middle Way School, the main object of meditation for:
The hearers is the selflessness of a person 
The solitary realizers is the emptiness of subject and object as being different substantial entities. 
The bodhisattvas is the emptiness of true existence.
The solitary realizer do take the selflessness of a person as an object of meditation. However they also take the emptiness of subject and object as being different substantial entities as their main object of meditation.
What are the main object of meditation for the Hinayanist? 
According to the Yogic Autonomy Middle Way School, their object of meditation are:
- selflessness of a person 
- the emptiness of subject and object as being different substantial entities.
The hearers realize directly the selflessness of a person. 
On the Path of Seeing, the solitary realizers also realize the emptiness of subject and object as being different substantial entities.
These realizations are lesser vehicle class of realization. 
Is the wisdom directly realizing the selflessness of a person in the continuum of a Mahayana superior a knower of bases? 
Yes, the wisdom directly realizing the selflessness of a person in the continuum of a Mahayana superior is a knower of bases.
Why is the wisdom directly realizing the selflessness of a person in the continuum of a Mahayana superior a knower of bases? 
Because that is conjoined with wisdom directly realizes the selflessness, and that itself abides within the lesser vehicle class of realization.
Why is the wisdom directly realizing the selflessness in the continuum of a Mahayana superior a knower of bases? 
Why does it abides within a lesser vehicle class of realization specifically? 
Because this wisdom directly realizing the selflessness in the continuum of a Mahayana superior has a similar observed object and similar aspect to the wisdom directly realizing selflessness in a Hinayana superior. 
The observed object would be the emptiness of a self-sufficient substantially existent person.
Khen Rinpoche: You understand? No?
What is a Hinayana path? 
Hinayana path is either the path that is in the continuum of Hinayanist or it is a path that is included within a lesser vehicle class of realization.
As such, the Hinayana path is not necessarily a path that is in the continuum of a hearer or solitary realizer.
As such, the Hinayana path exists in the continuum of a bodhisattva. 
A Hinayana path exists in a continuum of a Buddha superior.
What are the illustrations of Hinayana path that exists in the continuum of a Mahayana superior? 
Examples: the wisdom directly realizing selflessness in the continuum of a Mahayana superior. 
The wisdom that directly realizing the emptiness of the subject and object as different entities in the continuum of a Mahayana superior. 
These are illustrations of a Hinayana path existing in the continuum of a Mahayana superior.
Why are these realizations in the continuum of Mahayana Superior a Hinayana path? 
Why the realizations such as the wisdom directly realized selflessness and the wisdom directly realized the emptiness of subject and object are different entities in the continuum of Mahayana superior are a Hinayana path? 
Because these realizations shared or have object of meditation with a similar observed object and aspect.
Let’s take the wisdom directly realizing selflessness in the continuum of a Mahayana superior. That is a Hinayana path. 
Why is it Hinayana path?
Because it has a similar observed object and aspect of the main object of meditation of hearer. 
What is the similar observed object? Person. 
What is the aspect of it? It has the aspect of being empty or the lack of a self-sufficient substantially existent person.
As such, if it abides within a lesser vehicle class of realization, it is necessary a Hinayana path.
Is the reverse true? If it is abiding within the Mahayana path of realization, is it necessary a Mahayana path? Then the answer is no.
Why? We are not saying that the Mahayana path exists in the continuum of hearer.
If you are asked: Is a Mahayana path exists in the continuum of a Hinayanist. Then you have to say “No”.
If we say “The wisdom directly realizes emptiness in the continuum of a Hinayanist is a Mahayana path”, what are you going to say?
The answer is no. That is not the Mahayana path. 
Is the wisdom directly realizes emptiness in the continuum of a Hinayana superior a Mahayana path? No it is not a Mahayana path.
We say that the wisdom directly realizing emptiness in the continuum of a Hinayana superior is not a Mahayana path, then somebody object: No, it is a Mahayana path because that wisdom directly realizing emptiness in the continuum of a Hinayana superior abides within a Mahayana class of realization. 
Then you have to say: “No, just because he abides within a Mahayana class of realization doesn’t necessarily make it a Mahayana path”. 
Student: (Inaudible)
It is the emptiness of true existence. It is possible for there to be Hinayana superior to realize the emptiness of true existence. From the perspective of the YAMWS, there are Hinayana superiors that realize the emptiness of true existence.
For the knower of bases:
What is it boundary? Where does it exist? 
It exists in the continuum of all superiors. If that is the case, this includes buddha superior. This confirmed he has knowers of bases in their continuum.
Khen Rinpoche: All superior. Okay?
Student: (Inaudible)
Not necessarily the selflessness of a person. If you are asking about the definition, then it is selflessness of a person.
It is in the definition that is the selflessness of a person. But just because you say that it is a selflessness of a person, we are not necessary talking about the selflessness that is in relation to a person. 
Prasangika doesn’t delineate emptiness by basis, but do so by the object of negation. 
So don’t think of it in that way.
Khen Rinpoche: If you don’t understand, please ask me. Because I don’t know what you don’t understand. You ask me then I will make it clear. If there is anything that you are not sure about a knower of bases, now you can clarify. 
Knower of bases exists in the continuum of all superiors. But this is not the same as saying, if it is a path in the continuum of a superior is necessary a knower of bases.
We are just saying that knower of bases exist in all superior. That doesn’t mean that whatever path that exists in their continuum is necessarily knower of bases. 
Student 1: If it is a Mahayana path is it necessary included within the continuum of Mahayanist?
Ven Gyurme: No, the other way round.
Student 1: That is the question face and the answer was “No”.
Khen Rinpoche: No. Mahayanist, yes.
Student 1:If it is a Mahayana path, is it necessary included within the continuum of Mahayanist?
Khen Rinpoche: The answer is yes.
VenGyurme: That is not the question. If it is included within the Mahayana class of realization, is it necessary a Mahayana path? 
Student 1: And the answer was?
Khen Rinpoche: No.
VenGyurme : It is not about Mahayanist. If it is included in the Mahayana class of realization is it necessary a Mahayana path. The answer is no.
Student 1: Mahayana class of realization, can you give example like realizing emptiness of true existence?
KhenRinpoche: In the continuum of a Hinayanist.
Student 2: Just now Khen Rinpoche was explaining about the knower of bases in the continuum of a Mahayana superior, it is so because they share a similar object and similar aspect of the main object of meditation.
My question: Why is the expression similar but we don’t use the expression same object same aspect. So there must be a difference in that.
You can use the word the same but we are using similar.  We mean the same.
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t the English word same. Similar.
If you want to know what is the knower of bases is, you have to understand the definition. Basically it is a wisdom that conjoined with a wisdom that directly realizes selflessness.
On top on that, that wisdom needs to be abiding within a Hinayana class of realization. If these characteristics are present, that wisdom is a knower of bases.
What is it boundary? It exist in the continuum of all superiors.
Student 3: Just to clarify the knower of bases. Because in this definition it is very specific, it talks about directly realizing selflessness. In this context, we have already confirmed that it is the selflessness of a person that it is being referred to here, for knower of basis. 
As long as you know what is the selflessness of person, the emptiness of duality and the emptiness of true existence then it is okay.
Student 3: We know that this particular text is presented from the tenet system of the Yogic Autonomy Middle Way School. We have studied so much with the Consequence Middle Way School and we always think of emptiness as realizing emptiness of inherent existence. So superior in this context is someone who has directly realize the emptiness but the emptiness is the emptiness of true existence. Is that correct or not correct?  No? Okay.
We have gone through the main objects of meditation for the hearers, solitary realizers and the bodhisattvas.
The hearers have the selflessness of a person as their object of meditation. This means the hearers doesn’t necessarily meditate on the emptiness of true existence. 
Khen Rinpoche: Or else we have to go to Tenets all over again.
Student 4: Just now you are talking about the Mahayana class of realization existing in the continuum of a Hinayana superior, are all these considered as knower of the base? Or they are not?
Khen Rinpoche: What do you think? I am asking back.
Student 4: I thought that it doesn’t sound like knower of base.
Khen Rinpoche: Why not? You have to think that. You don’t think so. Why? What is missing? 
Student 4: I thought because it is not conjoined with the wisdom realizing selflessness in the person possessing it.
Khen Rinpoche: Not conjoined or conjoined with that mind?
Student 4: For this school, it is not considered conjoined.
Khen Rinpoche: All the tenet school?
Student 4: Yeah, so it is not conjoined, right? 
Khen Rinpoche: Talking same school.
Student 4: It is not conjoined. Because if we are talking about selflessness is talking about selflessness of a person.
Khen Rinpoche: Why not conjoined?
Student 4: If you are talking about Mahayana class of realization, you are talking about wisdom realizing emptiness of phenomena.
Khen Rinpoche: In a Hinayana superior, that mind is not conjoined with selflessness of a person. Why not? What’s wrong with that? Conjoined with that?
Student 4: No problem saying that.
Khen Rinpoche: So conjoined with that? So this is a knower (of base) now?
Student 4: Yes. So it is knower of bases.
Khen Rinpoche: That is why not correct.
Is the wisdom directly realizes emptiness in the continuum of a Hinayanist a knower of bases or not?
No. Because it is not abiding within a Hinayana class of realization.
A Hinayanist does not take a similar object of meditation with this kind of observed object and aspect.
Khen Rinpoche: Your mind working? 
Student 5: What happened if we removed “person” from the definition?
Ven Gyurme: Yeah, it is not in the definition.
Student 5: Selflessness of person 
Ven Gyurme: You are talking about selflessness of a person, right? It is not in the definition.
Please give me a few illustrations of a path that is in the continuum of a superior but is not a knower of bases.
Khen Rinpoche : Give me some examples. Then you will have ideas.
Student 6: Inferential realization of emptiness in the continuum of Hinayana superior.
Why is it an inferential realization in a continuum of a Hinayana superior?
Ven Gyurme: Inferential realization of emptiness in the continuum of a Hinayana superior is not a knower of bases. Why? 
To determine whether something is a knower of bases, you have to see whether it possesses the characteristic of a knower of bases or not. 
If it doesn’t possess the characteristic of knower of bases, then it is not a knower of bases. 
Ven Gyurme: You say no, then what is missing from the definition then? 
Student 7: I think selflessness is in the definition and is missing in this case.
We are not saying that it has to be a wisdom directly realizing selflessness of person. But rather it must be conjoined with the wisdom directly realizes selflessness. These are not the same. 
These are two different things: something being with a wisdom directly realizing selflessness and being conjoined with wisdom directly realizing selflessness.
You gave the example of inferential realization of emptiness in the continuum of a superior that is not the knower of bases. 
If you say that is not a knower of bases, from the definition of a knower of bases what is missing? 
If nothing is missing then it is necessary a knower of bases. If something is missing, then it is not a knower of bases. According to you something must be missing.
Student 7: Don’t know.
Whether it is inferential realization of emptiness in the continuum of a Hinayana superior or whether it is the wisdom of direct realization of emptiness in the continuum of a Hinayana superior, they are not knower of bases.
Why are these two not knower of bases? The inferential realization of emptiness in the continuum of a Hinayana superior does not abide within the Hinayana class of realization. The direct realization of emptiness in the Hinayana superior does not abide within the Hinayana class of realization.
Why is it the inferential realization of emptiness in the continuum of a Hinayana superior and the wisdom directly realizes the emptiness in the continuum of a Hinayana superior do not abide within the class of Hinayana realization? The explanation is already given earlier. 
Next illustration of a path of a continuum in the superior that is not a knower of bases, please.
Khen Rinpoche: That is all. No more?
Student 8: Meditation of love and kindness in the mind of a superior.
VenGyurme: Hinayana superior don’t have loving, kindness?
Student 8: If they do. 
Why is loving kindness in the mind of a Hinayana superior not a knower of bases?
Student 8: Because it is not the main object of meditation for the lower classes of vehicle.
Why loving kindness is not the main object of Hinayanist?
Student 8: It is not the main object of meditation at the knower of bases. As far as I understand the definition of knower of bases, there are specific object of meditation for the lower classes of vehicle and loving kindness is not one of them. That is what I understand. 
Khen Rinpoche: Good
The explanation of knower of bases come after the explanation on the knower of path. Why? One of the reasons is if one does not have the knower of bases, good cultivation or generation of that, then you will not able to produce well the knower of path.
The other reason is that without cultivating well the sixteen aspects of the Four Noble Truths; impermanence and so forth, which is included in the path that is shared with the persons of medium capacity, one would not be able to generate well the path of the person of great capacity. For that reason, after the presentation of knower of the path, then there is the presentation of the knower of bases.
There are nine topics that characterize the knower of bases. 
The first topic that characterizes the knower of bases is knower of path not abiding in cyclic existence through knowledge. That is basically mutually inclusive of the knower of path that knows hearers path.
The second topic that characterizes the knower of path is the knower of path that knows hearer path, which is the same as the first topic that characterizes the knower of bases: the knower of path not abiding in in cyclic existence through knowledge.
The wisdom directly realizes selflessness in the continuum of a Hinayana superior is the knower of path not abiding in cyclic existence through knowledge and the knower of path that knows hearer path. 
Question: Are there knower of bases in the continuum of a Mahayana superior? 
Khen Rinpoche: Yes, no doubt. You shouldn’t have doubt. What do you say yes, you mean no doubt, isn’t it?
What about an illustration of that?
A knower of bases that is in the continuum of a Mahayana superior. 
It is easy, isn’t it? You just have to say the wisdom that directly realizing the selflessness of a person in the continuum of a Mahayana superior, and that is the knower of bases.
It is a hearer path, isn’t it?
Khen Rinpoche: Yes? No? Should have no doubt.It is a hearer path. You should be able to say “Yes”.
Is that a hearer path? Yes. 
Is it a knower of bases? Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: No doubt. 
Is it a knower of path?
Khen Rinpoche: Why you doubt? That is very clear. We have already gone through that topic.
It is a knower of path because it is a knower of path that knows hearer path.
Is it a knower of path not abiding in cyclic existence through knowledge? Yes, it is just a new term.
Student 9: For a Hinayana superior, how is it the realization for him still not qualify as a knower of bases? For Hinayana superior that realizes this particular topic which abides in the Mahayana class. 
VenGyurme : Selflessness of a person or not?
Student 9: No. This is abiding in the Mahayana class.
VenGyurme : Are you asking the wisdom directly realizes the selflessness of a person, is it?
Student 9: Is the Mahayana superior exalted knower abiding in a type of realizer that ceases the extreme of cyclic existence relative to conventional baseand the knower of path that knows hearer path are mutually inclusive?
The definition of knower of path not abiding in cyclic existence through knowledge is a Mahayana superior exalted knower abiding in a type of realizer that ceases the extreme of cyclic existence relative to conventional base. 
What is this extreme of cyclic existence relative to a conventional base?  
It refers to a samsara that is acquired through karma and affliction.
The extreme of cyclic existence is posited as the rebirth that is propelled or projected by karma and afflictions. The wisdom directly realizes selflessness of a person in the continuum in a bodhisattva superior is the mind that stops this extreme of cyclic existence.
The example of knower of path not abiding in cyclic existence through knowledge is wisdom directly realizes selflessness of a person in the continuum in a bodhisattva superior. Why? This wisdom directly realizes selflessness of a person in the continuum in a bodhisattva superior is that which stops the extreme of a cyclic existence i.e. the rebirth in cyclic existence that is projected by karma and affliction. 
The second topic that characterizes the knower of bases is the knower of paths not abiding in peace through compassion.
The first topic is the extreme of cyclic existence. The second topic is the extreme of peace. The extreme of peace here is the Hinayana nirvana. 
What is it that stops one from abiding in the extreme of peace? 
It is the compassion in the continuum of a bodhisattva superior.  So the great compassion in the continuum of a bodhisattva superior is the knower of paths not abiding in peace through compassion. This compassion is a special method that makes one not abides in the extreme of peace. 
There are extreme of samsara and extreme of nirvana. 
Extreme of samsara is the rebirth that is projected by karma and afflictions. 
What stops that? It is the wisdom directly realizing selflessness of persons in the continuum of a bodhisattva superior. This wisdom directly realizing selflessness of persons in the continuum of a bodhisattva superior is a knower of paths not abiding in cyclic existence through knowledge.
Extreme of nirvana refers to the Hinayana nirvana. The bodhisattvas do not abides in nirvana. What stops them from abiding in nirvana? The compassion in the continuum of a bodhisattva superior is that which stops them from abiding in the extreme of nirvana. As such, the great compassion in the continuum of a bodhisattva superior is the knower of paths not abiding in peace through compassion. 
Next four topics are:
3. The knower of bases distant from the resultant mother
4. The knower of bases close to the resultant mother
5. Knower of bases that is of the discordant class
6. Knower of bases of the antidotal class.
There are the knower of bases distant from the resultant mother and knower of bases close to the resultant mother. 
The resultant mother here is the resultant perfection of wisdom. 
For example, the wisdom directly realizing emptiness in the continuum of a bodhisattva superior is a knower of bases that is close to the resultant mother. 
For example, the wisdom directly realizing selflessness of persons in the continuum of a Hinayana superior who has not realized the emptiness of true existence is a knower of bases that is distant from the resultant mother.
Why is the wisdom directly realizing selflessness in the continuum of a Hinayana superior who hasn’t realized the emptiness of true existence a knower of bases that is distant from the resultant mother? 
One, because this Hinayana superior does not have great compassion. 
Secondly, because this particular Hinayana superior has not realized the emptiness of true existence. Therefore, he still apprehends everything as true existent. He is bound by the apprehension of true existence. As such, the wisdom directly realizing selflessness in the continuum of a Hinayana superior who has not realized the emptiness of true existence is a knower of bases that is distant from the resultant mother. 
Whereas the wisdom directly selflessness in the continuum of a bodhisattva superior is a knower of bases that is close to the resultant mother. Why? Because this wisdom directly realizing selflessness of persons in the continuum of a bodhisattva superior is conjoined with great compassion but is also conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing the emptiness of true existence. As such, this particular wisdom directly realizing selflessness of persons in the continuum of a bodhisattva superior is a knower of bases that is close to the resultant mother. 
The knower of bases distant from the resultant mother is mutually inclusive with the knower of bases that is of the discordant class.
Maybe it might be good to talk about being close to the resultant mother, the resultant perfection of wisdom and being distant from it. 
There can be these two persons: 
one who initially enters the Hinayana path, travels all the way to the end of that, and becomes an arhat. After that then he enters the Mahayana path. 
there are also those who enter the Mahayana path from the onset, right from the beginning without entering Hinayana path. 
Among these two individual, who is going to reach enlightenment first? 
When we say close or distant, it is saying who is going to reach enlightenment first?
Those individuals who enter the Hinayana path, finished it and then enter the Mahayana path. These individual take a very long time to reach the resultant mother, basically to achieve the resultant perfection of wisdom. 
Why are these individuals very far away from the resultant mother? Why do they take such a long time to achieve enlightenment?
Firstly, they don’t have the thought of benefiting others. 
Secondly, their main goal in their life is to achieve Hinayana nirvana, and after upon achieving the goal, they just want to rest in peace.
Literally, the individuals who enter the Hinayana path primarily because they don’t have that thought of wanting to benefit others. The point of entering the Hinayana path is to achieve this peace. Once they reached it, they abide in peace and stay in there for eons and eons. 
It is said that the buddhas somehow wakes them up and says “You need to achieve enlightenment”. Buddhas do that but nevertheless it is said that it is very difficult for them to want to enter the Mahayana path and work for enlightenment because they are so well rested in peace. After the buddhas talked to them, they again go back to rest as it is very difficult for them to move. Some of them do actually wake up and enter the Mahayana path. Due to their strong habituation of resting in that peace, it is said that while having entered the Mahayana path, somehow they always like to go back to that state of rest.
The knower of bases distant from the resultant mother is the same as the knower of bases that is of the discordant class. Why? 
Because it is an obstacle to achieving enlightenment quickly. What I think is that instead of generating the Mahayana Path of Accumulation first, one enters the Hearers’ path, for example, Hinayana path. That entering of the Hinayana path is an obstacle or impediment to generating the Mahayana path. As such, it is a knower of bases that is of the discordant class because it is a discordant factor of entering the Mahayana path. 
If you have understood what I have said so far then that is enough for the knower of bases that is distant from the resultant mother and the knower of bases that is close to the resultant mother. 
Next:
Topic 7: Application of a knower of bases
Topic 8: Equality of application of a knower of bases
In order to achieve the knower of bases that is close to the resultant mother one needs to cultivate the applications and one needs an equality of applications. 
Then the last topic (Topic 9) is the Mahayana Path of Seeing. 
In this context here, there is only a discussion on the Mahayana Path of Seeing, and there is no discussion on the Mahayana Path of Meditation. 
Topic 9 explicitly indicated in this context is the wisdom directly realizing emptiness but implicitly the wisdom directly realizing selflessness is stated or indicated.
If you look at the topics that characterize the knower of bases, it ends with the Mahayana Path of Seeing. There is no discussion on the Mahayana Path of Meditation. If you look at the topics that characterize the knower of paths, there is the discussion on the Mahayana Path of Seeing and Mahayana Path of Meditation. That is not so for the knower of bases. Why? Because it is enough once there is the directly realization of the selflessness of persons. One does not need to familiarize over and over again with the realization. 
Once the wisdom directly realizing selflessness is actualized, there is no need to meditate over and over again because that wisdom directly realizing selflessness acts as the antidote to the apprehension of a self of person. That is the reason why the Mahayana Path of Meditation is not explained in this context of the knower of bases.
The bodhisattva superiors do not take rebirth in cyclic existence primarily because they have realized the emptiness of true existence and that realization is conjoined with mind generation, bodhichitta.
It is not necessarily so for Hinayana superior because there are Hinayana superiors who do take rebirth in cyclic existence under the control of karma and afflictions. It is said that even after achieving their Hearers Path of Meditation, the Hearers’ superiors still have to take rebirth in cyclic existence for 14 times, either as a desire realm god or human being. There are also many Hearers on the Hearers Path of Meditation who take rebirth in the form and formless realm due to their karma and afflictions. 
Earlier one of the student’s asked the question of whether there is wisdom of subsequent attainment for the Mahayana Path of Seeing. According to the Yogic Autonomy Middle Way School, I think I have to say yes. 
There is the supreme mundane qualities level of the Mahayana Path of Preparation. Then, there is the Mahayana Path of Seeing which can be divided into the uninterrupted path of the Mahayana Path of Seeing and the path of release of the Mahayana Path of Seeing. These three are in one meditative equipoise session. 
Then from the path of release of the Mahayana Path of Seeing, that bodhisattva superior arises from that meditative equipoise and achieves the wisdom of subsequent attainment of the Path of Seeing.
When that bodhisattva superior enters into a meditative equipoise as the sufficient power to act as the direct antidote to the Mahayana Path of Meditation abandonment. That meditation equipoise becomes an uninterrupted path of the Path of Meditation. 
Then he achieves the first uninterrupted path of the Mahayana Path of Meditation and enters into the path of release of the Mahayana Path of Meditation. After that he needs to wake up from the meditative equipoise and enters into the post-meditative session where he achieves the wisdom of subsequent attainment.
If we say that now there is the wisdom of subsequent attainment of the Path of Seeing, then why is it one cannot achieve the Path of Seeing with the support of the form realm?
Another way of saying is that based on what we have discussed about the wisdom of subsequent attainment of the Path of Seeing, if we say we can allow for an individual with a form realm who is on the Path of Seeing, then what is the problem? 
Remember what we discussed three times? What is the basis for newly attaining the Path of Meditation? It is necessarily a desire realm support.
Khen Rinpoche: Are you getting what I’m trying to say from the previous discussion? I’m trying to get this point inside there. Whether you are getting or not I don’t know.
Student 10: It then follows that one can achieve with a form realm body on a Path of Seeing subsequent attainment, one can enter into equipoise which is powerful enough to be antidote class to the Mahayana Path of Meditation and achieve initially the Mahayana Path of Meditation on the form realm support. 
One can initially achieve the Path of Meditation on the basis of the form realm support because it exists on the subsequent attainment on the Path of Seeing. 
Khen Rinpoche: I understand. You are asking question or?
VenGyurme: You are stating the consequence, right? 
Student10: Yeah. The consequence of this existence of the wisdom of subsequent attainment on the Path of Seeing which means that one can achieve the Mahayana Path of Meditation initially on the basis of a form realm support other than the desire realm support. 
It is clear that there is wisdom of subsequent attainment of the Path of Seeing. I don’t remember where I have read it but I remember reading this. It is said that the duration of the Mahayana Path of Seeing is very short. 
I remember I said something like this before to you? Do you remember? 
Khen Rinpoche: Not this time, I think must be the previous class.
Since the Mahayana Path of Seeing is very short, there is no need to change life i.e. to take another rebirth. 
Student 10: But nevertheless, how would that bodhisattva superior have enough opportunity to accumulate enough merit powerful enough for him to enter the meditative equipoise which is of the antidote class of the Path of Meditation? 
The obscurations are divided into nine levels: three big, three medium, and three small. Our presentation says that the big is divided into coarse of the big and subtle of the big. 
It starts with  the coarse of the big. As it is coarse of the big, so we don’t need to work very hard and don’t need to accumulate much.
Student 10: Yes, according to what they assert.
Khen Rinpoche: I’m just saying my way. I don’t know what the text say. I can say this way. 
Student 10: So they don’t need that time to accumulate enough merit to make it powerful enough to enter into equipoise.
You need to accumulate the collections in order to actualize an uninterrupted path because for the uninterrupted path, you need the backing of the merit to actualize uninterrupted path that is strong enoughbto act as antidote to its respective obscuration. 
Student 10: How short is that? It is difficult  to fathom 
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know how short it is but I think I have seen somewhere in the text. The period of time of the Path of Seeing is very short. That’s it. I don’t know how short. 
Student 10: Is there a different presentation between this school and the Consequence Middle Way School’s assertion of the wisdom inferentially realizing emptiness on the superior’s path in that. For the CMWS it was taught to us that the wisdom inferentiallyrealizing emptiness transform into entity of directly realization of emptiness initially attaining a Path of Seeing; which means that when it transform influentially realizing emptiness on the superior’s path I take it to be non-existent according to the CMWS, whereas in this school maybe they assert differently? 
I think the manner of proceeding should be the same. But what we need to think about is whether all the conceptual realizations of emptiness in the continuum of a person on the Path of Preparation when that person achieve the Path of Seeing  do transform in entity into direct perception? That is what we need to think. It seems like you have to say that not all the conceptual minds realizing emptiness transforms into entity of direct perception after achieving the Path of Seeing. This means to say that there are superiors who have realizations of emptiness via thought. 
Student 10: Is that necessarily inferentiallyrealizations or not? Thought can be just arriving at the conclusion through a sign.
VenGyurme: Subsequent cognizer?
Studen 10: Yeah, subsequent cognizer through conceptuality conjoined with wisdom directly realizing emptiness which is not an inferentiallyrealization of emptiness. 
Not sure whether you say that they are inferentiallycognizer but they are definitely subsequent cognizer.
Student 10: Yeah, that is no problem. It is only problem is whether it is inferentiallyrealizations of emptiness. Conceptual no problem with that. Between divisions of conceptuality it can be within inferentiallyand other conceptual consciousness other than inferentiallyrealizations. 
VenGyurme: Yeah, that is the first moment, right. In Tibetan language there are a lot of ways of indicating levels of probability. What I heard is a kind of a reluctant “No”, which means it is not. Subsequent cognizer “Yes”. 
Student 10: So that means there is no inferentiallyrealizations of emptiness on a superior’s continuum. Or because there are remnants from the Path of Preparation, it becomes subliminal or non-manifest, is it possible to explain it this way? 
Whether bodhisattva superiors have inferential cognition of emptiness or not, you have to answer the question by saying whether they have inferential valid cognizer realizing emptiness or not? Basically if they are bodhisattva superiors who still need to realize emptiness via a reason, and in dependence on a reason, then you can say that there are inferentially valid cognizer in the continuum of a bodhisattva superior. So you have to think of the answer by answering this question.  
We finish knower of bases. 
Student 11: Khen Rinpoche did you cover number 6, the knower of bases of antidote class? I think seem to be missing.
What you were told that will be taught in this module, 37 Aspects of Paths of Enlightenment, it is coming in the next category: the complete aspects application.
Extract from “Overview of the Ornament for Clear Realization
3. Knower of Bases
A knower of bases is an exalted wisdom developed by all aryas. The word “bases” refers to the sixteen aspects of the four noble truths. The principal realization in this case is the wisdom directly realizing the selflessness of persons. Through this knower of bases, hearers and solitary realizers seeking the peace of nirvana are led to the total pacification of all sufferings. This category is characterized by nine topics.
[Note: not all the topics under this heading are applicable to all aryas—some are applicable only to Mahayana aryas. Also, topics 7 and 8 exist on the Mahayana paths of accumulation and preparation, as well as on the Mahayana arya paths: the paths of seeing and meditation.]
1. Knower of paths not abiding in cyclic existence through knowing.
This is a Mahayana arya’s clear realization that does not abide in the extreme of cyclic existence through knowing. This knowing – the wisdom realizing the selflessness of persons – liberates one from cyclic existence.
2. Knower of paths not abiding in solitary peace through compassion.
This refers to a Mahayana arya’s clear realization that does not abide in the extreme of solitary peace through compassion. Due to great compassion, a bodhisattva does not dwell in the solitary peace of nirvana and does not disregard the sufferings of other sentient beings.
3. Knower of bases that is distant from the resultant Mother.
This knower of bases, which is a Hinayana arya’s clear realization, is devoid of great compassion and bound by the conception of true existence. Therefore, it is far from achieving the resultant Mother – the complete enlightenment of a buddha.
4. Knower of bases that is near to the resultant Mother.
This knower of bases is a Mahayana arya’s clear realization, and is described as “near” to the resultant Mother due to possessing great compassion and the wisdom directly realizing emptiness.
5. Knower of bases of the discordant class.
This knower of bases, which is a Hinayana arya’s clear realization, is devoid of special method and wisdom and, thus, should not be cultivated by a bodhisattva. Hence, it is labeled as the discordant class.
6. Knower of bases of the antidotal class.
Being conjoined with special method and wisdom, this knower of bases is to be cultivated by a bodhisattva.
7. Applications of a bodhisattva indicated in the context of the knower of bases.
These applications of a bodhisattva cultivate the antidote to the perverse conceptions adhering to true existence.
8. Equality of the applications of a bodhisattva indicated in the context of the knower of bases.
These are applications of a bodhisattva that stop adherence to true existence with respect to the entities of phenomena, their divisions, definitions, definienda, and so forth.
9. Path of seeing explicitly indicated in this context.
This presents the sixteen instants of the Mahayana path of seeing, which directly realize freedom from the elaborations of true existence.