Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/lesson7.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:50.892296
================================================================================

(One student presented her chosen verse from Chapter 8 of Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds as part of the exam process)
Comment by Khen Rinpoche: Actually my English is not that good to read everybody’s exam paper. Impossible for me to read as my English is limited. I have read one or two and is really good. It is wonderful you put in effort in the writing. It is wonderful that you have done your job. What she read is actually the same thing as all the buddhas, bodhisattvas, and all the great masters were talking. No different. So it is good to listen. Whoever read something, it is good to listen and meditate. Listen to the words is important. Also this is another way when we study so much. The goal is to have the realization; some kind of realization within oneself. Even if that is not possible, then able to share your knowledge with other people is the very basic. You can help to share your knowledge with other people. When you have the experience and the knowledge, then your sharing will be at much different level. At the moment what you do is just sharing your small knowledge with other people. This is just the beginning. So hope you can do more in future to share your knowledge with other people. We have learned buddhadharma for so many years. It is wonderful to train yourself to talk for 5minutes, 10minutes. I think it is very wonderful that there are about 18 people here but most of the people don’t want to do this. Of course it is the freedom of your choice. We will choose another person in the next class. So whoever comes next please be prepared, and talk slowly for 5minutes.
Knower of paths
Knower of paths - as the word suggests, it is an understanding of the paths, a knower of the paths. Which paths? The paths of the hearer, solitary realizer and bodhisattva. 
So it is a knower of these three paths and it knows them completely. 
Having said that, you must understand that this is just an understanding of what a knower of paths is. 
What I have just said is not the definition of knower of paths. I am not going to talk about the definition of the knower of paths again. 
In short, a knower of paths is a path in the continuum of a Mahayana superior. As long as it is a path in the continuum of a Mahayana superior, then it is necessarily a knower of paths. It doesn’t matter what illustration you come up with, as long as the illustration is a path in the continuum of a Mahayana superior, it is necessarily a knower of paths. You must not forget this. You must hold on to this with great certainty. 
There are 11 topics that illustrate or characterize the knower of paths. The first topic is limbs of knower of paths. 
In order to generate a knower of paths, one must be free from manifest pride because it is an obstacle which hinders the generation of a knower of paths. But just being free of this obstacle is not sufficient for the generation of a knower of paths in our mental continuum. The basis that directly brings about the generation of a knower of paths is mind generation (or the generated mind). 
Having said this, qualm may arise: Does it mean that only bodhisattvas have hope? Only bodhisattvas can generate the knower of paths? If we look at it from an overall point of view, all sentient beings possess the potential to generate the knower of paths. 
The basis that leads to the actual or direct arising of the knower of paths is mind generation. All sentient beings are indirectly the basis for developing the knower of paths. 
Khen Rinpoche: You understand what I’m talking? You are totally lost?
It is said that one of the greatnesses of the Lamrim, the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment, is that if we understand the Lamrim well, then that understanding enables us to see all scriptures as instructions.
Khen Rinpoche: You know how it comes about? Do you have any idea why that is so?
In Tibet, some people have well equipped kitchen. They have containers for everything: container for rice, container for beans, container for salt, container for sugar, they have containers almost for everything. If you happen to be somebody who has containers for everything, and when somebody pays you a visit and gives you a small handful of rice, then what are you going to do with it? Since you already have a container of rice, you will then add the rice that you have just received into the container of rice. Then if somebody gives you peas, and since you have a container for peas, you will then add that gift of peas to your peas container. 
Khen Rinpoche: You understand? So easy. So simple. That is it. 
So if we know the Lamrim well, just like the person who has many containers at home, then whatever we study, starting from the words and the meanings of the treatises, the profound philosophical subjects, we would be able to put them into their respective containers. 
For example, when we are studying something that is directly related to the path that is shared with the person of medium capacity, then those information that we have picked up that is relevant to the path of the person with medium capacity, we will categorize and classify those words and meanings and then put into the container of the path of a person of medium capacity. 
If we also pick up some other information that is useful for our practice of the path of the person of small capacity, then we will put this information into that container of the path of a person of small capacity and can use them respectively. 
When we know the Lamrim well, this is what we are able to do with our studies. We are able to classify whatever we have learned and put them into the proper categories. We will also be able to use them in our practice. 
However, if someone were to give the same handful of rice to a beggar, this might be useless to him. He may say: Why are you giving me this small handful of rice? The beggar may not appreciate it because he does not have any containers. He may just throw it away. 
I guess sometimes we are almost becoming like the beggar because we don’t know how to use the information, we don’t appreciate them and just think that it is useless and almost to discard them. 
I have mentioned this before and I am going to say it again. In order for us to be able to classify of what we have learned and then put it into the relevant sections of the Lamrim and to be able to appreciate and use the information, then whatever you have learned earlier in the course of your learning, those new information and new concepts that you have picked up as you progress in your learning, these understanding of the new topics that you have gained cannot be done at the expense of what you have learned earlier. If you have completely forgetting the words, the concepts, the definition and so forth of what you have learned before after having learned one topic and move to the another topic, then it is not going to work at all. It will become extremely difficult to experience the benefit of being somebody who has a lot of containers.
The knower of paths has few divisions. When we looked at the freedom from manifest pride, we have mind generation. Another division of limbs of knower of paths is called the nature of a knower of paths. What is the point? Unlike the hearer and solitary realizer, the Mahayana superior does not mainly abandon the afflictions. Why? Because the afflictions in the bodhisattva superiors mental continuum do not harm their practice of virtue, and it does not harm their activities to benefit sentient beings. 
In the explanation of this section in the great treatises, there are a lot of qualms and a lot of dispelling objections bringing in Haribhadra’s Commentary Clarifying the Meaning and so forth. At the end of all these, the summary is: What is the meaning when we say that the bodhisattva superiors do not mainly abandon the afflictions? The bodhisattva superiors do not have the attachment of the desire realm and the attachment of the form realm as their main objects of abandonment. Their main objects of abandonment are ignorance, the view of the transitory collections and pride. Why is this so? Bodhisattva superiors take rebirth in cyclic existence due to the level of the predisposition of ignorance and uncontaminated karma. When they take rebirth in cyclic existence, desire and attachment is utilized as a condition for them to work for sentient beings. 
The bodhisattva superior is unlike the hearer and solitary realizer. The hearer and solitary realizer enter into meditative equipoise in the final peace of nirvana. The bodhisattva superiors do not do that because their main goal is to work for the benefit of all sentient beings. The bodhisattvas are always working for sentient beings with skilful means that is the possessed of wisdom. As such, they do not enter into the peace of nirvana like what the hearer and solitary realizer do because their main goal is to work for us sentient beings. 
Then the second topic that characterizes or illustrates the knower of paths is the knower of paths that knows hearers’ path. Why is there a knower of path that knows hearer’s path? As I mentioned before, in order for the bodhisattva superior to benefit the disciples or the trainees of the different lineages like the hearers and solitary realizers, they do so only after having experienced the path themselves. Not only just knowing it, they generate the paths within their own continuum. Through that, they teach it to others. As such, there is a knower of paths that knows hearers’ paths. 
The next topic is the knower of paths that knows solitary realizers’ paths. Since the knower of paths is something that is generated after cultivating the hearers, solitary realizers and bodhisattvas paths in one’s own continuum, therefore there is a knower of paths that knows solitary realizers’ paths. 
In the explanation of these of two topics, there is an explanation of the differences between a hearer and the solitary realizer. These two are not the same but are different. Solitary realizer is superior to a hearer. There are about 6 or 7 characteristics that make a solitary realizer superior to a hearer. Let’s not go into that now. 
Then there is a knower of path that knows the Mahayana path. As such, the fourth topic is the Mahayana path of seeing. 
If you look at the order of these topics number 2, 3 and 4 in terms of inferiority and superiority, we can see that the presentation starts with a knower of paths that knows hearers’ path, then a knower of paths that knows solitary realizers’ path. The solitary realizers’ path is superior to the hearers’ path.  Then after that there the knower of paths that knows the Mahayana path. 
If you look at the Mahayana Path of Seeing, there are the 8 forbearances, and the 8 knowledges. 
The forbearances are the uninterrupted path, which is the antidote to the Path of Seeing abandonments included in the 3 realms. 
The knowledges are the path of release. When one abandons the afflictions of the three realms, which are path of seeing abandonments, then one achieves the path of release.
After the Mahayana Path of Seeing, comes the Mahayana Path of Meditation. Before discussing about the Mahayana Path of Meditation, we have topic number 5 - the function of the Mahayana path of meditation. Perhaps might need to be translated as the result of the Mahayana path of meditation.
Why is the effect or the result of the Mahayana Path of Meditation, topic number 5, is presented here? Because if we know what are the positive effects or the results of the Mahayana Path of Meditation, by meditating on it and cultivate that, then one will be inspired to meditate and enter into the Mahayana Path of Meditation. Essentially topic number 5, the effects or the result of the Mahayana Path of Meditation refers to those positive qualities that arise from generating the Mahayana Path of Meditation.
What are the beneficial qualities that are attained through the force of cultivating the Mahayana Path of Meditation?
There are six of beneficial qualities. I thought perhaps that it might be beneficial if we go through these six.
The first beneficial quality is a thorough pacification of the mind. 
The words ‘Thorough pacification of the mind’ actually appears in the sutras. In the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra in Twenty Thousand Verses, ‘thorough pacification’ that is mentioned is related to this topic. Thorough pacification and free of pride are taken to be the same thing. So, thorough pacification here means to have subdued or to be freed of pride. 
I guessed here “thorough pacification” means complete kind of pacification of pride. As the result of this thorough pacification, then externally one pays respect, here it literally says bowing to all beings.
The mind is thoroughly pacified, which is an effect of the Mahayana Path of Meditation, and in particular when one thoroughly pacified pride, then in the context of the practice of giving, due to the internal pacification of the mind, when this bodhisattva superior gives, externally he is very respectful of everyone while giving. At the same time, he is able to non-objectify the three spheres or the three circles in that he is able to give while recollecting and remembering that the giver, the gift and the recipient of the gift are empty of existing truly. It is mentioned in the text that these bodhisattva superiors bow to all beings as their virtuous friends - their own gurus. 
Internal pacification means thorough pacification of the mind in particular having conquered or overcoming their pride. Externally these bodhisattva superiors are able to respect or bow to all and also makes their practice of generosity pure. 
The point is that if there is no pride inside, then one would not give with pride. Because of the internal pacification, one does not practice generosity and make a big deal out of it.
The third beneficial quality attains through the force of cultivating the Mahayana Path of Meditation is victory in battle against the afflictions. This means that they gain this victory in their battle with the three poisons. If you look at the sutras like the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra (which is what this text is trying to explain), you will find words like these bodhisattva superiors gain victory over the arrow of attachment.
In the root text Abhisamayalamkara, the Ornament of Clear Realization, the word “victory over the afflictions” is used. That is how it is phrased in the Ornament of Clear Realization. Haribhadra says in his commentary called Clarifying the Meaning that these bodhisattva superiors outshine or overwhelm the afflictions such as attachment and so forth. Outshine or overwhelm here does not mean destroying. 
You should not forget what I had said earlier. In the text it is mentioned that the bodhisattva superiors do not mainly abandon the afflictions in that context.  Can you draw some relations between that and what I have just said about what Haribhadra said? 
Because of outshining or overwhelming the afflictions such as attachment and so forth, comes the fourth beneficial quality in that these bodhisattva superiors will never being dominated by the harm of sufferings. It is said in the sutra that these bodhisattva superiors can never be harmed by poison. Even if you try to poison them, it doesn’t work. If you try to cut them into pieces with whatever weapons you have, it doesn’t work. If you put them in the fire, you can’t burn them. If you try to drown them in water, that doesn’t work. If you try curses on them, they cannot be harmed.
As in the case of the Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, there is a dialogue between Avalokiteshvara and Shariputra, in some of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, there is also a dialogue between like the king of the gods, Indra, and the individual called Kusika and so forth. In the sutra, it is stated that somebody said that these bodhisattvas cannot be harmed by poison, by weapon, by fire, by water, and by curses. Then another person asked “Why these bodhisattva superiors are not harmed by fire, water, weapons, poison, curses and so forth?” The answer is: This is due to the knowledge mantra of the Perfection of Wisdom. 
What is the Perfection of Wisdom? Few lessons ago, I have talked briefly of what the Perfection of Wisdom is. Here, in the context of the answer, it is the path perfection of wisdom. Although the path perfection of wisdom is not the actual perfection of wisdom, i.e. not the highest or the final perfection of wisdom, but in this context here, the answer is the knowledge mantra of the perfection of wisdom. 
The perfection of wisdom here refers to the path perfection of wisdom; which is essentially the wisdom directly realizing emptiness. Specifically, it is a knower of paths that realizes emptiness directly. Due to this, these special bodhisattvas cannot be harmed.
Just like what the Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra says: The mantra of the perfection of wisdom, the mantra of great knowledge, the unsurpassed mantra, the mantra equal to the unequaled, the mantra that thoroughly pacifies all suffering, should be known as truth, since it is not false. There are five characteristic. In this context of relating to the answer is the knowledge mantra of the perfection of wisdom, the perfection of wisdom here refers to the path perfection of wisdom which refers to the knower of paths that knows the Mahayana path. If you have possessed the path perfection of wisdom, you will cross over to the other shore.
This path perfection of wisdom is the antidote to ignorance and it can overcome ignorance. As such, it is the mantra of great knowledge (knowledge is the opposite of ignorance). 
The path perfection of wisdom is the unsurpassed mantra because by depending on the path perfection of wisdom, one can achieve the unsurpassed non-abiding nirvana. 
The path perfection of wisdom is the mantra equal to the unequal, and the unequal here refers to the Buddha. Through the path perfection of wisdom, one can be made equal to the unequal.  So the path perfection of wisdom is the method that enables one to become equal to the unequal. Yes, the path perfection of wisdom is the unparalleled solution to all the sufferings. As such, it is the mantra thoroughly pacified all sufferings. 
So it is the mantra that knows the truth. Why? Because the reality is as what the path perfection of wisdom sees. The path perfection of wisdom sees the ultimate nature of reality, sees emptiness directly, and sees suchness and, how reality is, is not different from how it is seen by the path perfection of wisdom. The word “mantra” that is found in the Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra is not the generally speaking mantra of what we recite, but rather in the context of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra like what is found in the Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, when we say the mantra of the perfection of wisdom sutra, it refers to the path perfection of wisdom.
What we have just discussed about how the bodhisattva superiors cannot be harmed by weapons and fire, it is quite clear when we think about it. As I have said the mantra is the perfection of wisdom and in this context the path perfection of wisdom, it is a wisdom directly realizing emptiness. Not just that, it is the wisdom directly realizing emptiness that is conjoined with the mind generation. So when the bodhisattva has achieved the wisdom directly realizing emptiness, and if he already has bodhichitta, that bodhisattva superior is able to overwhelm or outshine or suppress the afflictions such as desire, attachment and so forth. So, he pacifies these afflictions. Because he has gained control over his mind, and in that sense internally he has control and externally he cannot be harmed.
Then the fifth beneficial quality attain through the force of cultivating the Mahayana Path of Meditation is that they possess the ability to achieve enlightenment. I guess at this point in time the bodhisattva superiors possess this extraordinary mind generation which is very powerful, as such they possessing the ability to achieve enlightenment.
The last quality, sixth beneficial quality, is the place where a bodhisattva on the Path of Meditation resides becomes a support of worship. Due to their extraordinary mind generation, the bodhisattvas on the Path of Meditation become so powerful. They bless the place wherever they reside. So it is said that the place where they reside become a place of worship and is worthy on honor, homage, offering and so forth. 
Remember a while ago, there was a question about what real benefit is there just by cultivating the good heart or meditating on bodhichitta and yet at the same time not doing anything practical for sentient beings i.e. just sitting there and think about bodhichitta. This is one of the benefits. I guess you can use this as an example as one of the benefits of those who have bodhichitta. Of course, we are talking about not just about the bodhisattva but the bodhisattva on the Path of Meditation whose mind generation is so powerful so he blesses the place. It is an environmental result of their meditation on their bodhichitta. Remember the ripening fruitional effect and so forth? One of it is the environmental effect. Perhaps I guess this is the environmental effect of their mind generation.
What comes after the fifth topic? Essentially it is an explanation on the Mahayana Path of Meditation. There is a presentation on the Mahayana Path of Meditation in terms of contaminated path and uncontaminated path. There is a contaminated Mahayana Path of Meditation and uncontaminated Mahayana Path of Meditation.
What is the basis for cultivating or generating the Mahayana Path of Meditation? The basis here is referring to the support. In simple English, the kind of life or body that one must possess before one can generate the Mahayana Path of Meditation. 
Of the three realms, it is a life or body of the desire realm. Within the desire realm, there are humans and gods. So, humans and gods of the desire realm are the support or the basis for the generating the Mahayana Path of Meditation. Both males and females can generate the Mahayana Path of Meditation. It is also said in the teachings that the support for generating the Path of Seeing is a male body. The Buddha said it in the sutra. 
Basically in order to generate the Mahayana Path of Meditation, one has to be someone in the desire realm and specifically a human or god. However, if one is in the form realm or the formless realm, then there is no way. So, the support that directly produces the Mahayana Path of Meditation is a body or life in the desire realm. Why? We are talking about the support or the kind of life that will actually allows the arising of the Mahayana Path of Meditation directly. The support for the actual production of the Mahayana Path of Meditation must also be a support of the production of the Mahayana Path of Seeing. Since the support included in the form realm cannot be the support for the production of the Mahayana Path of Seeing, so that is the reason. 
Why can’t one generate the Path of Seeing in the form realm for example? According to Vasubandhu’s Treasury of Knowledge, the beings in the form and formless realms lack disenchantment or they have very little disenchantment, therefore they are not able to develop the Path of Seeing in their minds. The desire realm is a support for generating the Path of Seeing because in the desire realm, one can generate a lot of disenchantment. The basis or support that can actually bring about the generation of the Path of Seeing is a desire realm body. 
After all of these, you may start wondering about the Path of Preparation. Does it mean that the Path of Preparation cannot be generated in the form and formless realms?  There are the four stages of the Path of Preparation. One cannot generate the Supreme Mundane Quality level of the Path of Preparation with a form realm rebirth existence or body as a support. Why? Because when one moves from the Supreme Mundane Quality level to the Path of Seeing, one does so within one meditative equipoise.
It is mentioned in the text that there are some individuals who does achieve the Heat Level of Path of Preparation and the Peak level of the Path of Preparation in the form realm body. That is clear. But there is nothing clear on the third level of the Path of Preparation which is called the Forbearance Level. This means we need to think about it using reasoning to establish whether one can actually achieve the Forbearance Level of the Path of Preparation with a form realm body. 
Are there bodhisattva superiors in the form realm? The answer is yes. 
Are there bodhisattva superiors in the formless realm? No. 
Many of you here have finished your learning of the Lamrim, so, there is a question for you now: 
Are there individuals in the formless realm who generate bodhichitta?
Khen Rinpoche: You know bodhichitta? What do you think? 
Whether your answer is yes or no, do you have any citation to cite the scriptural authority and/or reasoning? In the Lamrim, the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment, in the section on the perfect human rebirth, human life of freedoms and endowments, one of the eight freedoms is the freedom of being a long life god. It is mentioned very clearly in the Lamrim literature that long life god refers to an ordinary being that is part of the fourth concentration. 
There are four concentrations in the form realm. It is divided into the four concentrations. Within the land of the four concentrations, there is a section of the fourth concentration. In this section, there is this kind of being- the god. The freedom from being a long life god refers to freedom from being that kind of god in this particular area in the land of the fourth concentration of the form realm. It is refers to that and it also include ordinary being of the formless realm. 
So, the Lamrim is basically saying that ordinary beings from the formless realm lack this freedom. That means they are in the inopportune state.
It is mentioned in the Lamrim that the freedom of being a long life god. The long life god refers these two things: 
this particular kind of god in the fourth concentration in the form realm and
all the ordinary beings in the formless realm. 
This is saying that all the ordinary beings in the formless realm are in the inopportune state. They lack this freedom - the freedom of being a long life god. It doesn’t say in the literature that all the beings in the formless realm but it say all the ordinary beings in the formless realm. So, what does that imply?
Khen Rinpoche: It implies anything?
One of the eight freedoms is the freedom from being a long life god.  A long life god means two things, and in one of them it means in the ordinary beings of the formless realm. Does it imply anything? 
(Student response inaudible)
Khen Rinpoche: Anyway, think about that. Okay?
This is an example of why we need to know the words. From this you can see that words are there for a specific purpose. In this case again, why doesn’t it say freedom from being reborn in the formless realm, but rather it says freedom from being an ordinary being in the formless realm.