Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/lesson26.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:51.236615
================================================================================

When the great compassion arises in one’s continuum that is when one’s Mahayana lineage is activated. So in order to activate the Mahayana lineage, one needs great compassion to arise. Before the great compassion arise, one needs to generate the thought of benefiting others. So prior to the arising of great compassion, one must first develop or generate the thought of benefitting others. However the thought of benefitting others can only arise when all the different conditions come together. 
Here we know we should develop the thought of benefitting others. How should we go about doing it? In order for the thought of benefitting others to arise, causes and conditions must come together such as immediately preceding condition, observed object condition, and empowering condition. 
 The empowering condition for the thought of benefitting others is said to be the wisdom truth body. We need to think about this along this line. The wisdom truth body is said to be the empowering condition for the thought of benefitting others to arise in anybody’s continuum, and following the thought of benefitting others come the great compassion. On the basis of which when developed, the mind of enlightenment or bodhicitta arise. 
When one achieves the mind of enlightenment, one become bodhisattva traveling the bodhisattva path i.e. one traverse the five paths and ten grounds. Then at the end of the ten grounds, one actualizes the four bodies. After becoming a Buddha, one’s enlightened activities will engage sentient beings and help sentient beings. One’s wisdom truth body will be the empowering condition for the arising of the thought of benefiting others in the continuum of other sentient beings.
When one actualized the four bodies, one can perform the enlightened activities for sentient beings. It is said that the enlightened activities of buddhas are effortless and spontaneous. The buddhas have removed or pacified all forms of exertion or motivation. They have gone beyond that. They are freed from having to think or motivate before doing anything. So in that sense, their activities are effortless and spontaneous. The wisdom truth body can act as the empowering condition for the arising of any virtue in the continuum of all sentient beings effortlessly. 
Once the four bodies are actualized, one enlightened activities become effortless and spontaneous. Then one is able to act as an empowering condition for the arising of any virtue in the continuum of all sentient beings. Having said that, this is not to say that therefore everything is in the buddha’s hand or the wisdom truth body can do whatever it likes. Just because the wisdom truth body is present and just because it is the empowering condition for the arising of virtue in the continuum in any sentient beings minds that does not necessarily translate into the arising of virtue in the continuum of sentient beings. Both sentient beings and the buddhas must come together and work hand in hand. So from our side, as sentient being, we also need to put in effort. That is why in order for any virtue to arise, many conditions must come together. We never say just the empowering condition alone is sufficient. That is why we talk about the different conditions. It is like what you have studied in the presentation of mind and awareness, in order for an eye consciousness apprehending visible form to arise, just the presence of the uncommon empowering condition, the eye sense power, is insufficient. Yes, from the side of the eye sense power, it has the potential to cause an eye consciousness apprehending visible form to arise. But it alone does not lead to the generation of an eye consciousness apprehending form. There must be other conditions as well such as the observed object condition and so forth. 
I believe this is one of the questions for the recent discussion group on how the wisdom truth body acts as an empowering condition for the generation of virtue in the continuum of a sentient being. Based on your discussion, if you have come up with interesting line of thought or something different from what I have said, please share with us now. 
Khen Rinpoche: Did you discuss about that in the Sunday class? The question is there. What is the outcome?  Can share? Maybe something new? Anything there? You discussed so much on Sunday and nothing came out? Thiam Teck, something came out? You share what your group had said. What is the discussion conclusion? What is the answer? 
Student 1: Actually there is no conclusion.
Khen Rinpoche: There is no conclusion? What is your explanation during the discussion.
 Student 1: Because we have to think of the non-buddhist. All the non-buddhist accepts this.
 Khen Rinpoche: Doesn’t matter what they accept. The reality is like they don’t accept and is ok. Not necessary that they have to accept. Doesn’t matter whether they accept or not, the reality is like that. There is no issue. Why worry about that? Why doubts non-Buddhist also create virtues? Then Buddha helps only bodhisattva? Buddha help everyone. Not only Buddhist. Especially the Buddha helps more the Buddhist than non-Buddhists.
Student 1: So in this case, who is the first Buddha? Who is the first Buddha?
 Khen Rinpoche: You are asking among us “Who is the first Buddha?” I would say is Thiam Teck.
 Student 1: The answer is that the Buddha, wisdom truth body, is for us to create virtuous. If you go by this regression, before this Buddha become a Buddha, who is the dharmakaya that give him the wisdom truth body 
Ven Gyurme: What is the problem? 
Khen Rinpoche: There is no end and no beginning. So there is no problem. There is beginning and there is end also no issue.
 Student 2:  Student 1 question is if Buddha is the empowering condition for virtuous activities for the arising of great compassion, so for the first Buddha, who empowered him to develop great compassion?
Ven Gyurme: There is no first Buddha. There has never been a first Buddha.
Khen Rinpoche: For us, as sentient beings, your mind doesn’t have beginning, isn’t it?  Your mind doesn’t have beginning, why Buddha has beginning? Where got first Buddha?
Student 2:   You are saying that all along there is a dharmakaya that empowers even the first sentient being to become enlightened.
Khen Rinpoche: There is first Buddha, you mean? 
Student 2:   You are saying that the dharmakaya is the empowering condition for great compassion to arise. So, in the first place, the very first sentient being to get enlightened must have the empowering condition to develop great compassion?
Khen Rinpoche: So you are saying first Buddha there?
Student 2:   Yes, the first sentient being to get enlightened must have the empowering condition to generate great compassion. Who give him that empowerment? There is no Buddha before that and he is the first one.
Student 2:   We are from the same group, so we have the same question. Who empowered the first Buddha to develop that virtue, that great compassion? How can you say there is no first one? There must be a first one.
Khen Rinpoche: There must be a first sentient being also. If there is a first Buddha then there must be a first sentient being, isn’t it?
Student 2:   There must be a first sentient being.
Khen Rinpoche: Yeah or no? It doesn’t make sense. If there is a first Buddha, then there must be a first sentient being.
Student 2:   I think we have to think about it. From our side, we can’t accept that there is no first Buddha. To us, there is no dharmakaya before that because no sentient beings has been enlightened yet. So who is the empowering condition for that one? 
Khen Rinpoche: I am expecting the answer for that question. 
We all have a mind which is essentially the factor of luminosity and awareness. The mind emptiness of true existence is the tathagata essence. In a way both are tathagata essence. If you think about it from one perspective, this factor of luminosity and awareness is like the wisdom truth body. That makes it possible, right? The mind emptiness of true existence is like the nature body. As it is still with defilements so it is not the actual Buddha. Because we have that in the first place, we always have it since beginningless lifetimes, and it is always there. Therefore, virtue is possible. Therefore, transformation is possible. Therefore, enlightenment is possible. This is because we have it. 
In certain tradition, they said that we are already Buddha. We have always been a Buddha. There is some sense to how they express it. In the guru puja, the word ‘primordial buddhahood’ is used in the verse for generating bodhicitta. There is some sense of saying we are already Buddha. That there is also some sense in saying that this factor of clarity and luminosity is like the wisdom truth body. Then the emptiness of that is the nature body.
Because we already have this and it has always been there, that makes virtue possible. Therefore virtue is possible. Since it is there in the first place, and when the condition comes, then it is possible to create virtue. Otherwise, if the factor of luminosity and awareness is not there, there is no way for virtue to arise. We don’t talk about generating virtue.  In that way, for as long as sentient beings have existed since beginningless lifetimes, enlightenment has always been with them.  In that sense, if you think of what was discussed earlier, there is some sense in saying that we have always been Buddha as long as we have existed. So since beginningless times, we have always been a Buddha. Therefore, we shouldn’t be looking for the Buddha outside. There is no Buddha outside. The Buddha is inside. It has always been there. It is just that we are not aware. Or we have not manifested it. We are not aware and we have not manifested it. It is always been there. So in reality, we are one with Buddha. There is some sense in expressing in this way. So come the moment of time when the defilements which are now covering the mind are removed, whether we say we have achieved enlightenment or whether we say we are now in the factor of luminosity and awareness is now appearing clearly and completely. This is just a different way of saying but in essence this is what happens. We become Buddha or we are introduced to the complete clear nature of the mind and so forth. That is what has happened when the defilements are removed. Likewise, all sentient beings have always been like a Buddha. It is just that they are not aware. The Buddha is not somewhere outside of sentient beings. Every sentient being is like a Buddha. Buddha has always been with them. It is just that sentient beings are not aware. Come the day when they recognize and see that, that is when they become Buddha.  
When we talk about nirvana or when we talk about pure land, let’s say you have achieved nirvana, where do you achieve nirvana? It is in this world, which supposedly is a samsaric place. The environment is included in samsara. When an individual achieves nirvana, all the defilements are separated from the mind and that individual is in the same world as we are in. However, for that individual, this place is not samsara. 
For some people, their view of pure land is only limited to a place somewhere out there where one can get to. This is one way of looking at it and that is not the only way. If our mind is purified to the extent whereby everything appears in a pure way, it doesn’t matter when we are. Comes the times when our mind is purified of defilements, wherever we are will appear as a pure land.
When we talk about samsara, it include the environment For the individual whose mind is still obscured with defilements, it is only so for someone who has not abandoned the afflictive obscuration. For such a person, whatever objects he comes into contact with - forms, sounds, smell, taste and touch- inevitably these objects will cause that individual to develop afflictions like anger and attachment, and brings about suffering. For that person, whose mind is still not liberated from the defilements, the external world, forms, sounds smell, taste and touch becomes true suffering. Because they caused suffering, they bring about the generation of afflictions. When that same individual has abandoned all the afflictions and defilements, then those same objects that caused suffering earlier on would not bother him and will not bring about suffering or the arising of the afflictions. In fact, it causes bliss and happiness to that person. 
Khen Rinpoche: What do you think? Like that? No? In order to go pure land, you have to go somewhere. You must die and go somewhere or what? Not necessary. This world can be pure land.  You want to go to pure land with this body?
Student 3: In Tathagata Essence, they said dharmakaya pervades all. So, technically dharmakaya is everywhere. Where the dharmakaya is, the form body is also there. Also the abodes, technically that would make everywhere a pure land. 
Khen Rinpoche: If you can recognize pure land, it is pure land.
 Student 3: In the text, it actually says that in the Path of Meditation, whenever the bodhisattva meditates it becomes a place to worship. Where the form body is, all the form is a place of worship. So, technically everywhere is a place of worship. If we realized that, no need to do pilgrimage. As the dharmakaya pervades all things, so when we don’t generate virtue, we generate non-virtue. Does it mean the Buddha didn’t work hard?
 Ven Gyurme: No, no, no, the credit is always to Buddha.
Student 3: Yeah, the credit goes to Buddha.  
Ven Gyurme : The fault is always ours.
Student 3: The fault is always ours  
Ven Gyurme: Very unfair. 
Student 3: Not fair. 
Khen Rinpoche: You say not fair. Buddha says what you said is not fair.
Student 3: Actually what it means is any kind of circumstances we are in, very bad situation or whatsoever, it is already the optimal that the Buddha can do. It is the best that the Buddha can do. No matter how bad the situation is, like when we are faced with very bad situation, and most of the time you may end up probably killing somebody, and even in that situation is already the optimal situation that the Buddha can present to you. 
Ven Gyurme : At that time? 
 Student 3: Yeah.
 Ven Gyurme : Are you going to qualify ‘at that time’ or not?
 Student 3: Yes, at that time. It is saying that two hands need to clap. That one of the hand is always there . If the situation presents itself to me whereby I am angry, even at that time that is the best the Buddha can do. That is what it means dharmakaya pervades all. 
Khen Rinpoche: Of course the Buddha gives you.
Ven Gyurme: The Buddha is giving his best all the time. The simplified way to say is there is no way to doubt that, The Buddha is always doing his best. You don’t have to doubt that.
 Student 3: No matter what situation we are in, it is already the optimal condition for one virtue to arise. It cannot be any better already. 
Ven Gyurme: So basically you are saying from the Buddha side, the Buddha is not helping more or helping less in any time. At all the time, Buddha is at maximum power?
Student 3: Another question. It is said that the bodhisattva will not be born at the Peak of Cyclic Existence because they felt that it is helpless for them as they can’t do anything. Even the ten ground bodhisattva won’t go to the Peak of Cyclic Existence because they can’t help them. So it has to depend on the sentient beings to actually get out of Peak of Cyclic Existence to be any help to them. Does the Buddha have any influence to sentient beings in the Peak of Cyclic Existence?
Khen Rinpoche: I understand. I understand what you are saying.
Whatever bodhisattvas do, they still need to generate the thought. It is not effortless and they need motivation. Whether it is coarse or subtle, it doesn’t matter as they still need to project the will or intention “I am going to do this.” If there is such a thing as going to the formless realm, the Peak of Cyclic Existence, still they need to generate the thought of motivation.
Before the bodhisattva can be born into any particular place to benefit others, they must see the purpose. When they see the purpose, they get motivated.  When they motivate, they then project the will “I am going there”. No matter coarse or subtle, they still need to project the will. The bodhisattvas don’t see the Peak of Cyclic Existence as the place where they can be of some benefit to others, and as they don’t see the purpose, they don’t get motivated. Therefore, they won’t go there. The bodhisattva sees that there is other more worthwhile place to go.  
Unlike the bodhisattvas, the buddhas are very different. They see all phenomena directly. So whatever their mind perceive, the mind perceive directly as it is. Wherever the mind is, the Buddha body is there. So the Buddha body, speech and mind are inseparable and of one entity. That means buddhas pervade all phenomena and they don’t need any motivation to go anywhere. They are everywhere. 
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You don’t see?
In the 37 harmonies with enlightenments, next is called the five powers. In relation to the path, the five powers are primarily cultivated on the heat and the peak level of the Path of Preparation. 
The five powers have the four noble truths as the object of observation. 
 The five powers are: 
the power of faith
the power of joyous effort
the power of mindfulness
the power of meditative stabilization and 
the power of wisdom
 Definition of a power - in this context is an exalted knower that is self-powered. That means it possess the power on its own side and is independent. So an exalted knower that is self-powered with respect to generating of its result, an arya path. 
The first is the power is faith which is the faith of conviction regarding to what is to be abandoned and what is to be cultivated with respect to the Four Noble Truths. 
On the Path of Accumulation, due to the extensive learning, listening and hearing, then on the Path of Preparation, they achieve the faith of conviction with regards to what is to be abandoned and what is to be cultivated in relation to the Four Noble Truths. It is a faith of conviction that arises from knowledge.
The bodhisattvas on the Path of Preparation has a lots of enthusiasm and take on delight in abandoning what is to be abandoned such as true suffering and true origins. They are very enthusiastic in the cultivation of true cessation and true path. So this is the second power – the power of joyous effort.
With the faith of conviction and joyous effort, the bodhisattva has mindfulness of the object observation and aspect of the Four Noble Truths. Because of this mindfulness, they do not forget the object of observation and aspects of the Four Noble Truths. So that is the third power, the power of mindfulness.
As for the power of meditative stabilization, the bodhisattva remains undistracted and has single-pointedness of mind focusing on the Four Noble Truths without any distraction. 
The power of wisdom refers the special insight which is the special ability to discriminate between objects and analyze object. This analysis happens within calm-abiding. 
[BP1 L19: The five powers are: 
1. The power of faith, which is a conviction regarding the four noble truths. 
2. The power of effort, which delights in discarding true sufferings and true origins and adopting true cessations and true paths. 
3. The power of mindfulness, which does not forget the observed objects and aspects of the four noble truths. 
4. The power of meditative stabilization, which is a single-pointed mind focused on the four noble truths without distraction. 
5. The power of wisdom, which discriminates the mode of abidance of the four noble truths. ]
What is boundary of the peak of application? 
 The boundary of the peak of application is from the heat level of the Path of Preparation till the end of continuum of a sentient being. 
Why do we cultivate the complete aspect of application? 
The purpose is to gain mastery with the aspect to the three exalted knower. 
Not so much of definition, the peak application is when you have achieved mastery with respect to cultivating the aspects of the traits of the knowers.
 When one achieves the peak level of the Path of Preparation, one has now achieved the mastery with respect to the meditation of the aspect of the three exalted knowers. You are allowed to say at this point that you have achieved mastery with respect to cultivating the object of observation of the Four Noble Truths.
On the great Path of Accumulation, one would have achieved calm-abiding focusing on emptiness. Within that concentration, within that single-pointedness of the mind, comes the time when one’s achieves the union of calm abiding and special insight focusing on emptiness. 
When one enters the Path of Preparation, one achieves the heat level of the Path of Preparation. That is when you say you have achieved mastery with respect to the cultivation of the aspects of the three exalted knowers.
So prior to the Path of Preparation, even if one is on the Path of Accumulation, one has not achieved mastery with respect to the cultivation of the aspects of three exalted knowers. It is said that the bodhisattva achieves the mastery when he enters the Path of Preparation. 
When one enters the Path of Preparation, one achieves the union of calm abiding and special insight focusing on emptiness. So the difference between having achieved mastery and not having achieving mastery comes down to whether one has achieved the union of calm-abiding and special insight focusing on emptiness or not. I guess this is what you have to say. When one achieves the union of calm-abiding and special insight focusing on emptiness, one gains power through suppress the respective defilements of object of abandonment of the Path of Preparation.
So when one achieves the Path of Preparation with this union of calm-abiding and special insight, one gains the power to overcome the respective discordant factors of the Path of Preparation like non-faith, laziness and so forth. On the heat and peak level of Path of Preparation, the bodhisattva has the power to overcome the manifest forms of these discordant factors like laziness and non-faith during meditative equipoise.
On the heat and peak level Path of Preparation, bodhisattva can stop the discordant factors like laziness and non-faith and so forth from manifesting but are not able to destroy them completely. It is possible for the discordant factors like laziness and non-faith to arise. It is not impossible for them to arise. It is possible that they can manifest.
So on the heat and peak level on the Path of Preparation, the bodhisattva already has the special insight observing emptiness focusing on the aggregates, the body, the person, the self. Obviously, he has the power of faith which is a conviction. In this case a conviction in the lack of true existence of the person and the aggregates.  Therefore on the heat and peak level of the Path of Preparation, the bodhisattva has the faith of conviction in the lack of true existence of the person, body, aggregates. So is it possible for the bodhisattva on this level to have non-faith instead of faith. There is non-faith with respect to the person or the aggregates i.e. not having faith that is truly existence.
I think you probably can say that is possible for the bodhisattva on the heat and peak level of Path of Preparation to have lack of faith or lack of conviction with regards to the lack of true existence of the body and the self of a person.
During the meditative equipoise on the heat level and the peak level of the Path of Preparation, the bodhisattva still has the appearance of duality, that is the object and subject that is meditated on still has a sense of duality. The appearance of duality has not completely subsided, so there is a coarse appearance. The bodhisattva at this point is aware that there is appearance of duality.
The second power is the power of joyous effort which means enthusiasm. The opposite of that is laziness. It can also be discouragement. The opposite of enthusiasm is discouragement. On the first two level of Path of Preparation, it is seems like it is possible for the bodhisattva to be discouraged having to meditate on the aggregates as being empty.  
The third power is the power of mindfulness, which function is does not forget of the object of observation on whatever it is meditating on, and in this case is possibly the Four Noble Truths. On the heat and peak level of the Path of Preparation, it is possible for that bodhisattva to forget. 
The fourth power is the power of meditative stabilization. The opposite is distraction.
The fifth is the power of wisdom. The opposite to that is ignorance or not knowing. I think it is possible for the bodhisattvas on the heat and peak level on the Path of Preparation to be distracted and for ignorance to arise. 
The bodhisattvas in meditative equipoise still have dualistic appearance. They realized and they know that there is dualistic appearance. If that is the case, I would think the discordant factors of the five powers such as non-faith, laziness, forgetting, distraction and ignorance can arise.
You really have to focus on what I am going to say, otherwise it is difficult to catch. 
 [BP1 L19: 	
The discordant class of faith is non-faith. 
The discordant class of effort is laziness. 
The discordant class of mindfulness is forgetfulness. 
The discordant class of meditative stabilization is distraction.
The discordant class of wisdom is erroneous wisdom. ]
Then there are five strengths, which also translated as five forces. The five strengths are pretty much the same as the five powers. The only difference is that instead of the power of faith in the context of the strength it is the strength of faith or the force of faith. 
The five strengths are:
The strength of faith
The strength of joyous effort
The strength of mindfulness
The strength of meditative stabilization
The strength of wisdom
The five strengths or the five forces are discussed primarily on the forbearance and the supreme mundane quality levels of the Path of Preparation. 
[BP1 L19: The five forces are: 
1. the force of faith, which is a conviction regarding the four noble truths. 
2. the force of effort, which quickly realizes the four noble truths. 
3. the force of mindfulness, which does not forget the observed objects and aspects of the four noble truths. 
4. the force of meditative stabilization, which is a single-pointed mind focused on the four noble truths without distraction. 
5. the force of wisdom, which discriminates individual aspects of the four noble truths.]
At the heat and peak level of Path of Preparation, the bodhisattva cultivates the five powers and these five powers become stronger on the forbearance level on the Path of Preparation. When the five powers enter into the supreme mundane quality level of the Path of Preparation, they become stronger. Due to the force of meditating on the heat and peak level of the Path of Preparation, the five powers become stronger. So on the forbearance and the supreme mundane quality level of the Path of Preparation, they are called the five strength or the five forces. Here strength because it is stronger.
These five strength or five forces on the forbearance level and the supreme mundane quality level of Path of Preparation enable the mind to see the truth directly on the Path of Seeing.
It is said that on the forbearance level and the heat of supreme mundane level of the Path of Preparation while in meditative equipoise focusing on emptiness, dualistic appearance has not subsided completely. There is the appearance of duality having subsided although in reality there is still dualistic appearance. The thing here is that the bodhisattva is not really aware. He feels as if the dualistic appearance has totally subsided. It is said perhaps the bodhisattva at this level is not even aware, Himself as a meditator, he feels like there is a complete subsidence of the dualistic appearance and the mind has become much more subtle.
Anyway it is said on the forbearance level and the supreme mundane quality level of the Path of Preparation, there is this appearance of duality subsides and the bodhisattva feels like that but there is still something left there.
Probably we can say on the forbearance level and the supreme mundane quality level on the Path of Preparation, the discordant factors like non-faith, laziness and so forth does not arise. Let’s say you use the body’s emptiness of true existence as an example. The strength of faith is that faith of conviction in that it is like “It is true. It is empty. It is just as it is empty. It is truth”. It has a conviction in that. The opposite is non-faith and not believing the body is empty of existing truly. That non-aith would not arise on the forbearance and the supreme mundane quality level of the Path of Preparation.
There is a difference between the five powers and the five strengths. They are similar but there is a difference in that on the heat and peak level on the Path of Preparation, although the bodhisattva gains the power to suppress many of these discordant factors like laziness, non-faith, distraction, and so forth but it is still possible for them to manifest. They have gained the ability to suppress them but nevertheless it is still possible for them to manifest. At the forbearance level and the supreme mundane quality level on the Path of Preparation, the bodhisattva gains the strength to stop them from even manifesting. The five discordant factors such as laziness and non-faith and distraction will not manifest.
In the Acharya Haribhara’s commentaries, he said the five powers such as the power of faith, joyous effort, mindfulness, meditative stabilization and wisdom mingled with the discordant factor such as non-faith and so forth. This means that during the time of five powers, the discordant factors still can arise. He goes to say that during the time of the five strength, only the five strengths such as the strength of  faith, joyous effort, mindfulness, meditative stabilization and wisdom can arise and the discordant factors do not arise. I said these based on the Haribhara’s statement in his commentaries. 
[BP1 L19
Both five powers and five forces have the same objects of observation which are the Four Noble Truths. However we have to make a distinction between the five powers and five forces as they differ in their entities and boundaries.
As the five forces is an exalted knower that cannot be overcome by its discordant class, there is no opportunity for the discordant class to manifest when one is in meditative stabilization. It is said that during the post-meditative stabilization, the discordant class will also not arise. At the forbearance and supreme mundane quality levels of the path of preparation, when one is mediating on the five forces, for example, on faith, there is no way that the discordant class, non-faith, can arise. Even when one is not meditating on faith, non-faith will also not arise. 
On the other hand, at the heat and peak levels of the path of preparation, when one is mediating on faith, non-faith will not arise. But when one is not meditating on faith, it is said that the discordant class of faith, non-faith, will arise many times. This is the difference asserted by Gyaltsab Je in his Essential Ornament. His source was Haribhadra’s commentary on the Ornament for the Clear Realizations. 
This is how one differentiates between the five powers and the five forces. When meditating on any of the five objects of observation, there is no opportunity for the discordant class to arise. But when one is in the post-meditative session, in the case of the five powers, there are many opportunities for the discordant class to arise whereas in the case of the five forces, the discordant class will not arise.]
Student 4:  The meditator at the juncture in meditative equipoise has calm-abiding, which means that he has overcome the five faults of laziness, forgetfulness and obstacle to meditative stabilization. I have difficulty reconciling someone who has calm-abiding and has overcome all these faults while in meditating equipoise, these faults still arise. Does that mean someone who has calm-abiding would have laziness, forgetfulness and so on? 
Ven Gyurme: So you are saying that they arise during meditative equipoise?
Student 4: Just now it was stated it is during the meditative equipoise that these faults can arise because of duality. So someone who has calm-abiding without realizing emptiness also has appearances of duality. Would that also mean from the same reason apply that when he has the bliss of mental pliancy achieving calm-abiding, he still has laziness and so on?
Think about this: If you have achieved calm-abiding, does it necessarily follow that you have abandoned all laziness, all excitement, all laxity and so forth? 
Student 4: Of course not. But the point now is in meditative equipoise there is duality. It was mentioned that in meditative equipoise, because of duality, the opposite of these five powers arises. The signs being that there is duality in while in meditative equipoise. So that was the reason given.  I have problems with this reason. 
Let’s think about it. Special insight is not calm abiding. Special insight falls under wisdom and it is an analytical mind. It is a mind that investigates the object individually. That is what the special insight is. Whereas calm abiding is a concentration and it is a meditative stabilization.
The analysis is done within calm abiding and it is within a state of concentration. So within calm abiding, that state of concentration, the analysis and investigation is performed.
To that mind is there an appearance of duality or not? There is.
So when there is duality, is it allowable to say that there can be distraction. This is something to be discussed.
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know exactly.
The four levels of Path of Preparation are not necessarily meditative equipoise. You cannot say the entire heat level of the Path of Preparation is meditative equipoise. There is also post meditative equipoise. Likewise with the heat and forbearance level of Path of Preparation. If you have difficulty conceiving of discordant factors arising during meditative equipoise, then how about post meditative equipoise? If you think about post meditative equipoise. Then it is easy as it is quite straight forward. Yes, you can have laziness, distraction, non-faith, during post meditative equipoise.
Perhaps it is good to discuss whether discordant factors can arise during meditative equipoise or not. Of course they can arise on the heat and peak levels Path of Preparation.
So what do you think? Once you have calm abiding, can laziness arise or not? Can or not? 
Khen Rinpoche: How you know?  Is still laziness arising after achieving calm-abiding?  After you have achieved calm-abiding, you will still be lazy. No?
Following what you said, then everything will not manifest - no laxity, no excitement, no distraction, and only good things is left. Then how?
Student feedback (inaudible)
Khen Rinpoche: Ok, I am just throwing the question. You can think.
Student 5: I just want to clarify. Just now when it is mentioning about during peak application and the mastery of cultivating the aspects of the three exalted knowers, I noticed repeatedly the word compendium was missing. So I was just wondering whether it is just aspect would be enough or you have to have the word ‘compedium’ which was missing. Is there any difference?
Khen Rinpoche: If you include the word ‘compendium’ then in debate is much easier. Less complication. If you missed out the word ‘compendium, in debate it becomes a bit more complicated.
Student 5 : However I know when you cultivate compendium of all aspects you are just like on the top of the hill looking down and having overview rather than very specific. When you say gaining the mastery of just overview or actually with specifically like would be cultivating from serial application and eventually, serial application will be one by one by one by one. I guess in detail. I would say “It is a compendium, gained mastery of the compendium of aspect of three exalted knowers. My mind would think it is an overview of the aspects but not in details in which and everyone of them.
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know. Maybe we can talk some other time. Anyway, at least, as I have told you many times, you must know how to say the words. She is very good. At least she said “This is what” without looking at the book. Many of you come here, you don’t know even the word and have nothing to express. This is very basic. You need to express the word. On top of that, you really need to know the meaning. She asked many things that sound very good but I don’t exactly get what she is asking. Anyway this is good. You should be encouraged by looking at her as example. Put some effort to remember. Otherwise, time past this year, then next year, thinking I will do better next year, I will do better next year and nothing happen and after that empty. So at least one’s got opportunity must hold each word and put in effort. Try to get even one word into the brain. For example, in today class, what you get? Today at least your mind should focus “I got this in the class”. Then you discuss. I mean it is wonderful. Another benefit, imprint like the pigeon story. When reciting the sutra with the two pigeons that sits on the rooftop, then next life they become scholar. That is a good way to.  Let’s put some effort. That is so many things, but must get some of points. Today I got that and I put in my notes. At least, I must know this word. This is important. 