Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/lesson25.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:53.172808
================================================================================

Student 1: What is dharmakaya? It is the empowering condition for all virtues. So, not all virtues are uncontaminated. Will it be a problem whereby people will think that dharmakaya, the enlightened activities of Buddha, is an empowering condition for samsara? As ordinary beings, our virtues are all contaminated so it leads to samsara, even our virtues. So if all virtues are empowering conditions, are enlightened activities of Buddha, won’t it become an empowering condition for our samsara?
KhenRinpoche: What? Our samsara becomes what?
Student 1: The enlightened activities of Buddha are the empowering conditions for all virtues. That includes contaminated virtues which leads us to samsara. Wouldn’t that enlightened activities of Buddha are actually the empowering conditions for our own samsara?
Khen Rinpoche: All think also. All must think the answer also. Don’t wait for my answer. You must think your own answer. 
Ven Gyurme: She is saying Buddha is also a condition for our good rebirth in samsara. 
Khen Rinpoche: Somebody come answer. Who is ready come and answer? You got our question? Maybe can come share your answer first.  I think you didn’t get our question. You haven’t got our question, right? 
Student 2: To rebirth in this samsara is for us to create merit then can be enlightened. 
Khen Rinpoche: Good. She said Buddha bring you to samsara to create good karma. Very good!
Whether it is a contaminated virtue or non-contaminated virtue, it is not possible for suffering to arise from virtue. It is not possible for non-virtues to result in happiness. Even though one maybe in samsara but whatever pleasure and happiness one experience in samsara, that is a result of virtue and the virtue is said to have arisen with the wisdom truth body as the empowering condition. 
This is not an easy thing. Perhaps we can think along the lines of the Tatagatha Essence. The wisdom truth body, if you think about it, it is not something different or separate from what we call the Tatagatha Essence. In general, when we talk about dharmakaya, the truth body, if you think about it, at the end of the day it is not something dissimilar or different from Tatagatha Essence. Basically, the entity or the nature is the same.
During the Tatagatha Essence module, we saw how suchness is undifferentiated, in that the suchness of the buddha’s superior mind and the suchness of our mind are essentially same nature. In emptiness, they are the same. So the mind’s emptiness of true existence is the Tatagatha Essence. The Tatagatha Essence is the mind’s emptiness of true existence. Come the day when the defilements are separated from the mind, then the suchness of that mind that is undefiled is called the nature body. 
But if you look at what the nature body is, it is essentially the suchness of the mind. It is just that the name has changed. Previously, the defiled minds emptiness of true existence is called the Tatagatha Essence. Come the day when the mind is undefiled, its suchness is called the nature body. That nature body is the suchness of the mind. It is not something else. It is the suchness of an undefiled mind. 
If you think about the mind itself, not the suchness of the mind, that factor of luminosity and awareness, in a way it is the wisdom truth body. It is just that for the time being while the mind is still defiled, it is not the wisdom truth body. But that factor or luminosity and awareness has the potential to understand or to know all phenomena. It is just that for the time being, it is covered by the adventitious defilements. Come the day when these adventitious defilements are removed from the mind, then the mind itself is called the wisdom truth body. 
Now our mind is covered by the adventitious defilements. If you talk about consciousness, this factor of luminosity and awareness are essentially the ability to cognize, to interact, to understand objects. Come the day when the mind is separated from all the defilements, that very same mind, that factor of luminosity and awareness, is given the name wisdom truth body. It is not something different. It is just that mind, the factor of luminosity and awareness.  It just happens that it is not accompanied by the defilements. Likewise, the suchness of our defiled mind is called the Tatagatha Essence. Come the day when our minds are separated from the defilements, the suchness of our minds when undefiled is then called the nature body. 
So again, whether you are talking about the mind, the factor of luminosity and awareness or the suchness of the mind, at the time of the basis now and at the time of the result, essentially pretty much is the same thing. If you think about the ultimate nature of the mind itself, that factor of luminosity and awareness and investigate its deepest nature, you will find that it is by nature empty. Its ultimate nature is emptiness. 
If you think about the suchness, the mind’s emptiness of true existence and the mind itself, both are essentially one entity. It is just that conceptually you can isolate them into two different factors due to their different natures based on the function of the ability of the mind to interact with objects and cognize objects. Then that factor of clarity, factor of luminosity and awareness is given the name mind. Essentially, at end of the day, the mind and the mind’s emptiness of true existence are the same. In simple English, they are the two sides of the same coin. 
In the Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, the verse says “Form is empty and emptiness is form.” Instead of ‘form’ you can substitute it with ‘mind’ and it will arrive at the same meaning – “Mind is empty and emptiness is mind”. The mind’s deepest nature is emptiness. It does not transcend that deepest nature. The mind exists from within emptiness. Within the emptiness of the mind, mind exists. It does not transcend that nature. So we have to understand that mind and its suchness are one entity. 
If you were to trace the evolution of samsara and nirvana, what is the origin of nirvana? What is the origin of samsara? It all comes down to this factor of luminosity and awareness. Basically, the mind is the origin of samsara. If you trace everything to its root, it comes down to the mind is the origin or basis of samsara. It is also the origin and basis of nirvana. 
In order for this factor of luminosity and awareness to transform this mind into the entity of virtue, the requisite conditions must come together. I think we have discussed this in Lorig. In order for the virtuous state of mind to arise, first there must also be immediately preceding condition, a factor of luminosity and awareness that exist prior to the arising of a virtuous state of mind. There is also to be the empowering condition and it is said that the empowering condition for the generation of a virtuous mind is the wisdom truth body, Buddha.
As for the observed object condition, you can posit many different things that can act as the observed object condition for the arising of a virtuous mind such as the representations of the buddha’s body, speech and mind, or hearing the Buddha’s teachings. These can act as the observed object condition for the generation of a virtuous mind. 
So in order for virtuous mind to arise, we need the following conditions: 
the immediately preceding condition,  
the observed object condition 
the empowering condition. 
The teachings tell us that the empowering conditions for the generation of all virtues in the continuum of us sentient being is the wisdom truth body. We have to think how does the wisdom truth body can act as an empower condition?  If you say that there is something else other than the wisdom truth body that is the empowering condition, then what would you posit as the empowering condition for the generation of a virtuous mind in the continuum of any sentient being.
In the presentation of mind and awareness, which you have studied, in order for a sense consciousness apprehending form to be produced, three conditions must come together:
There must be the observed object condition which is form
The uncommon empowering condition which is a sense power
The immediately preceding condition would be a factor of luminosity and awareness, a previous moment of mind, a moment of mind that exists prior to the generation of a sense consciousness apprehending form. 
When these three conditions come together, then a sense consciousness apprehending form is generated. 
Likewise, in order for a virtuous mind to arise, these conditions must also come together:
There must be an immediately preceding condition
There should be an observed object condition 
The empowering condition as well. 
If you think about an eye consciousness apprehending visible form, why is an eye consciousness able to apprehend form but not something else? An eye consciousness apprehending form has a factor of luminosity and awareness. Therefore, it must have arisen from something which is that is luminous and aware, a prior moment of mind. But nevertheless, although it has arisen from a previous moment of mind but an eye consciousness cannot apprehend something other than visible form. So what is it that makes the eye consciousness apprehends form? It is its own peculiar sense power. In this case it happens to be the eye sense power which is its own uncommon empowering condition.
The eye consciousness apprehending a visible form is generated into the aspect of a visible form. An eye consciousness apprehending form cannot be generated into the aspect of sound. So why is an eye consciousness apprehending visible form generated into an aspect of form? It is determined by the observed object condition. So an eye consciousness apprehending form is not generated into the entity of form. An eye consciousness apprehending form is still consciousness, that which is luminous and is aware. This shows that an eye consciousness must have arisen from consciousness as well, a prior moment of consciousness, that which is luminous and aware. Without which an eye consciousness which in itself is luminous and aware, cannot be generated into that which is luminous and aware.  So it is important to understand this.
Based on what you have studied in the presentation of mind and awareness, how a sense consciousness is produced? In order for the sense consciousness apprehending the different kinds of form, and in order for it to arise, there must be the coming together of at least three conditions:-
The immediately preceding condition, 
The observed object condition 
The empowering condition. 
Likewise, if you were to apply the understanding of that to the arising of a virtuous mind, that is the imports. In order for virtuous mind to arise, many conditions must come together. There must be an observed object. So by focusing on some observed object can cause the virtuous mind to arise. Obviously the immediately preceding condition is there, but there also must be the empowering condition. 
The consciousness (mind) has no beginning. Neither will consciousness have an end. So mind (consciousness) is beginningless and it will never cease to exist. Likewise, the suchness of the mind has no beginning and will have no end as well. 
Another thing we have to think about and understand is the concordance of cause and result. A specific result can only arise from a concordant cause. An effect cannot arise from a discordant cause. It can only arise from a concordant cause. 
The point is that a virtuous mind cannot arise from a non-virtuous state of mind because the result of virtue has to be something pleasant. If you analyze and think about the effect of virtue, it is supposedly happiness, pleasure, something pleasant, something desirable, and something we consider good. So something which is good cannot arise from something which is bad. Something which is good can only arise from something which is also good. There must be a concordance. 
We need to think and analyze deeply. When we talk about virtue, when virtue arises in our mind, whether it is a virtuous mind or virtue, and the first moment when it arises, it cannot arise from without a cause. It must arise from a concordant cause. If you pinpoint to the first moment of a particular virtue or virtuous mind, because the virtue or virtuous mind is a composite phenomenon (compounded phenomenon), therefore, it necessarily must arise from a cause. All composite phenomena necessarily arise from a cause. Since here we are talking about virtue, virtuous state of mind must arise from something which is virtuous or good.
We have talked about the activation of the Mahayana lineage. The activation of the Mahayana lineage is the arising of great compassion in the continuum. In order for great compassion to arise, in order for the Mahayana lineage to be activated, in the first place there must be a reason for it to be activated. There must be the causes and conditions. It is not going to happen without a reason. It happens because of certain causes. Great compassion must arise from something.
We possess the inherent potential since beginningless life time to generate great compassion. The potential is there, and it has always been there, that which transforms. For great compassion to arise, in the first place, what makes it possible? It is because of our Tathagata Essence, our Buddha nature, which we have since beginningless life time. Because of that, that is why it is possible. Just because we have the potential doesn’t mean great compassion can arise. Is it possible that because we have the potential, then great compassion will arise? No, not possible. Yes, you have the potential i.e. you possess the seed or the base, but there are other conditions that must be present. Without which the Mahayana lineage cannot be activated. 
It’s said that the wisdom truth body is the empowering condition for the activation of the Mahayana lineage. Without the wisdom truth body then it is not possible.
Khen Rinpoche: What do you think? What activate that? Who activate that? We think “I did myself”. Your answer must be “I did myself. I did everything myself. I don’t need Buddha’s help there”. True? If you think you did yourself then you don’t need Buddha. 
If you don’t think that the wisdom truth body, the Buddha, has a hand in the generation of great compassion in anybody’s mind, come the day when you generate great compassion, then it is the same as saying you did it yourself. If we go along the route “I did it myself. The Buddha didn’t have a hand in it”, then you probably would be moving towards the direction end up saying the buddhas don’t have a job. They are not doing anything despite them achieving enlightenment to benefit all sentient beings. They are not benefiting all sentient beings despite them having all the power, ability and the omniscience to know the interests, dispositions, capacities of all sentient beings, yet they are not doing anything. You would probably be stuck there. 
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know what I’m talking. Am I answering your question? I don’t know. It is difficult. 
In the last lesson we look at the four legs of magical emanation (manifestation) which is essentially a meditative stabilization or concentration. We will review briefly the way to generate calm abiding through abandoning the five faults through cultivating the eight antidotes. 
In the Ornament of the Mahayana Sutras, eight antidotes are presented and they are supposed to remedy the five faults. These eight antidotes can be summarized or condensed into the four methods:
Method for striving
Method of benefit 
Method of engaging the object of observation 
Method of antidote 
The first three of the eights antidotes are: 
Faith,
Aspiration 
Effort
Because they prepare one to actualize concentration quickly, as such these three are classified under the method for striving. 
Then we have pliancy. Pliancy comes under the method of benefit. Why? Because when one achieves pliancies, both physical and mental pliancy, then the body becomes serviceable and becomes greatly beneficial for the individual. 
Next is mindfulness and introspection which comes under the method of entering or engaging the object of observation. So mindfulness and introspection falls under that. 
Intention and equanimity fall under the method of the antidote. As we mentioned before, through mindfulness and introspection (vigilance), when one detects the arising of laxity and/or excitement, then one has to apply the antidote; without which it becomes a fault. When the mind is abiding in a pacified state, there is neither excitement nor laxity. Then one should not be applying any antidote. That itself is like an antidote. Not applying antidote when it is not time to apply antidote itself is like an antidote. As such, intention and equanimity comes under the method of antidote. 
By cultivating concentration and by achieving it, then one achieves all the four legs of magical emanations. What is the purpose of achieving these? One achieves the five eyes and the six clairvoyances. . 
With these five eyes and the six clairvoyances, one can benefit others. With these supernatural abilities, clairvoyances and so forth, one is able to benefit others more effectively.
With the four legs of magical emanations, one can travel to many buddha fields and one can enter into many doors of concentration. It is said that because of these four legs of magical emanations, these very strong stable concentration, all the aspirational prayers that are made becomes very powerful and effective. In this context here, we are talking about the four legs of magical emanations in relation to the continuum of bodhisattvas. Bodhisattvas made very strong prayers. They actualize their prayers such as being reborn as many different kinds of human beings or different kinds of gods. Through these avenues of rebirths, they are able to benefit many sentient beings. 
With this stable concentration and with calm abiding, on the basis of having attained an actual concentration, they acquire different kinds of clairvoyances. One of the clairvoyances is called clairvoyance of the gods. With the clairvoyance of the gods, that individual can see coarse and subtle forms from great distance - many, many miles away. With that ability they can see coarse and subtle forms extending to very far distances.
Anyway, concentration is needed and on that basis, you need to actualize one of the actual concentrations. Based on that, these individuals can also hear both coarse and subtle sounds that come from very far away; basically all the sounds in the world.
Khen Rinpoche: You understand what mosquito is talking to you? 
We are talking about the five eyes and the six clairvoyances. The common cause for these different clairvoyances is that one must have attained an actual concentration. But there are also uncommon causes for the different clairvoyances. Now, we are talking about the clairvoyances of the gods with the ability to see both coarse and subtle forms. They can see forms that are very far away. Besides having attained an actual concentration, the uncommon causes are making many light offerings or providing illumination or light to people who are living in places that are not illuminated or where there are very dark, or providing the causes that will lead to an illumination of these places. These are the uncommon causes for clairvoyance of the eye. 
What about the clairvoyance of the ear? Clairvoyance of the ear is the ability to hear sounds that comes from a distance or very faraway places. The uncommon causes are offering music, instruments, bells and so forth to holy object like stupas.
Then there is a clairvoyance of knowing the mind of others, reading the thoughts, and ability to know what others is thinking. The common cause is an actual concentration. The uncommon causes are not speaking about the mistakes that others have done even though one know it, and not talking about the physical impairments of others. Some people may be physically challenged in certain ways such as with missing limps and so forth. Not pointing out those faults in a negative way and also protecting or guarding the minds of others. These are some of the uncommon causes for actualizing the clairvoyance that knows the mind of others. 
Next is the supernatural ability of magical emanation causing an object becomes many or causing many objects to become one. The common cause is the same i.e. one must have attained an actual concentration. The uncommon cause is offering footwear to others and offering transport. Here it literally says ‘mount’ but in this day it means transport; which could be a car. Also helping those not able to walk to move around, for example, like carrying them on your back or helping them to move to go to a certain place is also said to be an uncommon cause to actualize this supernatural power of magical emanation.
Next is the ability to remember previous lives. Besides the common cause of having attained an actual concentration, the uncommon causes are bearing hardships in your Dharma practice or bearing hardships for the Dharma. One of the example given is putting up with the challenges of building a temple, reading your Dharma texts (here it says reading scriptures) and reflecting what you have read and remembering what you have learnt and not forgetting it. All these are uncommon causes for achieving that supernatural ability to remember past lives. Also giving Dharma to others in a proper way is also an uncommon cause for ability to remember past lives. What is the benefit of remembering past lives?
Khen Rinpoche: I remember last time I went to south India, there is one mirror lady. She checked in the mirror and able to see many things in the mirror and then she explains. I noticed many Singaporean go there. Everybody goes there asked one question, what is my past lives? I heard everybody goes and checks that. I told them “Better you check your future lives, not the past lives”. You ask the mirror lady what is your future lives. That is better. You know your past lives, it is not much. If you know your future lives more interesting. You can do something but past lives there is nothing to do. Somebody says you are cow, you are bird, you are yak.
The ability to remember the previous lives in this context mainly refer to the bodhisattvas’ ability to see into the past lives of oneself and others who they have the Dharma connection with. The bodhisattvas act on those who they have formed the positive Dharma connection with. So, they look for these people and help them according to their needs and dispositions. So that is the main purpose.
Then there is the clairvoyance or supernatural ability which exhausts all the contaminated, basically exhaustion of the afflictions. This basically refers to realization of the final mode of abiding of phenomena (or the ultimate nature of phenomena). Actually remembering the past lives is something that many desire realm gods can do. It is also something that many spirits can do. It is said that even some hell beings are able to remember many of their past lives. 
In this context here, it is about developing the ability to read the mind of others and to know the mind of others. As for the ability to perform magical emanation, there is a way of performing magical emanation in dependence upon mantras. There is also way of performing magical emanation in dependence on certain substances like certain medical substances. Some spirits by birth have the ability to perform magical stuffs and apparition. As for the ability to read the mind of others, there are desire realms gods who can do that.
Sometimes to certain extent we can kind of roughly figure out what a person is thinking by just looking at their facial expression and on how they act. We can make those generalizations. But here the ability to read other people’s mind is based on how they look at the facial expression and so forth. This ability can be trained. There are people who are trained in that so that they can figure out what other people are thinking. It is not like our kind of rough estimation. It is a skill and they are pretty good at it and can be quite accurate. So, it is an ability. Even this ability is not something that is cultivated on the basis of meditative stabilization. The one that we are primary talking about here, the ability to read people’s mind, is an ability that is acquired on the basis of having actual concentration. The ability to read others people’s mind that based on actual concentration is really very accurate.
The four legs of magical emanation when divided:
The leg of magical emanation of aspiration
The leg of magical emanation of joyous effort
The leg of magical emanation of intention
The leg of magical emanation of analysis
The leg of magical emanation of aspiration refers to a very strong yearning aspiration to acquire concentration. 
The leg of magical emanation of joyous effort refers to putting in a lot of effort and hard work which then leads to the arising of concentration that one was aspiring to. 
There are some people who acquired from birth the ability to perform magical emanation. So, that is the result of the ripening of the imprints that was left in the mental continuum in the past lives through concentration. Such an ability that is acquired at birth is the leg of magical emanation of intention.
There is a type of concentration which arises from having analyzed and thought well on the meaning of the instructions that one has received from others. So, such concentration is called the leg of magical emanation of analysis.
Since the four legs of magical emanation are discussed in the context of somebody who has already entered a path, as such the boundary is from the Path of Accumulation up to the buddha ground. If we relate it to a path of the four legs of magical emanation, it is primary related to the Mahayana Great Path of Accumulation.
At the Mahayana Great Path of Accumulation, one comes to acquire the union of calm-abiding and special insight. Once achieves the concentration of the stream of doctrine (stream of Dharma), that bodhisattva is able to receive instructions directly from the Buddhas.
In order to achieve this concentration of the stream of doctrine, many things have to be attained in order to experience that kind of concentration. As explained in the Essential Ornament, 
The bodhisattvas must have accumulated the collections for many eons. 
They must be of the Mahayana lineage 
They must also have heard many teachings and instructions. 
They must have pure ethical discipline. 
One of the causes for achieving the concentration of the stream of doctrine is to have heard many teachings and studied well. When one achieves this concentration of the stream of doctrine, it is said that the bodhisattva is able to remember all the teachings that they have received in the past. But not just teachings, teachings that actually bear a lineage. There must be a continuum of lineage of the transmission. It refers to teachings that possess a lineage and possess a transmission. When he achieves the concentration of the stream of the doctrine, he will remember all the teachings that possess a transmission that the bodhisattva has heard in the past. That is why it makes a difference to receive the lineage of the transmission of the teachings because when come the time when we are at that level then whatever we have received in the past then we are supposedly to remember everything. I guess this is also one of the reasons why it is good and important to receive oral transmission. Of course, we only receive the oral transmission when the lineage exists. That is why it is called the oral transmission. So, now you know the benefit. Otherwise, generally many people think that receiving oral transmissions are not so important. I guess they find it boring by sitting there for hours and days and thinking “I don’t know what he is saying. It is just sound, blah blah blah”. Now at least you know the benefits of receiving lung – oral transmissions. Anyway, this is one of the benefits. It is said the benefit but for us at this moment it like kind of like true or not.
Next, you have the five powers and the five strengths (forces) 
The five powers are related to the Heat and Peak level of the Path of Preparation. The five powers are:
Power of faith
Power of joyous effort
Power of mindfulness
Power of meditative stabilization
Power of wisdom
Next t is the five strengths (forces) and they are tied in with the Forbearance and Supreme Mundane Qualities level of the Path of Preparation. The five strengths:
The strength of faith
The strength of joyous effort
The strength of mindfulness
The strength of meditative stabilization
The strength of wisdom
I will talk about the differences between power and strength in the next lesson.
Additional notes
The 37 aspects of an exalted knower of all aspects harmonious with hearers are divided into 7 groups which are located at various levels of the Mahayana path:- 
1. Four close placements of mindfulness 
2. Four thorough abandonings 
3. Four legs of magical manifestation 
4. Five powers 
5. Five forces 
6. Seven branches of enlightenment 
7. Eight branches of a superior’s path
The Mahayana path of accumulation has 3 divisions:- 
1. Small level of the path of accumulation 
2. Middling level of the path of accumulation 
3. Great level of the path of accumulation 
• The four close placements of mindfulness are found at the small level of the path of accumulation. 
• The four thorough abandonings are found at the middling level of the path of accumulation. 
• The four legs of magical manifestation are found in great level of the path of accumulation. 
The Mahayana path of preparation has 4 divisions:- 
1. Heat level of the path of preparation 
2. Peak level of the path of preparation 
3. Tolerance (or forbearance) level of the path of preparation 
4. Supreme mundane level of the path of preparation 
• The five powers are found at the heat and peak levels of the path of preparation. 
• The five forces are found at the tolerance and supreme mundane qualities levels of the path of preparation. 
The Mahayana path of seeing 
The seven branches of enlightenment are found on the path of seeing. 
The Mahayana path of meditation 
The eight branches of a superior’s path are found on the path of meditation.
Four Legs Of Magical Manifestation (BP1 L19)
The purpose of meditating on the four legs of magical manifestation is that when one has achieved them and attained meditative stabilization, it is very easy for one to engage in virtue as one has overcome laziness. Based on such meditative stabilization, one can perform many magical manifestations and with that one can accomplish the welfare of others. 
• The leg of magical manifestation of aspiration is the not the mental factor of aspiration. It is the single-pointed concentration that focuses on its object of observation. This concentration came about by depending on very strong aspiration. 
• The leg of magical manifestation of effort is not the mental factor of effort but rather it is the single-pointed concentration that focuses on its object of observation that came from the application of constant effort. 
• The leg of magical manifestation of intention is the single-pointed concentration that focuses on its object of observation that came from the familiarization with concentration from previous lives. 
• The leg of magical manifestation of analysis is the single-pointed concentration that focuses on its object of observation that arose by depending on the instructions (or doctrine) that was taught by others. 
The definition of leg of magical manifestation is an exalted knower engaged in a path that is a meditative stabilization based on the eight applications that abandon, these being the antidotes to the five faults.
The leg of magical manifestation of the Mahayana is superior to that of the Hinayana because it is conjoined with method and wisdom. 
Boundary: They exist from the Path of Accumulation through to the buddha ground. 
The way to meditate on the four legs of magical manifestation is through applying the eight antidotes that abandons the five faults. According to the Compendium of Higher Knowledge, the eight antidotes can be condensed into four methods:- 
1. Faith, aspiration and effort are posited as the causes for one to engage quickly in meditative stabilisation and can be condensed into the method of striving. 
2. Pliancy is the method that benefits the body and mind and is called the method of benefiting. 
3. Mindfulness and introspection are classified as the method that directs one’s attention to the object of observation. Mindfulness prevents one from losing the object of observation. Introspection checks whether the mind is losing the object of observation. 
4. Intention and equanimity are classified as the method of antidote. 