Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/lesson5.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:51:04.272210
================================================================================

Definition of exalted knower of aspects: a fully developed exalted wisdom directly realizing the 10 topics, mind generation and so forth. 
Boundary: It exists only on the buddha ground. 
There are 10 topics that illustrate the exalted knower of aspects.
Instead of defining the exalted knower of aspects in the way that we have, we can also say:
An exalted knower of aspects is a fully developed exalted wisdom directly realizing all phenomena. 
You can say that and the meaning is the same. 
To understand the exalted knower of aspects as an example, we have to examine its definition closely. We have to examine the different parts of the definition. 
You have to think and ask yourself: Why the definition must say a fully developed exalted wisdom? 
Why can’t it just be an exalted wisdom? There is a reason for the words to be there. 
The question of why it is a fully developed exalted wisdom should at least arise in your mind. Why not just an exalted wisdom?  
Why it has to say it isa fully developed exalted wisdom and not just a fully developed mental consciousness?
Why it has to be an exalted wisdom directly realizing the 10 topics and not simultaneously realizing the 10 topics?
In the last lesson we went through the exercise of just looking at this exalted knower of aspects. Perhaps the one whole lesson was wasted and not sure whether there was any benefit. When you are trying to understand what an exalted knower of aspects is, you must at least based on the definition that is given. You must at least know that in order for something to be an exalted knower of aspects, it musthave these elements and must fulfill these minimum requirements.
Let’s say we look at the exalted knower of aspects in a very simplistic way, then we can say that any consciousness in a continuum of a buddha superior is necessarily an exalted knower of aspects.
So if somebody were to ask you: If it is a consciousness in a continuum of a buddha superior, are you sure that it is necessarily an exalted knower of aspects? Do you agree?
Whether we sayexalted knower of aspects, wisdom truth body, the consciousness that has abandoned the two obscurations, or the resultant perfection of wisdom, they all mean the same thing. These are different ways of talking about the same thing; same as in they have the same meaning. 
Where does it exist? What is its boundary?
It exists only on the buddha ground, which means sentient beings don’t have it.
There are 10 topics that illustrate the exalted knower of aspects. We are not going to go into each and every one of them. We have went through:
mind generation
precepts,
four branches of definite discrimination, 
the naturally abiding lineage, the basis of the Mahayana achievings,and 
observed objects of Mahayana achieving.
The branches of definite discrimination is another way of saying the Path of Preparation.
Topic number 6 is object of intent, specifically the object of intent of Mahayana achieving. The object of intent of Mahayana achieving is talking about the goal for practicing the bodhisattva path. 
Prior to the object of intent of the Mahayana achieving, topic 5 is the observed objects of Mahayana achieving, which includes virtues and non virtues and so forth, i.e. all phenomena. 
Why do we have them as the object of observation? The purpose of focusing on the observed objects of Mahayana achieving is to achieve the three objects of intent. 
The goal of the bodhisattva path is to achieve the three objects of intent of the Mahayana achieving. 
What is the purpose of focusing on the observed objects of the Mahayana achieving? 
The purpose is to achieve the three objects of intent of the Mahayana achieving; which are:
the great heroic mind, 
the great abandonment, 
the great realization
In the definition of mind generation, what is the specific special intent of the mind generation?
It is to accomplish the welfare of sentient beings. 
So in order to achieve this intent, then one generates the intention to achieve omniscience in order to achieve that intent. 
Why are these three posited as the objects of intent of the Mahayana achieving? 
Because these three are the ultimate method to achieve the welfare of sentient beings. 
In the Tathagata Essence module, when we look at the eight qualities of the buddha jewel, the first two qualities are: the quality of being uncompounded and the quality of spontaneity
1. The quality of being uncompounded: 
The nature truth body of the Buddha is divided into two: 
(i) the nature truth body that is pure from the beginning and 
(ii) the nature truth body that is free from adventitious defilements. 
(Note - Nature truth body that is pure from the beginning is also translated as natural purity.
Nature truth body that is free from adventitious defilements is also translated as purity from the adventitious defilements).
[Tathagata Essence module: The quality of being uncompounded refers to the nature truth body of the Buddha that is pure from the beginning and which is not produced by depending on causes or something that disintegrates. As mentioned in verse 4, “Obeisance to the one who has no beginning, middle, or end,” this nature truth body has no beginning, middle or end.]
So the nature truth body that is pure from the beginning and the nature truth body that is free from adventitious defilements are the two aspects of the nature truth body.
Here, of the three objects of intent of the Mahayana achieving -the great heroic mind, the great abandonment, the great realization - the great abandonment refers to these two purities. 
The 3rd quality - the quality of not being realized through the cause of others – refers to the mind that directly realizes those two purities (natural purity and the purity from the adventitious defilements). So it is a mind that directly realizes the mode of phenomena, essentially is an exalted knower that directly realizes emptiness. This 3rdquality refers to the truth body which is a fulfillment of one’s own purpose. On the basis of that, then there is the truth body that is the fulfillment of other’s purpose. That is why there are the great heroic mind and the great realization.
The knower that knows conventionalities is one of the qualities. As I have mentioned before, the knower of conventionalities is the knower of the varieties of phenomena. In this context, I think it refers to the mind that knows all sentient beings possess the tatagatha essence. 
There is the knower of the mode of phenomena and the knower of the varieties of phenomena. I think, the knower of the varieties refers to the mind that sees the presence of the tatagatha essence in all sentient beings. They possess the natural purity, while realizing and seeing at the same time that sentient beings’ minds are obscured by the adventitious defilements. 
The mind that knows this is the knower of the varieties of phenomena, which in my opinion I think is the mind that sees the presence of the tatagatha essence, the presence of the natural purities in each and every sentient beings mind and at the same time are being obscured by their adventitious defilements. Because of these knower of the varieties, next is the quality of mercy.
Due to the power of these two qualities – quality of knowledge andquality of mercy - then buddhas can work for sentient beings.
[Tathagata Essence BP2:
The first three qualities—the qualities of being uncompounded, spontaneous and not being realized through the cause of others—are presented mainly from the perspective of achieving one’s own purpose or aims. 
The next three qualities—the qualities of knowledge, mercy and power—are qualities that are related to the fulfillment of the aims of others.  
The quality of knowledge refers to the Buddha’s quality of knowing all conventionalities. 
The quality of mercy and the quality of power are qualities that arise from the Buddha’s knowledge of conventionalities. Since the Buddha knows all conventionalities, he knows that the tathagata essence exists in the continuum of every sentient being. Knowing that, the Buddha generates mercy. 
The Buddha perceives the two truths directly. He perceives the ultimate nature of all phenomena and he also perceives all conventionalities. But his knowledge of the ultimate nature of all phenomena is said to be related to the fulfilment of his own aims while his knowledge of conventionalities is discussed in relation to the fulfilment of the aims of others.]
[Tathagata Essence BP1: The quality of knowledge: This is the ability to realize conventionalities. In Tibetan, ‘jinyedpa’ means the varieties of things or conventionalities. A sentient being is unable to simultaneously realize conventional and ultimate truths. When in meditative equipoise focusing on emptiness, at that time, there is no appearance of conventional phenomena to the meditator. But when one becomes a buddha, then even while one is single-pointedly meditating on emptiness, at the same time, one is able to apprehend the appearance of conventional phenomena, that is, both truths appear simultaneously. This is the unique quality of a Buddha.
The quality is mercy (or great compassion): Whilst in meditative equipoise focussing on emptiness, the Buddha realizes that there is buddha nature (tathagata essence) within the continua of all sentient beings although it is temporarily obscured by defilements which cause them great suffering. Such defilements can be removed upon application of the appropriate antidotes. Realizing this, the Buddha, out of his great compassion for sentient beings, shows the unmistaken path by turning the Wheel of Dharma.]
These are the three objects of the intent of the Mahayana achieving -the great heroic mind, the great abandonment and great realization. 
The purpose of focusing on the observed objects of the Mahayana achieving, which is topic number 5, essentially covers all phenomena, and when divided, there are divisions of:
- virtue, 
- non-virtue and 
- unspecified. 
The virtue is that which is to be a practice and to be adopted, non-virtue is that which is to be abandoned, and the unspecified are left in equanimity. 
Anyway, the purpose of focusing on these observed objects of the Mahayana achievingis to achieve the three intents of the Mahayana achieving -the great heroic mind, great abandonment and great realization. 
Next is followed by the four Mahayana achieving: 
1. Achieving through armor
2. Achieving through engagement
3. Achieving through collections
4. Definitely issuing achieving
For the purpose of actualizing the three objects of intent of the Mahayana achieving, one must engages in the four Mahayana achievings. In order to achieve the great heroic mind, great abandonment and great realization, then one has to do these four Mahayana achievings.
What is Mahayana achieving? Or what is a path in the continuum of a bodhisattva?
It is a path which arises in dependence upon mind generation. By depending on this path, there are the fulfillment of the two purposes - oneself and others. Roughly that is what a Mahayana achieving is. 
If we were to ask what exactly a path in the continuum of a bodhisattva or Mahayana achieving is, then it is a path that is based on mind generation. With the mind generation as the basis, this path is the thing that allows an individual to accomplish the two purposes - the purpose of oneself and the purpose of others. Roughly that is what a Mahayana achieving is or a path in the continuum of a bodhisattva.  
In order for it to be a path in the continuum of a bodhisattva, first it has the quality of great abidance. This means it relies on mind generation. 
Great abiding - the path in the continuum of a bodhisattva is a mind that relies on mind generation.
Great perseverance or great effort - is a mind of joyously persevering in achieving the two purposes. That is another quality.
Great result - in dependence on such a path (the path in the continuum of a bodhisattva or the Mahayana achieving), the result of great enlightenment is issued forth. That means it brings about the result of great enlightenment.
Great undertaking - it is the great undertaking that the bodhisattvas promise to work to achieve the great purposes of all sentient beings. 
Great forbearance, in that the bodhisattvas are willingly take on the hardships while working for sentient beings. 
Then the bodhisattvas work to eliminate all the suffering of sentient beings and they work to accomplish the welfare of sentient beings. That means they are able to work perfectly to accomplish the goals for sentient beings.
So these are the six greatnesses as mentioned in the Ornament of the MahayanaSutra.
Of the four Mahayana achievings, the first is achieving through armor.
Achieving through armor- the definition says it is a bodhisattva yoga conjoined with a vast intention and so forth. 
In fact, there is more to the definition. This means that when the bodhisattva engages in the practice to achieve the objects of intent, they will do so with a very vast mind, huge mind, courageous mind, strong mind. They have this very strong intention to practice the buddhadharma in order to achieve their goal. It is like a mental armor. It is a force. It is an energy.
In the sutras, they give the example of a king who is about to go to war. When the king who is about to go to war, the king prepares himself by putting on all the correct attire, in armor and so forth. Likewise, when the bodhisattvas go about practicing the holy dharma in order to accomplish the object of intent, they do so with a very strong mind and strong intention. They will put this into practice and accomplish it.
What is an achieving through armor? When a bodhisattva practices the perfections, let’s say the perfection of generosity, his practice of the perfection of generosity must include all the other perfections together.
[Six perfections: 1. Generosity, 2. Ethical discipline, 3. Patience, 4. Joyous perseverance, 5. Concentration, 6. Wisdom]
So the bodhisattva must possess this intention to practice inclusively all the perfections within each of every perfection. They have this intention and desire to do so. 
So achieving through armor is this vast intention and desiring to practice inclusively the entire six perfections within the practice of a particular perfection. It is a desire to engage in such a practice, but it doesn’t necessarily necessitate doing so. 
Let’s take the bodhisattva’s practice of the perfection of generosity as an example, when a bodhisattva practices the perfection of generosity such as making the gift of dharma. When he is making the gift of dharma, which is the practices, the perfection of generosity, he is also practicing the perfection of ethical discipline. In this context, it refers primarily to the bodhisattvas stopping the arising of any selfish interest while giving the dharma. That is ethical restrain. In this context, stopping the arising of any self-interest while giving the dharma. 
If the bodhisattva faces any criticism from others while he is making the gift of dharma, he is supposed to practice forbearance by putting up and bear with it. So that is the practice of patience. While he is giving the dharma, which is making the gift of dharma, the bodhisattva is doing it enthusiastically, so that is joyous perseverance. 
When the bodhisattva is making the gift of dharma, he should do it with single-pointedness of mind. That is, if he is talking about the Mahayana, he should just focus on the Mahayana and make sure he stays on the topic with mindfulness and vigilance and not suddenly talk about something else.
While the bodhisattva is making the gift of dharma, he non-objectifies the three circles by bringing to mind that the giver of the dharma, the recipient of the gift of dharma and the dharma that he is delivering, all do not exist inherently. 
Then dedicating the roots of virtue from that act of giving the dharma can constitute also the practice of the perfection of wisdom.
In summary, what is achieving through armor? Achieving through armor is that strong desire to practice inclusively the entire six perfections within each of the six perfections. 
Next is achieving through engagement.
Achieving through armor exists from the Mahayana Path of Accumulation. After wearing the great mental armor, then one actually go on do something. So that is why after achieving through armor, then the achieving through engagement. 
Why the king dress himself up for the war? After put on the war, he will then go to the war. He doesn’t just sit down.
Achieving through engagement starts from the Mahayana Path of Preparation. 
From the start of the Mahayana Path of Accumulation, there is achievement through amour which is essentially a strong resolve to practice inclusively all the six perfections within each of the sic perfections. When the bodhisattva moves on to the Path of Preparation, he has the achieving through engagement in that he actually joyously perseveres engaging.
The Path of Preparation starts with the achievement of the union of calm-abiding and special insight focusing on emptiness. Once the Path of Preparation starts, the bodhisattva gains the ability to suppress the manifest conception of the apprehended and the apprehender as truly existence. His ability to actually be able to engage in that comes from the realization of special insight. Prior to that he cannot. 
The war against the afflictions is not just waging the war but actually able to inflict some damage against the enemy of afflictions. That only starts with the Path of Preparation when one has achieved the union of calm-abiding and special insight focusing on emptiness.
Next is achieving through the collections. In dependence upon achieving through engagement, which is essentially engaging through joyous perseverance, he is able to accumulate the collections. Therefore, what come after achieving through engagement is achieving through the collections. 
Achieving through collections is that wisdom in the Mahayana Path of Preparation that is conjoined with vast collections which makes it possible to bring soon about the result – the Path of Seeing. 
On the Path of Preparation, due to the special insight focusing on emptiness, the process of being able to inflict some damage on the afflictions only starts then. Through that, the bodhisattva is able to accumulate vast collections, and that gives the power to the mind to be able to realize emptiness soon. 
When one goes to war, one must be adequately prepared by putting on the right attire and with strong resolve. Only then one goes to the war. Going to war is one thing but to be able to achieve something is another thing. So, in order to achieve something, many conditions must come together when one is waging a war i.e. one must be adequately prepared with the right weapons and the right strategy in order for one’s army to be effective. Likewise, achieving through collections refer to that wisdom that is conjoined with the two vast collections which prepares the mind to be able to realize emptiness directly soon. Achieving through the collections start from the great level of the Supreme Mundane Quality of the Mahayana Path of Preparation. 
Definitely issuing achieving refers to the power that is able to bring forth without doubt the exalted knower of all aspects. That means full enlightenment. 
The definition is a yoga of the pure grounds that definitely yields without doubt an exalted knower of all aspects. 
Definitely issuing achieving is yoga on the pure grounds that definitely yields without doubt an exalted knower of all aspects refers to the time whereby one knows for sure that enlightenment will be achieved. Definitely issuing achieving exists on the 3 pure grounds.
From the perspective of the Consequence Middle Way School, afflictive obscurations are abandoned on the 8thground. So it is only when the bodhisattva achieves the 8th ground, the enemy of the afflictions is destroyed. From then onwards, the bodhisattva is working towards enlightenment.
Khen Rinpoche: Are you following? Or are you totally lost? Are you getting some sense? 
We are just looking at these topics here in an extremely superficial way. We are no way near any examination or analysis of the topics. It is just merely superficial kind of looking at the topics. There is no way if we want to go into details. For example, when one studies achieving through engagement in details, one of the many details in these topics is the presentation of the form and formless absorption in concentration. It talks about the way to achieve calm abiding, the way to achieve special insight on the basis of achieving calm abiding, and then the way of achieving the form and formless absorption. There are different levels of form realms and formless realms and their concentration and also on how those are achieved through meditating on the path that meditate on the coarseness, and many other meditations. If we study the achieving through the collections in details, then there is an extensive discussion on the paths and grounds and about how does the different paths act as an antidote on the different objects of abandonment and how objects of abandonment are abandoned by the path that abandoned them.
Khen Rinpoche: So the 10 topics are completed. Better to complete, yeah.
Next is the knower of paths. 
Definition: Mahayana superior’s clear realizer conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing emptiness within the continuum of the person who possesses it. \
By looking at the definition, it is not sufficient for a mind just because it is conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing emptiness. That doesn’t make it a knower of the paths. It has to be a Mahayana superior’s clear realizer. If it is a Mahayana superior’s clear realizer conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing emptiness then it is a knower of paths.
To make it simple, knower of paths is a path in the continuum of a Mahayana superior. 
An exalted knower in the continuum of a Mahayana superior is mutually inclusive with the knower of paths. There is a difference in the limit of pervasion between a bodhisattva superior and the Mahayana superior. 
The limit of pervasion of a Mahayana superior is bigger than the limit of pervasion of a bodhisattva superior. 
Isn’t it a bodhisattva superior is necessarily a Mahayana superior? But a Mahayana superior is not necessarily a bodhisattva superior.
Khen Rinpoche: Yes? Who says yes?
A Mahayana superior is not necessarily a bodhisattva superior?
(Student reply: Inaudible)
Khen Rinpoche: What she is saying is correct. What you people said is correct. I just want to pinch a little bit to see how strong you are.
Student 1: Mahayana superior include Buddha.
Khen Rinpoche: As such, you are saying that a buddha superior is not a bodhisattva superior, right?
Student 1: Yup
Khen Rinpoche: What you are saying is correct. I am not saying not correct.	
In the continuum of a Buddha superior, is there a mind generation or not?
Student 1: Yes
Is there a bodhicitta or not?
Student 1: No. In the continuum of a Buddha, there is no bodhicitta but there is mind generation.
Is there a conventional mind generation or not?
Ven Gyurme: Instead of saying bodhicitta, says conventional mind generation. 
Student 1: There is no bodhicitta. 
Ven Gyurme:  Is there conventional mind generation or not?
Student 1: Should be no, if it is related to bodhicitta. Bodhicitta is necessarily mind generation, and mind generation is not necessarily bodhicitta. It is the same as we are talking about Mahayana superior and bodhisattva superior.
Khen Rinpoche: Yes, correct.
Then what is the measure of bodhicitta?
Student 1: Measure of the bodhicitta is up to the end of the 10thground.
Ven Gyurme: When we say measure, it means what is it? When do you have it? What is it?
Student 1: You have bodhicitta during the path. Once you reach the Path of No More Learning, you don’t have bodhicitta.
Khen Rinpoche: Yes correct. Just idea. When somebody says yes, don’t stop there. You just ask in different way to people then you make sure what you are saying is correct. So, that is important.
Does a knower of pathsnecessarily realize emptiness? 
Khen Rinpoche (in English): True? That is why you must think deeply.
Does a knower of paths necessarily realize emptiness? You have to analyze based on the definition. What does the definition says? Or what does the definition does not say? 
The definition doesn’t say a Mahayana superior’s clear realizer directly realizing emptiness, but rather it is a Mahayana superior’s clear realizer conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing emptiness in the continuum of the person who possesses it. 
So, the definition says conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing emptiness, and it doesn’t say directly realizing emptiness. If that is the case, does a knower of paths necessarily realizes emptiness directly? 
You cannot forget what was said at the beginning. What is mutually inclusive with knower of paths? It is the exalted knower in the continuum of a Mahayana superior.
Whatever your answer, yes or no, you always have an example to backup your position. What example? 
Student 2: Example would be the mind of a bodhisattva superior during post meditative equipoise engaging in the collections of merit.
In post meditative equipoise, this bodhisattva superior doesn’t see any emptiness directly? 
Khen Rinpoche: First thing you must be confident with what you are saying there.
Student 2: During post meditative equipoise, the superior bodhisattva doesn’t realize emptiness directly but his mind is conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing emptiness.
You said don’t have. If the wisdom directly realizing emptiness doesn’t exist then how do you conjoined with the non-existence.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You have to think. She said conjoined but the mind is not there how to conjoin?
Student 2: So, I need help.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Okay, sit down. I am just giving example? What I am saying is giving some idea how to think about the definition in a deeper way. This is just to give some idea. 
If it is a knower of paths, does it necessarily realizes emptiness directly?
Student 3: I don’t have an example but I saw the boundary here says Mahayana Path of Seeing through the Buddha ground. So, you must have the direct realization of emptiness.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): So, I am asking everyone include you, what the question I am asking must be very clearly of the listen.
Student 3: You said is the knower of the paths necessarily also realize emptiness directly?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): So, what is there to do with the boundary?
Ven Gyurme: If ‘it’ is a knower of paths does ‘it’ necessarily realizes emptiness directly?  Because knower of paths, there can be so many different illustration. You can posit as the knower of paths but whatever that ‘it’ is, that ‘it’ realizes emptiness directly or not?
Student 3: Should be right? Otherwise it is not in the boundary.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): What is there to do with the boundary?
Ven Gyurme: What has it to do with the boundary?
Student 3: That means it has to be inside this boundary then it is considered as a knower of paths, right?
We are not asking whether it is a knower of paths. We are asking if it is a knower of paths? Knower of paths exist from Path of Seeing till Buddhahood. So, if it is a knower of paths, does it necessarily realize emptiness directly?
Student 3: If it does then the conjoined doesn’t make sense. It sounds like that. But I don’t have an example. 
Khen Rinpoche (in English): If you don’t have an example then you don’t know.
Student 3: What is a clear realizer? You must explain this. 
Path, exalted knower, clear realizer have the same meaning. It is said that path, exalted knower and clear realizer are mutually inclusive. Well, it is understandable that sometimes we do experience some difficulties due to these different terms. Nevertheless we have to know the terms. Now you know that the path, exalted knower and then clear realizer are mutually inclusive. A Mahayana clear realizer is a Mahayana path.
Student 4: The definition is a Mahayana arya’s clear realization conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing emptiness in the continuum of the person who possesses it in his continuum. So, I am just wondering what is the significant of saying this later part “who possesses it in his continuum”? Because when you said conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing emptiness in the continuum, is understood that it is in the mind of the person who possesses it, isn’t it? I am just wondering whether those extra words “of the person who possesses it in his continuum” has some special significance.
In the definition of knower of paths, it ends with within the continuum of the person who possesses it. So, it is saying that in order to be qualified as being in possession of the knower of paths, that person himself must possess the wisdom directly realizing emptiness. Just because the wisdom directly realizing emptiness exist in the continuum of the another person is not a criteria that determines whether oneself possessing the knower of the paths. The point is in order for an individual to possess the knower of the paths that individual must possess the wisdom directly emptiness.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You understood then that is the point. Then what else?
Student 4: But isn’t that already understood because it seems repetitive to me. It saying like the handbag belongs to Cecilia who possesses the handbag. To me if I say the handbag belongs to Cecilia fullstop. It is understood that I possess the handbag. It is kind of like that. Every single word in the definition is there for a reason. It is not because they want to put in extra words. So, that is why I think it is repetitive. If the realization is in my mind, I don’t have to say the realization is in the mind of Cecilia who possesses the realization.
Just because it is included in the continuum of a person does not necessarily necessitate it being in your continuum or the person who possesses it. Just because it is conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing emptiness within the continuum of a person doesn’t mean therefore it is included in your continuum.
Handover of Exam Paper:
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You are supposed to handover your exam paper. It is not over. I want you to do more. Next, maybe for another one week, from the 10 [verses], you are supposed to choose 10, the best of the 10. I hope you have already think and choose it. Now, I don’t think so you know by heart all the reasons. I don’t think so you know by heart. Are you know already?
You have selected 10 verses and have written your answers pertaining to the 10 verses that you have chosen. Are you able to explain them without looking at your paper right now? You know what you have chosen, and you know what you have written. By not looking at your paper on what you have written, are you able to explain it by delivering a speech without looking at the text.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Yes? No? Oh, next is I want that. Those want to study, I want that.
The next level is that you should be able to talk about the 10 verses you have chosen and explain them just like that without looking at your paper.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Okay? I mean if you don’t want to do I will stop there. I will just collect the paper. This is not the point.
Ideally if you can talk about all the 10 verses that you have chosen then that is very good. But if not, at least one but you have to do it well. But whatever the one that you choose, please do it well by giving a fabulous presentation without looking at the paper. Just choose 1 out of the 10 verses that you have chosen and make sure that you are able to talk about it for at least 10 minutes. 
There will be a very lucky draw. Whoever name is being picked then you will be asked to share the dharma with the rest of us for 10 minutes. Next Thursday would be the very lucky draw day. So whosever name get picked then you are invited to come out and sit on a chair or stand and give the rest of us a presentation for 10 minutes. This also becomes a practice. You will gain some experience so that in the future if you do end up having to teach the dharma or share the dharma with others, this is the preparation. Let you have a feel of what it is liked.
Yes have to memorize in order to inspire the students. The teacher has to come across as knowing what he or she is talking about.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): It depends if you really want to do then we do that. If you agree you don’t want to do then I collect your paper now. So, put up your hand if you want to do or not? I am serious. If you really want to do then put your hand up. You don’t want to do then don’t put your hand. Simple.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I pick up from the 3rd one. Anyway those who don’t want to talk, it is okay. Those who put the hand up. I think many of you want to do this. Those who didn’t put up the hand please do that. Those who don’t want to do, hand over your paper now. Those who want to do, take your paper back.  Then those who want to talk so next Thursday handover your paper. From there, I will choose. 
Announcement on the Change of the Program
We are not going to do tantric paths and grounds this year. We will continue with this topic. If we do finish these 8 categories and 70 topics and if there is still some times then we may go through chapter 9 of Shantideva’s text quickly. Not all the verses but just have an idea of chapter 9. 
The Six Great Qualities extracted from Practicing the Path by Yangsi Rinpoche
In Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras, Buddha Maitreya establishes six characteristics that make the Mahayana vehicle supreme. These are:
1 the greatness of the basis, 
2. the greatness of perseverance, 
3. the greatness of the result, 
4. the greatness of taking continual responsibility, 
5. the greatness of patience, and 
6. the greatness of the activities bringing about the pure result of enlightenment. 
The greatness of the basis of the path refers to the fact that the Mahayana path is rooted in the practices of compassion and the development of the mind that seeks the benefit of others. All of the five Mahayana paths possess this attribute. It is this characteristic that establishes the practitioner in the Mahayana family. The greatness of perseverance refers to the fact that a practitioner on the Mahayana path possesses great perseverance, enabling him or her to engage in whatever activity is necessary to bring about the goal of benefiting others. For example, a Mahayana practitioner first generates aspiring bodhichitta, the strong wish to attain enlightenment for the benefit of others. On this basis, the practitioner then generates engaging bodhichitta, and thereby engages in the conduct of a bodhisattva in order to complete that goal. No matter how difficult the tasks may be, the Mahayana practitioner maintains a sense of joyful perseverance. This is the greatness of perseverance
The greatness of the result refers to the attainment of complete enlightenment through this path. This state of enlightenment is free of all failings and mistakes, and complete in all knowledge and qualities. 
The greatness of taking continual responsibility refers in particular to taking the bodhisattva vow for the benefit of others. In the presence of all the buddhas and bodhisattvas, the practitioner of the Mahayana takes this vow to dedicate every activity of body, speech, and mind to activities seeking the welfare of others. 
The fifth is the greatness of patience. A practitioner on the Mahayana path is able to voluntarily take on any problem, any amount of suffering, and deal with any difficult situation if doing so fulfills the benefit of others. The practice of the medium scope is to reflect on suffering and generate the strong determination to be free from it, which is renunciation. The extraordinary practice of the great scope practitioner, however, is to voluntarily take on suffering and problems instead of trying to avoid them, Rather than feeling burdened, the Mahayana practitioner takes suffering and problems as the method to facilitate progression on the path and, ultimately, to eliminate the source of suffering itself. 
The sixth greatness is the greatness of engaging in all the activities that bring forth the pure result of the attainment of enlightenment solely for the benefit of others, and in that way being able to accomplish the ultimate benefit for sentient beings. This refers to the fact that practitioners on the Mahayana path, once they attain a certain level, are able to cause the minds of the sentient beings that they are karmically connected with to ripen. Upon ripening their minds, the Mahayanist can ultimately cause them to be liberated completely, and can subsequently cause that liberation to become the complete form of liberation. 