Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/lesson23.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:51:04.208435
================================================================================

Khen Rinpoche: For Sunday discussion, anything to clarify?
We looked at the meditation on the inhalation and exhalation of the breath. I have mentioned that there are six levels. 
The first level is counting up to the10 cycles of inhalation and exhalation. One round of exhalation and inhalation is considered as one cycle. 
The second level is called pursuing in that as we inhale, we gradually bring the breath down to the throat, then to our heart, to the navel, to the waist, to the thigh, to our calf, the soles of the feet and exit from the soles of the feet and goes into the ground. Depending on the breathing capacity, it will leave our body and go into the earth about an arm span or hand span.
Then the third level is called setting. When we meditate on the exhalation and inhalation of the breath, we imagine the breath as a string of jewels when we inhale so the breath goes through our nostrils and goes all the way down to our body and comes out from our heels and again forming a circle and enters at our nose again. At the same time while focusing on the breath as a string of jewels, another part of the mind investigate whether the breath is benefitting or harming the body or whether it is producing happiness or suffering or whether it is hot and cold. It is just bring an awareness to that; not doing a detailed analysis but rather kind of a coarse investigation. 
The fourth level is called closely investigating whereby in addition of thinking the inhalation and exhalation of breath as being wind, it is in the nature of the elements and the derivatives of the elements.
As I have mentioned that the inhalation and exhalation of the breath is not just the wind, in addition to that, closely investigating and thinking it is in the nature of the four elements like earth, water and fire together with wind. It is also a closely investigating thinking that it is in the nature of the elemental evolutes which are form, smell, taste and touch (tangible object). Here it is to understand that the inhalation and exhalation of breath is in the nature of the eight form substances. When it is together with the phenomenon that are mind and the mental factors supported on it, then there is a mind that understands and thinks that it is the five aggregates.
Next is the fifth level which is called transformation. It is essentially through transforming the awareness of observing the wind then we perfectly apply ourselves to higher and higher roots of virtue. 
Next is the sixth level which is called completely purifying. I’m not sure what the difference between the fifth and sixth level is. I guess the difference between the fifth and sixth level is that:
on the fifth level one is setting one’s mind in virtue and 
on the sixth level one is applying to higher and higher roots of virtue and causing the roots of virtue to increase. 
So these are the six levels in relation to the meditation on the inhalation and the exhalation of the breath that is explained in the Treasury of Manifest Knowledge. 
We talked about meditating on the nine different aspects to counter desire and attachment. Now the six levels related to the meditation on the inhalation and exhalation on the breath, I think they fall under the meditation of the close placement of mindfulness of the body.
When we were talking about the close placement of mindfulness of feelings, we were talking primarily about the pleasant feeling and how generally we respond with craving and desire when we experience pleasant feelings. That will leads to us circling in cyclic existence. One of the ways to counteract the craving and grasping for these pleasant feelings is to meditate on the impermanence of those pleasant feelings. 
When we experience unpleasant feelings such as feelings of pain, it leads to craving as well, i.e. craving to be separated from that unpleasant feeling, Because of that craving to be separated from an unpleasant feeling such as feeling of pain, then we get upset and there is anger. So the way to counteract the craving to be separated from that unpleasant feeling is to meditate on how that feeling is in the nature of suffering.
As for the feelings of equanimity, at times we might feel nice, fuzzy and peaceful but that lead to perpetuation of ignorance. That is something that should be counteracted, and the way to do so is to meditate on selflessness. 
So even with regards to just that one close placement of mindfulness of the feelings, there are many ways to meditate on that. We can meditate on the four characteristics of impermanence, suffering, empty and selfless with regards to that close placement of mindfulness of feelings. Through that we can counteract the afflictions of desire, attachment, anger and ignorance. 
When meditating on close placement of mindfulness of the mind, there is a couple of things that we have to pay attention to:
- How the mind is a momentary phenomenon?
- How it changes momentarily?
- If you have to point to something that is the mind, you will probably have some difficulty of doing so. - How the mind is in the nature of clear light? 
- How the mind is something that will exist forever?
The mind is a disintegrating phenomenon (momentary phenomenon). If you are asked to point to something that is the mind, you probably have some difficulty doing so. The mind is unobstructive and it is in the nature of clear light and the factor of clarity, and the factor of luminosity and knowing and awareness. Its continuum has no beginning and neither would it have an end. 
We are talking about the close placement of mindfulness of the mind. Of the two mental factors of investigation and analysis, here we are analyzing to discover the entity of mind, and what exactly is the mind. It is wisdom. 
The meditation on the close placement of mindfulness of phenomena is essentially a wisdom that analyses in order to settle the issue with regards to what is it that we need to cultivate (positive factors such as love and compassion) and what we have to abandon (such as anger, hatred, attachment). It is a wisdom that analyses in order to settle these. We have to cultivate this through this settling, and coming to a decisive understanding. This is done by hearing and reflection or study and reflection. Through hearing and reflection, one settles correctly on what has to be abandoned and what has to be cultivated and then we place our mindfulness on that. 
Student 1: There are four topics of the four close placement of mindfulness. Each of the topics has four general characteristics of impermanence, suffering, selfless and empty. When we talk about permanent phenomena under the close placement of mindfulness of phenomena, how do permanent phenomena fit into impermanent characteristic?
Khen Rinpoche: Good question. Somebody answer. Quickly, quickly don’t wait. We have already completed the topic.
Student 2: I think as long as the phenomena give rise to suffering, even if it is not impermanent, it can be meditated upon. 
Khen Rinpoche: He’s not asking that. His question is not that. His question is not that. 
Student 3: Because permanent phenomena is dependent on impermanent phenomena. It can’t be there is no permanent phenomena if there is no impermanent phenomena. 
Khen Rinpoche: Very good, very good. We have better idea come, she has another idea. Somebody come. 
Student 2: How is a permanent phenomenon dependent on impermanent phenomena? So go by the logic of substantial cause, then permanent phenomena is also impermanent phenomena. If permanent phenomena is dependent on impermanent phenomena, then to me it seems to follow that permanent phenomena comes from…
The Student 2’s question is: What are the objects of observation posited for the close placement of mindfulness of phenomena? All phenomena include not just the composite phenomena but also the uncomposed (permanent phenomena).
As for the manner of meditation, there are two ways of meditating: 
meditating on the specific characteristics or 
meditating on the general characteristics 
Both are applicable to all the different close placement of mindfulness. If you accept that, then there are the four characteristics starting with impermanent, suffering, selfless and empty. How do you apply the general characteristics of impermanent to permanent phenomena? 
Khen Rinpoche: That was the question.  Is there such a thing in the first place?
Student 4: I think phenomena refer to the thoroughly purified and thoroughly afflicted class of phenomena. It is not just any phenomena right?
Khen Rinpoche: It is very clear in the text that phenomena here refer to unproduced phenomena, basically permanent phenomena. I think I have mentioned already quite a few lessons ago that phenomena here refer to all mental factors except feelings. It also refers to all the non-associated compositional factors and unproduced phenomena (permanent phenomena). 
Khen Rinpoche: Is it difficult you think to answer this question? Are uncomposed phenomena true suffering? 
Student 5: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: I’m quite surprised. If you are asked “Are uncomposed phenomena true suffering?” Are you going to say “Yes” or “No”?  What are you going to say if somebody asks you? Yes? No? Why? You cannot just say “No”. Why? You must give reason why you say no. You think about okay.
It is clear that you can’t meditate on the permanence of a permanent phenomenon, right?
Is uncomposed phenomenon true suffering? If it is true suffering, then it has to arise from karma and afflictions. That means it has to arise from causes and conditions. Anything that arises from causes and conditions can be uncomposed phenomena or not? Therefore, can you even say that uncomposed phenomena arise from causes and conditions? 
Khen Rinpoche: Can you say that or not? 
If uncomposed phenomena can arise from karma and afflictions, then there is no way you can stop it. In the first place, how did it arise? If it is not impermanent then how are you going to exhaust it when it arises?  That means if it is permanent, how can you exhaust something that is permanent? 
Anyway, that is all for the four close placement of mindfulness. 
In the 37 harmonies of enlightenment, next is the group that is called the four correct abandonings.
What are the objects of observation? 
Virtue is in the class of thoroughly purified phenomena, Virtue is divided into two: 
That which has been generated
That which has not been generated. 
Non-virtue is of the class of the thoroughly afflicted phenomena. Non-virtue is divided into two:
That has been generated 
That has not been generated. 
So altogether there are four objects of observation:
Virtue that has been generated
Virtue that has not been generated
Non-virtue that has been generated 
Non-virtue that has not been generated. 
How do you meditate on these four correct abandonings? 
With regards to the non-virtues that have not been generated, you make sure that they are not generated. You have the non-generation of non-virtues that has not been generated. 
What about the non-virtues that have been generated? You abandon the non-virtues that have been generated. 
In short, the correct abandoning is joyous perseverance. You need to know the entity. 
What is the correct abandoning? It is joyous perseverance. 
What about virtues? The virtues that one has not generated, you generate that, i.e. the generation of virtues that have not been generated. 
The last is the increase in virtues that have been generated.
So these are the four correct abandonings and they are in the nature of joyous perseverance. What are those four again? 
Abandonment of non-virtues that have been generated
Non-generation of the non-virtues that have not been generated
Generation of virtues that have not been generated 
Increase of the virtues that have been generated
So correct abandoning is in the nature of joyous effort. In order for there to be joyous effort, in the first place, there has to be strong aspirations for these four things. 
There are two different words that are used. For non-virtue, we have to abandon and for virtue, we have to cultivate. 
With regards to the virtues that we are supposed to generate;
We have to strive in generating the virtues that have not been generated
We have to strive to increase the virtues that have already been generated. 
As for the abandonment of the non-virtues, whether it is the non-virtues that have not been generated or the non-virtues that have already been generated, the word used in Tibetan is chonpa? which means that you have to put effort for it. 
With regards to virtues, we used the word strive. With regards to abandoning the non-virtues, you have to put in the effort and work hard for it.
In the course of striving to generate virtues and working at abandoning the non-virtues, first we have to have the aspiration to do that. When we are in the process of abandoning the non-virtues and generating virtues, there are obstacles and hindrances along the way. What can hinder or obstruct the abandonment of non-virtues and the generation of virtues?  Literally the word in Tibetan is laxity but what it means here is when your mind feels low or down or weak, the antidote to that is to uplift the mind.
There are times where we may be distracted by many other things from abandoning non-virtues and  cultivating virtues, then the antidote to that is to reflect on the faults or disadvantages of distractions and also the faults of samsara. With mindfulness and vigilance, we put the mind back into abandoning non-virtue and cultivating virtue. 
What is the purpose of cultivating these four correct abandoning? It is to weaken the discordant class and to strengthen the concordant class, basically weaken the non-virtues and to strengthen and increase the virtues. 
So the purposes of correct abandoning are:
To discard the objects of abandonment 
To cultivate and adopt the antidotes
In the context of this text, the correct abandoning as discussed here is an exalted knower. We are talking about this kind of joyous perseverance that exists in the continuum of someone who has already entered a path. 
That is about it for the four correct abandonings. 
What is its boundary? It exists from the Path of Accumulation up to buddha ground. 
If the boundary of the four correct abandonings extends all the way up to the buddha ground, the question is: Does all the four correct abandoning exist in the Buddha superior’s continuum?
Khen Rinpoche: What do you think? Does Buddha have these four? You understand the four? 
With regards to non-virtues, do these two correct abandonings - the non-generation of the non-virtues which have not been generated, and abandonment of the non-virtues that have been generated - exist in the Buddha superior’s continuum or not?	
Then with regards to virtues, do these two correct abandonings - the generation of the virtues that have not been generated and the increase of the virtues that have been generated  - exist in the Buddha superior’s continuum or not?	
From the etymological point of view, it is called correct abandoning because it has been abandoned correctly. 
There is an explanation that links these correct abandoning to the four powers that are cultivated in the practice of confession.
The abandonment of non-virtues that have been generated is related to the power of support and the power of eradication. The power of eradication which is essentially the mind of regret. 
Then the non-generation of non-virtues which have not been generated is related to the power of restraint. 
The generation of virtues that have not been generated together with the increase of virtues that have been generated is related to the power of applying the antidote. 
I have a personal qualm. The abandonment of non-virtues that have been generated is said to be related to the power of support and the power of eradication (the mind of regret). How does the mind of regret or the power of eradication, how does that abandon or get rid of the non-virtues that have been generated?
Khen Rinpoche: Anybody has answer for that?
That is about it for the four correct abandonings. Don’t think there is anything more to say. 
Some people practice walking meditation. There is a meditation related to walking in connection with the meditation on emptiness that is taught in Nagarjuna’s Fundamental Treatise on Wisdom. When we walk, as we take many steps, we can reflect: Where am I walking to?
When we walk, the action is that we are walking to somewhere.  Obviously we start from a particular position and are walking to another position. As we are walking towards another position, we cannot be walking to the position that we were started from, which is the past. Then where exactly are we going to? We are not yet at the place we are going to. So the path of the past is gone and the path that we will be going to in the future has yet to exist. When we analyze, what is left with is the present. We cannot say the future and we cannot say the past. The only choice is that we have to say is that our action of walking to somewhere is in the present. 
Khen Rinpoche: Are you getting?
If you really want to pinpoint what exactly is this action of going, then physically it is having one foot on the ground and another foot in the air. Obviously you cannot be walking with the two feet on the ground. You have not arrive at the position that you are walking to even it could be just nearby. If you analyze and really have to pinpoint the state of motion to say where the action of going is, then is it the state of motion whereby one leg is on the ground and another leg is in the air not touching the ground? Where does the act of going start? Does it refers from the moment the leg is lifted or does it refer to the whole process and before the leg put down?  That whole period of time itself can be divided into the past, present and future. The point is that if you analyze then there is really nothing you can really point out and say decisively that “This is the going.”  You really cannot point to anything 
At the end of the day, you cannot point to anything that you can decisively say “This is going. It is only this and it is not that”. So what is going? What is coming? It is just established in name. It is posited in dependent on something else. It is in relation to something else that you can say “This is this and not that.”
Whether it is sitting down, walking, going, coming, and if you really have to look for “Where is that sitting? Where is that going? Where is that coming? Then there is really nothing that we can point to and decisively say this is it. All these do exist and function but they exist in just mere name. 
We think of ourselves as something naturally very solid and if we need to point to something that is “me”, we think we can point to something that is “me.” That is how we think of ourselves and that is how we appear to ourselves. However, if we do analyze then if we will to look for the goer, we would not able to find the real goer. If we will to look for the person who is sitting down, we can’t find when we look for it.
I guess there are many things that we can think about while walking.  With the so called walking meditation, one can probably focus on so many things. With regards to selflessness, if we can place our awareness on meditation on the act of going where, what is this act of going and who is this goer, then it might help in the understanding of selflessness. 
Since we are all beginners, it might be easier if we focus on the inhalation and exhalation of breath, or we can focus on our daily activity of walking.
Khen Rinpoche: Okay, my talk is done. You have questions then you ask. I am not going to talk anymore. 
Student 6:  I still don’t understand why permanent phenomenon is not suffering. Let’s say I have an object of attachment and after that there is a mental image of that object of attachment in my mind, is that mental image a cause for suffering?
Khen Rinpoche: Anybody? Come, say something. Rather than me answering, maybe somebody come and answer what she said.
Student 7: Khen Rinpoche has just said permanent phenomenon is not caused by causes and conditions.   True suffering is caused by ignorance and karma.
Khen Rinpoche: Her question is I said that, and after that she asked her mental image create problem for her, true suffering. Her question is that. How are you going to answer with that?
Student 7: So, you are saying mental image is the cause?
Khen Rinpoche: Cause suffering for her.
Student 7: That it would mean actually mental image is caused by something, right? That is what you mean also right?
Khen Rinpoche: By her experience, permanent also gives her suffering, for example, mental image. So, how are you going to answer? Everybody think. Come and say something. More active.
Student 8: It comes from our mind. Because her mind is suffering but it is not my mind that is suffering.
Khen Rinpoche: So, it is her problem, not your problem. Good, good. Cynthia said it is her problem not my problem..
Student 9: Maybe I ask a question. Is a mental image produced, does it abide and does it disintegrate?  So, therefore it arises, it abides and that is why it disintegrates, right?
Khen Rinpoche: So, what is your answer for his question?
Student 9: I am proposing the mental image is impermanent.
Khen Rinpoche: Benny think mental image is impermanent. Okay?
Student 10: According to Prasangika, mental image is a permanent phenomenon. Actually mental image doesn’t create problems for us. It is how we apprehend that mental image. We apprehend that mental image that we have with ignorance or attachment or any of the afflictions. Actually it is our affliction that causes suffering for us. Okay that is my answer. But actually I have a question on my mind for a few years still cannot find the answer.
Khen Rinpoche: Why you wait until now?
Student 10: How does the dynamic works? How does an impermanent phenomenon such as mind able to hold on to an object which it apprehends, that object apprehended by the mind is mental image which is a permanent phenomenon? At one hand you have the mind is an impermanent phenomenon that is disintegrating moment to moment and on the other hand you have the mental image which does not disintegrate moment by moment. So, how do these two things come together?
Khen Rinpoche: Come, come say something.
Student 11: Maybe Mui Cheng were thinking in terms of the phenomenon causing suffering. It is not talking about that. It is talking about phenomenon itself what is this? It is not talking about the phenomenon causing, then you have to say that Buddha also can cause you suffering, right? You see the Buddha and then have a mental image of Buddha and that causes you suffering. That is your interpretation. But it is not talking about that. It is talking about phenomenon whether it is true suffering.
Khen Rinpoche: You have to understand when you say that phenomenon doesn’t have to be something solid. So, mental image is a phenomenon.
Student 11: When she was talking about is that that phenomenon causing suffering.
Khen Rinpoche: She thinks the mental image is the cause of suffering. It is a true suffering. So, you have to answer for that, yes or no.
(Student 6 response inaudible)
Student 11: You are talking about the observed object condition is the cause, then there is no permanent phenomenon, because all the permanent phenomena will be a cause for something, right?
Ven Gyurme: Mental image cannot be an observed condition, right?
Student 11: If it is not then it is not a cause right?
Khen Rinpoche: Some people will get pissed off by their teachers/gurus. For some people Buddha pisses them off. In the context whereby we assume that we have a teacher and that teacher in reality is Buddha. Then the student gets angry with that teacher who in reality a Buddha. So, for that student, is that guru a true suffering or not? 
You also seem to accept that if it is a cause or origin of suffering, it is true suffering. In this case, is it true suffering or not? Going by her logic, if you remember somebody and that remembrance is via a mental image (meaning generality) in the mind. Because of the image of the person then you get upset. So that is the cause. If you extend that argument to a person who is in reality Buddha, and we get upset with that person and for us, is Buddha true suffering or not? Yes or no?
Student 11: For that person who has ignorance, technically I think that one is a true suffering. Because I remember there was one class, let’s say apple, whether apple is true suffering.
Ven Gyurme: No, talk Buddha.
Student 11: If the person who realizes emptiness then that one may not be a true suffering. Possible that Buddha is true suffering.
Ven Gyurme: Yes or no?
Student 11: But the person doesn’t see the person as Buddha.
Ven Gyurme: It doesn’t matter right? Yes or no?
Student 11: Yes. When Buddha manifest as a bridge, I see the bridge as true suffering.
Ven Gyurme: So Buddha can cause suffering?
Khen Rinpoche: Is there a common locus of Buddha and true suffering or not?
Student 11: No
Ven Gyurme: You just asserted yes. Then you have to say yes.
Student 11: Unfortunately yes. 
Khen Rinpoche: So, what is the conclusion is?
Student 11: My own fault. Nothing to do with whatever see out there.
Khen Rinpoche: Nothing to do with mental image?
Student 2: Not mental image’s fault. 
Khen Rinpoche: Then your fault?
Student 2: My affliction’s fault.
Khen Rinpoche: It follow that, for you, your body is not true suffering. You are saying your mind’s problem but not your body’s problem.
Student 11: My body is the product of karma and afflictions. Sorry, my body has anything to do with my mental image?
Khen Rinpoche: I am just giving example. Your house cause suffering or not?
Student 11: My house true suffering.
Ven Gyurme: Your altar room?
Student 11: Next thing you will start to say Buddha’s statue and Buddha’s images.
Khen Rinpoche: Your house?
Ven Gyurme: Your sadhana?
Student 11: A lot of time, I read everyday and I think it is true suffering.
Ven Gyurme: For us, dharma book is true suffering right? Then how?
Student 11: I am about to ask another question. I got this problem with true suffering. Contaminated aggregates are necessarily true suffering. When we talk about contaminated aggregates mean five aggregates, right?
Khen Rinpoche: Ya.
Student 2: Five or four whichever many the person has. If the person has realized emptiness directly - the Path of Seeing, technically doesn’t have true suffering.
Ven Gyurme: Mahayana Path of Seeing?
Student 11: At the Mahayana Path of Seeing, the person will not have true suffering. They take on the mental body which is not true suffering. But that is talking about the body. But the person actually has not abandoned ignorance. Even though the person does have the ignorance of the twelve-link, that one fair. But the person actually has not abandoned ignorance which actually in a mental factor. It is a compositional factor. The person still has at least a contaminated aggregate of the compositional factor. Why would we say that this person actually totally doesn’t have true suffering when this person has not abandoned ignorance per say? Which is actually a mental factor, a compositional factor.
Ven Gyurme: Got attachment also.
Student 11: Attachment and etc. That has always been the qualm that I couldn’t quite figure out why? Then the person goes to pureland also has not abandoned ignorance.
Ven Gyurme: Got seed of contaminated karma.
Khen Rinpoche: We have to say that if it is a true origin then it is necessarily true suffering. The pervasion works that way but not the other way round. If it is a true suffering, it is not necessarily true origin. So, when we say true suffering, we have to understand it either in the sense of true suffering or true origin. 
In the case of bodhisattva on the Path of Seeing who realizes emptiness directly, does he has ignorance in his continuum? He has, but is it the ignorance that belongs to true origin? You have to say no. 
Because we say that if this bodhisattva superior possesses the ignorance that belongs to the true origin then he will possess the ignorance that is able to accumulate the karma that projects a rebirth in the cyclic existence. But he doesn’t have that ignorance of true origin. The question needs to be asked is “The ignorance that is in the continuum of this bodhisattva superior arises from affliction or not?”
Khen Rinpoche: That is the question. What is the ignorance in the continuum of a bodhisattva superior? What exactly is it? The ignorance in the continuum of a bodhisattva superior arises from ignorance. So, the ignorance in the continuum of a bodhisattva superior arises from virtue or non-virtue?
Ven Gyurme: Neutral? Unspecified. 
Khen Rinpoche: Arises from realizing emptiness? From where?
Ven Gyurme: Arises from seed or not?
Student 11: Seed of affliction. Seed of ignorance.
Khen Rinpoche: It follows that it arises from ignorance. So, it arises from karma and afflictions, true origin. So, it follows that it is true suffering. It follows that bodhisattva superior has true suffering.
Student 11: That is why. I couldn’t understand why we say bodhisattva superior abandoned true suffering.
Khen Rinpoche: They abandoned, right?
Student 11: At that contaminated phenomenon I just cannot understand why we would say that they have abandoned true suffering.
Khen Rinpoche: Okay. We stop here. It will never end.