Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/lesson24.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:53.110258
================================================================================

Student 1: With regard to the truth of the cessation to suffering, in the presentation of the Four Noble Truths, there are two sets of cause and effects of phenomenon:
the truth of suffering is the result of the truth of origins of suffering, 
the truth of the cessation of suffering is the result of truth of the path leading to the cessation of suffering. 
Khen Rinpoche: What is your question? 
Student 1: I just wanted to clarify whether the truth of the cessation of suffering is it an impermanent phenomenon or a permanent phenomenon. The reason I am asking this question is because I have certain questions about the cessation of suffering. On one hand the cessation of suffering is a product. It is the result of the truth of the path leading to this cessation of suffering. When we looked at the word ‘cessation’, the word itself already indicates there is this factor of production, abiding and cessation. 
Khen Rinpoche: So your question is “Is truth of cessation impermanent or not?”
Student 1: On the other hand, when the cessation of suffering is achieved, the cessation of suffering will remained as a cessation of suffering forever and it will not change into something else. So in that way, the cessation of suffering is unchanging, this is a permanent phenomenon. When we look at these two different perspectives, how do we classify this cessation of suffering - Is it a product? Or a non product? Or is it an impermanent phenomenon? Or is it a permanent phenomenon? 
Khen Rinpoche: I understand your question now.
Student 1: I also inclined to think that mental image is impermanent.
Khen Rinpoche: Okay.
Student 1: To me, a mental object is something that co-exist with mental consciousness. There is no need for a mental image to be impermanent to account for the memory because a mind naturally possesses the innate cognitive ability to remember. For the CMWS, subsequent cognizer is valid cognizer. I find it difficult to accept that one will have mental consciousness, an impermanent phenomenon that arises voluntarily while the mental image is a permanent phenomenon. I thought mental image would be classified as a non-associated compositional factor. It is an appearing object in the mind. I know we have been told that emptiness of inherent existence is an impermanent phenomenon. The reason is that the conventional nature and the ultimate nature are posited as one entity with different isolates. The two isolates of the one entity must exist in congruent to each other. They should complement and support each other. They cannot exist as being the complete opposite of each other or two isolates of one entity is being directly opposed to each other. If one isolate is a permanent phenomenon, and the other isolate is an impermanent phenomenon, it follows that these two isolates are completely mutually exclusive entities. We cannot treat them as two isolates of the same entity. For the cup and the emptiness of the cup, when the cup ceases, the emptiness of the cup also ceases. While asking this question, I also mentally prepared to be rebuked from all sides. But to me is a qualm. Perhaps Khen Rinpoche can explain the different interpretation to the word ‘permanent’ in relation to a mental image, the cessation of suffering and the emptiness of the inherent existence. My understanding of permanent is something that is non-momentary. A non-momentary phenomenon is an unchanging phenomenon. And a non product is unproduced phenomenon is a non-functioning thing. 
Khen Rinpoche (In English): Too long…I don’t know what you are asking. 
The main thing is that you have to think about what is being discussed in the Tatagatha Essence and what was posited as the Tatagatha Essence. There are two parts:
- There is Tathagata Essence which is the factor of luminosity and awareness, which is the mind. 
- The emptiness of existence of mind is also posited as the Tatagatha Essence. 
So the emptiness of true existence is posited as the Tatagatha Essence. But the basis of emptiness, the factor of luminosity and awareness, which is the mind, is also Tatagatha Essence.
When the stains or defilements of the mind are removed through the force of the antidote, then the absence or void of the defilements is none other than the emptiness of the mind. That true cessation is achieved through the force of an antidote is not something other than the emptiness of the mind. It is not like when you have achieved true cessation that is something that is not the emptiness of the mind. It is not like that.
The mind has always been empty of existing truly since beginningless lifetime. For as long as the mind is in existence, the final nature of the mind is empty - the emptiness of true existence. It has always been like that – pure and undefiled. The emptiness of the mind is not something created through causes and conditions. That is why the natural Perfection of Wisdom is posited as emptiness because for as long as emptiness existed, it has always been undefiled by the defilements.
That factor of clarity, luminosity and awareness is the mind. When the mind is separated from the defilements then that mind becomes the wisdom truth body. The emptiness of that wisdom truth body is the nature body.
When somebody achieves the Path of Seeing and the release of the Path of Seeing, that mind is separated from a particular defilement, basically, the intellectually acquired or artificial conception of true existence. The cessation that is achieved is the abandonment of the artificial conception of true existence, which is the emptiness of that mind. It is just that at this point in time, the emptiness of the mind of this person who has achieved this abandonment is called true cessation; which is the abandonment of the artificial conception of true existence - the emptiness of that mind. Come the time when the person has abandoned the afflictive obscuration, the abandonment of the afflictive obscuration is still the suchness of that person’s mind. But at this juncture it is just given a name the abandonment which is the abandonment of the afflictive obscuration. 
Then comes a time when the mind is separated from every single obscuration including the knowledge obscuration, the emptiness of that mind is called the abandonment which is the abandonment of two obscurations. It is the same suchness of the mind. Because the mind is evolved, the suchness of that mind that is evolved is given a different name.
During the process of this whole evolution, the mind has evolved or changed. The suchness of the mind that is going through that process of evolution acquired different name. Different names are acquired because the mind has changed, not because of the suchness of the mind has changed. Suchness of the mind has never changed. As such, the suchness of the mind is uncompounded phenomenon.
As for the meaning generality or mental image, it is a bit difficult. When we talk about mental images, there is a factor which is specifically characterized and there is a factor which is conceptual construct. However, for us, these two are indistinguishably mixed and it is difficult for us to see the difference between the two. The point is the appearances that appear to a conceptual consciousness are not necessary conceptual as:
There are appearances that are conceptual, and 
There are appearances that are non-conceptual. 
One of the reason for understanding the four close placement of mindfulness is that one comes to understand that:
the class of the thoroughly afflicted class of phenomenon - true sufferings and true origins - are objects to be abandoned and
the true path and true cessation are objects to be cultivated.
One comes to understand this through wisdom. With wisdom, ones comes to understand what is to be abandoned and what is to be cultivated. Based on that, one develops an aspiration to cultivate that should be cultivated and abandon that should be abandoned.
So the main point is that one should understand that one has to have wisdom to understand what needs to be abandoned and what needs to be cultivated. On the basis on that, one develops an aspiration to actually abandon that should be abandoned and cultivate that should be cultivated. 
Then what follows after the four close placement of mindfulness is the four correct abandonings. Essentially the four correct abandonings is joyous perseverance. What is the entity?  Essentially is joyous perseverance. It is an enthusiasm for abandoning the objects of abandonment and enthusiasm for adopting the antidotes which are the objects of cultivation.
There are non-virtues that already arisen or has been generated. One has to abandon the non-virtue that one has already been generated. To do that, the power of support and the power of eradication are very important. 
In the previous lesson, I raised the qualm about the power of eradication, which essentially is regret. By just generating regret alone, does that lead to the purification of the negativities that has already been accumulated? Yes or no? I guess we probably have to say that if there is real, sincere and strong regret, it will lead to reduction or purification of the accumulated non-virtue. Just a sincere apology usually would be okay, let’s says, sincere apology following one has said something nasty or hurtful to someone. If one apologize sincerely for many times, it will works, isn’t it? Then both sides will forget about it.
In the event of accumulation of non-virtue, if one cultivates the power of support, which is going for refuge and generating the mind of enlightenment, and, in particular to have a strong regret, would reduce or purify the non-virtues that has already been generated. 
The first of the four abandoning is called the abandonment of the non-virtue that has already been generated. That abandonment does not refer to an action that has already ceased. It doesn’t mean; “The job is done. It has already been abandoned” but rather it is referring more to the action. It is not to be seen as a past tense, but rather the word ‘abandonment’ is more like a verb referring to a particular action that will be done in the future. 
Next is the generation of non-virtue that has not been generated. Simply what it means is not accumulating fresh negative karma or not engaging in new non-virtue i.e. one does that through applying the power of restraint. If we are able to apply the power of refraining from doing the action again, it makes a big difference to not generating new non-virtues.
Next is generating the virtues that have not been generated. With respect to the virtues that have already been generated, one should not have a sense of contentment but rather one should seek to increase those virtues that have already been generated. Whether one is generating the virtues that have not been generated or increasing the virtues that have been generated, one needs effort. One needs to actively bring about whether it is generating new virtues or increasing the virtues that have already been generated. One does so with enthusiasm and should not be content with just doing small little thing and thinking “This is enough merit!” but rather we should seek to increase those virtues that have already been generated. 
From the four powers, the generation of the virtues that have not been generated and the increase of virtues that have been generated go with the power of the antidote. The power of applying the antidote (remedy) is the condition for the generation of virtues that have not been generated and increasing the virtues that have been generated. As mentioned in the Lamrim literature under the power of applying the antidote (remedy), six are mentioned:
Reading or reciting teachings of Buddha
Recitation of dharani and mantra
Making offerings to buddhas,
Reciting names of buddhas
Erecting holy images
Meditation on emptiness (which is the best)
It is said that the meditation on emptiness is the most powerful way of applying the remedy. But you have to understand why it is so. In the beginning of Chapter 9: Wisdom of Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds, Shantideva said that all the teachings that came prior to this chapter are generally the teachings that were taught by the Buddha for developing wisdom. Wisdom here refers to the wisdom realizing selflessness. So whether it is a recitation of sutras or mantras, making offerings etc, at the end of the day, that is a preliminary for leading the sentient beings towards the development of the wisdom realizing selflessness.
While it is said that the root of our cyclic existence is the ignorance apprehending a self, we have to identify for ourselves what exactly is this ignorance which is an apprehension of a self, which is said to be the root of all our problems and samsara. The only one antidote to this ignorance apprehending a self is the wisdom realizing selflessness. This means to say that without this wisdom realizing selflessness, doesn’t matter what you do, there is no other way to defeat this ignorance that is the root of all our problems. So it is most vital to engage in hearing, reflecting and meditating in order to develop this wisdom realizing selflessness. At the same time we have to accumulate a lot of merits to purify our mind of obscurations and negativities.
We all have to ask ourselves; “Why do I need the dharma in the first place? What am I looking for?” You have to want the dharma from the depth of your heart. In order for that, you need to know why you need the dharma. You are all here to find out about the dharma and to educate yourself about the dharma. Do you ask yourself why are you doing this? What are you looking for? If you don’t see for yourself from the depth of your heart and don’t really know why dharma is so important and why you really need the dharma, then I think everything is going to be difficult. Until you get at least some real feeling from your heart how samsara sucks and how normal life sucks and it is really suffering, then just learning and studying the dharma alone will not have much effect on the mind. It is important to have some sense of renunciation from your heart. You really need to feel that normal life is really sucks. On top of that, you have to reach a point in time where you begin to see that the root of our problems is really our ego -ignorance. The only antidote is developing the wisdom realizing selflessness. It is only when you see that understanding from your heart, then you will be able to put up with difficulties in your learning and practice. You also will be able to just disregard any physical discomfort or challenges when you meet them in the course of your learning and practice. You have to reach that kind of stage where you can feel it. It is only when you are such a person with this minimum kind of experience will start to appreciate your own gurus. If you are such a person who is a bit sick of samsara and finding way out of samsara and looks for the dharma, especially looking for the wisdom realizing emptiness, and when you find someone who is qualified and can help you to get what you want, then definitely you will be so appreciative of that person. You will feel the kindness of that person. Then what is being mentioned in the teachings that the guru is kinder than the Buddha makes sense to you.
Let’s say that you are dying of thirst and then meet somebody who has water and gives a cup of water to you and that save you from death. Of course you will be so appreciative of that person. You will regard that person as so kind. But this is just for this one life alone. So for that person who feels that samsara sucks and is really looking for a way out, then when that person meets his qualified teacher or guru who can help and give the person of what he wants, which means freeing him from samsara forever and from life to life, then that guru’s kindness is without comparison and is so kind. So for such an individual who sees all of these points, obviously he can feel the kindness of the guru. Because he sees how the guru can benefit him all the lifetimes up to enlightenment, then it is not difficult for this person to sacrifice for the guru, even giving up the body, possessions, making offerings and so forth. It is not difficult for that person anymore. 
I think we have too much of learning here but without practice. We have too much talking and learning.  Of course in one way we are planting imprints, but no matter what imprints are planted, the mind doesn’t change at all. The mind does not change at all by just learning the dharma. So it is too much talking and too much learning. I think it is difficult for us to have the interest of dying to practice the dharma. We don’t have that kind of interest. 
We have been talking about the four correct abandoning, and essentially it is joyous perseverance; that means effort. You cannot have effort without enthusiasm. Basically you must have enthusiasm and from the heart you really want to abandon the objects of abandonments and adopt the antidotes to cultivate the practice. 
Next in the 37 harmonies of enlightenment is the set of the four legs of magical manifestation. They are essentially meditative stabilization. 
What is posited as the object of observation of the four legs of magical manifestation? Literally it is magical emanation as it is able to cause one thing to become many; and causing many things to become one.  As mentioned here in the text, the way to achieve calm abiding is the cultivation of concentration. In Maitreya’s Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes, there is an explanation of how one can develops calm abiding through cultivating the eight antidotes that counters the five faults.
Of the eight antidotes, the first four that are the antidote to the fault of laziness:
Faith, 
Aspiration, 
Effort 
Pliancy.
The aspiration (or yearning) for calm abiding (or concentration) is important before one can have any hope of achieving it. Before you can yearn for concentration, you first must have faith as faith is the root of aspiration. You need the faith of conviction; “It is really like this and this is absolutely necessary and beneficial. I need this.” It is from the faith of conviction that one has strong yearning (aspiration). If there is strong yearning, one would naturally put in effort and joyously persevere. You need to joyously persevere to put in a lot effort to achieve the goal. Through putting in the correct effort, when one achieves physical and mental pliancies, one would not be overcome by physical and mental challenges.
So we need faith, aspiration, joyous perseverance and pliancy for developing concentration. During the actual process of cultivating concentration, at the beginning it is extremely important to not forget the object of observation. Because forgetting the object of observation is a big fault. The remedy to that is mindfulness; which is not forgetting. The function of mindfulness is not forgetting.
On the basis of not forgetting the chosen object of observation, one then enters into the cultivation of concentration. But in the process, many challenges and obstacles will arise such as laxity or mental excitement. In order to recognize their arising, you need introspection (vigilance) which is essentially also a wisdom. It is introspection (vigilance) that detects the arising of the faults of laxity and excitement. But just detecting their arising is not sufficient. What do you do after you detect laxity and excitement are about to arise? You are supposed to apply whatever antidotes that is relevant to the fault that is arising right away. If vigilance detects the arising of either laxity or excitement, one has to apply the relevant antidote. So not applying the antidote when these are arising is then a fault. When laxity and excitement are not arising when the mind is in a peaceful, calm and undisturbed state i.e. in the absence of laxity and excitement, and if one applies an antidote at that time, then it is also a fault. It is the fault of over application. So one should not apply any antidote when there is no laxity or excitement arising. Rather one has to leave the mind in equanimity.
This is how it is explained in Maitreya’s Distinguishing the Middle from the Extremes for the cultivation of calm abiding through abandoning the five faults via applying the eight antidotes.
We have looked at all of these before and I thought to just to go through it briefly. Hopefully it can serves as a reminder of what we have learned. 
The other method for cultivating calm abiding is through the nine mental stages as explained in Maitreya’s Ornament of the Mahayana Sutra.  
The first mental stage is called placement. In the beginning you have to choose or decide on the object of observation i.e. something that you are going to focus your mind on. Once you have chosen an object for your mind to focus on in order to develop calm abiding, you have to stick to that object. You can’t be changing object every now and then. So you have to place your attention of mindfulness on the chosen object of observation. 
On the first stage of mental placement, you fix your mind on the chosen object of observation. At this first stage, probably you are not able to stay on the object for even more than a minute or two as the mind is just so distracted. After you have placed your mind on the chosen object of observation, the idea then is to extend your ability to stay on the object for a longer period of time of at least 5 to 10minutes; not just 1 or 2 minutes. That is where you have the second stages which is called continuous placement. At this stage of the development of the mind, one is probably very distracted. The mind is being distracted here and there. The idea is to pull the mind back on to the chosen object of observation and try to develop the ability to stay on the object for a longer period of time for 5 to 10 minutes. If you want to develop your mind and you want to meditate, you have to put in the time and effort.
The third mental stage is patchy placement. When one is at this stage, one has achieved some ability to abide on the object. There is some stability with regards to the mind ability to abide on the chosen object of meditation. But nevertheless, the mind can still be distracted.  So when the mind is distracted, then through the application of mindfulness and vigilance, one pulls the mind’s attention back onto the chosen object of meditation. So on the third mental stage, which is patchy placement, one has a fairly good idea of the both the cause and subtle form of laxity.
On the fourth mental stage, which is called close placement, one is improving on what was achieved in the third mental stage, i.e. one improves one’s ability with the application of mindfulness and awareness. 
During the fourth mental stage of close placement, one is pretty good with the ability to stay on the object of observation, which is quite stable and also fairly good clarity of the object of observation. 
On the fifth mental stage which called taming where one is able to stay on the object quite well and quite stable. There the object of observation is appearing clearly in the mind but the mind’s grip on the chosen object of observation is a bit loose because there is still subtle laxity at this stage. So it is due to laxity. 
Lama Tsongkhapa in his Lamrim Chenmo says that there were some Tibetan masters of the past said that when one reached this level, this is already a good meditation because one has the factor of clarity and the factor of stability and the mind is very relax. Because of this, the Tibetan masters said this is good meditation as you see the thing clearly, your mind is not running away and yet you are also relax. Lama Tsongkhapa said this is rubbish and said this is not good meditation at all.
I guess we may have the similar experiences even we are not at the fifth stage. Sometimes when we meditate, our mind is able to stay on the object and the mind is not disturbed and has some feel of clarity of the object and yet feeling very relax at the same time. We may feel really relax inside to the point we fall asleep after a while. The point is that if our meditation despite feeling very relaxes about it and that leads to fall asleep, that is not a good meditation at all.
Khen Rinpoche: You know what is the reason? You know why not good meditation if you fall asleep after that. 
The main point is that if your mind is becoming less and less clear, more and more dumb and finally leading to sleep; which itself is a derivative of ignorance.  Sleep is classified as a derivative of ignorance. If that is the case, that meditation cannot be a good meditation. It is a bad meditation because it is making your mind less and less clear and more and more dumb. How can it be a good meditation? It is making your mind worse, and not making your mind better.
We looked at all of these before in the Lamrim. You already know this provided you have not forgotten about it. If you have forgotten all of these that means you have not understood it in the first place. There is no such thing as knowing and ascertaining something and forgetting it. If you really know it, you won’t forget about it. Here I am saying that understanding something and forgetting something are mutually exclusive. 
Khen Rinpoche: You know the word mutually inclusive?
That is why Je Rinpoche Lama Tsongkhapa said that such a kind of meditation that makes your mind less and less clear, more and more dumb and more and more dull and finally even leading you to sleep is not a good meditation at all. It is really bad meditation. For it to be a good meditation and for your mind to develop, not only must there be clarity and stability (to be able stay on the object without being distracted), also the manner the mind holding onto the object must be fairly firm. The mind is very alert, has strength and energy to have a good hold of the object. If these characteristics are there, then it will make your mind better and better. Therefore at this mental stage, because of the great danger of being overcome by laxity, the meditator really has to do something to nullify the arising of laxity. The meditator has to do that by uplifting the mind such as thinking about the great benefits of having concentration and so forth. So the meditator has to uplift the energy of the mind such that there is the factor of stability, factor of clarity and there is also energy behind the mind manner of holding on to the chosen object of meditation. So that’s the fifth mental stage of taming. 
On the sixth mental stage, which is called pacification, probably there is no danger of being overcome by laxity. Because of uplifting the mind earlier on, there could be instances whereby the mind comes under the influence of distraction because of over lifting of the mind. 
Vigilance is extremely important on the fifth and sixth mental stags. On the sixth mental stage, because there is still the danger of the mind being distracted under the influence because of over-lifting of the mind, one has to notice the arising of distraction with strong vigilance. One can counteract that through thinking about the faults of distraction of bringing to mind the faults of distraction. 
The seventh stage is called thorough pacification. On this stagel, there is still the possibility of subtle excitement arising. Even if it does arise, without much effort one is able to overcome it. Of course the meditator still needs to put in a little effort but not much effort. He is able to overcome the subtle excitement.
The eighth mental stage is called single-pointed attention. On this stage, I guess there is no danger of excitement or laxity arising. The meditator is able to really stay on the chosen object for a long time. Let’s say if we allow the arising of excitement or laxity on this level but even if it does arise, it will be quickly pacified through the strong mindfulness and vigilance of the meditator. 
The ninth stage is called balance placement. On this stage, the meditator only needs to put in a little bit of effort to get into concentration. Once he gets into concentration, he is able to stay in that concentration for a long time naturally and spontaneously. So he needs a little bit of effort to get into it and once he is in it, then he is kind of cruises along.
Then there will come a time when the meditator achieves the physical pliancy follows by mental pliancy. So it is said that when the pliancies are achieved it marks the attainment of calm abiding. Then following the achievement of mental pliancy, the meditator experiences the bliss of mental pliancy followed by the bliss of physical pliancy.
There will then come a time when the meditator achieves mental pliancy followed by physical pliancy. Following the achievement of physical pliancy, the meditator experiences the bliss of physical pliancy followed by the bliss of mental  pliancy. It is said that when the bliss of these pliancies are achieved, this marks the attainment of calm abiding.
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know. I forgot if I got the wrong order. I am not sure. 
I guess there is mental pliancy when the mind is serviceable. Due to the serviceability then one achieves the serviceability of the winds in the body and that is the physical pliancy. First there is mental pliancy then the physical pliancy. 
The achieving the serviceability of the body, physical pliancy, is due to the smooth movement of the wind in the body. So after the achievement of the physical pliancy, comes the bliss of physical pliancy, and then follow by the bliss of mental pliancy. 
When all of these is achieved, because of the serviceability of the body and mind, the meditator does not find it tiring or boring or lazy because laziness is overcome once he has achieved all these. So that person has no difficulty engaging in virtue. When he is engaging in virtue, the mind is so enthusiastic and so happy. So when engaging in virtue with the body like making prostrations, when we look at the meditator, he is full of energy. He would not feel tired or bored. Unlike us, when we think of those occasions when we have to make prostrations.
Khen Rinpoche: So how to achieve enlightenment? I don’t know.
With some understanding of all of these will probably help us see how important calm abiding is and having the realization is so important. In a way it also shows that these contaminated or appropriated aggregates, as we called it, can be transformed. With calm abiding, not talking about enlightenment, there will be quite a big transformation that happens to not just the mind but even the body. 
The calm abiding is really the basis for these four legs of magical manifestation. To be able to do all these magical transformations you need calm abiding and perfect concentration. It is said that bodhisattvas with these legs of magical manifestation can travel to purelands to receive teachings. Then on the great path of accumulation, one achieves the concentration called the stream of dharma (or stream of doctrine) whereby the bodhisattva is able to see the supreme emanation bodies directly and receive teachings of that. All these happen on the basis of the needs of calm abiding. So calm abiding is really important. 
Extract from BP2 Lesson 27 of Heart Sutra and Stages of the Path (the Six Perfections)
Today we will look at achieving calm abiding through the nine mental stages that are explained in Maitreya’s Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras.
In order to achieve single-pointed concentration, first it is extremely important to gather and rely on the preconditions for developing calm abiding. These were explained earlier. The preconditions include having contentment and little desire, completely giving up many activities and the hustle and bustle of life, observing pure ethics and so forth.
It is mentioned in the teachings that keeping pure ethics is an extremely important precondition for developing concentration. At the very least one must intentionally refrain or restrain one’s body and speech from committing non-virtues. This is the minimum.
The nine mental stages, the six powers and the four types of attention
1 Placement—power of hearing—tight engagement 
The first of the nine mental stages is translated as mental placement in the LRCM. Perhaps you could say it is settling the mind. At this first stage, you are settling or placing your mind on the object of meditation. This is achieved through the power of hearing. 
Six powers are needed for developing concentration as we progress through the nine mental stages. Of the six powers, the first is the power of hearing.
Before you can settle your mind on an object of observation, first you must hear the instructions for doing so from another person. You must be introduced to the kinds of objects that you can settle your mind upon and so forth. Through hearing and understanding the instructions, you decide on your object of meditation and then you place your mind on the object exactly according to the instructions you have received. So through the power of hearing, you try to settle your mind on that object. 
At this initial stage, when you are trying to settle your mind on the object of observation, there must be tight engagement. We are talking about forcibly engaging in or attempting to tighten the focus of your mind on the object of meditation. It is said in the teachings that at this initial stage, settling your mind on an object of observation is challenging and difficult and you are only able to do so for a short while. 
The analogy used in the teachings is of bees flitting from flower to flower. The bees only land and stay on a flower for a short time before moving on to another flower. This is an analogy of one’s attempt at settling one’s mind.  
The first mental stage is called placement (or mental placement).
At this stage, one is only able to settle the mind on the object for a very short period of time.  
Placement is achieved through the power of hearing.
At this level, there is a need for tight engagement (or tight focus). This is the first among the four types of attention.
 2 Continuous placement—power of reflection—tight engagement 
When one attains the second mental stage, one is able to settle the mind on the object of meditation for a longer period of time. Therefore the second mental stage is called continuous placement. 
At the second mental stage, one’s ability to set the mind on the object of meditation for a longer period of time does not come about through the power of hearing. It comes about through the power of reflection, i.e., constantly thinking about and reflecting on the object of meditation. Focusing on the object of meditation, one is able to place the mind on that object for a longer time. As such, one’s quality of mindfulness on the second mental stage is better than the mindfulness on the first mental stage. This is saying that the quality of mindfulness that comes about through the power of reflection is better than the quality of the mindfulness that comes from the power of hearing. 
Just like the first mental stage, on the second mental stage, there is also the need for tight engagement. Among the four types of attention, the first is tight engagement. This is required on the first two mental stages:  
At the first mental stage, the mind is barely able to abide on the chosen object of meditation. It does not abide for a long time as it is a distracted mind.  
At the second mental stage, one is able to abide on the object for longer periods of time. 
In that sense, there is this continuity of the ability of the mind to place or set its attention on the object.
3 Patchy placement—power of mindfulness—interrupted engagement 
The third mental stage is called patchy placement (also called patched placement or resetting). 
At the third mental stage, the mind abides on the object of meditation for most of the time. At this level, there is the great danger of laxity and excitement arising. One needs strong mindfulness in order to notice the arising of laxity and excitement so that immediately upon their arising, one applies the antidotes to remove them. Therefore there is a need for strong mindfulness and the third mental stage is achieved through the power of mindfulness. 
At the third mental stage, when the mind comes under the influence of laxity or excitement, the mind becomes distracted. Strong mindfulness is required to notice such distraction. The function of mindfulness is non-forgetfulness of the object of meditation. When one has strong mindfulness, even when one is distracted, one immediately notices this and returns one’s attention back to the object of meditation. Hence this is called patchy placement or resetting, i.e., one is resetting the attention of one’s mind back to the object of meditation. This powerful mindfulness on the third mental stage is a continuity of the mindfulness that arose on the second mental stage. At the second mental stage, through the power of continuous reflection, one developed mindfulness. This mindfulness continues on and at the third mental stage, one seeks to make it stronger. 
4 Close placement—power of mindfulness—interrupted engagement 
The fourth mental stage is called close placement or close setting. This is also achieved through the power of mindfulness. Both the third and the fourth mental stages are achieved through the power of mindfulness. However, there is a difference between these two stages. 
At the third mental stage, patchy placement, through the power of strong mindfulness, one resets the attention of one’s mind back to the object of meditation when the mind is distracted. This is achieved through the power of strong mindfulness. 
The fourth mental stage involves strong mindfulness as well. The difference is that on the fourth mental stage, one is relying on the power of strong mindfulness to keep the mind from being distracted in the first place. The ability to do this on the fourth mental stage is a result of the strong mindfulness that was developed on the third mental stage. 
At the third mental stage, one’s mindfulness is being developed because every time one notices that the mind is distracted, one immediately pulls back one’s attention. When one gets distracted again, one pulls it back again. Such cultivation of one’s mindfulness on the third mental stage gives rise to the more powerful mindfulness that occurs on the fourth mental stage. With that powerful mindfulness, one is able to place the mind on the object without letting it be distracted. 
5 Taming—power of introspection—interrupted engagement 
The fifth mental stage is called taming or disciplining. 
As mentioned earlier, the third and fourth mental stages are achieved through the power of mindfulness. The fifth and the sixth mental stages are developed through the power of introspection, i.e., one develops a very strong introspection at these levels. As we had seen in the earlier lessons, powerful introspection arises from powerful mindfulness. 
Due to the tight engagement with the object of meditation on the fourth mental stage -one is able to keep one’s attention on the object of meditation without any distraction - there is the danger of the mind becoming slack and laxity arising. One needs to stop this at the fifth mental stage. This is done through the power of introspection. It is only with introspection that one is able to notice that there is laxity in the mind. When laxity is detected, one immediately takes action against it. When the mind is lax, i.e., there is slackness of the mind, one needs to uplift and cultivate delight in the mind. One of the ways to do this is to reflect on the qualities of concentration. One overcomes laxity in this way. 
6 Pacification—power of introspection—interrupted engagement 
The sixth mental stage is called pacification. 
At the fifth mental stage, through the power of introspection, one notices the slackness of one’s mind. When one notices there is laxity, one needs to uplift the mind and generate delight in cultivating concentration. One works at eliminating laxity in this way. 
When one achieves that, one moves on to the sixth mental stage. At the sixth mental stage, the likelihood of laxity arising is minimal. Laxity may not even arise but due to uplifting the mind on the fifth mental stage, there is the danger now of the mind being distracted. There is the danger of excitement. One needs to recognize these dangers with introspection. 
The way to deal with such potential distractions on the sixth mental stage is to recall and reflect on the faults of distraction. By doing this, one pacifies the mind that does not take delight in concentration.  
At the fifth mental stage, there is a danger of laxity arising.
 At the sixth mental stage, there is a danger of excitement and distraction arising
In order to recognize that these dangers are arising and to be able to deal with them, one needs very strong introspection. Hence the fifth and the sixth mental stages are achieved through the power of introspection.
7 Complete pacification—power of joyous effort—interrupted engagement 
The seventh mental state is called complete pacification. 
The seventh and the eighth mental stages are achieved through the power of joyous effort. 
At the seventh mental stage, laxity does not arise but there is still the danger of excitement arising and the danger of scattering. However these two are now easily pacified with a little bit of effort.
Of the four types of attention, the attention pertaining to the third to the seventh mental stages is called interrupted engagement. During these mental stages, the mind is not able to abide completely on the object of meditation all the time. The placement of the mind on its object of meditation is interrupted every now and then by laxity and excitement. Therefore the attention during these stages is called interrupted engagement. 
8 Single-pointed attention—power of joyous effort—uninterrupted engagement 
The eighth mental state is literally called making single-pointed. At the eighth mental stage one’s concentration will not be interrupted by either laxity or excitement. 
With effort, one is able to place one’s attention on the object continuously without being interrupted by laxity and excitement. It is said that on the eighth mental stage, just by relying a little on mindfulness and introspection, one is able to place one’s attention on the object of meditation without any interruption from laxity and excitement. 
Of the four types of attention, the third type that is involved with the eighth mental stage is called uninterrupted engagement. It is called uninterrupted engagement because one’s engagement with the object of meditation is uninterrupted by laxity and excitement. 
9 Even placement—power of thorough acquaintance—effortless engagement 
The ninth mental state is called even placement or setting in equipoise. 
At the eighth mental stage, with the application of a little effort, mindfulness and introspection, one is able to place one’s mind on the object of meditation without being interrupted by laxity and excitement. 
At the ninth mental stage, the mind spontaneously settles and remains on the object of meditation without effort. Of the six powers, the ninth mental stage is achieved through the power of thorough acquaintance. 
Of the four types of attention, effortless engagement is involved with the ninth mental stage because the mind is effortlessly and spontaneously abiding on the object. 
At the ninth mental stage, one’s concentration is completely freed of laxity and excitement, i.e., it will not be affected by laxity and excitement at all. One’s mind now effortlessly and spontaneously settles on its object simply by turning one’s attention towards it. One no longer needs to work at it. Hence there is no need for mindfulness and introspection here. 
Laxity and excitement do not arise on the eighth mental stage. Nevertheless one still needs to apply some mindfulness and introspection whereas at the ninth mental stage, there is no need for any mindfulness or introspection. These two mental stages are similar in that both are not affected by laxity or excitement. But on the eighth mental stage, there is still the need for some mindfulness and introspection whereas at the ninth mental stage, there is no need for mindfulness and introspection as the mind now effortlessly and spontaneously settles on its object of meditation by just turning the attention of the mind to the object. 
When one reaches the ninth mental stage, it is as if one has gained control of or mastery over one’s mind but one has not achieved calm abiding yet. A mind of the desire realm With regard to the mind of a person who has reached the ninth mental state, is that a mind of the desire realm or the form realm? It is a mind of the desire realm. 
The Measure For The Accomplishment Of Calm Abiding
What is the dividing line between achieving calm abiding and not achieving calm abiding? One has not achieved calm abiding yet even though one is abiding on the ninth mental state. Only when that concentration is conjoined or qualified by the bliss of pliancy, only then is it calm abiding. Otherwise it is not calm abiding. 
Divisions of pliancy  
There are two forms of pliancy: (1) mental pliancy and (2) physical pliancy.
There are also two forms of the bliss of pliancy: 
(1) the bliss of physical pliancy and
(2) the bliss of mental pliancy. 
Mental pliancy is the antidote to the negative tendencies of the mind.
Physical pliancy is the antidote to the negative tendencies of the body.
Order of arising 
Of the two types of pliancy, mental pliancy arises first followed by physical pliancy
This is then followed by the arising of the bliss of physical pliancy. 
After that comes the bliss of mental pliancy.  
This is the order of their arising:
Mental pliancy  physical pliancy  bliss of physical pliancy  bliss of mental pliancy
Initially when the bliss of mental pliancy arises, it arises strongly and with such force that it is difficult for it to go hand-in-hand with concentration. When the force of that bliss of mental pliancy gradually subsides and is balanced, i.e., of equal measure with concentration, that is when calm abiding is achieved for the first time. 
Then the force of that pliancy having arisen for the first time gradually diminishes. In fact, it is not that pliancy has been exhausted and goes away. However, that gross pliancy has moved the mind excessively, so when it neutralizes, unshakable pliancy that is delicate like a shadow and in accord with meditative stabilization arises. When the joy has disappeared, the mind remains firmly on its object, and calm abiding free from the restlessness of agitation through great joy is achieved. 
In short, when concentration is conjoined with the bliss of pliancy, then it is calm abiding. Otherwise it is not. This is the dividing line between calm abiding and that which is not calm abiding. The Lam Rim Chen Mo says: 
In summary, when your mind is serviceable, energy and mind focus as one, so the energy becomes serviceable. At that time, an extraordinary physical pliancy occurs, and when this happens, exceptional concentration arises in your mind. This, in turn, brings forth an exceptionally serviceable energy. (Page 86)
Extract from BP1 Lesson 16 Ornament for Clear Realizations
Four thorough abandonings   
The objects of observation of the four thorough abandonings are:-
virtues already generated
virtues not yet generated
non-virtues already generated
non-virtues that are not yet generated
The four thorough abandonings are in the entity of effort.
How does one meditate on the four thorough abandonings?  One must first generate aspiration. From aspiration comes effort (or joyous perseverance) and after this comes stabilisation through the thorough placement of the mind.
In order to generate virtue not yet generated, one must first generate aspiration. This is followed by effort (or joyous perseverance). Then one has to single-pointedly place one’s mind on that endeavour. Laxity and excitement will arise similar to what happens when one is working on developing single- pointed concentration. 
When there is laxity in the mind, one needs to uplift the mind by reflecting on the benefits of generating that virtue. This will help to uplift and make the mind happy. Then one can hold on firmly to the virtuous object.
When there is excitement in the mind, one needs to meditate on death and impermanence and the faults of cyclic existence. This is to bring the mind back to the virtuous object when the mind is distracted. 
The point is that when one is putting in effort to generate the virtue that is not yet generated, one does this without falling under the influence of laxity or excitement. One has to single-pointedly concentrate on that virtue.
In Maitreya’s Discrimination between the Centre and the Extremes, it states that the purpose of meditating on these four thorough abandonings is to weaken all the phenomena of the discordant class and to increase the class of antidotes. 
Another purpose is to be able to develop the four legs of magical manifestation quickly. 
The four thorough abandonings come after the four close placements of mindfulness. By meditating on the four close placements of mindfulness, one can identify clearly what is to be abandoned and what is to be cultivated. Then when one meditates on the four thorough abandonings, one strives to overcome the discordant class by identifying clearly the antidotes to the discordant class and to generate virtue. 
When one meditates on the four thorough abandonings in relation to non-virtue, one abandons those non-virtues already generated and one strives not to generate non-virtues that are not yet generated. In relation to virtue, one increases the virtues already generated and generate virtues not yet generated. 
The definition of a thorough abandoning is an exalted knower engaged in a path that is an effort that delights in rejecting and adopting abandonments and antidotes [respectively]. 
The four thorough abandonings are in the nature of effort that acts to:
thoroughly abandon non-virtues already generated
not generate non-virtues that are not yet generated
increase virtues already generated
generate virtues not yet generated
The essence of the definition is that the four thorough abandonings is a path and that it is in the entity of effort.  
Boundary: The four thorough abandonings exist from the path of accumulation through to the buddha ground.
The four thorough abandonings of the Mahayana are superior to that of Hinayana but no special reasons are given other than saying that the four thorough abandonings are a meditation on the antidotes to the discordant class which is conjoined with special method and wisdom. 
There is also an explanation on how the four thorough abandonings are connected with the four opponent powers in purification practices. In the commentary on the Abhidharma, it is mentioned:-
thoroughly abandoning non-virtues already generated is related to the power of basis (or reliance) and the power of eradication (or regret). 
not generating non-virtues that are not yet generated is related to the power of restraint
increasing virtues already generated and generating virtues not yet generated are subsumed under the power of the antidote (or remedy). 
There are different ways of relating the four thorough abandonings to the four opponent powers but the above seems to be one of the better ones.
In short, in terms of non-virtue, if you haven’t  done it, don’t do it and if you have done it, try to abandon it and make sure not to do it again. In terms of virtue, if you have not yet done so, generate it and if you have already done so,  increase it. As the abandonings are in the entity of effort, it mean putting in effort not to commit any non-virtues or let them manifest in our minds. For those non-virtues that have already arisen, it means putting in the effort not to let them arise again. The path that strives in these four things is the thorough abandonings. 