Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/lesson1.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:50.769028
================================================================================


The verses from Vajra Cutter Sutra that we usually recite before class
which say:
  Do not commit any non-virtuous actions,
  Perform only perfect virtuous actions,
  Subdue your mind thoroughly,
  This is the teaching of the Buddha.
Simply speaking, it is saying that we should abandon all non-virtuous,
strives in cultivating virtues and discipline our mind. As such, this is
like a short summary of the Buddha’s teachings.
Why should we abandon committing any non-virtuous actions? Even if it is
something that is of small non-virtue or something insignificant, why
should we abandon all non-virtues? This is because we don’t like suffering.
The only result that will arise from non-virtue is suffering.
We need to perform perfect virtuous actions. Why? All of us want happiness,
but we are not satisfied with just a little bit of happiness. If possible,
we would want real, permanent and everlasting happiness, i.e. something
that doesn’t change. Since we want real unchanging happiness, then we have
to engage in perfect virtuous actions.
The verse says “Perform only perfect virtuous actions”, then what
constitutes perfect virtuous action? A perfect virtuous action is an action
that is done not influenced or motivated by either attachment to the
happiness of this life, or attachment to future life happiness. It has to
be a virtue that is done looking for the happiness of nirvana - liberation
from samsara. If we want real, permanent and everlasting happiness, and the
freedom from samsara, then we need to create the cause by engaging in the
perfect virtuous actions.
So in not committing non-virtue and committing perfect virtuous action,
that is where we have the presentation of action/karma and their effects.
Whatever actions we accumulate, on their own they will never ever go to
waste:
    - when we accumulate non-virtues, we will definitely experience the
      result of suffering, and
    - when we engage in virtue, we will experience the result of happiness.
It is extremely difficult to understand the workings of karma and its
effect, especially to understand the intricacies behind the workings of
karma and its effect. This is not say that we can’t come to an
understanding of the workings of karma and its effect through reflections
and analysis, and through using reasons and logic. We can come to quite a
good understanding of the validity of karma and its effects through
reasoning, in particular, if we understand what an enlightened being is,
and understand what omniscience is. As the Buddha being the omniscient one,
we will be able to trust the Buddha’s proclamation and explanation on the
workings of karma and its effects.
Through such a practice, even if we managed to achieve permanent
everlasting happiness for ourselves, and free ourselves from the cycle of
death and rebirth through achieving nirvana, that is not the end of the
road. Even if we have achieved nirvana, we still lack the full capacity or
the ability to work for the welfare of others and to benefit all sentient
beings. Just achieving permanent everlasting happiness for ourselves alone
is not appropriate and is not correct, therefore, we also must strive to
gain the full capacity and the ability to do perfect work for all sentient
beings. In order to do that, we have to overcome our self-cherishing
attitude. In terms of the obscurations to be abandoned, we need to overcome
the knowledge obscurations.
Even if we have achieve permanent everlasting happiness for ourselves, that
is the peace of nirvana, our own purposes have not been brought to
culmination. That is we have not achieved our highest potential yet. If we
have not reached the fullest potential, then it goes without saying we will
not be able to also do perfect work for others, and we will not able to
fulfill the welfare of sentient beings. Even if we have achieved liberation
from cyclic existence, it is not that our mind is completely separated from
every single defilements or obscurations, as there is still something that
obscures the mind, which is known as the knowledge obscurations, and that
prevents us from being omniscient.
So even we have achieved liberation we have not yet remove that
obscuration. As such, it is said that we have not fulfilled our fullest
potential. If there is still an obscuration obscuring our mind, then there
is really no way that we can do perfect work for all sentient beings. As
such, we need to enter the Mahayana path, the path to enlightenment that is
conjoined with the altruistic intention to achieve enlightenment for all
sentient beings. Then one generates the wisdom realizing emptiness. Upon
generating the wisdom realizing emptiness, then one seeks to develop it
further and further to its fullest capacity. That is where one achieves
enlightenment.
“Subdue the mind thoroughly, this is the teachings of the Buddha” is a
short verse that many people recite every day. It is something that we can
commit to memory and recite it daily as a way of reminding ourselves the
points that I have just talked about.
The verse that comes after that in the prayer is:
   A star, a visual aberration, a flame of a lamp,
   An illusion, a drop of dew, or bubble,
   A dream, a flash of lightening, a cloud,
   See conditioned things as such!
I have explained this in the past. Anyway, there is no harm going through
this again, because if you have some ideas of the meaning of this verse,
and you can reflect on it regularly on a daily basis, it can be very
helpful especially when you meet with challenges in your life.
Let’s take the verse that we have just discussed, “Do not commit any non-
virtue”. So whenever we meet with problems in our lives, and if we do
remember that verse, then we can just remind ourselves that all the
problems that we meet in our lives are the result of not having abandoned
non-virtues in the past. Basically we get into trouble because we didn’t
follow the Buddha’s advice. Or whenever we meet with difficulties or
challenges and having unhappy mind, we can tell ourselves that the result
of having unhappy mind comes from an undisciplined mind or an unsubdued
mind. Actually that is the reality. That is the truth. It is very clear.
The reason why we suffer and are unhappy is because our mind aren’t
disciplined (unsubdued, untrained). All the problems and unhappiness come
from that. If the mind is disciplined, and the more disciplined it is, the
more subdued it is, we will experience less unhappiness and problems. In
fact, if the mind is completely trained (subdued, disciplined), then it
doesn’t matter what happens on the outside. I guess there is really no way
for that person to be unhappy. Whether we get affected by challenge or
problem, it depends on whether the mind is subdued or not. This is obvious
and clearly evident.
If we really understand and are convinced that the main cause of suffering
is not outside but is inside, it does makes a huge difference to our
worldview. Then many things become easier to handle. That is reality. But
that is not how we see the world because whenever we experience problems or
challenges, instinctively we always think that it is something out there
and we point the finger outside of us “It is nothing to do with me. It is
not my fault. It is because of this situation or that external
circumstance, or that idiot, or that person.” It is always something
outside. We never think that the source of the problem comes from our
undisciplined mind. We never even think we are at fault. We always think
that it is something or somebody outside. When we have this kind of
worldview, we can check whether the problem or unhappiness that we are
experiencing becomes bigger or smaller. Not only does the problem not go
away, it becomes bigger and bigger.
When we put the blame for all our problems, whether big or small, on the
outside, or whether on the situation or somebody out there, we notice that
the problem and unhappiness doesn’t go away or get smaller, but it becomes
bigger. In fact, many a times it becomes bigger and bigger. Then obviously
it must be a sign that we have gotten it wrong. It is a sign telling us
that our belief that the problem is outside is wrong belief. All these come
back to not following Buddha’s advice, and because we didn’t subdue our
minds.
If we are able to see for ourselves and really convinced that the main
cause of suffering is not outside, but is inside, then whatever problems we
experienced is the result of some non-virtue  karma accumulated by
ourselves in the past. In addition, with the heartfelt admission understand
that whatever problems we experienced and the way we deal with problem when
we feel unhappy or difficult is actually due to our own unsubdued
(undisciplined) mind. When we put these two together, then it makes a huge
difference. This is like the bedrock of the practice. When we say to
achieve happiness and to live life, this is like the bedrock; the very
foundation. It doesn’t matter whether you are able to do extensive profound
studies and all those complicated things, or whether you are not able to
study a lot about the Buddhadharma, or whatever it is, this recognition and
understanding that the problem doesn’t come from the outside  but comes
from inside is like the foundation for everything else.
In the verse which starts “Like a star, a visual aberration, a flame of a
lamp,” -  “a star” is an introduction to reality; i.e. what constitutes
reality. There are two facets of reality:
 - a superficial level of reality and
-  a deeper level of reality.
In technical language, we call it the two truths - the conventional truth
and the ultimate truth.
In the mind of ordinary beings such as ourselves, we do have many different
valid states of minds that are able to understand the superficial level of
reality. We called them valid cognizer, specifically in this case, we
called them conventional valid cognizer. Examples are the minds within us
that realize the table, a flower, a cup. The mind that realizes such things
is called conventional valid cognizer.
The mind is able to realize these things based on the appearance of those
phenomena. The objects that are realized by the conventional valid cognizer
are conventional truths.
We have many of such minds which we called conventional awareness  or
conventional valid cognizer that do realize things like apple, fruit,
flower etc.  Object such as an apple, table  or fruit does appears to such
a mind. In accordance with the appearance to this mind, we have to say that
that object exists.
How do we posit whether something exists or not? How do we posit whether
flower or fruit exists?
Based on its appearing to the mind that realizes it, and in this case a
conventional valid cogniser. As it appears we say that it exists. Whether
it is a fruit or a flower, it appears to a conventional mind (conventional
valid cognizer). As it appears, it is known to exist.
Is there something more to the flower that is appearing to a conventional
valid cogniser? Is there something more to that appearance? Is there
something deeper?  Or is the flower just the mere appearance? Is there
another level of reality to the flower? That is what we need to think.
A vast majority of people like ourselves will not see anything else other
than what appears to us. When a flower appears to us, it appears to us in a
certain way. That appearance is what constitute the flower, and there is
nothing beyond that. It is just that one dimension reality. We don’t think
that there is something beyond that or something deeper than that. We don’t
see it and we don’t even know that there is something more than that mere
appearance.
We don’t see beyond the flower. At most we just interact with the
appearance of the flower. That is about it. We don’t see that there is
another dimension to that flower. In fact, there is something deeper than
that. There is another level of reality which we don’t see it. Although it
is there but we don’t see it. Why we don’t see it? This is because our mind
is obscured. Our mind is polluted by the predisposition of ignorance, the
imprints of ignorance. As long as our mind is obscured by these
obscurations or defilements, we will not be able to see the deeper truth of
reality.
To those conventional states of minds in our continuum, all kinds of object
appear, starting from form, sound, smell, taste  and touch. All kinds of
object appear to the conventional awareness. Those that actually exist do
appear to the conventional awareness. But even the fabrication of reality
i.e. things that do not actually exist, and such non-existence do appears
to the perspective of these conventional awareness. Basically we have a
mismatched of rights and wrongs, i.e. anything can appear to the
conventional awarenesses. At the same time, whatever it is appearing,
whether it is an existence or non-existence, that conventional awareness is
polluted by the stain or latency of ignorance.
It is said that to the mind polluted by the latency of ignorance, all kinds
of thing can appear. An analogy given here is of how stars appear at night.
A dark night is likened to the darkness or fogginess of ignorance. Just as
all the stars can appear in a dark night, likewise a whole variety of
appearances can appear to the consciousness that is affected (stained,
polluted) by the latency of ignorance. When we are able to separate the
defilements or ignorance from the mind, then the mind is able to see the
final nature; which is the deepest level of reality of whatever object in
question. As mentioned earlier, each object or phenomenon has two levels of
reality – a superficial one and a deeper level of reality. So when the mind
is separated from the latency of ignorance, the mind can see the deepest
and final nature of that phenomenon.  The object that is ascertained by
such a mind is called ultimate truth.
It is said that as long as it is an existence or phenomenon, it has two
levels of reality:
   1. A superficial level of reality and
   2. A deeper level of reality, or the ultimate nature
    - The superficial level of reality of any particular phenomenon in
      question that appears to a conventional awareness is posited a
      conventional truth.
    - The deepest nature of reality of the object which appears to the mind
      is called the ultimate truth.
These two truths are realized by their respective valid cognizer: -
- A valid cognizer distinguishing a conventionality
- A valid cognizer distinguishing an ultimate.
While at night we can see all the stars in the sky, and that is the analogy
for conventional truth. In the day time, what we see is just the sky, a
vacuity, a space, an emptiness like thing. As we don’t see stars in the
day, that is analogous to the experience of the person who has directly
realized the ultimate nature of all phenomena because in the perspective of
the mind directly perceiving the ultimate nature of all phenomena, no
conventional truth appears. Nothing appears to the perspective of the mind
directly realizing the ultimate nature of the phenomenon except emptiness.
Although a conventional valid cogniser is a mistaken consciousness,
nevertheless it is valid or correct with regards to what is appearing to
it. The object that it realizes such as flower is valid and is correct with
respect to that phenomenon although it is a mistaken phenomenon.
Although a conventional valid cognizer is valid with respect to the object
it is realizing, for example, if it realizes a flower, it is valid with
respect to what it is realizing. It realizes flower as a flower, right? But
nevertheless, conventional valid cognizer is considered as mistaken
consciousness. In what way they are mistaken? They are mistaken in that
whatever appears to them.
Yes, the flower appears, but at the same time the flower appears as truly
existent while it is not. The flower appears as inherently existent while
it is not. In that sense, conventional valid cognizer is mistaken in that
regard.
Conventional states of mind which is a valid state of mind, but not all
conventional states of mind are valid. Although conventional valid states
of mind (conventional valid cognizer) are valid with respect to what they
are realizing, but nevertheless, they are still considered mistaken in that
whatever they realize, they realize it, but at the same time, the
realization comes with an appearance of a fabrication of reality.
An apple appears as truly existent while it is not truly existent. In that
sense, it is considered as mistaken. That is why according to the highest
school of thought, the Consequence Middle Way School, although conventional
valid cognizer is a valid cognizer but nevertheless are mistaken.
A wisdom directly realizing emptiness which is not a mistaken
consciousness. Why? Because in the perspective of that wisdom directly
realizing emptiness or in the perspective of a superior’s meditative
equipoise, only emptiness appears. Nothing else! No conventional truths, no
conventionality appears. Why? Because that mind, that meditative equipoise,
is not affected by the stains or the predisposition of ignorance.
To the conventional mind (conventional awareness), all kinds of thing can
appear includes things that exist and things that don’t exist. As for
conventional valid cognizer, a phenomenon can present itself and appear to
this conventional valid cognizer. This conventional valid cognizer realizes
the phenomenon that is appearing as it is. Therefore, it is  able to posit
the existence of that phenomenon. That is why we need to deepen our
understanding of the working of our mind i.e. how our mind works. We only
have conventional awareness, and that is pretty obvious. The word
“conventional awareness” includes a lot of things, both correct states of
mind and completely illogical perverse and wrong states of mind. So
conventional awareness includes both the right mind and wrong mind. For
example, there are perverse consciousness or wrong consciousness. A wrong
consciousness or perverse consciousness is a conventional awareness. It is
wrong because the thing that a wrong consciousness believes in actually
does not exist. Whereas to a conventional awareness that is a valid
cognizer (hence the word “conventional valid cognizer”), phenomena that
appears to a conventional valid cognizer. Based on its appearance,  this
conventional valid cognizer is able to posit and ascertain its existence.
Those phenomena that appears to the conventional valid cognizer do exist.
We see apples, fruits, tables, flowers and so forth. The mind that sees
these different objects are valid in that whatever is appearing, for
example, the apple that appears to the eye consciousness (which is a
conventional valid cognizer) exists. As it appears it function. Whereas the
mind thinking that rabbit has horn,  the famous example, and in the
perspective of that mind, it believes the rabbit has horn. It doesn’t
matter what the mind believes but in reality there isn’t a rabbit with
horns. Although in the perspective of that wrong consciousness there is a
rabbit with horns, but in reality there isn’t a rabbit with horns. As such,
the mind apprehending a rabbit’s horn is a perverse consciousness (wrong
consciousness). It is not a valid cognizer. It is a conventional awareness
but it is not a conventional valid cognizer because it is a wrong
consciousness.
Then it gets a bit complicated. We talk about conventional states of mind
which are valid ones, i.e. the correct one. When we say a conventional
valid cognizer realizing a flower, it is valid with respect to the flower.
It realizes flower and it posits flower, but yet at the same time, the
flower appears as truly existent. While there isn’t such a thing as a truly
existence phenomena but nevertheless whatever appears to a conventional
valid cognizer appears as truly existent. So there is a part of that
experience that is wrong and is mistaken but yet it is a valid cognizer.
To the conventional valid cognizer apprehending a flower, the flower
appears but the flower appears as truly existent. In reality, is the flower
truly existent? Does the flower exist from its own side? Does the flower
exist inherently? No! But still it the flower appears as truly existent to
the conventional valid cognizer realizing flower.
To the conventional valid cognizer seeing a flower and realizing a flower,
the flower appears as truly existent (inherently existent) while it is not
truly existent. For if the flower exists in the way it appears, that is if
the flower is indeed truly existent (inherently existent), that would be
the deepest final nature of that flower. If that is the case, then this
truly existent flower would have to appear to the wisdom that directly
perceives the ultimate nature of the flower. But to the wisdom directly
perceiving the ultimate nature of the flower, the flower does not appear.
So in the perspective of the wisdom directly perceiving the ultimate nature
of the flower, the flower does not appear at all.
If it is an appearance to a conventional valid cognizer it is not
necessarily an existent. To illustrate that, an example of visual
aberration, such as seeing falling hair or seeing a shimmering mirage is
given. As for the shimmering mirage, while there is no water there, it seem
that there is body of water. Some people with certain medical conditions do
see falling hairs while there is no falling hairs. This is to illustrate
that whatever appears to a conventional valid cognizer is not necessarily
an existent. If whatever appears necessarily exists then even to those
whose eyes are not affected by medical condition should also see falling
hairs.
Khen Rinpoche: Those who come to class long time I think should have no
problem. Those new ones might have some difficulties there. We haven’t
touch the next topic. Those who are here first time read this (handout)
when you will go back after the first class.
Although under certain conditions a mirage appears and we might be led to
believe that it is an actual body of water while there isn’t any water over
there. Likewise, while everything that appears to a conventional valid
cognizer also appears as truly existent, that doesn’t mean that the apple,
the tree, the fruit and so forth are necessarily truly existent.
Although apples, trees, flowers and so forth are posited by conventional
valid cognizer and although they appear to the conventional valid cognizer
as truly existent, they do not exist truly. Having said that it doesn’t
mean to say that apples do not exist just because they are not truly
existent. It doesn’t mean to say that flowers do not exist just because
they are not truly existent. We cannot say that. We still have to be able
to posit and establish their existence. How do things exist? So ultimately,
 at the end of the day, what are apples, trees, flowers?  We have to posit
them as just mere appearances. They exist as that.
We still have to account for the existence of things like table, chairs,
flowers and fruits. They do exist, but how do they exist? Basically they
are dependent arising in that through the coming together of their
respective causes and conditions, then they exist. They come into existence
and they are nothing more than mere appearances. Next the flame of a lamp
is used to illustrate that.
Things exist. But how do we posit them? As through the coming together of
their own respective causes and conditions, they come into existence. Their
existence are just that mere appearance. The example of the flame of a
butter lamp is used to illustrate this. A flame of a butter lamp does not
exist in and of itself on its own. But rather, through the coming together
of many conditions like the butter or oil, the wick and many other
conditions then the flame comes into being.
Samsara is that we seek to free ourselves from all the problems and
sufferings.
Nirvana is that we seek to achieve permanent everlasting peace.
Both samsara and nirvana are equal in that they have never existed in and
of themselves.
The samsara (cyclic existence) that we should free ourselves from has never
and will never exist in and of itself. Samsara does not exist from its own
side under its own power in and of itself but rather our samsara is a
result of our own karma and afflictions.
Nirvana, the liberation from all the sufferings is what we want to
accomplish does not exist in and of itself; never and will never. As such,
we need to create the conditions and put together all the conditions before
we can achieve our liberation. We need to abandon our karma. We need to
abandon our afflictions. We need to exhaust our karma and afflictions
before our nirvana can be achieved.
That is a presentation of dependent origination (dependent arising).
Anything and everything that exist, exist as dependently arisen. That which
is dependently originated (dependently arisen) is completely contradictory
with existence in and of itself. Dependent arising and independent
existence are directly contradicting one another. Something which is
dependently originated cannot exist in and of themselves. Do phenomena
actually exist in and of themselves? Although they appear that way but do
they exist in that way? For if phenomenon exist in and of themselves, then
when we look for it we should be able to find it. We should be able to
point to something that is the object - the imputed object, the designated
object. But when we look for it, we will not be able to find the object. We
cannot point to something that is the imputed object. As such, anything and
everything that exists do not exist in and of themselves because they are
dependently arisen. So how do things exist? How do we then explain the
existence of phenomenon? How do they exist then if they don’t exist in and
of themselves? If they don’t exist inherently then how do they exist? They
exist in mere name. They exist as mere appearances.
At the end of the day, it is a matter of eliminating the possibilities. On
one hand obviously things exist, and that is pretty obvious. Things do
function and things do exist, right? Nobody disputes that. But yet at the
same time, things do not exist in and of themselves. They have no
independent existence. But then if they don’t exist independently, they
don’t exist in and of themselves then how do they exist? What alternative
do we have? We cannot say they don’t exist. Obviously things do exist. So
what alternative do we have? The only alternative left is they exist in
mere name.
Any object in question has a superficial level of reality and a deeper
level of reality. The part about the phenomenon which is just a mere
appearance, the superficial level of reality, is called the conventional
truth. Its deeper nature, its ultimate nature, its final nature, that is it
being devoid of inherent existence, it’s emptiness of true existence, that
is the deeper, ultimate nature of that object. There is the deeper level of
reality of that object, that emptiness of true existence of that object is
an ultimate truth. On any basis, there exist these two levels of reality.
This is a short explanation of what constitutes reality. When we talk about
reality, the whole of existence and anything that exist basically is
condensed and contained in these two truths. Reality is constituted by
these two levels of truths - conventional truth and ultimate truth. This is
the reality, and not some fabrication. It is just an observation of what
exists. Is it enough to just having an understanding of the reality (in
technical language is called  the basis), the meaning of reality and what
constitutes reality? No! Just knowing that the reality is as such will not
free us from suffering. Based on an understanding of these two levels of
reality, then what is it that we can do to deliver ourselves from
sufferings? What is the method?
Based on the Buddha’s observation and thorough understanding of the
reality, which has always been and will always be, then the Buddha
expounded and gave his first teaching – the Four Noble Truths. The Four
Noble Truths is essentially an explanation of the cause and effect
relationship pertaining to the class of thoroughly afflicted phenomena and
the other is the presentation of the cause and effect so to speak
relationship pertaining to the class of thoroughly pure phenomena.
So that is how it is phrased in precise technical language. What I have
just said actually means this:
    - what are the causes and conditions that keeps us stuck in samsara and
      sufferings
    - what are the causes and conditions that we need to put together to
      free ourselves from samsara so that we can achieve nirvana.
That is where the Four Noble Truths come in.
If reality is really as what the Buddha has said, there is a superficial
level of reality and then there is the deeper level of reality, and if we
can understand the whole of reality in terms of these two truths, then why
have we been suffering? Why are we still in samsara taking rebirth over and
over again? Why? To help us to understand that the next example of illusion
is used.
To help us to understand what has been keeping us in cyclic existence, then
there is the example of illusion. The kinds of illusion or aberration that
David Copperfield or David Blaine conjures up, some are really attractive
and some are really frightening. If the illusion that is conjured by these
illusionists or magicians is a pleasant aberration that looks nice, we
develop an attachment for it. We take a liking to it. We believe it is real
and our mind get all excited. But if he conjures up something frightening
or scary, then we might develop an aversion and get frightened and
developed fear for it. It appears and we believe it. The mind reacts
naturally and instinctively in that way. While the illusion, whether it is
a pleasant or frightening, that is conjured by these illusionists are just
illusions, and whether it is an illusion of a beautiful person or beautiful
object it is just an illusion. There isn’t anything there, and there is no
object or person there. But nevertheless when we are affected by the
illusions casted by these magicians, the illusions appear. We believe and
get sucked in, and we either develop a desire and  excitement or we develop
aversion or fear of it even though it is just an illusion.
This illusion is an example that should be applied to the reality because
whatever appears in our daily lives, especially when we meet with problems,
difficulties and suffering. When we are stuck in the situation of problems
that is suffering and of unhappiness, how does it appear to us? It appears
so real, right there in and existing in and of itself from its own side.
That is how it appears. While it does not exist in and of itself, but it
appears to exist in and of itself, solid, independent, inherently
existence. We assent to the appearance and we believe that is how the
problem exists in reality. Based on the mind assenting to that appearance
then that is where the game starts; anger comes in, attachment and so on
and so forth.
Whatever problem or happiness that we experience in our daily lives appear
as truly existent, existing in and of themselves while they are not. But we
believe that is how they exist. We assent to that appearance. Based on that
the whole range of emotions are invoked in us, from anger to attachment.
Then we start to experience problems, unhappiness and all kinds of
sufferings.
That is how we have been reacting all these while from life to life in
samsara. That is how we have been getting ourselves into problems one after
another. Based on assenting to the appearance of true existence, then how
do we stop ourselves from experiencing that again? What is the method to
overcome? The method is explained by the next few examples. After illusion,
there is drop of dew or bubble. Perhaps we will look at that in the next
lesson.
Khen Rinpoche: Question? If you don’t understand or confused, you can ask
one question. If you are clear, then okay. I don’t know those who are
seriously studying then please read the handout. I’m not going to go
through everything. Just give some idea to you so people might think what
you study in Buddhism. If you study Master Program, what is there to study?
This is just an outline. To understand these two pages, it takes ten years.
Anyway, maybe I will go through that roughly.  I’m not sure. But good to
have some ideas. That’s it.








