Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/lesson19.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:51:04.350473
================================================================================

(Presentation of homework on the number of possibilities between complete aspects applications and serial application)
Student 1: For both complete aspects application and serial application is a bodhisattva who has achieved the peak level of Path of Preparation, who is cultivating the aspects of the 3 exalted knowers, because…. At the beginning of this, Khen Rinpoche mentioned that a path…
Khen Rinpoche: Just give me the example. This is this but not this. Both must give the example, and explain later.
Student 1: For both complete aspects application and serial application is a bodhisattva who has achieved the peak level of Path of Preparation, who is cultivating the aspects of the 3 exalted knowers
Khen Rinpoche: Your example is not so clear. Make it clearer. In this case, you are talking about the mind or the person? I am not so clear. You are talking the person bodhisattva or? That is why you have to make specific.
Student 1: So you have to say in the continuum of a bodhisattva who has achieved the peak level of Path of Preparation, is that more specific? Or do I have to say that a bodhisattva who engages in meditative equipoise, on the peak level of Path of Preparation, who is cultivating…
Khen Rinpoche: Again you are saying bodhisattva, then it is talking about the bodhisattva not talking about the mind ya?
Student 1: So you can’t use like a bodhisattva superior, you can’t use the person?
Khen Rinpoche: Anything you can use, but are you talking about person or the mind? So you have to be clear.
Student 1: So a bodhisattva superior who has achieved the peak level of Path of Preparation who is cultivating the aspects of the three exalted knowers.
Khen Rinpoche: So you are talking about the bodhisattva is the example in this case? 
Student 1: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: You are saying bodhisattva is both?
Student 1: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche:  So you have to think. Her example is a bodhisattva, and she said both. You have to think that.
Student 1: A complete aspects application but not a serial application, is a 10th ground superior who at the last moment of being a sentient being.
Khen Rinpoche: Again here you are saying the bodhisattva, same thing. Give example. So it is correct or not, you have to think.
Student 1: So I have to figure out what to say. I mean you have to say that a wisdom of a 10th ground bodhisattva superior who has cultivated the aspects of the 3 exalted knowers who is at the last moment of being a sentient being.
Khen Rinpoche: You mixed up these two - the person and the mind – together. You have to be specific. You are talking about the person or you are talking about the mind? When you read the sentence, it is confusing, sometimes talking person, sometimes talking mind.
Student 1: So referring to the mind, I don’t know how to phrase it.
Khen Rinpoche: You have to understand. You say person, bodhisattva on the 10th bhumi at the last moment of the bodhisattva.
Student 1: So can I say a path in the continuum of a 10th bodhisattva superior at the last moment of being a sentient being?
Khen Rinpoche: A path, then okay.
Student 1: Something that is a serial application but is not complete aspects application is none because the boundary of serial application does not go up to the last moment of a continuum of a sentient being.
Not both a serial application and complete aspects application - the continuum of ordinary who hasn’t entered the Path of Accumulation. Therefore the number of possibilities is three.
Khen Rinpoche: Is there something that is all four applications?
Student 2: No
Khen Rinpoche: This homework is compulsory. Whether you get it right or wrong, you have to do it. You have to try. It was compulsory for all of us. You know what is compulsory? If you don’t do homework, next time you will be fined $100. Joking. All of you are adults and adults should only be told once, and don’t have to repeat things over again and again. You are not kids. So as adults, when I tell you to do, then should understand just by me saying it once.
Student 2: There is nothing that is all four applications because there is nothing that is both serial application and a momentary application.
Khen Rinpoche: Good, correct. That was a very good answer. You could tell that is a very good answer because the reason he gave in just a few words. From the words he used, it shows he understood based on the reason he gave of why there isn’t something that is all four applications. One can gives such correct answer only after you have thought about it. So that was a thought out answer. That is why I always tell you to think about stuff. From your own side, you have to do it voluntary.
Khen Rinpoche: He answered everything. You have questions, just ask one.
Student 3: In class 12 or 13, you mentioned that Is there such a wisdom directly realizing selflessness in the continuum of a Mahayana superior a Hinayana path? The answer is yes. Is it also a Mahayana path? Yes, because if the person who possesses this wisdom is Mahayanist, then the knower in his continuum is a Mahayana path. Further reason was given that such a realization in the continuum of a Mahayana superior is a Hinayana path. 
Is such realization share similar object of observation of meditation and similar aspects with the Hinayana path of realizations? In my word, to summarize it, is the wisdom directly realizing selflessness in the continuum of a Mahayana superior is both a Hinayana path and Mahayana path, although Mahayana superior’s main object of meditation is emptiness of true existence.
It further says that whatever abides within a Hinayana class of realization is necessarily a Hinayana path whereas whatever abides within a Mahayana class of realization is not necessarily a Mahayana path. 
What I understood in the class is the wisdom directly realizing emptiness in the continuum of a Hinayana superior is not a Mahayana path, but bearing in mind that such realization of the Hinayana superior realizing emptiness of true existence, shares similar objects of observation of meditation and similar aspect with the Mahayana class of realizations.
I am little confused that like a fully qualified path, you have to bring into consideration of his wish, his goals and his aspirations. When you say the wisdom directly realizing selflessness in a Mahayana superior is both a Hinayana path and a Mahayana path, what makes it a Hinayana path? Is it relating to the main object of meditation that relates to the Hinayana path? If that is the case, then a Hinayana superior who meditates on the emptiness of true existence also has the same object of meditation of the Mahayana path, so what makes…..
Khen Rinpoche: Can somebody comes and answer? I got the questions that she was asking
Student 4: The realization of emptiness in the Hinayana superior is not conjoined with mind generation. That is why it is not Mahayana path.
Student 3: If that is the case, what makes a Mahayana superior realizing selflessness a Hinayana path?
Student 4: Because he has renunciation. 
Khen Rinpoche: His answer very short, renunciation. Very short, I don’t know what he means. You have to make it a little longer. When you say renunciation, doesn’t make much being a Hinayana path. Her question is why that is Hinayana path? Your answer is renunciation, it doesn’t answer.
Ven Gyurme: Mahayana superiors also have renunciation.
Khen Rinpoche: She said why that is Hinayana path. Now you answer for that.
Student 4: Because a Hinayana path is defined as either abiding in the Hinayana class of realization or in the continuum of a Hinayanist.
KR: What? You have to say very carefully. 
Student 4: A Hinayana path is defined as either abiding in the Hinayana class of realization or a path abiding in the continuum of a Hinayanist.
Student 3: I am not disputing that. I totally agree with that, but what I am saying is that a Mahayana superior, by your extrapolation, why one says that this is a Hinayana path? You could have said that it all Mahayana path, by realizing the selflessness of a person. 
Ven Gyurme: Basically you are asking why Mahayana superior has Hinayana path.
Student 3: Yes, I mean his goal is not a Hinayana goal. His goal is a Mahayana goal, is that defines the path? I couldn’t get through that in my head. 
Khen Rinpoche: What she is saying is: If it is included within the Hinayana class of realization, then it is necessarily a Hinayana path, but if it is included in the Mahayana class of realization, it is not necessarily a Mahayana path. Why? The reason is the same as they are both included within a certain class of realization, but that which is included in the Hinayana class of realization makes it necessary a Hinayana path. If that is the case, why if it is included in the Mahayana class of realization is not necessarily a Mahayana path? That is basically her question.
Khen Rinpoche: She is asking why? Should be the same. She is basically following the logic, the same logic but why one yes, and one is no. She follows the logic, the logic is same. So why one is yes and why one is no? She thinks the logic is same, should be same.
The reasoning is similar but you cannot say that the Mahayana path exists in the continuum of a Hinayanist. That is absurd and is not acceptable. In the continuum of a Hinayanist, it is not possible for there to be a Mahayana path, but in the continuum of Mahayanist, it is possible for there to be Hinayana path. Let’s say you are asked: Are there a Hinayana path in the continuum of a Mahayanist? Mahayanist possess Hinayana path or not? Yes or no? Yes?
Why is it possible that Mahayanist possess Hinayana path? 
Why are they Hinayanist? Because they are on the Hinayana path. 
How come Mahayanist has this additional thing in their mind? Aren’t they Mahayanist? That is the question. 
Why is it that the Mahayanist must possess Hinayana path in their continuum?
Student 5: Because the bodhisattva has to teach the disciples of different disposition and different vehicles so he has know and have knowledge about that particular vehicle. You must have understanding and realization before you can teach someone. Without the knowledge, without the understanding and without the realization, how are you going to impart knowledge to people? You yourself have to have that experience, understanding, and knowledge, before you can impart the knowledge to others.
Khen Rinpoche: Answer is something like that. What if somebody asks after this answer: Is there self-cherishing in the continuum of a Mahayanist?
Student 5: Before you enter the Mahayana Path of Accumulation, you must have the uncontrived bodhicitta. No they don’t have self cherishing.
Khen Rinpoche: It follows that they have.  It follows that Mahayanist have self-cherishing, because that is why they can teach the people who has self-cherishing. 
Student 5: Not necessarily.
Khen Rinpoche: We are debating. Whatever is said is not necessarily true. If you follow the debate, then it follows that they have self-cherishing, because they teach people who has self-cherishing.
Student 5: But they don’t have to have self cherishing to teach people.
Khen Rinpoche: Therefore it follows that the Mahayanist has self-cherishing.
Student 5: I would still say no.
Khen Rinpoche: In order to take care of those who has self-cherishing, if you don’t have self-cherishing how are you going to take care of them?
Student 5: Buddha emanates and teaches people, does not mean that Buddha has self-cherishing.
Ven Gyurme: It follows that Buddha has self-cherishing.
Student 5: No that means you are wrong.
Ven Gyurme: You have to go with the consequence of what you say. It is not just half way change.
In the sutra, it is said that the bodhisattva need to know the paths of all the disciples that they have to take care of. As the people they are taking care of are from all three lineages, as such they have to know the Hearer path, the Solitary Realizer path and the Mahayana path. They have to take care of the trainees of those three lineages and the way to take care of them is to teach them through knowing the path themselves. The bodhisattvas have to know the paths themselves. That is the reason why  they have to generate the Hearer path and Solitary Realizer path in their continuum. That is why the Mahayanist does possess the Hinayana path in their continuum. 
The main illustration is the wisdom realizing selflessness of a person. As the wisdom realizing selflessness of a person is the main object of meditation of the Hinayana trainees, and since the bodhisattva possess the wisdom realizing the selflessness of person in their continuum, as such it is said that some bodhisattvas do possess the Hinayana path in their continuum.
Coming back to the four close placement of mindfulness, there is a presentation of these four close placements of mindfulness in relation to the four noble truths. One can come to understand four noble truths through these four close placements of mindfulness. 
Through the close placement of mindfulness on body, we will come to understand that our contaminated appropriated aggregates are the entity of suffering. Through that one comes to understand true suffering.
One meditates on the close placement of mindfulness of feeling in order to understand true origin. When we experience pleasant feeling, it would leads to craving or desire to not be separated from that pleasant feeling. When we experience unpleasant feeling, we develop the desire to be separated from that unpleasant feeling. So both pleasant and unpleasant feelings lead to craving, which is a source or origin of suffering.
Through meditating on the close placement of mindfulness on the body, we come to understand true suffering. 
Through our meditating on the close placement of mindfulness on feelings, we come to understand true origin. 
Through understanding these two, we will act to abandon these two.
Question: Is craving induces by feeling of equanimity (neutral feeling)? 
It is clear that pleasant and unpleasant do induce desire i.e. desire to not to be separated from pleasant feelings, and desire to be separated from unpleasant feelings. What about neutral feeling, equanimity? Does it lead to desire or craving? Or it leads to no feeling?
Khen Rinpoche: What do you think? If you have neutral feeling, what you have after that? Nobody have the experience of neutral feelings? Or have? Have? Then what you feel after that? You stay there for long time or you want to look for something else?
In one of the commentary to the Ornament of the Mahayana Sutras, it is said the feeling of equanimity leads to the craving for something. Remember those times when we are not really feeling anything such as sitting down and feeling neutral, and then we get bored after a while which then lead to wishing to experience a pleasant feeling again. Usually we will not be content with just sitting there and feeling nothing. We usually look forward to pleasant experience and excitement. 
I wonder what it meant by the statement in one of the commentary to the Ornament of Mahayana Sutras which says “The feeling of equanimity induces craving or desires to achieves or get something. 
Let’s us look at our own life. The whole day in and out, we are looking forward to an experience of pleasure, and for us is definitely contaminated pleasure. That is what we are looking forward to at all time. We always look for the next one and then the new one. That is what we are working for day in and out. Whatever we are doing in our live and we even have different lifestyles, but what we are working for is to have that experience. We manifest the contaminated feeling of pleasure. Why are we looking forward to it? Because we crave and desire for it, we then work for it day in and day out. Because of that, we do so many things and in the process we accumulate karma to cycle in the cyclic existence. If you think about it, the main reason and condition for us to continue cycling in samsara is due to our craving, which is based on our contaminated feeling of pleasure.
All our experiences of pleasure are nothing more than just that feeling during that time. It is that brief experience and they are like dreams because once it is over, it is gone and doesn’t continue. We do experience specific feeling of pleasure but it doesn’t last. When it stops, what do we hope for? We are looking forward to the next feeling of pleasure. And when next feeling of pleasure comes, it is just a mere experience. When it is gone, again we have a craving and desire of the next experience of pleasure. That is our lives. If you think about it, we can see that all our experience of pleasure, are the main condition that causes us to continue in samsara, because that induces craving and craving brings about karma and so forth. 
Next is a bit tricky but difficult one. It is explained in the text that through the meditating on the close placement of mindfulness on the mind, we will come to understand true cessation. 
The question is that if we meditate on the close placement of the mind, how will that leads us to understand true cessation? 
I have mentioned before that when we meditate on the close placement of mindfulness of the mind, we will come to see the momentary nature of the mind. The mind undergoes momentary change and with that understanding, the realization of this momentary change will destroy whatever conception of permanence we have of the mind. 
We talked about how we regard the body as the base of or as the residence of the self i.e. the basis of the self or self grasping. We somehow conceive the body as being the residence, the place where the “I” resides and regard the things that we utilize and enjoy. With regards to the mind, we tend to conceive the mind to be “me” and to be “I”.  We tend to conceive the mind to be the “I,” me, the person. Since we conceive the mind as being permanent and unchanging, then we also conceive the mind as person, and then conceive the person as being permanent and unchanging.
So if we come to understand that our mind is in the nature of changing momentarily, then we can also come to understand the “I” which we regard the mind as “I” is impermanent and changing. I guess that is how we overcome the wrong conception of permanent, unitary and independent person or self. Through this, we can see how the mind is changing momentary in each and every moment. We can see how the continuum of the mind is eternal, and yet within its existence, it is changing momentarily in each and every single moment. As such, we can also come to understand that the self, the person is not self-sufficient, but rather, the person, the “I” is dependent on the aggregates.
Yes, the mind does disintegrate momentarily but yet the mind continuum is eternal and it goes on forever. Since the continuum of the mind is eternal and goes on forever, one will come to understand that the “I” which is imputed in dependence upon the mind, its continuum, would also exist forever. This person will understand that even the continuum of the body may be severed, and the mind goes on forever. Since the “I”, the person does not exist self-sufficiently, it exist in dependence upon the mind, as such, he would understand the “I” would exist continually. Through this, the person can develop the understanding that there is a person who can achieve or manifest true cessation. 
This is difficult but I am not sure how to put it across. I guess, perhaps, it might be what I have just said. It is difficult because what is mentioned in the text is just this one paragraph which says ‘Through meditating close placement of mindfulness of mind, the basis of self grasping, the mind, is analyzed as impermanent and so forth, thereby stopping the conception of that. Then due to the absence of fear of annihilation of the self, we will actualize true cessation.” There doesn’t seem to be any other explanation out there that is clearer than what I have just read. If you think about it, perhaps it is like that.
When we talked about close placement of mindfulness of the mind, we meditate on the impermanence nature of the mind. As it is impermanence that means that it is changing momentarily from moment to moment. Through that, one also comes to understands how the continuum of mind is eternal. If the continuum of the mind is eternal, then the “I” which is imputed in dependent on the mind should also have to be eternal. Although it changes momentarily, it also has to be eternal. So even if the body disintegrates, i.e. the continuum of the body is severed, one will not have this fear of annihilation of a self. From this, one can comes to understand that true cessation can be achieved on the basis of mind. 
We have not realized selflessness, and that is one of the reasons why we are afraid of death. We have this feeling that we somehow will cease to exist. We say annihilation of the self, the fear of just going out of existence or the feeling that we will be gone, because we kind of associate very strongly our existence with our body. When we think our body ceases to exist, then we also cease to exist. We have this fear because we have not realized selflessness. However, when we come to understand that the self does not exist in a self sufficient way but rather it exists merely imputed on the mind, and since the basis of the mind will exist forever, as such, the person whose existence is dependent on the mind would also exist forever. Therefore, there must be a time where true cessation can be achieved.
From this we can see that there is no need to have the fear of annihilation of the self or the person is going out of existence, especially when we understand the self that exists in dependence upon the mind, and since the mind will never ever cease to exist, then there is no way that “I” will cease to exist. As such, we don’t need to be afraid. If we bring in the tantric presentation, the ultimate or the final destination of the person is this extremely subtle wind and mind, and since this extremely subtle wind and mind never ceases to exist, as such the “I” will never cease to exist. So when the selflessness of a person is realized then one will not generate the fear of annihilation of the self.
When we talk about this subtle self, there is really no thought of the “I” being born and going out of existence as it has always been there.
Khen Rinpoche: So don’t need to worry. You will never die. So why scare.
I am not sure whether my explanation is appropriate or correct. This is something to think about. The teaching tells us that through meditating on the close placement of mindfulness of the mind we will come to understand true cessation. They are my opinions but are not necessary the truth.
Next is the close placement of mindfulness of phenomena. Here phenomenon includes all phenomena. When phenomena are divided, there are:
Completely pure phenomenon and
Thoroughly afflicted phenomenon
Completely pure phenomenon is mind like love, compassion, faith and bodhicitta. 
Thoroughly afflicted phenomenon is like three mental poisons, jealousy, negative competitiveness, pride.
You have to understand that the completely pure phenomenon is the object to be cultivated, and the thoroughly afflicted phenomenon is the object to be abandoned. Through understanding these then we enter into true path.
So this is the explanation of how one engages in the four noble truths through meditating on the four close placement of mindfulness. With the exception of close placement of mindfulness of the mind, the other three are easy.
Through meditating on the close placement of mindfulness on the body, we come to understand true suffering. 
Through meditating on the close placement of mindfulness on the feelings, we come to understand true origin.
Through meditating on the close placement of mindfulness on the mind, we will come to understand true cessation.
Through meditating on the close placement of mindfulness of phenomena we will come to understand true path.
When we talk about the pervasive compounded suffering, the suffering of conditionality, this refers primarily our contaminated appropriated aggregates. Our contaminated appropriated aggregates are the vessel of all the suffering, in that it is the medium through which we experience all sufferings at the present. It is also the basis (medium, vessel) for all the suffering that we will experience in the future. These contaminated appropriated aggregates of ours are the cause (vessel, medium) through which we experience the suffering of pain and the suffering of change. This is explained extensively in the Lamrim literature, so we should use the information here in the meditation of close placement of mindfulness on the body. 
All our suffering of sickness, aging and death happens on the basis of our contaminated appropriated aggregates. It is the basis from which they can occur, otherwise no. Because of having these contaminated appropriated aggregates, there is never a single moment where we can really feel at ease, real peace, and real joy. As long as we possess the contaminated appropriated aggregates, it is likened to carrying a bed of thorn on our bare back.  It doesn’t take much to experience the manifest pain, suffering. All we need to do is to poke the body and the condition of discomfort, pain will arise immediately. It is important to see this for ourselves. This is the truth and is the reality of our existence. All we need to do is just to touch it, and the sense of discomfort arises.
Our body consists of four elements. As soon as there is an imbalance in the elements, we will get sick and discomfort. When there is an imbalance of the wind element i.e. when the wind element is excessive, we experience mental agitation. When the fire element is too strong, we experience discomfort in the form of feeling hot in the body or developing fever and so forth. That is our body.
The essence of meditating close placement of mindfulness of the body is to realize that our body, which is the contaminated appropriated aggregates, is in the nature of suffering. It is the basis of all the present suffering. It is also the basis of all the suffering in the future. We have to see this for ourselves and this reflection is necessary for those who are looking for liberation and those who are seeking to achieve nirvana. That is why when the suffering is presented in the Lamrim literature, the emphasis is on the suffering on conditionality or pervasive compounded suffering. That is the main suffering. It is said if we are unable to recognize correctly and not able to recognize it well of what the pervasive compounded suffering is, there is no way for us to develop real wish from our heart for liberation. 
When we understand well how our body really is so contaminated and how it is in the nature of suffering, then it is also possible to feel “What is the use to hold on so dearly to this body?” We have this idea that the body is part of our existent and the sense of self relating to the body. So when we understand how this body is so contaminated and in the nature of suffering, we will not have the strong sense of clinging on so much to “my body.” So the more we recognize correctly or realize that our body is in the nature of suffering and it is contaminated, then our attachment and clinging to our body will be lesser. The lesser the clinging we have for our bodies, the lesser of suffering we will experience. Then when we actually experience the physical bodily pain or suffering, it doesn’t affect us so much. We will not be bothered by it so much as we would have if we do not realized the body is in the nature of suffering. Through understanding well the suffering, we come to understand what true origin are and based on that we will develop a desire to actualize true cessation. If we are able to develop a desire to actualize true cessation, we are then able to engage the path. I think the best object for us to focus on is our own body. When we meditate on the close placement of mindfulness of the body, and as beginners we need to pay attention to our bodily conduct because our physical demeanor has an effect on people. So we should place our mindfulness on our mind to avoid demeanor or physical conduct that would disturb people mind or disturb others and focus on adopting a bodily conduct that would not be objectionable to others. Then that would be helpful to others.
In the Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds, there is a lot of discussion on the physical bodily conduct and example is given such that if we were to point out a direction to somebody “this is where you should go” we shouldn’t indicate the direction with just one finger. Rather with a respective demeanor, we extend our hand and all our fingers and point respectfully in the direction where the person should go. We should rely on bodily conduct that is not objectionable to others but that is respectful of others. So whatever that physical bodily conduct that others might find objectionable or might disturb other people’s minds, then we should mindful to abandon that and to adopt bodily postures and physical demeanor that people will not find objectionable. We should think in our mind all the times “As a dharma practitioner, I have the responsibility and I should not act in this way. I am an ordained person. I am a fully ordained monk. I am a dharma practitioner,” and putting our mindfulness on that. Verbally we should remind ourselves, “I am a dharma practitioner, and I should be mindful to say things that are pleasant to others and not to say things that are unpleasant to others”.
Khen Rinpoche: Just telling about one of my Geshe friend. His parents and sisters come from Tibet to Delhi to meet him. So they met in Delhi. After then, waiting for taxi in India. Somehow taxi didn’t stop or the payment has some problem or negotiation for the payment or something like that. Then my friend, who is a geshe, showed temper. Then the mother and the sister were shocked. Very shocked. The Geshe told me that his sister was totally shocked. His sister said to the Geshela; “You have been in a monastery for thirty years, and you have taken full ordination, you are a graduate, then how come you show the temper for such a small thing?” So after that, his mind totally changed. So it is very good to remind ourselves. It is very important. We have been Buddhist practitioner for 20 years, 15 years, I don’t know. Maybe longer than that. 50 year? Or longer than that? I don’t know. Anyway, nevertheless, a long time, 10 years, 20 years. Even small thing, we cannot be patient about it. Then asking oneself what kind of practitioner you are? It is true. Very true. Sometimes people says that the Buddhist practitioners is worst than non practitioner. I mean I am not saying that I am perfect, but just a reminder to myself, and for everyone. Really need to be careful. We study so much and at the end of the day our mind become harder b harder and nothing changed. Even say small thing, we cannot bear it and blow up oneself. I am not saying that I am perfect. We all need to remind oneself. This is what I am talking about.  Because of the incident, the Gehse was very glad and his mind really wakes up. After being thirty years monk, you should be enlightened being. Like being a thirty years monk, is not that the difference that the taxi driver made ten dollars or twenty dollars, but it makes a lot of difference to blow out of it. It is like that.
All of us have to try to be mindful with our body, speech and mind as much as possible. All those actions might perhaps impact on others in a negative way. We should try to avoid all these. We should consider ourselves as practitioner of dharma and we shouldn’t be harming or hurting others. So at a practical level, we have to do something. We just have to be careful and to be mindful and to rely on mindfulness and introspection in whatever we do.
In the vinaya, the code of discipline, if you look at the rules of conduct for fully ordained monk, there are many precepts governing the movements - the way one walk, the way one eat, the way one sit, so forth. For example, as a fully ordained monk, one has the precept of not to be walking and at the same time looking here and there in a distracted way. Ideally, if possible, one should not look beyond a certain distance, i.e. kind of looking downwards, and walk. One also not supposes to walk with swinging the hands here and there. There are many of such precepts. The whole point is to instill this sense of mindfulness and vigilance all the time.
We have to cultivate mindfulness and introspection on our bodily behavior. We don’t conduct ourselves physically in a way that is objectionable to others, or which is harmful to others. Likewise, we should not say things that harm others. Likewise, mentally we should not engage in thoughts that are not beneficial and that are harmful to others. We should try. When we find ourselves falling short, with mindfulness and introspection, we should catch ourselves and if possible we should remedy it, literally we should confess and do something about it.
Khen Rinpoche: Sometimes, as Buddhists, we learn so much logic. This logic should help oneself. But many of us use different ways of logic. If somebody shout at you, “This is your karma” When hurt you “This is your karma”. You use that kind of logic which is not good. Because we know all these come from your karma. When you say some bad things on other people “This is your karma.” Too much logic using in the wrong way. Sometimes learning too much philosophy becomes not good. So you have to know that. I heard someone like that. They quarreled so much and fight so much, then they use “Your karma this and that. You receive this because you didn’t clear your karma.” So sometime has to be careful. You learn so much philosophy and can be big danger deceiving oneself if you don’t know how to use it.