Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/lesson17.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:50.822516
================================================================================

(Student sharing and presentation)
Khen Rinpoche: Last lesson homework, maybe somebody can come and answer 
Question: There are four characteristics of true suffering - impermanent, suffering, empty and selfless. How are these four characteristics of true suffering antidotes to the four erroneous conceptions? 
Khen Rinpoche: Somebody come and say something. Okay come. Good. You must come immediately, don’t wait. You wait, somebody will take your opportunity. That’s it. So must come out quickly as possible. 
Student 1: By realizing how our aggregates is impermanent and undergoes momentary change, we dispel the misconception of holding this aggregate to be permanent.
Khen Rinpoche: So antidote to permanence is meditation on impermanence. Okay next.
Student 1: By meditating on how our aggregates are the basis for experiencing the 3 types of suffering, we dispel the misconception of holding contaminated pleasurable feelings as bliss and the contaminated body as pure or purity. 
Khen Rinpoche: Can you repeat that one?
Student 1: Meditating on suffering dispel the misconception of bliss and purity.
Khen Rinpoche: As for the second feature, you are saying the suffering is antidote to 2 erroneous conception, right? Okay, good.
Student 1: By meditating on how our aggregates is empty of self-sufficient, substantial existence and lack of inherent existing self, we dispel the misconception of holding these aggregates as having a self. So the aspect of empty and selfless dispel the misconception of self. 
Khen Rinpoche: What you are saying is correct. What Kelvin says is correct. Anybody disagree withwhat he said? Any disagreement then come and say. What Kelvin said is not correct then you have to say something. I think what he said is correct. 
Student 2: How does then one address the way the lower schools address uses the four aspects of true sufferings to overcome the four erroneous conceptions if you only abide with the higher schools? From the perspective of a higher school, how would the lower school use the ….
Khen Rinpoche: No, no. He’s not talking about higher school or lower school. He’s talking generally. He cover for everything. What Kelvin is saying cover for everything, not like higher school, lower school difference, not saying that. What he said is talking generally, all tenets is covered. 
You said empty of inherent existence, and that has to go with Prasangika’s. If you have to say something that fits all the four tenets, the common that everybody says…..empty of?
Student 2: Empty of being permanent, unitary and independent and so on.
Student 1: If follow the lower school, then that empty refers to emptiness of a permanent, unitary independent existence, and selfless refers to empty of a self-sufficient substantial existence.
Khen Rinpoche: Okay, it is correct. Do you understand what we are talking about?
Each of the four noble truthshas four characteristics, and that make a total of 16 characteristics.
The four characteristics of true suffering are impermanent, suffering, empty and selfless. Therefore:
Atrue suffering is impermanent,
A true suffering is suffering
A true suffering is empty
A true suffering is selfless. 
I have mentioned the four erroneous conceptions in the last lesson. What are the four erroneous conceptions? There are many erroneous conceptions. There are four features of true suffering that are taught to dispel four specific erroneous conceptions. They are:
The erroneous conception of conceiving impermanent as permanent
The erroneous conception of conceiving suffering as bliss
The erroneous conception of conceiving impure to be pure 
The erroneous conception of conceiving selfless as the self.
In one of Asanga’s text, he said that one aspect of true suffering acts as an antidote to one erroneous conception. Following that sentence is another sentence which says an aspect of true suffering acts as an antidote to 2 conceptions.Then followed by another sentence, the two aspects of true suffering act as an antidote to one erroneous conception.
Khedrup Je clarified of what Asanga had said in one of his text. Khedrup Je said that:
Meditation on the aspect of impermanence act as an antidote to the conception of permanence
Meditation on suffering (dukka, misery), the second aspect of true suffering, is an antidote to the erroneous conception of purity and bliss.
Meditation on empty and selfless, the third and the fourth aspects of true suffering, are the antidote to the conception of a selfless as self. 
In one of Jetsun Rendawa’s commentary, he very clearly said that the erroneous conceptions of purity and bliss are counteracted by the meditation on the aspect of suffering. 
Why is the meditation on suffering,the second characteristics of true suffering,is an antidote to 2 erroneous conceptions? 
Because the mode of apprehension or the way of how the erroneous conception of purity and blissapprehending the objects are similar in that they conceive the apprehended object as pleasant and as attractive. Because these two erroneous conceptions have a similar way of apprehending their object in the sense of having a similar aspect of pleasant object, as such, the meditation on suffering is the antidote to these two erroneous conceptions. That is how it is explained.
Why did I bring up this for discussion? Generally when people are asked: “How is the four characteristics of true suffering an antidote to the four erroneous conceptions?
More often than not, people would assume that because there are four erroneous conceptions, and since there are four aspects of true sufferings that one needs to meditate ona particular aspect of true suffering is an antidote to just one erroneous conception, which means people would probably think that:
meditation on the aspect of impermanence is an antidote to the erroneous conception of permanence
meditating on suffering is the antidote to the erroneous conception of bliss. They will say that meditation on the aspect of empty, the third characteristic of true suffering, would be an antidote to the erroneous conception of purity. 
meditation on the aspect of selfless would be an antidote to the erroneous conception of self. However, this is wrong. 
- meditating on suffering is the antidote to the erroneous conception of bliss. 
They will say that meditation on the aspect of empty, the third characteristic of true suffering, would be an antidote to the erroneous conception of purity, and meditation on the aspect of selfless would be an antidote to the erroneous conception of self. However, this is wrong. 
If you look at what is mentioned in the treatises, the treatises will tells you it is not like that and this is wrong i.e. meditation on the aspect of empty is an antidote to the erroneous conception of purityis wrong.It is clearly said in the teachings that meditation on the aspect of suffering acts as the antidote that counteracts the erroneous conceptions of purity and bliss. So by meditating on how everything is in the nature of suffering, we can:
- counteract the erroneous conception conceiving of that which is impure to be pure, and 
- counteract the erroneous conception of conceiving that which is suffering as bliss. 
You need to keep this in your mind. Not just regurgitating of what I have just said. What is important is that you need to understand how, for example, the erroneous conceptions are counteracted by these different characteristics of true suffering.You really need to understand the point.
Recently we have been talking about the four close placements of mindfulness. The four are the close placement of mindfulness of body, feelings, mind and phenomena. One way of explaining these four close placements of mindfulness is tying these four to the four erroneous conceptions. That is one way of explaining how these four close placements of mindfulness are antidotes to the four erroneous conceptions.
If you remember what was said in the previous class, we have the natural idea that the body is the dwelling place or the residence of the person and the self. Based on this wrong ways of thinking, misconceptions come into play and then we generate attachment which leads us to accumulating karma, and which then gives us suffering and keeps us in samsara. So meditation on the impurity of the bodies counteracts this erroneous conception.
Much has been said about the meditation on the impurity of the body in Chapter 8 of Engaging in Bodhisattva Deeds, which we have just covered recently. You have to take the information from that chapter and utilize it in your reflections and meditations. In short, in Chapter 8, the meditation on the impurity of the body is done:
- by examining the very nature of the body itself of how it is by nature dirty 
- by examining the cause of the body 
- by examining the result of the body, what it gives rise to. 
So by examining the entity, cause and result in relation to our contaminated appropriated aggregates, we will come to understand how the body is indeed impure and dirty. Through that, at least we can reduce our attachment to the body and reduce this erroneous conception conceiving of the body as pure. And gradually to even overcome this erroneous conception. 
There are also advices pertaining to meditating on the body of the past, the present and the future as part of the exercise of weakening and removing this erroneous conception of the body as pure. 
Next is the close placement of mindfulness of feelings. As I have mentioned before, we workday in and out but what are we looking for at end of the day? When we say we enjoy things, we enjoy life, we enjoy this and that, what exactly are we looking forward to enjoying? Basicallyit is experiencing the pleasure, which is feeling. So what we all are looking forward toat end of the day is always enjoying. You say enjoying, but what is that you are enjoying? It is this pleasant feeling and that is what we are working for everyday. But for us, it always involves attachment and craving. When there is pleasant experience, pleasure feelings manifest. We always get emotionally involve with strong attachment and then accumulate karma. That is how we continue to circle in cyclic existence. So in order to stop suffering, we have to stop attachment and craving for feelings and in particular here, pleasant feelings. The way to counteract this attachment is to reflect on how even the pleasant feelings are in the nature of suffering. 
We obviously have craving. What do we crave for? We crave for feelings and in particular pleasant feelings. What is the condition for craving to arise? Feeling. For us, our feeling or our experience is the condition for craving to arise. We follow after that and then that craving becomes grasping. With the 12 links of dependent origination, there is the link of potential existence. From there, when you have birth, you are going to have ageing, you are going to have sickness, and you are going to have death. If you analyze in this way, you can see that the origin of all of our problems or suffering in samsara is our experiences of feelings. 

Birth, ageing, sickness and death come from potential existence which then comes from grasping, which comes from craving and the condition for craving to arise is feelings. 
The other problems is that we think that feelings, in particular pleasant feelings, are so desirable and good. That is the problem. It gives rise to a craving and very strong grasping. There is no denying that we all have feelings, and different kinds of feelings arise. The point is it is not so much of the feeling but it is about how attachment to the feelings that gives rise to all the problems. We may experience pleasurable feelings but we have to see for ourselves that they are in the nature of suffering.
When we meditate on the close placement of mindfulness of feelings, as I mentioned earlier, we use our experiences that have already happened in the past. By using the memories of those experiences, we can also come to understand how the present feelings and future feelings are also in the nature of suffering. 
We all have many experiences of pleasure. So when a pleasurable feeling arises in the present, we don’t instinctively see it as suffering. We don’t really see it in the nature of suffering, but we see it as something that is desirable, as something need to have and as something to be followed. Nevertheless, we need to counteract this wrong idea about the pleasurable feelingsby just tapping on our memories of our past experiences. We have many past experiences of pleasure, and if we think about all our past experiences of pleasure, they are just nothing. Actually it is in the nature of suffering. If that is the case, as we have already experienced that, then no matter how our present feelings appear to us at the present moment, which may appear as something really desirable, wonderful and not in the nature of suffering, we should tap on our memories of our past experiences and we can remind ourselves that our present experiences of pleasurable feelings are not different from our past experience. From that, we can at least reduce our attachment to the current experiences of pleasure. Likewise, all the pleasurable experiences of feelings that we may experience in the future is going to be much the same in nature,in that they are actually suffering. 
It is important that through the meditation on the close placement of mindfulness of feelings, we come to understand that our experiences of feelings are the source or origin of all our problems which is the conditions that lead to suffering. It is important to understand that because if we are able to get used to this understanding and then internalize it, we can definitely counteract and reduce our attachment to feelings. 
Shantideva asked in the text: Why are we still so attached to our pleasurable experiences? He says that whatever pleasure that we are experiencing and will experience is not going to be any different from what we have experienced in the past. In fact, there is no pleasure that we have not experienced in the past and whatever pleasures that we are experiencing in the present and whatever pleasures we will experience as we go on with life, those experiences will not be any different from what we have already experienced in the past. They will not be any better. As such, he questioned the reader: Why are we still clinging on to pleasant feelings.
I think one of the best way to think about this is to just tap on our memories of all the pleasures that we have experienced in the past. Whatever pleasures and pleasant experiences will ends up as sufferingor something that is not really satisfying. That is quite evident as it is our own experience which we have gone through it numberless times. By remember this, so whenever we get hung up on our pleasures, what we need is just to remind ourselves that the pleasant feelings are not going to be any different from the past. We have to see and come to understand for ourselves that whatever experience of pleasure including our day to day experience of pleasure, so-called happy contaminated feelings, are actually the cause of suffering. They are actually product of pain and suffering. So if you are a practitioner or meditator, then this is what you need to think about. 
Our past experiences of pleasure are just like dreams, i.e. we cannot go back to the same dream once we have woke up.Likewise, whatever pleasurable experiences - happy and pleasant feeling - that we have are just like dream in that there is nothing much we can point to except that we have experienced it before: “I remember I have experienced it before” and that is about it. 
Next is the close placement of mindfulness of mind. We all have a very concrete sense of I, self, or person. We have this sense of the I being something eternal, permanent, enduring, always there, very solid, and unchanging. As I mentioned before, if one is pushed to point to something that is the I or the person, everyone would instinctivelyregard the mind. What is the person? What is the I? It is the mind. There is this concept that the mind is I, me. We conceive of the mind as the self and conceiving the self as eternal, enduring, permanent and unchanging. In order to overcome the erroneous conception of the self as permanent and unchanging, we meditate on the momentarily nature of our mind. That is quite evident if we just observe our mind which is never static, it is momentary which changes from moment to moment. So with that insight, we can counteract the erroneous conception of the self as permanent.
With this solid concrete sense of self identity, we always think that the self is eternal, enduring, permanent, and unchanging. It is the very solidI that is the same throughout all of time. We have this natural feelingthat there is this I that has always been there and will always be there. Not only is it there, it is unchanging, and it has never been changed. It is always the same. That is a wrong conception. That is why we work for the I. We work so hard day in and day out for this unchanging solid I. We do so many things in life and work so hard to take care of it. With this attitude and worldview, it lead us into attachment, anger and so forthall the time. Then we accumulate karma. That is how we continue in cyclic existence. So in a way, we can see how all our problems, sufferings and our own samsara come from this sense of a strong of I that is unchanging.  
By meditating on the close placement of mindfulness of mind, we can counteract the erroneous conception (apprehension) of permanence. 
The purpose of meditating on the close placement of mindfulness of phenomena is to counteract the wrong idea that all thoroughly afflicted phenomena and completely pure phenomena are objects of utilization of a self-sufficient substantially existent person. 
By seeing how all phenomena, both thoroughly afflicted phenomena and completely pure phenomena, lack a self, we overcome the erroneous conception conceiving selfless as self. 
This is how the meditation on the four close placement of mindfulness acts as the antidote to the four erroneous conceptions as explained in Gyaltsab Je’s Essential Ornament.
Khen Rinpoche: Any question on that? Or totally satisfy? That time somebody was saying that if everything is suffering, yourself, the environment is all suffering, true suffering. Then that become over renunciation. 
Last lesson we have discussed about ourselves is true suffering, including all what we enjoy become true suffering. Then somebody was asking, if that is the case, then over renunciation. You understand? No point to live. Ya, it is interesting question “No point to live. Everything is suffering; left and right. Why we live?” That is over renunciation. So it becomes more depression. So how? Ya, somebody comes and explain. If somebody says that how are you going to explain? Everything is suffering, isn’t it? Left to right, what we see.Anybody has some answer for that? Over renunciation on that you have any answer?
The point is it is too much to live. The idea is that too much to live. Somebody comes and explain. If somebody asks you then what are you going to say? Also many people say Buddhist only talk about suffering. Why go and study Buddhism as they only talk about suffering and make you more miserable.
Student 1: I think why people said that and I myself kind of feel that because we don’t really see that as suffering but we are giving up happiness. If you really realize that everything is true suffering then you want to give it up.
Khen Rinpoche: You won’t give up?
Student 1: Because you see as true suffering. But that can only happen after you have realized that indeed even all objects of enjoyment and our aggregates are true suffering.
Khen Rinpoche: Wei Chiang said if you know more suffering, you are able to work harder. Yes, are you saying something like that?
Student 1: No
Khen Rinpoche: No? I heard something like that. If you really understand the true suffering then you can work harder. You don’t relax. No? I heard something like that.
Student 1: Renouncing what is true suffering is not over renunciation because nobody wants suffering. The issue is whether you really understand what true suffering is.
Khen Rinpoche: Understand everything is suffering, it becomes very tense, it is stressed, overwhelm by the suffering.
Student 1: But you also need to understand there is a way to stop the suffering.
Khen Rinpoche: Ya, ya.
Student 1: If the Buddha only taught the first two truths then there is no hope.
Khen Rinpoche: Correct!
Student 1: Are you hopeful?
Khen Rinpoche: Of course. You have to answer: Of course. Why is there a doubt? 
Student 2: Pleasant feeling is a cause of suffering and it is a producer of suffering so long if we were to attach to it. For example, if my son scored very well in PSLE, you feel happy but at the same time if you are aware of it and you are not attached to it, it is there and it is gone.
Ven Gyurme: Then it is not suffering?
Student 2: The subsidence of the happiness, would it be suffering? If there is no attachment to the pleasant feeling, will it still be the source of suffering?
Khen Rinpoche: I have no answer. There is no feeling?If you are not attached to that feeling then?
Ven Gyurme: Are you trying to find out that whether that is okay and at the same time do you recognize the feeling is suffering or not?
Student 2: If I stop it there and recognizing that is.
Ven Gyurme: Do you recognize it is suffering or not?
Student 2: I can’t at this moment.
Ven Gyurme: What if you recognize it as suffering then what will your reaction be? Is it okay also??
Student 2: If I feel happy and attached it, it would be suffering in the sense as projecting karma to flip me into another being. You are suffering if you constantly crave for it within this life. If I recognize the good feeling and leave as it is...  
Ven Gyurme: What are you trying to ask? Are you asking whether it is okay or not? Can we live life like that or not is it? Something to work towards.
Student 2: Whatever it is, the student still have to study. 
Khen Rinpoche: Understand.
For us, we have the apprehension of self, ego, ignorance. Because of this apprehension of the self then there is the apprehension of mine. Anything that belongs to the self, including the children, is mine, and it is related to the self. Whatever that isinvolves with attachment and as long as there is a sense of I, then there will be a sense of mine, my children. For us, whether wefeel happy or not, there is attachment. If we feel happy, then there is attachment but if wedon’t follow and exaggerate it, then that itself is good.Let’s say, if you have children or somebody that is matter to you don’t do well in the exam, do you feel happy? It is clear because we still have the apprehension of self, then definitely there will be attachment. When somebody who matters to you such as your children do well, you are happy. This is due to attachment. When the children don’t do well, you feel unhappy. That is due to attachment also.
As said in the vinaya, for those who don’t realize things are actually in the nature of suffering, they are able to stay relax as nothing seems goes wrong and everything is good. Such people are considered as the childish one, and that is how the childish leads their life. That is what they think and that is their world view. They are kind of like relax because they think everything is fine. There are also superiors who also think everything is fine and relax. That is the same experience but the reason is different. The superiors see suffering, and they realize suffering as suffering. Because of that, they are cool about it.
Of the two, which you prefer? In order to see which is better, think of an example first. If you have a sickness, is it better to not know that you are sick or is it better to discover it with the help of a doctor? The first one is called ignorance is bliss. So, it is better to know you are sick and then do something about it.
Khen Rinpoche: You don’t think that?
Student 3: About over renunciation, I think there need to be a balance. When I heard about true suffering and everything is suffering, the idea of over renunciation came to my mind. At that time it was valid because every single thing is suffering includes the pleasure of the sweet mango that I have tasted and the pleasant music that I listened toare all contaminated. Then what is this life for? I might as well going to die now. The books that I have read in the past including those from His Holiness are about suffering. After I came to this class, it no longer is just suffering as it is. If the Buddha had only taught the first two noble truths and not true path and true cessation, then I must as well going and die. However, this is not the case. Based on your example, if I know I am ill and going to die, then ignorance is bliss because then I can do something about it. Knowing suffering is better than not knowing it. For those who didn’t comes to this class or read, true suffering seems everything is suffering. After having attended this class then there is not such thing as over renunciation.
Ven Gyurme: So, there is no over renunciation, right? 
Student 4: I think the reason why we suffer a lot because we have a lot of expectations. If we learn to let go of expectation then our mind will be at ease. The more the expectation the more we suffer. So this is due to expectation. 
Khen Rinpoche: Okay, good.
It is important to understand and to accept that we are changing from moment to moment. We are aging. We will get sick. We will die one day. That is a fact or reality. It can never be change. So it is better to know it and, more importantly, to accept it. Rather than holding on, like what the gentleman used the word expectation, but basically that is the psychology of most people. They have the idea that life has to be good and never change. But that is the problem. When the world presents itself in the different way to what we expect it to be or want it to be then when change comes, we get huge shocked. When you got sick or terribly ill suddenly or suddenly you have to die then you become so shocked. Why? There is no need to get so shocked. The shock comes from the expectation that things must not be liked that, and should not be liked that. The pain comes from that. However, if we accept and recognize how life is like that and it is the nature, then when we do experience problems like sicknesses or when death comes, then there is much less suffering. So, there is huge difference in knowing that we are suffering than refusing to look at it.
We have to understand and accept that the body that we have is the basis for all the sufferings of this life. If we don’t have this, then there is no basis to experience suffering. It is the vessel, the medium, and the conduit where all the experiences of this life is experienced. The reason why we are suffering because we have this body. We just have to accept it and then life is much easier. When problem comes, it is no big deal. Otherwise wewill get shocked. Many people can’t accept it because they don’t understand that the body is aging momentary and disintegrating. They don’t understand that it is the nature of suffering. They don’t understand that they will get sick and will die. We will cease to exist one day. That is why when people get into trouble or especially when they have sickness, they always says “Why me? Why I am sick? It is like not able to accept why he is sick? They are not asking in the philosophical way but is a kind of like complaint. It is like not able to accept why they are sick and that gives them so much unhappiness, and so much sufferings. But if we understand that is the nature of life, and because we have a body, we will suffer. If we can accept it and this islife, then when problem comes definitely the mind would not be so disturbed. 
If we don’t recognize that this is the nature of life, then there is nothing we can do. If we don’t recognize and don’t accept it, and as all of us are subject to sicknesses, and when some sickness happens or death approaches then there will be so much worries, fear and suffering. On top of that, if we add the understanding of karma, then that makes the whole experience even more rich and profound. Then we are able to deal with it. This is what I think. There is a big difference between knowing and not knowing. There is a big difference if we know and accept that our body is disintegrating moment to moment, is aging and will get sick. We will die. If we know and accept it, I think it is much better than just pretending that these things don’t exist or just refusing to accept and refusing to think about it. Even if we refuse to accept it and we don’t want to look into it, and if our life go on smoothly, don’t get sick, and don’t die, that is fine, but there are some things to be said about it. Like it or not, we will definitely get sick and definitely will die. If we can accept that this is the reality- aging, sickness, death- then definitely much less mental turmoil and disturbance when we meet with these different stages of life. Like the gentleman who said earlier, expectation really creates a lot of suffering. It is not just talking about our body during our death or our sickness but basically everything in life; the more expectation we have, the more pain we will suffer. If we are contented, accept life is suffering, accept that is the reality, then I think much less mental suffering.
It is important to recognize of what we have just discussed - how samsara is suffering, our life is in the nature of suffering, actually everything is in the nature of suffering. It is the truth and at the same time we must know how to think. We must know when to think what, and when to think, what to think at the correct time. Otherwise, for some people when they think of suffering, it makes their mind very uptight, very narrow, very compressed and stressed. That is wrong. We must know how to think. That is why when we train our mind in stages. That is why right in the beginning of the Lamrim, there is the topic of human life of freedoms and endowments. Hence, that is one reasons that there is hopeThat is why we have to know how to think, and how to progressively train the mind. 
When we think of our own human life of freedoms and endowments that we have already obtained, on the basis on it, we can achieve so many things we want. Whatever we want we can choose. Whatever we want, we can achieve it. We can create the causes for it with this human life of freedoms and endowments. A human life of freedoms and endowments is especially exalted compared to other kind of rebirth. 
If we work hard and work correctly on how a human life of freedoms and endowments is one of the best basis for newly attaining paths like Path of Seeing and Path of Meditation and so forth, then when we put all these bits and pieces of information together, we only feel happy and sense of enthusiasm and  joy.
In one of our earlier discussion, even a god of the form realm even have calm abiding and special insight. Compare to us, the gods have these amazing mental qualities, calm abiding and worldly special insight but they cannot newly achieve the transcendental paths. They cannot newly achieve the Path of Seeing and Path of Meditation on that basis. The human life of freedoms and endowments is one of the best basis for newly attaining these transcendental paths. On top of that, if we reflect on how hard we must have worked in the past that is why we get this human rebirth now. Because we have kept pure morality and have done some kinds of practice of generosity and so forth which are the favorable assisting condition, we must also make many stainless prayers and dedications. That is why we are experiencing this result of human life of freedoms and endowmentsnow. So, if you put all these points together then it gives rise to a sense of joy.
Dharma practice is never meant to be done with a depressed mind, unhappy mind, or unwilling mind.
It is never been the case and it should never be the case. Dharma practice has to be done happily and willingly with the sense of joy. You know you can do it and in particular I think we need to have this self-confidence, this positive self-esteem. It is very important that we practice with that attitude all the time. That is why I think it is very important to really meditate on the topic of the human life of freedoms and endowments. If we just think of human life of freedoms and endowments alone, one might then think life is so wonderful, so good. If we just live life thinking that life is wonderful without doing anything, then there is danger as well. That is why we also need to meditate on the death and impermanence in order to persuade our mind to practice dharma. That is why we have to think of death and impermanence as well. Anyway, my point is that when we train our mind, we have to practice according to the Lamrim. Training has to be done according to the Lamrim – the Stages of the Path.
That is why Buddha didn’t just talk about suffering. He talks about the source of suffering, the origin of our problems and he presented the cessation. Then there is a possibility to end all this. He has the method and he has the path. The Buddha don’t just talk about suffering. So, if we have the whole picture, it really makes a differenceto the mind. If there is no solution to the suffering then it is better to be ignorance, not to think about suffering, not to remember suffering, not to meditate on suffering. If there is no way out, then it is pointless. As there is a way out, that is why it is very important to think about suffering and to recognizeit.