Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/lesson9.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:51:04.070697
================================================================================

I have mentioned about the four reliances in the last session especially where it says:
Do not rely on the person but rely on the dharma
In this case here you are not looking at who the speaker is but rather you should pay attention to what the person is saying and why is he saying certain things..
(One student presented his chosen verse from Chapter 8 of Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds as part of the exam process)
Q&A:
Student 1: In the last class, it seems that we have come to a conclusion that the gods and humans in the desire realm beings are the suitable basis for one to enter the Path of Seeing. However, all the six realms beings of desire realms are able to develop bodhichitta and enter the Path of Accumulation. From there on, which path that they will proceed until that basis will not allowed them to carry further on?
Khen Rinpoche: You understand what she’s asking? You understand her question? No? You must understand the question first. Otherwise if I answer, you don’t know the question then there is no point with the answer. But you must understand what she is asking. I think if I’m not wrong, I understand something of what she is asking. 
All the six types of migrators in the desire realm can generate bodhichitta and enter the Path of Accumulation.
The basis for newly generating the Path of Seeing is a human support or a desire realm god support. We have looked at this. Her question is that the six types of migrators can enter the Mahayana path, but how far can they go? With their individual support, how far can a hell being go after generating bodhichitta, how far can a preta go, or how far can an animal go? Can they go into the Path of Seeing, Path of Meditation or how far?
Khen Rinpoche: You got the question? Okay, come and say something. How far they can go?
Student 2: If they are not humans or gods, then once they generate bodhichitta while they are in the lower realms, their negative karma should be exhausted. Then they should not be at the lower realms at all. They should go up.
VenGyurme: Go up? Go where?
Student 2: Because their bodhichitta are so powerful, they will get good rebirth and maybe go further.. Path of Accumulation….
Khen Rinpoche: I understand what you are saying. Great! Good. Anybody agree with what he said? You understand what he is saying? He said once you develop the bodhichitta mind, you won’t stay long as the hell being but will come up from the hell being and take a better rebirth. He doesn’t have to stay long time there. Very good idea. Anybody else? What do you think is right? Or how long you stay? Everybody is free to come and say your thing. 
Student 3: I generate bodhichitta first time as a hell being. I see so much suffering around me, and I want to help them, I want to stay until they are all cleared of hell realms. 
Khen Rinpoche: He is saying bodhisattva will stay in the hell for longer time. Basically he is saying something like that. His idea and logic is that you stay long time there because you want to help all these hell beings. That is why you stay long time. That is his reason, isn’t it?  Student 2 said quickly come out, and Student 3 said they stay long time. Anybody else? I mean is very good. Your mind should be exercised then you have a lot of idea. Otherwise, I just say six realms and bodhichitta. That’s it and finish. You don’t really go use your brain. So there are two different ideas. What do you think? 
Student 4: You are saying you actually stay as long as you want to because as bodhisattva you want to actually alleviate the sufferings. Isn’t that at one point C, they will not fall into the lower realm? My thinking is like what Student 2 said earlier; “Once you generate bodhichitta, you actually go into the Path of Accumulation and you will get yourself out from the lower realm. When you actually start to practice and at the point where entering into point C, the medium path of Path of Accumulation, then you will not fall back into lower realm.
Khen Rinpoche: Medium path of what?
Student 4: Path of accumulation.
Khen Rinpoche: You say doesn’t fall down? What did you say?
Student 4: It is supposed to be like this according to the chart.
Khen Rinpoche: According to the chart, what it says? What chart said? You read.
Student 4: The chart actually said that at point C is where it is not possible to fall… oh sorry I see wrongly. It is Hinayana, sorry!
Khen Rinpoche:  You have to read your chart carefully.
Student 4: It is only at point F.
Khen Rinpoche: C and F are different. Not the C, isn’t it?
Student 4: Not C. 
Khen Rinpoche: Okay. Look carefully your chart. 
Khen Rinpoche: Hup Cheng, if you come every day in class, you will be the best student. It is very good. I mean you come only few classes, I noticed his mind work differently compared to you people. Really, it is true. You come every day but your brain not working.
Student 5: When a person dies he will go into hell realms during the intermediate state. Then we make a lot of prayers and accumulate a lot of merit. There was a discussion that in fact that person, due to the power of the merit, the karma of him going to hell realm is exhausted. He then quickly finishes up his karma in hell realm and then has a good rebirth. So when Student 3 said that “I generate bodhichitta in hell realm and due to my bodhichitta, I want to stay in the hell realm”. Even if he want to stay in the hell realm but due to the merit he accumulated, and the power of bodhichitta, maybe that bodhisattva will totally exhaust the karma to be carried on in the hell realm. With no choice due to the power of karma, he actually takes a good rebirth. 
Khen Rinpoche: She is saying same thing. Bodhisattva doesn’t stay long time in hell being. Bodhisattva comes up quickly. She doesn’t agree with what Student 3 said.
Student 6: I think technically they should only be able to reach until the border of Path of Preparation. Technically I think for these hell beings and animals cannot develop calm abiding because they can’t sit still on an iron hot ground. 
Khen Rinpoche: What?
Student 6: I think technically they can’t develop calm abiding, for hell being and animals. So they can only reach the border of Path of Accumulation even if they don’t die and continue practicing. 
Khen Rinpoche: Okay. 
Student 7: I don’t think that if they develop bodhichitta, they can choose to stay in the lower realm to help others because it would imply that they can choose their rebirth. I think to choose their own rebirth, you will need bodhichitta plus the realization of emptiness. And not just bodhichitta alone. 
Khen Rinpoche: So what are you trying to say? The conclusion is that bodhisattvas go up faster, and they don’t stay long time? Because?
Student 7: Because if they only have bodhichitta but not the realization of emptiness, then they cannot choose to stay.
Khen Rinpoche: In other words, they can’t choose to come up also because they don’t have wisdom realizing emptiness. How can they choose another rebirth? They have no choice but have to stay long time. 
Student 7: But they have bodhichitta.
Khen Rinpoche: What that makes to come up faster?
Student 7: Why that can make them come up faster?
Khen Rinpoche: Because that same reason…
Student 7: Because they have too much merit to stay in hell realm.
Khen Rinpoche: He said same reason, that mind make him to stay long time. The same reason you say, this mind make faster to come up. So two things. He said because of this mind, you stay long time. Because of this mind, you say coming up faster. Very interesting. You think carefully. Saying same thing. Because of the reason, somebody said stay longer. Because of this, you say come up faster. 
Student 7: Maybe I try one more time. I understood that the situation was like an animal develops bodhichitta. 
Khen Rinpoche: Huh? Animal develops bodhichitta
Student 7: An animal develops bodhichitta. The question is: Does it stay long an animal or can it goes up to the next? I say that it automatically goes up because it has bodhichitta and has too much merit to stay as an animal. If it were to stay as an animal to help other animals, it would have to choose that and the only way that it can choose that is if it has also the realization of emptiness. But it doesn’t have it but it just has bodhichitta. Does it make sense?
Khen Rinpoche: When you say choose, then I don’t understand. He can’t choose. That part is a little bit… So two person against one. Anybody?  
Student 8: Because I have this same question in mind as well as Student 5.  I got a question.
Khen Rinpoche: You are asking question or what?
Student 7: I ask a question before I answer. 
Khen Rinpoche: Okay. 
Student 8: Can the rest of the six realm beings other than the humans and the gods realize emptiness? In that support, can animal or hell being or hungry ghost can have inferential realization of emptiness?  
Khen Rinpoche: Okay I will answer later. What do you want to say?
Student 8: If the answer is cannot, then to answer Student 5’s question, then it would be that the rest of the six types other than the two, they would not be able to pass beyond the small Path of Accumulation.  Because at the medium Path of Accumulation, those beings on the path would have necessarily realized emptiness. Whether they stay long or not, I don’t know, it depends on their karma. 
Khen Rinpoche: Okay, that is good. Basically she is saying the Path of Accumulation which has three divisions:  the small, medium and great, and the small Path of Accumulation can be in the lower realms. After that, this person has to come up. On that basis, no hell being develops the medium Path of Accumulation because of realization of emptiness. So like that. I don’t have exact answer. I also need to think whether the hell being able to realize emptiness or not. I mean the text very clear, they have developed the bodhichitta mind in the six realms. Maybe sutra mentioned hungry ghost, animals, and some example of the nagas which develop bodhichitta mind and hell being. This very clear in the sutras. Buddha had mentioned that. But I didn’t’see any quotation that hell beings realize emptiness. So I’m not sure. Again you have to say why being hell beings cannot realize emptiness.. There’s many question. 
Student 9:   Student 6 talks about calm abiding. Technically to enter the path, you need calm abiding, So for that person to be able to generate uncontrived bodhichitta even as a hell being, he has to have calm abiding. Calm abiding and special insight on bodhichitta. So what is wrong with this person having calm abiding? 
VenGyurme: Already have calm abiding already the hell being. Hell being bodhisattva she’s saying. 
Student 9: So if you can have calm abiding of bodhichitta, why can’t you have calm abiding on emptiness?
VenGyurme: Focusing on emptiness?
Student 9: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: Okay. Anyway, I mean good exercise in your mind. 
It is said that if one generates bodhichitta, it is almost like no way that one can fall to the lower realms. Let’s say, even if there is a possibility that being who has bodhichitta have fallen into the lower realms, he would only stay there for a very short time. Just a short time, i.e. he would not stay for long time. I think this is being mentioned in Chapter 1 of the Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds. 
I’m inclined to think that they will not stay a long time in the lower realms after the bodhichitta is generated. Let’s say, even if the hell being who generates bodhichitta makes the prayer to live in hell realm forever until each and every single hell being is free, they will not stay in the hell realms for long time. In fact, because of making such prayer, with that kind of strong aspiration it purifies so much of the negativities such that that hell being bodhisattva will be liberated very quickly from that hell rebirth.  
In general, one ends up in the hell realms because one has accumulated the karma to be born in the lower realm, for example, in the hell realms. As to how long that person will stay in the hell realm or how quickly he will be freed from the hell realm depends on how much negativities are purified and how much merit is accumulated. I’m more inclined to take this position. Perhaps it is better to say that once bodhichitta is generated with a lower realm support, that individual will not remain in that support for a long time. It is stated quite clearly in the teachings that once the forbearance level of the Path of Preparation is achieved, there is no going back to the lower realms. 
Of course people would ask: Is it possible for the individual on the heat level and the peak level of the Path of Preparation will actually go to the lower realms? That is something to think about. 
In the previous discussion, it is not possible to newly attain the Path of Seeing and the Path of Meditation with a form realm support. But at the same time, we have to say that there are bodhisattva superiors with a form realm support.
Do you understand what I’m saying? On one hand I am saying it is not possible to newly attain the Path of Seeing and Path of Meditation with a form realm support but there are bodhisattva superiors with a form realm support. 
As for the formless realm, it is stated clearly in the sutras or in the text that there are no bodhisattva superiors in the formless realm.
In Asanga’s Compendium of Knowledge, the higher Abhidharma, he said that there are bodhisattvas superiors who take rebirth in the desire realm and form realm but do not take rebirth in the formless realm.  Why?  Because it is not an abode where one can ripen sentient beings. 
Since bodhisattvas superiors have control over where they want to be born, the bodhisattva superiors do not choose to be born in the formless realm. 
It is said that bodhisattva superiors have a control over where they are born and they choose to be born where they can be of benefit to others. They choose to be born within the desire realm and also the form realm. 
If bodhisattva superiors have control over where they wish to be born, and since they do choose to be born in desire realm, we can therefore say that the bodhisattva superiors can choose to be born as any of the six types of migrators of the desire realm. 
So bodhisattva superiors have full control over where they want to be born and they seek to be born wherever they can be of benefit to the sentient beings. As I said earlier, they do choose to be born in the desire realm and the form realm but not the formless realm. So if the bodhisattva superiors have full control over where they want to be born and since it is said that they choose to be born in the desire realm, the six types of migrators in the desire realms, starting from the hell beings, hungry ghosts and so forth, that means we have to say that the bodhisattva superiors can choose to be born as any of the six types of migrators including to be born in the hell realm. Their being born in the hell realm is not due to karma and afflictions but it is done intentionally out of choice. But they are not a lower realm being. They take on a support that is similar to the support of a hell being.
If they are born in the hell, they are not an actual hell being. They are not lower realm beings, because it is done by choice. They have to choose a lower realm support, for example, as a hell being support. That means they looks like an actual hell being but they are not. 
Because bodhisattva superiors have abandoned negativities, they will not experience physical suffering. Because they have realized emptiness directly and see the truth directly, they have no mental suffering. Remember there is a quotation in the Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds.
Khen Rinpoche: You remember?
What we have just said is found in the Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds.
Khen Rinpoche: Somewhere there. 
As such, there can be bodhisattva superiors who take on a form realm support.
What about Hinayana arhat? What are the places or the abode or the support or the realms in which they can manifest the state of becoming an arhat achieving the Hinayana nirvana? It is said in the teachings the support of the three realms. So it is said clearly that one can become a Hinayana arhat and achieve liberation from cyclic existence on the basis of a desire realm support, a form realm support and a formless realm support.
It is said in the teachings that one can achieve liberation from cyclic existence, the Hinayana nirvana, on the basis of the desire realm support, form realm support and formless realm support. The support for achieving a nirvana on the basis of a formless realm support must be the same support when prior to achieving nirvana. That means when he was on the Hinayana Path of Meditation. 
Similarly, if you say that one can achieve nirvana on the basis of a form realm support, that support must be the same support when that individual was on the Hinayana Path of Meditation, which necessarily precedes achieving nirvana. 
So earlier on we were talking about how that one cannot newly generate the Path of Seeing and Path of Meditation in the form realm. That is talking about the Mahayana Path of Meditation. 
We talk about the Path of Seeing in which it is not possible to newly generate the Path of Seeing on the basis of a form realm support. It doesn’t matter whether it is the Mahayana Path of Seeing or the Hinayana Path of Seeing.
So the basis for newly generating the Path of Seeing, whether it is a Hinayana Path of Seeing or the Mahayana Path of Seeing, it has to be a desire realm support. Within that, we say the supreme is that of a human being, but there are also desire realm gods who can newly attain the Path of Seeing. The desire realm support has to be the support for newly generating the Path of Meditation; it doesn’t matter which Path of Meditation. 
Are there bodhisattva superiors with a form realm support? Yes. 
Are there bodhisattva superiors in the formless realms? No. 
Back to what I have just said earlier on, I am saying that there are people with a formless realm support who have achieved the Path of Meditation. So, there is a Hinayana Superior on the Path of Meditation with a formless realm support. 
Why do we say that there are Hinayana Superiors on the Path of Meditation with a formless realm support? It is said clearly in the teaching that one can achieve nirvana, let’s says the Hearer’s nirvana, and becomes a Hearer’s arhat with a formless support. 
Remember, in the context of the eight freedoms on the meanings of a long life god, one of the eight freedoms is the freedom from being a long life god. Hence, one of the meanings of the long life god here is ordinary being of the formless realm. Here, it says ordinary being of the formless realm. It doesn’t say all beings in the formless realm.
That is the reason why a long life god is posited as an ordinary being in the formless realm. It doesn’t say every single one who has a formless realm support. It is said that there are individual who attained the Hinayana Path of Seeing and the Hinayana Path of Meditation with a desire realm support but are unable to manifest the Hinayana Path of No More Learning on the basis of a desire realm support.
There are people who on the basis of desire realm support attained the Hinayana Path of Seeing, Hinayana Path of Meditation. There are those who can manifest the state of arhathood or achieve the Hinayana Path of No More Learning on the desire realm support but there are some who cannot. They reached the Hinayana Path of Meditation on the desire realm support on the basis of that but they cannot actualize the Hinayana Path of No More Learning. Then they take rebirth in the form realm and with the form realm support they achieved the Hinayana Path of No More Learning. But then there are some in the form realm support still cannot do it. They then again take rebirth in the formless realm and with the formless support they achieve the Hinayana Path of Meditation. Then they take rebirth in the formless realm and then with the formless support then they achieve the Hinayana Path of No More Learning and become an arhat. 
Actually in the second topic that characterizes the exalted knower of all aspects which is called precepts, that precepts itself when divided in certain way then there are ten divisions. 
The third one is called the precept which instructs on the basis of the Three Jewels. So, at that point in the treatise, the philosophy text, there is a very extensive explanation on this topic which is called the Twenty Sangha. The detailed explanations of the different kinds of Hinayana superiors and at which realms are they can be found in the Twenty Sangha. Perhaps in the future, if there is interest and determination to learn, then maybe we can look at it.
There is really no limit when it comes to learning the Buddhadharma especially this philosophy. Actually it is not that when you learn then everything becomes easier and easier. That is not how I see. In fact, when you learn you see more and more things, things get deeper, more subtle, more profound, more difficult. 
Just give an example, if you did manage to get an understanding of all these together with your prior understanding on the paths and grounds, how to achieve liberation, who can achieve what, the kind of support to realize emptiness and so forth, and when you look at the Lamrim topic of a human life of freedoms, for example, then you have a better understanding of what the freedom is and can really feel that this precious human rebirth is indeed precious. Otherwise, without learning in depth and having an understanding of so many other topics, when you just look at the Lamrim and  just tick off the list such as “I am free from this and that, I am a human being and so forth” , then you just sit there and think “What so big deal about these?” That is why you don’t get the feeling and the understanding. 
However when you get the overall understandings of many things, then in order to see the truth directly or to realize emptiness directly, then you know the importance of it as you cannot do that with the formless realm support. You also cannot do it with the form realm support. To see the truth directly for the first time, you need to be a human being of the desire realm. Based on this, then it is no big deal for being a god; whether it is a desire realm god or formless realm god or form realm god. After seeing all these, then you will see that this precious human rebirth is indeed a big difference. Hence this is an example of knowing and learning about many other topics which does reinforce and help our understanding of the Lamrim.
This human life of freedoms and endowments that we have achieved didn’t happen without a cause or condition. There are so many causes and conditions that must come together before we can achieve this rare precious human rebirth. We had work so hard some time in our past life to accumulate much merits. The cause of the opportunity that we have now is because we practice pure ethical discipline. Somehow it happens and along the way they were supported by practices of generosity and so forth. At the same time, we made many stainless pure aspirational prayers. We took a very long time to put together all these conditions and causes and now we are experiencing the result. Just having a human life of freedoms and endowments in itself is no big deal. Getting a human life of freedoms and endowments is not the point. We have to use it then it becomes meaningful. If we put together what we have just learnt about how we cannot achieve the realization of emptiness in this support and that support and realize how precious it is, and at the same time, we look at how it is so difficult to get such a rebirth, perhaps there are some flavors and some feeling in the mind that what we have now is really something very special and should use it to do something.
There is an analogy that is employed in the teaching. In the analogy, there is a person who is traveling to a treasure island and there is someone to guide him there. With the help of the guy, this person actually reached the treasure island. Although the treasure are there for him to take but he returned empty handed. He found the right person to guide him and took so much effort to reach the treasure island which is filled with treasures that ready for him to take it. Somehow this person didn’t take the opportunity and returned empty handed. It is really foolish of this person. Likewise, we have worked so hard and have created all the conditions before and we have guide. Now we have achieved this perfect human rebirth which is likened to having reached the treasure island. With this precious human rebirth and if we do something about it, we can even realize emptiness directly and see the truth directly. If we don’t practice, we will return empty handed. Where do we return to? We return to an inopportune state and get a rebirth where there is no opportunity of whatsoever like what we have now. Then indeed is very foolish.
Those of you who are considered yourself to be practitioners, then this topic is something that really must put aside some time to think about. It is very important. After having achieved this precious human rebirth, we should not waste it. We should use it to practice the dharma. In fact, if we get at it, we might even attain a path, perhaps even the Path of Seeing. Even we don’t manage to achieve a path but at a very least, we should work hard, practice and then plant as many imprints as possible and at the same time makes aspirational prayers to be able to actualize the path in the future life. When we realize for ourselves that we have this precious opportunity then we should motivate ourselves “Now I have this opportunity, what should I do? As much as possible, I am going to aim to generate or develop the three principles aspect of the path in my own mind. First is renunciation, then bodhichitta and the wisdom realizing emptiness”.
We have to think about this topic and be able to feel that with each and every moment that has passed and every single day that has passed and we didn’t use to learn and practice the dharma. And that was a wasted day. We need to develop this kind of feeling “Such a waste that I didn’t get to learn or I didn’t get to practice”. This is what we really need to work at.  
In the practice of rejoicing in our own merits, we rejoice in the merits that we have accumulated in the past. What we have now this precious human rebirth which is the special basis which came from its own cause. We did something positive in the past. We have accumulated a lot of merits and all the causes. That is the reason why we have achieved this basis. We need to have conviction that what we are experiencing now with this precious human rebirth is indeed incontrovertibly and without doubt a result of the positive action that we did in the past. We need this kind of ascertainment.  It is only on the basis of this ascertainment then we can rejoice about the merits of the past. Otherwise, there is no real rejoicing and if we don’t cherish the result of the merits, then there is no way to say “I rejoice in my merits that I have accumulated in the past” 
You see how the study of the deeper aspects of the Buddhist philosophy, the great treatises, is helpful. It aids in our understanding of the practice of Lamrim. With what we learn in the Buddhist philosophy, we can use the points to help us to understand better and practice the Lamrim better. What is the Lamrim?  It is the Stages of the Paths which is actually a gathering of all the essence of all the great treatises.
It is very important to know how to use what we have learned in these great Buddhist philosophical treatises and use it to help better our understanding of the Lamrim and the practice. Whatever we learned in our philosophy we must know how to put in the practice of the Lamrim. This is very important. Otherwise, we become like the example which I have gave where you don’t have many containers. You only have one or two containers, and when somebody gives you a gift, you don’t know where to put in, and you may either don’t know where to put it or you may just throw it away. As you know, one of the greatnesses of the Lamrim is that if you know the Lamrim well, you will be able to see every single scripture as something to be practiced. You not see it as just intellectual trick and is not to be practiced. That will not happen to you. If you know the Lamrim well, you know how to use every single thing you have learned in the Lamrim. If you know the Lamrim well, then you will know how to use every single thing that you study in your philosophy and also where to put it. If we don’t know the Lamrim well perhaps I think might be very difficult to utilize what we have learned in Buddhist philosophy. 
I guess there are many people who think that there is no real use in studying all these Buddhist philosophy. They may think “What is the point? It is not for practice. It is nothing to do with my practice. It is nothing to do with Lamrim”. How can that be? Because Lamrim is the essence of all the great treatises. It is just that we don’t see it. In the way, it is understandable because the great treatises are really extensive and profound.  
You know I have been saying this over and over to you. You should not be so easily discouraged when you find the going tough and find it is difficult to understand in some of the topics. You shouldn’t be discouraged so easily and quickly. If you don’t have really no real interest in dharma in the first place then of course it doesn’t matter. I am not talking about those people. If you really want to know the dharma and have really sincere interest then you must remember not to get discouraged so easily and quickly because when you get discouraged you are only blocking your own progress. Nobody is blocking your own progress. In fact, you stop your own progress.
You have to know clearly that what we are not doing short term learning here. We are not just here to find out a little bit about the Buddhadharma or we are just doing this for one month or one year. It is not that. It is a very long term study. So, for those of you who are engaged in long term study, and if you want to continue with your long term study then it is extremely important to be consistent in coming to class. If you come to class one time and then don’t come to class and come to class after a while and so forth, then you are not going to learn because, in the first place, the subject matter is really challenging. So, if you are inconsistent in coming to class then it is not going to work.
For those of you who really see the point and want to learn, you have to be consistent in coming to class. You have also to be consistent in your learning. You also have to learn all the different subjects. I guess by now you should see that all the different subjects are called different subjects are similar but not the same. They are connected. When I am teaching you guys, one of the difficulties that I find is that there is no consistency; some of you know this topic, and some of you don’t know the topic. It is very difficult to teach because everything is connected.
Take for example, now we have been going over and over again on this small little topic.  In fact, this shouldn’t happen. There is no need for that to be happened if you are consistent.
It is just a small little topic but we have been going over and over again and got stuck.  I have been explaining the same thing over and over again at different time but it is the same thing.
Khen Rinpoche: Sometimes a little bit confused myself on how to teach, where to teach, what is really beneficial for you. I don’t know. Today also we didn’t go to the topic. 
Anyway, next class I finish the knower of the path. I will complete that section. Then I will see whether go all other topics one by one. I am not sure. If you are really interested then I will go through that. Otherwise, we will take long time and challenging. Otherwise I make it short and sweet. Okay, ask one or two questions if you don’t understand. I won’t repeat this again. I only repeat this three times. Three classes I repeat same topic. I repeated the same topic in three classes, if you notice.
Student 10: Does this Yogic Autonomy Middle Way School assert a post meditative equipoise after the path of release of Mahayana Path of Seeing before initially entering to meditative equipoise of the Path of Meditation? In other words, between Path of Seeing and Path of Meditation, does the Yogic Autonomy Middle Way School assert a post meditative equipoise (subsequent attainment)?
I can find out more but as for now I guess perhaps not necessarily from the perspective of the Paths and Grounds of the Yogic Autonomy Middle Way School. I think perhaps it is meditative equipoise – uninterrupted path.
Student 10: Just only meditative equipoise? There is no subsequent attainment?
Ven Gyurme: In between Path of Seeing and Path of Meditation, according to the Yogic Autonomy Middle Way School.
Student 10: Don’t have. If that is the case then you can assert that you don’t need the rest of the meditative equipoise to accumulate the merits to make your mind more powerful to enter into your next level of meditative equipoise.
Ven Gyurme: You are saying for the rest of the grounds?
Student 10: The rest of the grounds. I can assert that as well. Because you need the subsequent attainment to accumulate to make your mind more powerful to enter into your next level of meditative equipoise to clear the afflictions.
Ven Gyurme: So you are saying there isn’t or there is no need?
Student 10: If there isn’t the consequence is that would not need to have all this as well because the same reason will apply. If you don’t need the subsequent attainment for this one, the rest of the subsequent attainment will be the same reason. We don’t need that as well.
If we assert there is a subsequent attainment, a post meditative equipoise, then it will be difficult to then account for why you newly generate the path in the higher realms. That is the consequence. This is something to think about. I will check again because there is a presentation of the paths and grounds according to the Yogic Autonomy Middle Way School. It is different and is not what we saw in class. Student 10: Can I say that the superior bodhisattva whenever they manifest in the six realms, their aspect in the support of the beings of the realm they manifest into? But by conventional nature there are mental bodies. Can I confirm this? Because I still have problem reconcile mental body with the aspect that they manifest. I don’t know how mental body plays the picture into this.
Ven Gyurme: What is the entity of support does that bodhisattva superior takes if he does manifest, let’s say, as a hell being? Does he have the aspect of the hell being? 
It is said clearly that when the bodhisattva superior takes rebirth in the hell realm, he takes on this hell being support. He looks exactly like how hell beings should look like. When this bodhisattva superior takes on the support, for example, the dog’s body, and if we happen to see such a bodhisattva in that aspect, we would not be able to tell that it is not a dog. They do whatever a normal dog does. That is what we see - being born, growing and dying in the exact manner of how a normal dog would go through. 
If they take on this aspect, they behave exactly like a dog. So, whatever aspect they take on they act exactly. That is how people would expect them to act. Of course, that bodhisattva superior is in the aspect of an animal, but he is not a real animal.
Student 11: It is about the question of subsequent attainment. If that is so, Consequence Middle Way School has a subsequent attainment. Then the basis that we talk about and think about it must follow will not follow. The thing about must be a desire realm basis and that would not hold for Consequence Middle Way School.
Ven Gyurme: Whatever the reason is, if the reason works against the Autonomy Middle Way School’s position then the opposite must be true then for the Consequence Middle Way’s position. Therefore that will invalidate the thing about generating the superior path in the higher realm. That is what you are saying?
We are talking moving from one path to another. You moving from one path to another, there is no subsequent attainment. It is from meditative equipoise to meditative equipoise.
Khen Rinpoche: You have the chart. You read there. You have the chart? Last time we gave the chart of paths and grounds.
You are talking about whether there is a wisdom of subsequent attainment in general or when you are moving from path to path?
Student 11: From the Path of Seeing to the Path of Meditation, just now he was asking between Path of Seeing …?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): What do you have in the chart?
Ven Gyurme: It is from meditative equipoise to meditative equipoise.
Student 11: After the Path of Seeing to the next uninterrupted path, there is a break right? 
What is your question? 
Ven Gyurme: Obviously there must be subsequent attainment between the two paths. Are you asking that or you are asking when you moving from Path of Seeing to Path of Meditation? What you are asking?
Student 11: I am asking between the two paths.
Ven Gyurme: You are now asking moving from path to path.
Student 11: From the path of release then after there is a subsequent attainment then the uninterrupted path with regards to that Path of Seeing and Path of Meditation. So, he is asking whether it is a meditative equipoise all the way through? It was said that likely to be all the way through as a meditative equipoise because then the explanation with the regards to saying that it must be on the basis of the desire realm being and not on the form realm being will not hold through, right? But if Consequence Middle Way School has a subsequent attainment then doesn’t hold through.
Ven Gyurme: You are talking about moving from path to path. Not whether there exists anything in between the path.
Student 11: Basically it is actually to extrapolate of what he was asking about. Just now it was on Yogic Autonomy Middle Way School.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Okay we talk next time. I don’t know how to read the chart.
Student 12: It is said in the text of the Lamrim, if we were born as a human being and we die we will not come back as a human being. If we don’t reach bodhichitta or realize emptiness then next life we will fall in the lower realm. I don’t understand. Why?
Ven Gyurme: You are saying that we are all going to the lower realm?
Student 12: That is what I read in the Lamrim.
Ven Gyurme: So, you are saying that if we don’t generate bodhichitta in this life, next life we are going to the lower realm. You are saying that?
Student 12: That is what I read.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Which Lamrim you read? You go back and you read again.
If you look at the Path of the person of small capacity, somebody who is looking for good rebirth in the future life, the main method to achieve that is to practice the ethical discipline of restraining from the ten non-virtues. As a Buddhist that practice tie in with the refuge to the Three Jewels. Since you have these two then you will achieve the goal of the person of small capacity which is a good rebirth.  It doesn’t say right from the beginning you will need bodhichitta, you will need wisdom. Otherwise, forget it.