Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/lesson20.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:47.568408
================================================================================

We have been talking about the four close placements of mindfulness. The object of close placement of mindfulness is something that is known by the wisdom and that object which is known by the wisdom is held closely by the mental factor of mindfulness. As such, there is the close placement of mindfulness.  In order to be mindful of something or able to remember or recollect of something, first one must already know that object that one is going to remember, to recollect, or to be mindful of. Without which one cannot be mindful. As such, it is said that mindfulness is a mental factor that brings to mind a valid object that one has already known. 
The close placement of mindfulness of the body is also taught in the vinaya, the ethical code of conduct.  In that context, it is being taught primarily for the ordained in that one places one’s attention on the impurity of the body, how the body is impure, how the body is filthy and how the body is impermanent.
In the sutra, it is explained that the body as something that undergoes disintegration, the body is something that will not abide for a long time, and the body is something that we will have to leave behind one day. This is how it is being mentioned in the sutra and is something that we should think about. 
The body is having the nature of disintegrating momentarily. The body is not abiding for a long time and is something that we have to leave behind one day. This is the nature of the body, and that is the reality. We first understand this reality through wisdom. Once this reality is understood by the wisdom, then we hold on to this reality with the fact as an object of our memory, as an object of our recollection, and as an object of mindfulness. We need to keep it in our mind without losing the recollection of it as we go about with our life. It doesn’t matter what we might be doing but the attention is always placed on the fact that the body being impermanent, not lasting forever, and as something that we have to leave behind.
Many people engage in all kinds of wrong livelihoods for the purpose of sustaining themselves and for the purpose of looking after their bodies. If we are able to understand the reality of the body with wisdom, we see that it is by nature impermanent, something disintegrating momentarily and it will die one day. If we know the reality and we are able to place our mindfulness on that and not forgetting on that fact as we go about doing whatever we do in life. With that understanding, recollection and mindfulness of that in our daily life, it would contribute to the abandonment of wrong livelihoods. Then one will not engage in wrong livelihoods just to make a living. On top of that, if we know the reality well and able to remember it well all the time, it will gives strength to the mind of wanting to make life meaningful. It is an impetus for us to want to use this body while we have it to engage in the practice. If we recognize and remember continually that our bodies are impure, filthy and impermanent, then comes a time we have to die and leave the body behind. This will gives impetus for us to be able to take essence from this life. This will helps in reducing any jealousy and counteracting any inflated sense of self, arrogance, and pride. Because of that, it also helps to view others in the same way in that they are not going to live long. As such, we are able to regard them in a positive light by not feeling arrogant or proud in relation to them. Perhaps we even able to regard ourselves as lower than them, perhaps as their servants. When we realize we are not going to live forever and are going to die one day, our bodies are filthy in nature and are impermanent, that might helps in not being attached to our possessions or whatever we owned in life. When we don’t have that kind of attachment to our possessions, then we may want to have these possessions meaningful and be able to use them in a beneficial way.  It is not that we don’t know that our bodies are impermanent and have to die one day. In fact, we know it. But the problem doesn’t come from that, but the problem comes from not putting it in the forefront of the mind and not putting our mindfulness on it. We know but we don’t remember it mindfully. We just forget it. We forget that our lives are impermanent and we are going to die soon. Then many problems arise in our lives.  But knowing this alone will not help, but rather it is putting it in the forefront of the mind, and leaving it there without forgetting it. As much as we can, we should put our mindfulness on it and not forgetting it all the time. We just have to get used to it, and it is a matter of familiarization. It will be helpful if we do that.  Otherwise, just having the intellectual knowledge that we are going to die is not really useful. But rather, it is the remembrance that is useful. If we don’t remember about this, then when things get difficult in life, some people may not know what to do and got lost. For example, when we suddenly get sick, we have so much worry about the sickness and don’t know what to think. If we do recognize the reality of the body, and more importantly to remember it, we may know that this is just life. We are bound to get sick and sooner or later we have to die. If we bring this fact to mind, then having a sickness will not cause us that much worry or difficulty. Before we can place our mind attention closely on the body being filthy, dirty and impermanent, we first must recognize that fact. That recognition and understanding is what wisdom does. Wisdom is the mind that understands and sees the reality as it is. Wisdom is not a mind that goes around making things up such as “It is my mind that creates the fact that the body is dirty and impermanent”. Wisdom is not like that. That is superimposition. So wisdom is the mind that sees reality as it is. In this case, it is wisdom that sees the impure body as impure, just as it is impure. Also, the wisdom is seeing the impermanent body as impermanent, just as it is impermanent. In this case, this is what wisdom is. 
In the vinaya, it is explained that one should sit in the seven-fold Vairocana posture, and look at the body like a sickness or like a disease.  When we sit down and engage in the close placement of mindfulness of the body, we are looking at our own body primarily and not so much looking at other people’s body. Rather, it is focusing on our body and views it like a sickness. As we have discussed before, the basic nature of this body is suffering. Because of that nature, the body is like a disease.  It is explained that we should view the body like a sickness or disease. It is very much like how when we have a disease such as cancer with tumor appears on the body, and some of the tumor grows really big. 
With that sickness as the condition, then a bodily growth arises such as a big tumor.  So view the body like a disease with a tumor and knowing that we are going to die. The tumor here is analogous of the pain because when there is bodily growth such as a tumor, and the tumor causes pain. So that is the viewing of the body like a disease or a sickness. 
Then there is also the viewing of the body like weapon with pointed edges in which when we touch it, it is painful.  It is also being described that we can view the body like a poison in which one will not die immediately if one took the poison due to its slow reaction. But it is a matter of time that the poison manifests and in the process one suffers with pain, and eventually one will die. 
There is also an explanation of viewing the body as impermanent, as empty, and as selfless. This is how it is explained in the vinaya. The purpose of reflecting and meditating on how the body is dirty and filthy is to counteract desire and attachment. So this meditation is helpful for those who are very desirous and have very strong attachment. 
There are also other meditations that counteract attachment for our body. We might be attracted to another person’s body for various reasons. One can be attracted to the person’s shape, color or touch. The suggested meditation to counteract this is to imagine the color or the shape or how the body will feel if one touches it in the 8th or 9th decomposition process.  
People could be attracted to others’ bodies because of the color, the shape or the touch. Let’s say, someone is attracted to somebody’s body because of the color, then the suggested meditation is to imagine the object of attachment, the color of the body, slowly changes to bluish when a person die.  Imagine that happen to the object of attachment, the body. Then the next step is imagining that boils appear on the person’s body and pus starts to come out. The third step is that when the boils dry up, or the pus leaks out, then what is left at the end is just bare flesh. 
One can imagine that happens to the object of attachment, the body, if one is attracted by the color of the body. We are attracted to a person’s body color, shape or touch. Here, we are talking about the color which is beautiful and attractive. In place of that recognition, if we were to impute the sense of ugliness onto that body, that will oppose any idea of the body as being attractive.  If we do find somebody else’s body is attractive because of the shape, then we can meditate on two aspects to counteract that attachment:
One is to imagine that the person’s body is eaten by maggots; literally we call it the meditation on the aspect of eating. Then there is the aspect of breaking down. When the body is eaten by maggots and after a while, it breaks into different parts (i.e. the body breaks apart instead of a whole). The various parts are just dispersed. So these are the two aspects that counteract attachment to the shape of one’s object of attachment, body. 
If one is attached to the touch of another’s body, and earlier on there is a meditation on where the body is all eaten up and the body breaks into different parts. Even though the body is broken down into various parts, imagine those individual parts are also eaten by maggots. Then one meditates on the end result after the maggots have eaten up everything, and what is left is just the skeletons. 
If our attachment is towards wanting ourselves or for other’s body to be served, honored or respected, then imagine the body is like a corpse as the corpse has no reaction and is not moving. The meditation on viewing the body like a walking skeletons or skeletons sitting down or whatever act, it is as an antidote to those various forms that an attachment may take in relation to our body. These meditations can counteract manifest forms of desire and attachment. When desire and attachment arises and manifest, and for the time being, these meditations are helpful in that they can reduce the sense of attachment or desire or at least make it non-manifest. These meditations alone cannot stop attachment completely. In order to overcome attachment completely, there is only one way and that is to realize selflessness.
Khen Rinpoche: I haven’t seen this thing but I heard in Thailand that there are Theravada traditions. They really go to this. They keep the body there and bring all the novice monk to look at how the body decay. One day, second day, third day, after five days to see what happen. You want to go? I mean that is the reality of our body is exactly like this; no difference. I hope that it still exists there but I haven’t seen. I mean to train your mind to reduce the attachment. So I think is very helpful to do this meditation. Now we only talk and only imagine and we don’t see it. You didn’t see and think that our body is disgust. Nothing to be so much cherished and attached. This was explained in the vinaya. 
With regards to the meditation on viewing the body as a skeleton, then there are different ways in which we can do it. We can talk about it and think about it. In the Abhidharmakosa, there is an explanation of viewing the body as skeleton; basically a body of whether it is our body or somebody else’s body that we are attached to. In your mind you visualize that the body you are attached to as being a skeleton. 
You visualize that certain parts of the body are eaten by maggots. You can either visualize the tip of your big toe is eaten up by maggots until the point where one can see the bone. This is how it is explained. We start with a certain part of the body like the edge of our big toe or the point of the mid brow where the maggots start to eat the flesh till the point where some bone is revealed. From there, you can imagine that more and more bone is revealed as the flesh is eaten up by the maggots. You imagine to the point whereby all the flesh is eaten and then what is left is just the skeleton.  Likewise, imagine that happening to everyone as a skeleton and viewing the whole world is filled with skeletons.  I guess perhaps that meditation here is to start with ourselves. After that, we imagine that our one skeleton becoming more and more till it fills up our room or our house. Then it goes out of the house and fills up the place, the country and the world. Not sure but I guess maybe it is like that. 
You then visualize that similar skeleton of yours becoming more and more and filling up the room, the whole house, the place, the country and eventually the whole world. After that then you withdraw. The skeletons absorb into one and another. Finally, absorbing into the original skeleton and then we place our attention on that one skeleton. This is prescribed for beginners.
Khen Rinpoche: For the beginners.
Then the next stage of meditation, in essence, is similar. The only difference is that after one has withdrawn all the skeletons back to the original skeleton and instead of revealing the entire skeleton, that original skeleton becomes half its size.
We start off in the same way in the third stage in that at the end, we withdraw all the skeleton back into our body. The difference between the second and third stage is that instead of focusing on just half of the body at the end of it, we focus just on our skull. We dissolve all the skeletons out there back into our body. What remains is only just the skull. There is nothing else but just the skull. Then place your attention on this.
The fourth stage is again similar. The only difference is that at the end we withdraw the skeletons back to our body. What is left to our body is just that bone at the area of the mid brow. You don’t even have the skull but just the bony part near the mid brow. What remains is the size of the thumb. That is all that is remain. At the end, all the skeletons are drawn into that and one places one’s attention on that alone 
In the chapter 8 of Shantideva’s Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds, it was explained that the main obstacle for developing concentration is attachment, in particular it was explained that the attachment to the body is the main hindrance. That is why there is so much emphasis on presenting all the antidotes to counteract attachment to the body. When we are not able to practice dharma, such as not able to sit down and think about dharma, and not able to sit down and meditate, basically the main problem is attachment, in particular having a lot of attachment to the body. That is why there are all these antidotes. If we fail to counteract attachment to the body, then real dharma practice is pretty much very difficult. Pure dharma practice, real dharma practice, real reflection, and real meditation do not happen unless we work at counteracting the attachment. Most of us and most people have a lot of difficulties because of attachment, especially attachment to the body; whether it is our own body or somebody else’s’ body. It is a difficult and challenging issue for everyone. Unless we are able to counteract this kind of attachment, or else it is just difficult. If you are able to place your attention on the fact the bodies, our bodies and others’ body are just dirty, filthy and impermanence, and we will decay and will die one day, then it is very helpful for the mind. With this mindfulness only then we are able to make our life meaningful.
IO one hand, we are told how extraordinary precious the human life of freedoms and endowments is. A human life of freedoms and endowments is even more precious than the world god’s life. Yes, although the human body is dirty, filthy, is impermanence, will decay, one day it will die but it is also emphasize that a human life is very precious.
The reason why our human life of freedoms and endowments is precious is because with it we can achieve many goals – the goals of this life, the goals and happiness of future life including achievement of liberation and enlightenment. All these goals are achieved on the basis of the human life of freedoms and endowments. That is why it is precious. There is no reason why it is precious other than this.  We discuss earlier on that on the basis of this human life of freedoms and endowments, it is possible to newly achieve Path of Seeing and Path of Meditation, i.e. something that cannot be achieved even with the god’s rebirth. Although this human body is filthy, dirty and impermanence yet it is very precious in which we can do many things with it. Therefore, we have to take care of it and use of it well and don’t let it go to waste.
Khen Rinpoche: In our home town, people keep all the cow dungs. It is dirty but they cherish so much. They keep that. Why? They know it is useful but they know it is dirty. Even cow poo, immediately many people rush there put the hand there and take it home. It is happening because they can use for fertilizer. Also after they use they make like a bread with the hand and then put on the wall and dry up. After one, two months the cow dung is totally dried up so they use as fire to cook. Very powerful fire become that they use for cooking and the food cook on that is delicious.
This human life of freedoms and endowments is precious; therefore we have to take care of it. We must know how to take care of it. Otherwise, it is just taking care of something which is very dirty and filthy. If we don’t know how then it is just taking care of a bag of filth.  Our life is already difficult. If we lead a life motivated by attachment and desire, we just making it more difficult. That is the same as going out and collecting huge amount of shit. Then you leave it in your room for you to smell. 
As we don’t know what to do with the shit that we have collected, then we put it there and it smells. Anyway, these are the various antidotes that are taught for those who are very desirous to counteract their attachment. By depending on those various meditations that was explained earlier in order to counteract attachment to various aspects of the bodies, it is said that meditation on the body as the skeletons act as the antidote to the various aspects of attachment for the body. If we find ourselves having a lot of desire or attachment for a body, whether it is our body or somebody else’s body, then this meditation if done will be is helpful.
You have to see for yourself whether it works or not. When you experience strong desire or attachment, then you think of this meditation and try you see whether it works or not. Due to the fact it works and it does help to counteract any manifest desire and attachment. You have to try for yourself. I have mentioned about the close placement of mindfulness on our bodily conduct the last class. The essence is that we have to check whether we are using our body to harm or hurt others or not. So, to continuing to place mindfulness on that, we don’t use our body to harm others.  It is not that we don’t know the information. We know all these information. We have studied all these. 
When we create non-virtue with our body, speech and mind, there are these four ripening effects. All these come about if we engage in any action that it is harmful or harms and hurts others with our body, speech and mind. If we do it then the damage is done and it hurt. There are these four results. We know all these. It is not that we don’t know. But whether we remember it and act on it or not, the idea is to place close placement of mindfulness to remember that so to stop ourselves as much as possible to harm others.  When we are mindful of not hurting others physically, harming others verbally and also does not create non-virtue, negative karma of hurting or harming others, there is also the added element of benefitting others especially if we act physically or verbally in the way that is beneficial to others. On top of the earlier benefit of not harming them there is also the benefit of creating merit of benefitting others. 
Khen Rinpoche: I mean it makes a big difference to us on how we behave. It is important. One day I went to one shop to look for shoe in Singapore. In one of the shops, there was one lady who was helping there. I tried the shoe but she didn’t give me the socks. Can I have the socks? Then after she brought the socks. How she bring the socks? She brought the two socks, not the new one, with two hands. She is not Buddhist. She is Malay. She doesn’t know anything about me, not about respect of me, nothing but she gave me the socks with two hands together. I mean in some shops you go, they give with one hand, like this. If it is your own experience, how you feel in your mind. Somebody gives something with two hands to you respectfully. Of course, you feel happy. Somebody gives you something maybe with no respect or the way they behave, immediately in your mind, not angry but you have some kinds of thought that this person is not so good. Or immediately you project that this person is arrogant or not nice. Immediately it creates some unhappiness there. So, whatever you want to buy, you won’t buy because it is unpleasant, and you don’t like it. This is not good so you don’t want to buy. You go off. If the person does respectfully, you will buy the thing and both get the benefit. I get the benefit as the person makes me happy by just small action. I am telling this that as a Buddhist, I think we need to do something that our action is not like hurting so much to people. As much as possible, smile with respect. Don’t be so arrogant, and always act as low as possible. I mean that really bring so much joy to others. I am just giving small example. If you do that, when the return comes back immediately people respect us back. They won’t show you black face. So, it is extremely important for ourselves on how we behave, and how you show your face to others. I am not saying that I am always perfect. I have a lot of difficulties myself also. I am not perfect. It is extremely important for everybody to try to do that. Try to talk to people, smile to people, say hello to people. When you see each other, not like not seeing each other like that, it really just creating so much energy there. Idea is that. Just unhappy with each other will create so much negative energy. We talk about life is not too long. It is short. How long you can live? One year? Two years? One month? Ten years? I mean nobody can predict. This is something we need to remind ourselves all the time. I think it is extremely important to be mindfulness on your body and speech. Same thing also when you speak to people. The way your talk can bring so much happiness, joy for the other person. But with the same word, same speech can bring so much pain or suffering to others. Therefore, always be mindful on how you communicate, and how you talk to people. This is extremely important. I did mention long time ago, when I was in Dharamsala. I think that was 1986 or 1987. I am in Dharamsala in Tushita for two months memorizing some texts. In December or January, it was very cold there. In the morning about 9:30 am like that, the sun rise. I just came out from the room and sit at the garden to get some heat from the sun. That morning a group of people with a nun came. I know the ang mo nun. I know her. She came from below Dharamsala with 5 or 6 people to Tushita. I have never talked to her but I know her. I was outside the gompa there. Then she came and asked me where is Ven Roger’s room. I was so cold and just came out sitting there. I pointed to the room. Of course, I can see the room as it is not so far.  I just said “that room”. She was so mad and upset and angry with me. Then she shouted at me saying “Why don’t you stand up and show me the room?” Of course, I am so upset and angry and didn’t move at all. I said “Just in front the window there and that is the room. Go there”. I didn’t move. If you think deeply, it is my own problem. If I stand up and show the room “Come, this is the room”, I think will solve all the problems. But I didn’t do that and she was so upset. She tells the French nun. Then I go to His Holiness’s teaching.  When she sees me, she just doesn’t want to face me like seeing a ghost. Don’t want to see like that. That went on for almost two or three weeks like that. She tells another monk “This monk is so arrogant”. She told so many stories about me so bad this and that. After that, one nun that I know talks to me “Why don’t you go and apologize to her. Go and say sorry. It will be okay like that”. But I didn’t go. 
Then one day, she arranges dinner for two of us to be together. The nun organized and then we sit down and talk and after that no more problem. She knows I am Kopan monk. Then she says “Last time I helped so much. I did so much. I did this and that. Now I am not going to help Kopan.” She says so much to me. Like that, she goes and talks to Rinpoche of this and that. 
Actually it is very small but it becomes very big issue. After a while, one month or something it is okay. Then we have dinner which another nun organized. We didn’t say sorry. Anyway, there was talk and after that it was okay. 
I mean she walks from down to up and she will be tiring and cold. She doesn’t know also that I just came out from the room for the sun. When she asked me, if I ever able to do this respectfully then I think then there is no issue at all. So, when we think about that, who really created the problem? Then it is myself. I started the problem, not her. Sometimes, it is really important to recognize oneself. Sometime, unhappy with this and that but look deep down. If yourself is wonderful, and if yourself did correctly who is there to be upset. I think no one will be upset with you. I think so. If you smile, people with smile back. If you are not smiling then people will not smile back. Therefore, if we really have to think deeply, we always blame on others “This person is so… I am perfect, I didn’t do anything wrong. I am so good. Why this person do that? Why this person is upset? Why this person do…?” In reality it is like that but we never think that way. We always think problem from other side. Oneself never is the cause of the problem. 
So, that is I am talking here. It really important to be mindful on how we speak, and how we react.  Then that make huge difference for oneself that can bring so much happiness. I just said this example person gives me the socks with two hands. It is such a simple action but that makes a difference. You go to restaurant, and how some waitress serve you, how they talk to you extremely pleasant, they serve so well, they are so pleasant, and they smile. If you are looking as a business, of course, that is the best way to do. You bring all the customers to your restaurant because how you serve others. We as a Buddhist, we have so much commitment, refuge, not to harm sentient beings, taking bodhisattva vows. After that taking tantric vows, making so much promising for our gurus, Buddha, and all mother sentient beings. But in reality even one sentient being you cannot stand. What I am saying is that we really need to think deeply. You all learnt so much, but you really need to think how to behave ourselves. Nobody to blame.  As. I was mentioning one time in the Chinese class you becomes like a compassionate Buddha. Once you behave well, you talk nicely, your manner very pleasant then you are little compassionate Buddha. What is the difference? Everybody loves you, really caring, less problem. Sometimes we learned so much, this topic, that topic, this and that. We know so many dharma, knowledge but action is zero. That is one person saying “Knowing everything but don’t know one thing.”  One of the Kadampa masters says something like that. “You know everything, but don’t know one thing.” Therefore it is important we learn the four mindfulness and at same time how to be mindful on body, speech and mind. Always remembering that. Really important.
As it is mentioned in the Lamrim, of all the awareness or recognition, the best supreme attitude of recognition or awareness is that of death and impermanence. If we can remember that at the back of the mind all the time, we are definitely going to die and the time of death is uncertain. That attitude, that remembrance and awareness is said to be the best of all the aware nesses.
The Kadampa master has says “We know a hundred things but we miss out one thing”. That one thing is death and impermanence. Because of not remembering to bring death and impermanence to mind, we are like a person who actually doesn’t know everything although we know one hundred other things. But if we don’t remember death then there is pretty the same as not knowing the other hundred things.
Then for those whose minds that are always very busy, and just thinking of stuffs on these and that, literally having a lot of discursive thoughts, then the recommended antidote is mindfulness on the breathing - breathing meditation. I think I might mention it in the next class. There are six points with regards to the meditation for counteracting the discursiveness. This is found in the auto commentary to the Abhidharmakosha. In the current day, the Theravada tradition, which is one of the Hinayana’s subschool and can be found  in the Pali canon. In the Sutra, a lot of which are not available in the Tibetan edition but in the Pali canon, there is a lot of explanation on how to cultivate mindfulness in daily activity while walking, sitting, lying down, eating and so forth. There is also a lot of explanation apparently on the mindfulness on the breathing. I think I will talk about this in the next lesson. Perhaps you might find it useful for your own reflection. As I have explained, you can also kind of think about it as I go along. Perhaps that might be useful.
We have talked about four close placement of mindfulness. You think about how through the meditation on the four close placement of mindfulness we enter into the four noble truths. That is the question. The second part is in particular how the close placement of mindfulness of the mind leads us into engaging into the true cessation.  This one is challenging but think about it and see whether you have any opinion like “If I think about this close placement of mindfulness of mind in this way and because of that there is how we can engage the true cessation. If you have an opinion thinking that maybe this way of thinking is good, then that will be good”.
Khen Rinpoche: Anyway, the idea is better explanation. Able to have better explanation from you on the topic number 3, mindfulness on mind on how they lead into the understanding of true cessation. If you think maybe you might have better idea. That day, I talked but I am not sure what I am talking does make sense, I don’t know.  I am not confident myself of what I said. Have to say something that is why I said. I am not really confident what I am saying on that also. Not like 100% is correct so I didn’t get that. 