Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/lesson14.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:51:03.943386
================================================================================

Khen Rinpoche: Those who have done their homework, maybe someone can come out and read. You have done so and what you do is just to read. 
Student 1: Just want to see whether my thinking is correct or not.
Khen Rinpoche: When she reads, please listen. Then if she is not correct, you make the correction, okay? Then from there you learn. When somebody reads, you must listen and must pay attention. 
Student 1: First, the possibility between the exalted knower of aspects and the knower of paths. Something which is both the exalted knower of aspects and the knower of paths.Example: Mahayana mind generation in the exalted knower of aspects exist is both the exalted knower of aspects and the knower of paths.
Khen Rinpoche: What is the first example? You took out the both. Something is both. You give one example.
Student 1: Mahayana mind generation exist in both the exalted knower of aspects and the knower of paths.
Khen Rinpoche: What do you mean by that? It is not so clear for me. What do you mean?
Student 1: If I would to rephrase it, mind generation are present in both the exalted knower of aspects and the knower of paths.
Khen Rinpoche: I didn’t get the first one. If something is both, you are talking something is both. What is both? Give an example of what is that?
Student 1: Mind generation.
Khen Rinpoche: Mind generation? You are talking about the bodhicitta mind? 
Student 1: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: The bodhicitta mind is both. You are saying that? 
Student 1: I would have to say ‘Yes’.
Khen Rinpoche: The bodhicitta mind is both -the first one and the second one. Yeah, okay then the next one.
Student 1: All the eleven characteristics of the knower of the paths in the continuum of a buddha superior are both the exalted knower of aspects and knower of paths.
Khen Rinpoche: Eleven aspect.
Student 1: Eleven topics of knower of paths in the continuum in the buddha superior are both the exalted knower of aspects and knower of paths
Khen Rinpoche: First one I don’t think so is correct. If you are talking about the eleven aspects, there are many, the Path of Seeing, the Path of Meditation, that doesn’t exist within the eleven. You remember there is Path of Seeing and there is Path of Meditation? These do not exist in the buddha’smind
Student 1: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: You said all the eleven exist in Buddha mind
Student 1: All the eleven topics in the knower of paths in the continuum of the buddha superior.
Khen Rinpoche: You mean the buddha have all the eleven topics? You are saying like that.
Student 1: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: Buddha don’t havePath of Seeing and Path of meditation.
Student1: Of course, all the eleven topics of the knower of paths.
Khen Rinpoche: Buddha don’t have.
Student 1: Buddha have.
Khen Rinpoche: Buddha have path of seeing?
Student 1: Yes. No? Okay understand.
Khen Rinpoche: Many things to learn.
Student 1: I try another one. Something is exalted knower of aspects but not the knower of paths -example would be the resultant perfection of wisdom in the buddha superior that does not exist in the knower of paths. 
Khen Rinpoche: You forgot the boundary of the knower of paths? It exist from the Mahayana Path of Seeing till Buddha ground.
Student: Right to the Buddha ground. 
Ven Gyurme: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: What you are saying contradicts with the boundary.
Student 1: I am saying the resultant of perfection wisdom in the buddha superior does not exist in the knower of paths. Is not true?I think I will give up from here. Let somebody else try or should I try another one. Maybe all wrong. But at least I try.
Khen Rinpoche: Good to try. Not expecting answer to be perfect. Good to try.
Student 1: I thought the resultant perfection of wisdom in buddha superior does not exist in the knower of paths. Yeah, so it will be the same if any consciousness of a buddha superior does not exist in the knower of paths also would be wrong? 
Ven Gyurme: It is not about existing in. You should phrase it “is knower of path or not knower of paths”. It is not the existing in or out. Is the resultant perfection of wisdom in the knower of paths or not?
Student 1: Just now I say no. Was it wrong?
Khen Rinpoche: Yes it is wrong. Totally wrong.
Student 1: Alright. So in another words, it will be inclusive.
Khen Rinpoche: Whatever is an exalted knower of aspects is necessarily a knower of paths.
Student 1: Right, Yes. So I got it.
Khen Rinpoche: But the exalted knower in the continuum of a buddha superior is necessarily an exalted knower of aspects and it is necessarily a knower of paths. 
Student 1: Maybe something which is a knower of paths but not in an exalted knower of aspects would be the knower of paths that knows the Hearers’ path in the continuum of a bodhisattva superior exists in the knower of paths but not in an exalted knower of aspects.
Khen Rinpoche: Okay that I will give ten marks. Just now zero mark.
Student 1: In another word, all the characteristics of the knower of path, the eleven topics of the exalted knower of aspects is not the knower of paths in the ….also confusing. I think I skip that.
Khen Rinpoche: I confuse you and you confuse me. 
Student 1: Something that is neither exalted knower of aspectsnor knower of paths would be i-phone and things like that. Yeah I think on the basis of that I may also got it wrong. 
For the possibilities of the knower of paths and knower of bases, something that is bothknower of paths and knower of bases, an illustration is the wisdom realizing the selflessness of a self-sufficient substantial existent person within the continuum of a Mahayana superiorbecause it abides in a lesser vehicle class of realization and also in the continuum of a Mahayana superior.
Khen Rinpoche: That sounds correct
Student 1: Can I say that all the nine topics of knower of bases in the continuum of a bodhisattva superior are both the knower of paths and knower of bases.
Khen Rinpoche: There are nine topics that characterize the knower of bases, right?
Student 1: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: You think all nine necessary to be knower of bases? I don’t think so.
Student 1: So at least those that are listed in knower of bases, all the nine topics are being listed down in the knower of bases.
Khen Rinpoche: Yes there are nine topics.
Student: If they are not knower of bases why are they listed under knower of bases?
Ven Gyurme : I think many people here think that the topic illustrates the category is necessary in that category. I think a lot of people think that.
Student 1: Because of that I would like to ask a question. The last topic is Mahayana Path of Seeing so I was thinking it shouldn’t be in the knower of bases. I was quite confused why is it being listed in under the knower of bases?
Khen Rinpoche: If you remembered what I have said about the exalted knower of all aspects, there are 10 topics that illustrates or characterized this exalted knower of all aspects. There are two ways in which the topics characterizes or illustrates the exalted knower of all aspects. 
The cause illustrating the effect. 
The object illustrating the subject.
These are the two ways of illustrations. Through these two ways of illustration we come to understand what is being illustrated. Here, is the exalted knower of all aspects. So depending on these two methods of illustration, one comes to have a better understanding what an exalted knower of all aspects is. For example, the first topic that illustrates the exalted knower of all aspects is mind generation.
Through the understanding the mind generation as a cause, for example, one comes to understand the resultof the mind generation. We are not saying that mind generation is necessary an exalted knower of all aspects. 
Student 1: Not necessary.
Khen Rinpoche: Something which is an illustration is not necessary that which is being illustrated.
For example, when you see smoke, you come to understand that there is fire. But smoke is not fire.
Student 1: Just now that one I was illustrating was wrong if I were to lump all that nine topics together. Even though they illustrates but not necessary belong to that knower. Okay, understand.
Khen Rinpoche: When I talked about the ten topics that illustrates the exalted knower of all aspects, there are two manners of illustration:
Illustrating the effect with its cause. 
Illustrating the subject through an object
We are not saying the object is the subject and we are not saying the cause is the effect.
Student 1: Something that is knower of paths but not the knower of bases. Example, the mind generation or the wisdom directly realizing emptiness of true existence in the continuum of a bodhisattva superior is a knower of paths but is not a knower of bases because he does not abide in the lesser vehicle class of realization.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Your example is correct but your ??? I don’t know.
Student 1: Something is a knower of bases but not a knower of paths. Example is the wisdom realizing the selflessness of a self-sufficient substantially existent self within the continuum of a Hinayana superior. 
Khen Rinpoche: Correct.
Ven Gyurme : Something that is not both….
Student 1: Yeah, iphone, telephone.
Ven Gyurme : You could say ignorance.
Student 1: The possibility of the knower of aspects and knower of bases. Or you don’t need? Okay. Thank you.
Khen Rinpoche: She reads, some correct, some mistakes but is good enough. Everybody should put effort to do the homework. Everybody makes mistake. By mistake then we learn. Sometimes you don’t want to show out your mistake, and pretending to know and you don’t learn much. When I say read, you should immediately come out and read. Shouldn’t worry about showing the mistakes. Of course we all make mistakes. If you have mistakes, of course, I will say you have mistakes, just accept and from that you learn it. Homework is very important. You think, you write. You think correct, come here, then is not correct. From there you learned. This way then you never forgets. Otherwise very difficult. If I say something, you think “Today I knower of paths, knowers this and that”. After two days, three days totally zero. Forget everything. But doing homework, because you think a lot then you write down. From there you read, discuss then that will be much clear. So homework is important. Do that. Then Sunday come together then you share your homework. I write this and somebody knows better can correct each other. So that this way can learn. Of course, this topic is not easy. A lot of things to know and understood. It is not easy.
We have finished with the three exalted knowers. Next is the four applications. 
The first of four is the complete aspects application. 
Definition of the complete aspects application: The bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined with the wisdom cultivating the compendium of the aspects of three exalted knowers. 
Boundary - It exists from the Mahayana Path of Accumulation till the end of the continuum (of the sentient beings). 
If we look at it simply, if it is a complete aspects application it is necessarily a path in the continuum of a bodhisattva. 
If it is a path in the continuum of a bodhisattva, it is necessarily a complete aspects application. 
So at the bare minimum, you should be able to say this; “The complete aspects of application is a path in the continuum of a bodhisattva.” 
If we looked at the name “Complete aspects application”
“Complete aspects” means all the aspects without missing any. 
Aspects of exalted knower of all aspects. 
Aspects of knower of paths.
Aspects of knower of bases. 
Complete aspects application is a mind that meditates on the aspects of these three knowers. 
What does the bodhisattva meditate on? They meditate on the aspects of the three knowers. 
How the bodhisattva doesmeditates on the aspects of the three exalted knowers completely. 
The bodhisattva can meditates on those object individually or he meditates on the compendium of those aspects completely.
So in the case of complete aspects application, as seen in the definition, the complete aspects application is a mind that meditates on a compendium of the aspects of the three exalted knowers.
The complete aspects application is not something that meditates on the aspects individually, but rather meditates on a compendium of the aspects.
So the complete aspect application is a mind that cultivates a compendium of aspects of the three exalted knowers. What does it means “to cultivate a compendium of aspects of the three exalted knowers”? In Tibetan, is literally to gather, to bring together, or to summarize all the aspects. As it is not so straight forward, you need to investigate and to think about it. 
According to Gyaltsab Je commentaries,Ornament of Essential Explanation, he says the meaning of cultivating a compendium of aspects of the three exalted knowers means to cultivate these aspects with a union of calm-abiding and special insight. With this as the scriptural authority, we say that a bodhisattva necessarily realized calm-abiding, and bodhisattva necessary has special insight. Why? Because they cultivate the compendium of the aspects of the three exalted knowers and the meaning of that is to cultivate them with a union of calm-abiding and special insight.
The meaning of cultivating a compendium of the aspects of the three exalted knowers is not clearly stated in any of the text. That is why it is a bit challenging. I remembered my own teacherGenlaused the example of going to the very top of the building and then look at the view. You see whatever is in front of you in its entirety. What you don’t see is the individual building here and there. This is the analogy and you can apply to the meaning as to how the bodhisattva cultivates a compendium of the aspects of the three exalted knowers. In the case of the complete aspects application, it is not like looking at one or two aspects individually but the bodhisattva engages all the aspects collectively i.e. in its entirety.
Although the complete aspects application is the mind that cultivates a compendium of the aspects of the three exalted knowers, this doesn’t mean that therefore the complete aspects application is necessarily a mind that realizes each and every single 173 aspect. There is no necessity of realization.
In summary, the complete aspects application is the practice of the bodhisattvaof cultivating a compendium of the aspects of the three exalted knowersbymeditate on all the 173 aspects of the three exalted knowers. How do they do so? They meditate all of them completely in a condensed way. They cultivate the compendium of the aspects of the three exalted knowers. What does it mean when we say cultivate a compendium of the aspects of the three exalted knowers? It means the practice is done with a union of calm-abiding and special insight. That is about it and we have to think for ourselves what it means.
[BP1: The application in complete aspects means to meditate on all these aspects in their entirety and this meditation is done through gathering them together. 
What is the meaning of “gathering them together?” It means to meditate on all the 173 aspects together in their entirety rather than focusing on a single specific aspect. The analogy is that of standing on a very high mountain looking down at a city. One sees the whole city in its entirety rather than looking at a particular building. The word “yoga”’ has many meanings. In this context, it refers to the bodhisattva training in the mind of enlightenment]
Student 1: is it correct to say that such a union of calm abiding and special insight not necessarily talking about focusing on emptiness? 
Khen Rinpoche: Not necessary.
Student 1: Then you can cover the Path of Accumulation.
Khen Rinpoche: No difference? You said realized emptiness no difference? Yeah
Student 2: What does the term bodhisattva yoga means? 
Khen Rinpoche:  What kind of yoga bodhisattva does? 
The yogi is the one who does yoga. What is yoga? The word for yoga in Tibetan isneljor:
Nel refers to the natural state. In the ultimate sense, it refers to the final nature of phenomena. 
Jor means to connect, and in the sense to realize. 
So technically, a real yogi is someone who realizes the final nature of phenomena. 
The word for yoga is neljor- two syllables. 
Nel here can mean the natural state, or the clear light nature of mind. You can also take it to mean the afflictions has never ever abided in the nature of the mind. 
So the yogi is somebody who realizes that. You can explained it like that.Such a person is a yogi - the real meaning of practitioner.
If you remembered the terminological division of the perfection of wisdom, the first one is the natural perfection of wisdom. You can take it as the meaning of nel, the natural state, the final nature of all phenomena. 
The mind that realizes that directly is the path of perfection of wisdom.
The person who realizes that is the yogi. He possesses the yoga and that’s why he is a yogi. He realizes the natural state.
What I have just said is probably the ultimate (final, highest) meaning of the word yoga. Based on that is the highest meaning of yogi -the one who possesses the yoga. That is like the final sense. 
The word ‘yoga’ can mean different things. For example, a person who practices generosity with no self-cherishing attitude or whatsoever and is completely for the sake of others, can be called a yogi, a good practitioner.
You can also say a person who practices without any attraction to the happiness of this life and without attraction to the happiness of samsara is a yogi. You can called such a practitioner a yogi.
This is just my own idea. You can read nel to mean the state of liberation and enlightenment or the highest level of happiness, and jorto meanto move towards that or to actualize that. So that person who has that mind moving towards that nel, the state of liberation and enlightenment, is the yogi.
In this context here, the bodhisattva yoga in the definition of the complete aspects applicationrefers to any practice that is in the continuum of a bodhisattva.As such, a bodhisattva is necessary a bodhisattva yogi. 
In the first three chapters of the Ornament of Clear Realization, the aspects of the three knowers are presented individually:
Chapter one is theexalted knower of aspects,
Chapter two is the knower of paths
Chapter three is the knower of bases.
The aspects of three knowers are presented but that is not sufficient. One needs to meditate or cultivate the aspects of these three knowers. One’s meditation must be conjoined with the application.
Chapter seven is the momentary application. In short, momentary application is the mind of the bodhisattva that has attained steadiness or stability with respect to all aspects of the exalted three knowers. It only exists for a very short time. 
Where do it exists? It only exists at the end of the continuum of a sentient being. 
In order for momentary application to come about, one must gained stability or steadiness with respect to aspects to the three exalted knowers. As such, before onecan achieves momentary application, one must cultivate serial application. As such, chapter six of the serial application is presented. 
The purpose of cultivating the serial application is for somebody who has not gained stability or steadiness with respect to the aspects of the three exalted knowers. It is for that person to gain steadiness or stability with respect to the aspects of the three exalted knowers.
Before one can cultivate serial application, one must achieve peak application, which is its basis. One gainspeak application to gain mastery over the aspects of the three exalted knowers.
Before one can cultivate peak application, which is cultivation of gaining mastery over the aspects of three exalted knowers, one first must meditate on the aspects of the three exalted knowers. As such one begin with the complete aspects application.This is the reason why the complete aspects application is the first of the four application.
[Extracted from Overview of the Ornament for Clear Realization
The Ornament for Clear Realization is composed entirely of verses and is dividedinto eight chapters. Each chapter presents one clear realization, which ischaracterized by specific topics. The topics help to enhance the understanding ofeach clear realization by describing different features such as cause, entity, and result.
A total of eight clear realizations are presented. 
The first three − an exaltedknower of all aspects, a knower of paths, and a knower of bases − are objects to begenerated; 
The next four − an application in complete aspects, peak application,serial application, and instantaneous application − are the four practices to beengaged in; and 
The final clear realization − exalted wisdom truth body − is thefinal object to be attained. In this way, the entire bodhisattva path to enlightenment,or buddhahood, is clarified.]
This is how one explains the four applications starting with the momentary application.Before one can have momentary application one must have the serial application that is indicated in this context. Before that one must have the peak applicationthat is indicated in this context. Before that one must have the complete aspects application which is indicated here.
Of the eleven topics that characterizes the complete aspects application, the first is the knower aspects of the antidote class indicated in this context.
The knower aspect of the antidote class indicated in this contextis an exalted knower that is able to quell its discordant class. Basically this refers to the path as a path is necessary an exalted knower that is able to quell its discordant class.
So the knower aspects of the antidote class indicated in this context refers to an exalted knower in the continuum of a bodhisattva. In order for it to be a knower aspects of an antidote class, it must be a wisdom that is able to quell its discordant class. 
A path in the continuum of a bodhisattva that is conjoined with a wisdom that cultivates or meditates on any aspect of the three exalted knowers. That means an exalted knower is able to quell its discordant class.
On top of the exalted knower aspects of the antidote class indicated in this context, primarily there are three:
A knower of aspects that is a knower of bases. 
A knower of aspects that is a knower of paths
A knower of aspects that is an exalted knower of all aspects.
When we say a knower of aspects that is a knower of bases, you have understand that is a knower of bases. 
When we say that a knower of aspect that is a knower of paths, you have understand that we are talking about knowers of paths. 
When we say a knower of aspect that is an exalted knower of all aspects, you have to understand that we are talking about an exalted knower of all aspects.
When we talk about aspects, there are object aspects and subject aspects.
Let’s use a mind realizing impermanence as an example. 
The object of the mind is impermanence; is the object aspect. 
The mind that realizes impermanence, is the subject aspect.
There are persons who advance the position that object aspect is that which to be meditated on, not the subject aspect. 
Whereas there are some who say that the subject aspect is that to be meditated on and not the object aspect. There are these different views. But our system, we posit that both object aspect and subject aspect are to be meditated upon on.
For our system, we say that a person who meditate on impermanence. So there is a mind that meditates on impermanence.
That mind that meditate on impermanence is not just the thing that needs to cultivate. ONE IS also meditating on the object; which is impermanence in this case. So impermanence here is the object aspect. Object aspect is also something to be cultivated or meditated upon.
When we meditate on impermanence, one also need to cultivate the mind that meditate on impermanence.
If we take the position that object aspect are not to be cultivate but only subject aspect are to be meditated upon, then it will result in the fallacy of emptiness not being an object of meditation, whereas emptiness is the main object of cultivation or the main object to be meditated on by the bodhisattva.
For example, for the mind that meditates on great compassion. If you just say that you meditate only on the subject aspect and not the object aspect, then what about the mind realizing great compassion? You meditate on great compassion, isn’t it? 
There are different ways of meditation.You can meditate on both subject aspect and object aspect. Both are objects to be cultivated. As for the manner of meditation, there are different ways of meditation. Let’s take the example again, the mind realizes impermanence. 
Impermanence is the object to be meditated upon. We are meditating on the aspects of impermanence, by thinking about what it is, what it characteristic is, and so forth. 
For a mind that realizes impermanence and meditates on impermanence is taking impermanence as the object and then meditating on it. It is not that when in the meditation one is trying to convert or transform that particular mind into the entity of impermanence. 
But as for the mind of great compassion, when one is trying to cultivate great compassion, one is meditating on great compassion. At the end of the day, the purpose of your meditation is to transform the mind into the entity of great compassion. You see the manner of meditation is different from the manner of meditation from the mind realizing impermanence. 
The mind realizing impermanence is a meditation that takes impermanence as its object. The mind doesn’t transform the mind into entity of impermanence. For the case of great compassion, one is meditating on the great compassion. At the end of the day, meditation on great compassion means to transform the mind into entity of great compassion.
In general, both object aspect and subject aspect are objects to be cultivated or to be meditated upon. In this context here, we are looking at the knowers of the antidote class and we are talking about the knower of aspects in that meditation is that of the mind generating in the actual entity of that object.
Khen Rinpoche: Just leave an imprint on your mind..
In the chapter four in ‘The Ornaments of the Clear Realization, when the aspects of the three knowers are enumerated, there are a total of 173 aspects which are divided into: 
1. 27 aspects of the knower of bases 
2. 36 aspects of the knower of paths and 
3. 110 aspects of the exalted knower of all aspects 
How many aspects are there in the knower of bases? 27
How many aspects are there in the knower of path? 36
How many aspects are there in the exalted knower of all aspects? 110
In total there are 173 aspects.
In this context here we are mainly looking at the knower aspects, altogether there are 173.
There are 27 knower aspects of the knower of bases. How do we get that 27? 
These 27 knower aspects of a knower of bases are discussed in relation to the Four Noble Truths.Of the Four Noble Truths, the first one is true suffering.
How many knower aspects are there? There are four knower aspects that realizes the four characteristics of the true sufferingwhich are:
Impermanence
Suffering
Empty
Selfless
Those are the four knower aspects of the knower of bases that realizes the four characteristics oftrue suffering.
Next is the four knower aspects of the knower of bases that realizes the four characteristics of true origin which are:
Cause
Origin
Strong production 
Condition. 
Next is the four knower aspects of the knower of bases that realizes the four characteristics of true cessation which are:
Cessation
Pacification
High auspiciousness (or sublimity) 
Definite emergence.
Then there are the 15 knower aspects of the knower of bases that know the true path. 
How many aspects of true path are there? 15.
How do we end up with the 15 aspects of true paths? 
First divide the paths into 3 paths:
The uncontaminated Path of Seeing which are the antidotes to the afflictive obscurations. 
Thecontaminated Path of Meditation which are the antidotes to the conception or apprehension of an external form).
Theuncontaminated Path of Seeing which are also the antidotes to the conception or apprehension of external form.
Of these three, let’s look at the first one - the uncontaminated Path of Seeing which are antidotes to the afflictive obscurations. 
How many aspects of such a path? There are four aspects of true path that is thisuncontaminated Path of Seeing which are: 
Paths, 
Suitability, 
Achievement 
Deliverance. 
These are the four characteristics of path. 
How many aspects of true path that are contaminated Path of Meditation which are the antidotes to the apprehension of external form? 5. 
How many aspects of true path that are uncontaminated Path of Seeing which are the antidotes to the apprehension of external form. 6. 
So total is 15.
The 5 aspects and the 6 aspects are actually indicated by certain words in the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra. We are not going into that. 
Therefore there are 27 knower aspects of the knower of bases4+4+4+4+15 = 27
Next, the knower aspects of the knower of paths. How many are there? 36.
These 36 knower aspects of a knower of paths are also explained in relation to the Four Noble Truths.
The numbers is 8,7,5,16 but you must know the order of the Four Noble Truths here. There are:
- 8 aspects of true origins, 
- 7 aspects of true paths, 
- 5 aspects of true suffering 
- 16 aspects of true cessations.
Those are the knower aspects of the knower of paths. 
Next we have the knower aspects of the exalted knower of all aspects. How many are there? 110.
There are 110 knower aspects of an exalted knower of all aspects. How do you have 110? 
There are:
37 aspects of the exalted knower of aspects that is concordant with those existing in Hearers,
34 aspects of an exalted knower of aspects that is concordant with those existing in bodhisattvas
39 uncommon aspects of an exalted knower of all aspects. 
There are 110 aspects of the exalted knower of aspects, and the first is the 37 aspects of an exalted knower of aspects that is concordant with those existing in Hearers. What is this? This is the 37 aspect that we are talking about.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Finally we reach the topic? From the next class I will talk about four mindfulness which is the easy one. I just say you meditate. Anyway, this one easier to understand. 
We need to know how these 37 aspects fit into the whole picture. Now you have some very rough idea of how we have reached this point here in the text. The 37 aspects themselves are quite straight forward, starting with the four close placement of mindfulness and so forth. That is much easier to understand. 
Extract from Overview of Ornament of Clear Realization:
Application in Complete Aspects
An application in complete aspects is a bodhisattva’s meditation on the 173different aspects of the three exalted knowers by way of a union of calm abiding andspecial insight. This is for the purpose of attaining control over these differentaspects. It is characterized by eleven topics:
1. Knower-aspects of the antidotal class explicitly indicated in this context
2. Principal applications explicitly indicated in this context
3. Excellent qualities of Mahayana applications
4. Faults of the applications
5. Yoga of the path perfection of wisdom (also known as “characteristics of theapplications”)
6. Mahayana partial concordance with liberation explicitly indicated in thiscontext
7. Mahayana partial concordance with definite discrimination explicitlyindicated in this context
8. Bodhisattva sangha who has attained a sign of irreversibility
9. Application of equality of cyclic existence and solitary peace
10. Application of pure land
11. Application of skillful means