Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/lesson18.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:56.361024
================================================================================

(Presentation of homework on the possibilities between complete aspects applications and peak applications)
Student 1: Something that is complete aspects application and not peak application - Any bodhisattva yoga on the Path of Accumulation that has not achieved mastery over a compendium of the aspects of the three exalted knowers. For example, inferential realization of emptiness in a continuum of a bodhisattva.
Khen Rinpoche: I think sounds good. 
Student 1: Something that is complete aspects application and peak application - Doesn’t exist. When one achieves special insight focusing on the aspects of three knowers, one achieves mastery and does not cultivate complete aspects application. 
Khen Rinpoche: Okay, not correct.
Student 1: Something that is peak application and not complete aspects application - When one achieves special insight focusing on the aspects of three knowers, one achieves mastery. So this special insight focusing on the aspects of three knowers in the continuum of a bodhisattva is something that is peak application but not complete aspects application. 
Khen Rinpoche (In English): That also not correct. 
Student 1: Something that is not a peak application and not complete aspects application - Direct realization of emptiness in the continuum of a Hinayana arhat. As it is not bodhisattva yoga so it is not both. 
Khen Rinpoche: Correct. The first one and last one is correct. The middle two is wrong so you get 50 marks. I understand why you are confused. I understand. But good, you did the homework. As I have mentioned before, if you really want to learn, you must do the homework. By making mistake, then you will learn. 
With regards to what I have said earlier:
- the complete aspects application is being cultivated for the purpose of acquiring mastery 
- the peak application is an application that has achieved mastery over the cultivation of the compendium of the aspects of the three knowers.
That explanation was just for the purpose of helping you to get some idea of what those two applications are for. 
If you look at the definition of the complete aspects application - a bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined with the wisdom cultivating a compendium of the aspects of the three exalted knowers. 
If you look at the boundary, where does it exist? It is from the Mahayana Path of Accumulation through the end of continuum (of the sentient beings). 
Your second and third examples are incorrect because you said that once you have achieved peak application, there is no complete aspects application. That cannot be because complete aspects application exists from the Mahayana Path of Accumulation till the end of the continuum of sentient being. That means it also exists on the Path of Preparation. It is taught that if it is a path included in the continuum of a bodhisattva, it is necessarily a complete aspects application. So a bodhisattva necessarily possesses the wisdom that cultivates a compendium of the aspects of the three exalted knowers.
Peak application is a wisdom that cultivates the aspects of the three exalted knowers but its cultivation is more exalted than that that was done on a Path of Accumulation because when one achieves the Path of Preparation, one achieves the peak application which is the wisdom that has achieved mastery over the cultivation of the aspects of the three exalted knowers. As such, a peak application is necessarily a complete aspects application but a complete aspects application is not necessarily a peak application. 
Do you have any questions pertaining to the complete aspects application and peak application?
Next, let’s look at the serial application and the momentary application. 
Definition of serial application: A bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined with the wisdom that serially cultivates the aspects of the three exalted knowers for the sake of attaining steadiness with respect to the aspects of the three exalted knowers. 
Boundary: Mahayana Path of Accumulation up to just prior to the end of the continuum (of sentient beings)
I have roughly mentioned before the difference between serial application and momentary application is based on whether one has achieved steadiness with respect to the aspects of the three exalted knowers. 
A serial application is a mind that serially cultivates the aspects of the three exalted knowers for the purpose of attaining steadiness with respect to the aspects of the three exalted knowers. 
The bodhisattvas cultivate the aspects of the three exalted knowers either do it through cultivating a compendium of the aspects of the three exalted knowers or cultivate the aspects of the three exalted knowers serially. Both are done from the Mahayana Path of Accumulation.
Why do the bodhisattvas cultivate a compendium of the aspects of the three exalted knowers from the Mahayana Path of Accumulation? Because they do it for the purpose of achieving mastery in their cultivation.
Why do bodhisattvas cultivate serially the aspects of the three exalted knowers from the Mahayana Path of Accumulation? They do it for the purpose of achieving steadiness with respect to the aspects of the three exalted knowers.
Although the bodhisattvas on the Path of Accumulation do cultivate serially the aspects of the three exalted knowers but when they have achieved the Path of Preparation, i.e. when they acquire the peak application, they cultivate serially the aspects of the three exalted knowers. Their serial cultivation of the aspects of the three exalted knowers becomes definite i.e. they are able to do it definitely in the correct order. This is not necessarily so on the Mahayana Path of Accumulation. 
On the Path of Preparation seeing the Path of Meditation, in any one meditation session, the bodhisattvas cultivate serially the aspects of the three exalted knowers for the sake of achieving these aspects of the three exalted knowers. They cultivate them serially and in a definite order without missing anything. 
The bodhisattvas cultivate the serial application from the Mahayana Path of Accumulation up to just prior to the end of the continuum. That means that at the end of the continuum, there is no serial application. So there is serial application up to and before the achievement of the wisdom at the end of the continuum. 
From the Mahayana Path of Preparation up to just prior to the end of the continuum of a sentient being, the bodhisattva serially cultivates the aspects of the three exalted knowers for the sake of achieving steadiness with respect to the aspects of the three exalted knowers. In any one session, they cultivate serially without missing anything and the 173 aspects of the three exalted knowers in proper order. At the end of the continuum of a sentient being, that is when a bodhisattva achieves steadiness with respect to the serial cultivation of the aspects of the three exalted knowers.
Khen Rinpoche: Are you following? Are you lost? You lost? No? Okay. 
When one achieves the wisdom at the end of the continuum, that bodhisattva has achieved steadiness with respect to the serial cultivation of the aspects of the three exalted knowers. Prior to that, from the Path of Accumulation up to just prior to the end of the continuum of sentient being, the bodhisattva serially cultivates the aspects of the three exalted knowers. That means serially in order and without missing anything and doing that in a proper order in cultivating all the 173 aspects of the three exalted knowers. At the end of the continuum of a sentient being, the bodhisattva achieves steadiness with respect to the serial cultivation of the aspects of the three exalted knowers. 
Then question arises: Why the bodhisattva only achieves steadiness with respect to the serial cultivation of aspects of the three exalted knowers. Why is this steadiness not achieved prior to the end of the continuum?
What is the meaning of having achieved steadiness with respect to the serial cultivation of the aspects of the three exalted knowers? So what is the meaning of having achieved steadiness? 
A shortest instant of a complete action is like when you snap your fingers and that snap of fingers is divided into many parts. So that one smallest part of that. Here we are talking about an instant of a complete action which is a finger snap, in which is not the smallest moment of time. An instant of a complete action means a finger snap. In this short moment of time is when the bodhisattva at the end of the continuum brings to mind or place his attention on any uncontaminated phenomena. When he brings to mind that one uncontaminated phenomena and all the other similar instances of uncontaminated phenomena that are of a similar type, that bodhisattva is able to manifest all of them in his mind in that moment of a finger snap.
When one achieves the wisdom at the end of the continuum, whatever phenomenon is brought to mind, then all the other phenomena that are of a similar type are also brought to mind at the same time immediately. The bodhisattva has the capacity to do this. 
Here we are trying to understand the meaning of achieving steadiness. For example, at the end of the continuum, when a bodhisattva brings to mind the emptiness of any phenomenon that is included within a thoroughly purified class of phenomena, he brings to mind that emptiness. When he brings to mind that emptiness of that thoroughly purified phenomena, the emptiness of all the other thoroughly purified class of phenomena are manifest, and the bodhisattva doing all of these within the duration of a finger snap. The bodhisattva at the end of a continuum is able to do this because of his thorough familiarization with the cultivation of the aspects of the three exalted knowers that starts from the Path of Accumulation. So it is a result of the thorough familiarization. 
When one achieves the momentary application at the end of the continuum, the bodhisattva achieves a steadiness with respect to the aspects of the three exalted knowers. This steadiness is achieved because of the serial cultivation that started from the Mahayana Path of Accumulation. The bodhisattva serially cultivating all the 173 aspects of the three exalted knowers over such a long period of time, and because of the thorough familiarization, at the end of the continuum of sentient beings within this short moment of a finger snap, the bodhisattva is able to meditate on all these 173 aspects. This has to happen. If this doesn’t happen, how can we be enlightened? When we are enlightened, we will see all phenomena directly as they are. All these must be achieved prior to enlightenment.
With regards to having an idea of what the eight categories are, you studied the definitions and the boundaries. If you can get a rough idea of what they are, then within a short period of time such as five minutes, you are able to understand or able to explain this is this, and that is that. This can happen if you are familiar with the material and having thought about it over and over again. 
Definition of momentary application: A bodhisattva’s final yoga that has attained steadiness with respect to the aspects of the three exalted knowers.
Boundary: It exists only at the end of the continuum of a sentient being.
In chapter 6 of the Ornament of Clear Realizations, the serial application is presented.
In chapter 7 of the Ornament of Clear Realizations, the momentary application is explained. 
Do you have any questions about the serial application and momentary application?
[BP1: When one is engaged in serial application, one cultivates the aspects of the three exalted knowers for the sake of attaining stability in those aspects by progressively or serially cultivating them. One has not attained stability yet.
When one has attained stability in that cultivation, then one attains momentary application. From this, we can see that serial application is the cause and momentary application is the effect (i.e., there is a cause and effect relationship between them). These two are mutually exclusive. 
What is the meaning of stability? It refers to the bodhisattva’s ability to cultivate all the 173 aspects of the three exalted knowers as objects of utilization in the shortest moment of time. There are many ways of positing the shortest moment of time. In this context, the shortest moment of time refers to the “shortest moment of a complete action,” which refers to the duration of a finger snap or the blink of an eye. (When the duration of a finger snap is divided into 65 parts, 1/65 of a finger snap is the shortest moment of time). 
The stability achieved by the bodhisattva in the cultivation of the aspects of the three exalted knowers means being able to cultivate those aspects in the shortest moment of a complete action (e.g. the duration of a finger snap). It does not refer to the 1/65 of a finger snap which is the shortest moment of time. 
Momentary application refers to the time in which the bodhisattva is able to cultivate the 173 aspects of the three exalted knowers in the shortest moment of a complete action.]
With regards to the example about achieving steadiness with respect to the aspects of the three exalted knowers, and to help you to understand the meaning, I gave the example of how when a bodhisattva brings to mind the emptiness of a thoroughly pure phenomena, and at the same time, within that moment of a finger snap, those phenomenon that are of a similar type to this, which means the emptiness of all the other thoroughly pure phenomenon, are also manifest in that short one moment of finger snap. The bodhisattva is able to bring all of that to mind. 
I use the word phenomena of a similar type, and by the power of the word, it seem to suggest that those that are not of a similar type or those that are discordant are not manifest. In the example of emptiness, anything that is not of a similar type with emptiness doesn’t manifest.
Because a bodhisattva brings to mind a particular phenomenon, then other phenomenon of a similar type are manifest. By the power of those words that are used, we can say that the statement is also implying that those phenomena that are not of a similar type are not manifest. If that is the case, is there any problem? 
Khen Rinpoche: No problem.
Student 2: No problem okay. I’m trying to correlate this to understanding that this serial application of the three exalted knowers without going into realizing the emptinesses would be done in post meditative equipoise (wisdom of subsequent attainment) because in the uninterrupted path of the path of release, nothing except emptiness appears. The three exalted knowers cannot appear to the bodhisattva superior.  That’s my problem. Also at the end here, it seems like there is only emptiness of the three exalted knowers involved, not the appearance of the aspects of the three exalted knowers in the momentary application. So how does that transform into the buddha’s final manifesting of the three exalted knowers.
Khen Rinpoche: I didn’t get exactly what you are trying to say.
Student 2: The problem with the ultimate truth and the conventional truth basically. 
VenGyurme: So the serial application with the conventionalities as the observed objects can only happen in post meditative equipoise, you are saying right?
Student 2: Not in meditative equipoise. 
We have to think about the definition of a serial application. It says it is a bodhisattva’s yoga that is conjoined with the wisdom that serially cultivates the aspects of the three exalted knowers for the sake of attaining steadiness with respect to the aspects of the three exalted knowers. It doesn’t say a wisdom that serially cultivates the aspects of the three exalted knowers so on and so forth. It is a bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined. 
What I have said earlier about how it is a wisdom that serially cultivates the aspects of the three exalted knowers and how that is for the purpose of achieving steadiness with respect to the aspects of the three exalted knowers. That explanation was just to make it easier for you to understand the essence of what a serial application is. If you go by the definition, it says it is a bodhisattva yoga conjoined with the wisdom that serially cultivates the aspects of the three exalted knowers for the sake of achieving steadiness with respect to them. If you analyze the definition and if you want to debate, then you have to be more specific. 
The definition of a serial application is a bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined with the wisdom that serially cultivates the aspects of the three exalted knowers for the sake of attaining steadiness with respect to the aspects of the three exalted knowers. It doesn’t say a bodhisattva’s wisdom. Since the definition is a bodhisattva’s yoga that is conjoined with the wisdom that serially cultivates the aspects of the three exalted knowers for the sake of attaining steadiness with respect to the aspects of the three exalted knowers, and even if you posit the wisdom of meditative equipoise, because of the definition, then you will not have any problem even if you use the illustration of the wisdom of meditative equipoise. 
Student 2: The aspects of the three exalted knowers do not appear in meditative equipoise, only the emptiness of it appears. 
VenGyurme: Bodhisattva’s yoga.
Student 2: Ya, I have no problem with the definition. 
Khen Rinpoche: What is your problem?
Student 2: The problem is that how will that become a steadiness in the final moment. We are talking about steadiness of the appearance of the aspects of the three exalted knowers, and in the final moment, it is meditative equipoise only emptiness. So there is no appearance of the aspects of the three exalted knowers. How could that be a steadiness there? It does not appear then, so can we say that it is the compendium that is appearing?
Khen Rinpoche: It doesn’t appear there.
Student 2: So there are no aspects of the three exalted knowers that appear. My understanding is that the steadiness is with respect to the appearance of the aspects of the three exalted knowers. 
Khen Rinpoche: The bodhisattva has achieved the power to do so if he wishes to. That doesn’t mean it must appear.  
Student 2: Steadiness of the appearance of the aspects of the three exalted knowers…
Khen Rinpoche: If the bodhisattva wants to, he can make all the aspects of the 173 aspects of the three exalted knowers just appear in his mind. He has the capacity to do so. 
Student 2: Not before momentary application, right?
VenGyurme: No,  on momentary application.
Student 2: During momentary application, that is only a meditative equipoise, am I right to say? Or is it….
Khen Rinpoche: Yes, he has achieved the power to do so. 
Student 2: So what does that mean because….
Khen Rinpoche: He has power to do.
Student 2: So that power only manifest in the Buddha ground, am I right?
Khen Rinpoche: No.
Student 2: How would that manifest during momentary application? It will never manifest.
VenGyurme: It is not manifest.
Student 2: So it only manifest on Buddha ground in other words i.e. the path of release on the Path of No-more-learning. 
Khen Rinpoche: On the Buddha ground, the Buddha doesn’t even need that. The instant of a complete action become even shorter.
So you can say that the bodhisattva at the end of a continuum has that power to do so. But having the power doesn’t mean he has to do so. If he wants to do it, he can do but not doing. 
Student 3: Can I just use a very simpler analogy just to explain that part. It is like if you are meditating on something, for example you have the ability to read, but when you are meditating you are not reading but you have the ability to read. Everyone knows how to read, right? But when you are meditating, you are not reading but you still have that ability to read. So it is the same thing as that last moment of a bodhisattva. He has the ability but it is just that at that moment, he is actually doing meditation on emptiness. 
Khen Rinpoche: You helping me?
Student 3: I’m just using an analogy to try to understand this. Is this the right analogy?
KhenRinpoche: Cannot be this moment (finger snap). I think can be longer than that.
Student 3: But does this analogy work?
Khen Rinpoche: Ya, it works. Because Benny didn’t say anything, it works. If doesn’t work, then he have to reply. So if he doesn’t answer, it works 
Student 4:  Can I just clarify since you did bring that up? About the finger snap, I just want to clarify more for the terms. Does it mean the same as an instant? Years ago in the teaching of tantra, in terms of describing an instant, it came out to be 20 minutes or maybe longer than that.
Khen Rinpoche: In the deity yoga, we say instantaneously arise as such and such deity. The instantaneously here refers to the instant of a complete action which means a finger snap. Literally that is what it means. It only happens for those who have thorough familiarization. For us, that is no way. Forget about a finger snap, if we try for it, I don’t know how long and it doesn’t work for us. As seen in the sadhana, when it says instantaneously arise as this and that, the instantaneously here refers to the instant of a complete action which means like a finger snap.
Student 4: During the explanation when you say that at the last moment of the sentient being, bodhisattva can recollect similar aspect of thoroughly pure phenomena. What about contaminated phenomena? What about the thoroughly afflicted phenomena? Why it is that he can only have the ability to recollect the aspect of the similar of type that is similar to thoroughly pure phenomena” Because at the last moment of the sentient being, he is going to be a Buddha, and the Buddha can realize everything. So during your explanation I was expecting “Why don’t we say that can recollect every phenomenon instead of like emphasizing thoroughly pure phenomena”.
Khen Rinpoche: What I have said earlier is an example or an illustration. The example I gave was that if the bodhisattva putting his mind on the emptiness of a thoroughly pure phenomenon, then the phenomenon of a similar type would also appear. That means the emptiness of all the other thoroughly pure phenomena would also appear because it is a phenomenon of similar type. That was just an example. So, if the bodhisattva puts his mind on the emptiness of a thoroughly afflicted phenomenon, then the emptiness of all the other thoroughly afflicted phenomena will also arise. The qualm that I raised just now is “Can a bodhisattva bring to mind or manifest in his mind the emptiness of both the thoroughly afflicted phenomena and thoroughly pure phenomena?”
When the bodhisattva sees emptiness directly in that meditative equipoise on the Path of Seeing, it is said that he sees the emptiness of all phenomena directly. On the Path of Seeing, the bodhisattva in the meditative equipoise does see the emptiness of all phenomena directly but I don’t think he sees the emptiness of all phenomena directly in an instant of a complete action, i.e. in the duration of a finger snap. 
Student 5: If he is realizing the emptiness of ignorance, would that be liked the ignorance is still around? Because the two truths are always one entity. I am talking about momentary application.
Ven Gyurme: Whose ignorance?
Student 5: When he is meditating on the thoroughly afflicted phenomena, is it possible that he is meditating on his own ignorance and trying to abandon them? If he is meditating on emptiness of ignorance as the class of thoroughly afflicted phenomena and momentary application, I have difficulty with that.
Khen Rinpoche: What is your difficulty?
Student 5: Because there is ignorance conjoined with the emptiness of ignorance
Ven Gyurme: Whose continuum? Whose ignorance? The bodhisattva’s ignorance?
Student 5: Ya, by that time, he has no ignorance.
Khen Rinpoche: At the end of the continuum? 
Student 5: Ya, momentary application. So, he is meditating on emptiness of thoroughly afflicted phenomena, an example can be the emptiness of ignorance.
Khen Rinpoche: Okay then?
Student 5: If he is meditating on his ignorance that means the conventional aspect of that emptiness will be his ignorance. Remember we say that we wouldn’t bring ignorance to enlightenment as well during the Tathagata Essence. The emptiness of ignorance has been abandoned together with abandoning ignorance itself.
Ven Gyurme: This bodhisattva still has ignorance, right?
Student 5: Momentary application, last moment of the continuum, 8th ground onwards, pure ground no more ignorance isn’t it?
Khen Rinpoche: There is no ignorance, right? So, you are meditating on whose ignorance?
Student 5: Can be meditating on sentient being’s ignorance.  
Ven Gyurme: But you said you are meditating on his ignorance just now. That is why I asked you.
Student 5: I am asking whether is it possible because the class of thoroughly afflicted phenomena can be quite wide and so I am bringing in this example. Is it possible that he won’t be meditating on that but focusing on sentient beings’ ignorance?
Khen Rinpoche: At the end of the bodhisattva’s continuum, he doesn’t have ignorance. So, it is not possible to enter into meditative equipoise directly seeing emptiness of his ignorance. According to the AMWS, does this bodhisattva have ignorance? No!  Has he abandoned ignorance? No. According to AMWS’ path and ground, in order to achieve enlightenment, one has to abandon ignorance. In the continuum of this bodhisattva at the end of the continuum, does he have the apprehension of true existence? No, because of the antidotes that he has cultivated. So the apprehension of true existence which is the apprehension of the self of phenomena cannot arise.
Student 6: When you said cultivates a compendium of the aspects of the three exalted knowers, you are gathering 173 aspects and meditate in one session. That is complete applications. For serial application, you got 27, 36 and 110. Do you do 27 in one go and then you do 36 and then you do 110? That is called serial application from the Path of Accumulation. 
Ven Gyurme: Meditates a compendium of 27 in one go?
Student 6: I am not sure that is why I am asking you. When you said serial application, you do it in order. I don’t know what it means by doing it in order.
Khen Rinpoche: In the definition of the serial application, the wisdom that serially cultivates means cultivate in stages. It cultivates the aspects of the three exalted knowers for the sake of attaining steadiness. How many aspects are there for the three exalted knowers? 173. 
Once the peak application is achieved, from the Mahayana Path of Preparation, the bodhisattva serially cultivates the aspects of the three exalted knowers. He necessarily does it serially in proper order.  Serially means that must be one after another. I would think that the bodhisattva meditates first on the 27 aspects of the knower of the bases, follow by the 36 aspects of the knower of the paths and then follows by 110 aspects of the exalted knower of all aspects. I would think so like that. I have not seen it being stated clearly in the text. Probably it has to be like that. 
Student 7: Why is the order of the serial application important? Why has to be exact order in order to complete the application?
Ven Gyurme: On the Path of Accumulation, it is not necessary very orderly, right?
Khen Rinpoche: Why in order? I don’t know what to say why in order? 
In general, of the three exalted knowers, one would have to first generate the knower of the bases, then the knower of paths and through that the knower of all aspects. In terms of the two selflessnesses, first the selflessness of person is realized. That is where you have the explanation of the knower of bases. Then after that, the selflessness of phenomena is realized, of which there is coarse and subtle according to AMWS. 
When talk about the selflessness of phenomena, we talk about the knower of paths. Since one has to meditate in order to cultivate the knower of the bases first, and then follows by the knower of paths, I guess in terms of the serial cultivation of the aspect of the three exalted knowers, one serially cultivates first the 27 aspects of the knower of bases, and then one goes on to meditate on 36 aspects of the knower of the paths. It is the same with the practice of the Lamrim – the Stages of the Path. One must first meditate on the path that is shared with the person of the small capacity. Only after that then one goes on meditate on the path that is shared with the person of medium capacity and then on the basis of that then one can start on meditating on the path of the person of great capacity. The order is definite, and one cannot skip. There is no way one can skip. Likewise, when we talk about the three knowers, we cultivate on the knower of bases, then knower of paths and then goes on meditate on the aspects of the exalted of all aspects.
My personal thought on this is that when one meditates on something serially in the proper order and through the familiarity of doing that over time, then comes a time when one can meditates on all of them simultaneously. That can only come because of the habituation with a pattern.  I wonder if at the time of practice to achieve steadiness when one is meditating on the 173 aspects but not in the proper order, i.e. you starts with A, then with Z on another day and then with D on another day, and after having done without proper order, I am not sure whether you are able to meditate on the 173 aspects altogether at the end. I am not sure whether you are able to do that. Let’s say you are able to that, I guess it would be much more difficult because the mixed up will come out together.
Student 8: Few friends just reminded me that they still want to know it means by “conjoined”. Khen Rinpoche has answered what conjoined is but I think it is too profound for anyone to understand what conjoined means.
Khen Rinpoche: Anybody has idea? Somebody has idea what is conjoined?
Let’s take the bodhisattva superior’s practice of generosity as an example. His mind is of generosity, and the generous attitude is helped or conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing emptiness. If it is a path in the continuum of a bodhisattva superior then it is necessarily conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing emptiness.
Khen Rinpoche: Correct?
When the bodhisattva superior practices generosity, his practice of generosity is accompanied by the wisdom directly realizing emptiness, or literally being helped or accompanied by. When this bodhisattva superior practices generosity, he will not be affected by the tendency to holding on to things; whether the gift or the giver as truly existence. The bodhisattva superior’s practice of generosity is done within the non-objectifying the three spheres. We are not saying that bodhisattva superior’s generous attitude, the mind of generosity, realizes emptiness directly. Rather when the bodhisattva is practicing generosity, that mind is manifest. The bodhisattva’s experience is unlike us. When we give, we hold on to thing like the giver, the gift and the action as something there very strong. The bodhisattva superiors are not like us because in their mental continuum they have the wisdom directly realizing emptiness. 
Likewise, if it is a path, it is necessarily conjoined with the determination to be freed of renunciation. If it is a bodhisattva path, it is necessarily conjoined with mind generation (bodhicitta).  That means whatever the bodhisattvas do, they naturally do everything for the sake of others. It is never mixed with self-cherishing. It is all for others because whatever they do is conjoined or accompanied by bodhicitta. They naturally do everything for the purpose of others. Let’s say someone who possesses renunciation in their mind and practices generosity. Since he possesses renunciation in his mind, his practice of generosity is conjoined with renunciation. Whatever he does, including that practice of generosity, is never done for the happiness of this life.
Whatever recitation and practices that we do, it always starts with going for refuge to the Three Jewels and then follows by the generation of bodhicitta. Why? It is said that the motivation is so important. It is very important to adjust the motivation and to set a proper motivation at the beginning. That is why motivation is so important. Whatever we do, that practice would be affected by the type of motivation we have. Depending on the type of motivation, our action and our thought are conjoined with, then that action would have its own result.
Likewise, when we are learning the Dharma, listening to the Dharma, reading or studying, the motivation is also important. Depending on the motivation that we are conjoined with, for example, the motivation of learning the Dharma or listening to the Dharma is to subdue the mind, then whatever we do, it will contribute towards the subduing of our mind. Let’s say the action of learning the Dharma, hearing the Dharma, and listening to the Dharma is conjoined with the motivation of subduing the mind. It is not just conjoining at the beginning, and when we finish and enter into the actual activity, we forget completely about the motivation. That is not what it meant. To be conjoined with a motivation means to be helped by it all the times. That means whatever number of hours we read or study or listen to the Dharma, it is to be helped by the motivation of “I am doing this to subdue the mind” and because it is helped by this motivation then whatever we learn, every single word we hear or read would become a cause in helping to subdue the mind. Likewise, when we ask question or when we receive answer or we answer question, it is the same thing. Whether they become a cause for subduing the mind or not depends whether it is helped by that motivation.
To say that an action is helped by the motivation or conjoined with a thought, both the holder and the help must be together, otherwise there is no meaning of conjoined. Conjoined means two things must be together. With just one thing, it cannot be conjoined with itself. So, two things must be present. Let’s say when you are learning, studying or listening to the Dharma, the action must be helped by the motivation. Therefore, motivation must be there at the same time together.
Our usual idea of setting the motivation that it is has only got to do at the beginning of the action. That is what we think. Even that we also didn’t do well. Generally, we initially set our motivation “I set my motivation” but after that we do something else. That is why our practice doesn’t get anywhere. As much as possible, the motivation has to be kept in the mind.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): I think conjoined is something liked that. 
Maybe we will finish the four close placement of mindfulness together with the four thorough abandonments in the next lesson. 
Homework
Compare Serial Application and Complete Aspects Application, how many possibilities are there?
How many possibilities are there in Peak Application and Momentary Application?
Is there something that is all four applications?
Khen Rinpoche: Okay, you got three homework? Try your best. Next time when I say you come, you come out. All rushing to the microphone.