Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/lesson2.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:50.841158
================================================================================


In the last lesson, we were talking about the verse from the Vajra Cutter
Sutra:
   A star, a visual aberration, a flame of a lamp,
   An illusion, a drop of dew, or bubble,
   A dream, a flash of lightening, a cloud,
   See conditioned things as such!
The first line of the verse “A star, a visual aberration, a flame of a
butter lamp” is an explanation of the basis of what reality is; which is
condensed in the two truths.
As for the analogy of a star, at night time when it is dark, we see many
stars in the sky. That is analogous to the variety of appearances that can
appear to a mind that is polluted by ignorance. As for the consciousness
(mind) that is polluted by the predisposition of ignorance, there are
instances of such mind which are valid cognizer. But there are also other
instances of such a mind that is not a valid consciousness (valid
cognizer).
Whenever you listen to an explanation to the dharma such as what we are
doing now, it is very important that you reflect and analyze as you hear
what is being said. That is extremely important. If you just sit there and
just hear what is being said without thinking at all, without reflecting,
and without analyzing, then there is no way you are going to learn
anything. So you have to analyze simultaneously. In the process of
educating ourselves or when you are learning the dharma and hearing an
explanation like now, you have to simultaneously analyze of what you are
hearing. Without which you will not be able to see whether you understand
something or not. If you don’t even think about it, you will not be able to
see whether you agree with what is being said or not. If in the process of
thinking, you do find there are things that are objectionable or you do not
agree with, then you need to bring it up and ask me. You can question “Why
did you say that? Is that correct? Is that wrong?”
When you are dealing with Buddhist philosophy looking at great treatises,
in order to understand what is being said or what is actually written in
the text, you really have to reflect and analyze in order to understand the
meaning. Otherwise, there is no way to learn and to understand any topic at
all. When you engage in the studies on these topics, you really have to
just try your best. Your mind really have to be very alert in seeking out
the answer through analyzing and reflecting.
There is a variety of ways that object can appear to a conventional
awareness. Obviously there are things that exist do appear to a
conventional awareness. However, things that do not actually exist also
appear in the perspective of a conventional awareness. Then how do we
decide whether something exist or not as anything can appear to a
conventional awareness. How do we then tell that a particular appearance is
a representative of something that actually exist? Whereas another
appearance might be just a false appearance in that it doesn’t represent
reality and it doesn’t represent any existence. What decides? Who decides?
So that is something that we really need to spend time analyzing and
thinking about it.
From the viewpoint of the highest philosophical school, it is decisively
stated that everything that exist, exist in mere name. It exist as
something that is merely designated by thought. This is very clearly stated
according to the highest philosophical view point. Yet at the same time,
the proponents of this highest viewpoint also state very clearly that it
doesn’t mean that anything that is a fabrication or creation of the mind
necessarily exists.
So whatever you hear, you should be able have at least able to grasp what
I’m trying to say. You should be able to think because all of you are not
kids. All of you have studied and  have passed  through the education
system.  My point is that you have to try your best to see what I’m trying
to say here. Of course that doesn’t mean that you can get it all the time.
Whenever we learn something, obviously there will always be new concepts.
There are even new words that we cannot handle as we are not familiar with.
But that doesn’t mean that you don’t try. You just have to try and get
whatever you can. The point is that you really have to think. You  can’t
just sit there and not thinking at all.
The highest philosophical school states that everything that exist
necessarily exist in mere name (exist as merely designated by thought).
There are no phenomenon that has ever existed or will never exist in and of
themselves. There is no inherent existence. There is no true existence. Yet
at the same time they also say that it doesn’t mean that whatever is
labeled by the mind, whatever is created by the mind, or whatever is
thought by the mind to exist necessarily exist. For example, our body does
not exist in and of itself (does not exist from its own side) but
nevertheless it appears to be truly existent (inherently existent) to the
mind that it is appearing to.
Another example is that the eye consciousness apprehending a mirage as a
body of water. To the eye consciousness at particular times, there can be
an appearance of a mirage which actually is not water but it appears to the
eye consciousness as a body of water. We believe in it. These are examples
of how things can appear to the mind but do not actually exist in reality.
In the teachings, easy example is used such as thinking that there is a
body of water there whereas there isn’t any water there. It is just an
illusion;  a mirage.  The point behind these examples is that they lead us
to the understanding of things that actually do matter. If you understand
the example, then you use the understanding to look at our body as an
example of how the body does not exist in the way it appears. Although the
body appears to be truly existent but it is not truly existent. Just think
of how our body appear to us when we think of the body. Our body has never
appeared to us as merely imputed by thought. The body doesn’t present
itself to the mind as something that is existing in mere name (merely
labeled by the mind). No way!  How does the body appear to our mind?
Instinctively, as something existing in and of itself, and right there from
its own side. Taking our body as an example, this is how things appear. Our
body appear so real, existing right there from its own side. Yes, this is
how it appears, but at the end of the day, the analysis  leads to the
conclusion that although the body appears to exist truly, in reality the
body has never existed truly. All these analysis should lead to that
conclusion and that should be the point that must be settled upon.
Just as what we recite in the Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, in
the paragraph that starts with “Form is empty”. What it is saying is that,
for example, the form aggregate that we have is empty. Empty of what? Empty
of existing in and of itself, empty of true existence, empty of inherent
existence.
So what is that phrase “Form is empty” is trying to settle upon? It is
trying to settle upon the meaning of ultimate truth, the ultimate nature of
reality.
So understanding this is so important and it is really indispensable. We
say “form is empty”, what it is saying? At the end of the day, the
conclusion is that phenomena such as our body as form does not exist in and
of themselves, they do not exist truly, they do not exist from their own
side although our body, form and so forth, appear to exist from their own
side, appear to exist truly, appear to exist in and of themselves. In
reality they do not exist in and of themselves. As such, phenomena like
form, like the body are empty of existing in and of themselves, empty of
existing inherently. So the emptiness of form is the final mode of abiding
of form. In simple English, the emptiness of form is the ultimate nature of
form.
“Form is empty” is establishing the ultimate nature of form in that form
has never and will never exist inherently. Form like our body does not
exist in and of itself. As such, form or our body is empty of existing in
and of itself. It is devoid of existing inherently.
After having established the ultimate nature of form or our body, however
for some people, if form does not exist inherently, does not exist in and
of itself,  they could perhaps be mistaken thinking that form does not
exist whatsoever. They mistakenly conclude that there is no form at all.
This is of course wrong because form does exist. As such, the next phrase,
“Emptiness is form”. The meaning of this is pretty much the same as “A
flame of the butter lamp” as in the first line of the verse from the Vajra
Cutter Sutra. Although a flame of a butter lamp has never existed in and of
itself, never existed truly but nevertheless, the flame of the butter lamp
is dependently arisen through the coming together of different conditions
such as butter, wick and so forth. Only then a flame of a butter lamp comes
into existence. But it does not exist in and of itself. How does it exist?
A flame of a butter lamp exist in mere name. Literally it is just a mere
appearance. That is how it exist.
The explanation of  “A flame of a butter lamp” is basically the same as
the meaning of the line “Emptiness is form”. Although form is devoid of
existing in and of itself, and is empty of existing inherently, it doesn’t
mean that form does not exist. It is true that when we look for the imputed
object form, we will not find something that is concrete which we can point
to that is form. What we will find is the emptiness of form. We have found
the emptiness of form but that doesn’t mean form does not exist. How does
form exist? Within emptiness, form exist as something merely designated by
thought. It exists in mere name. That is how form exists.
The first line in the Vajra Cutter Sutra  “A star, a visual aberration, a
flame of a butter lamp” is an introduction to what reality is. What
constitutes reality?. The whole of reality can be included in the two
truths. Anything and everything that exist is included in these two truths.
So this is an introduction to what reality is or, in philosophical
language, what is the basis.
It is stated in the teachings that if we do not understand the basis i.e.
what constitutes reality especially in terms of the presentation of the two
truths, we will not discover the intent of the Buddha. We also will not
understand well the intent of the Buddha and his teachings. In order to
understand well the intent of Buddha and the intent of the Buddha’s
teachings, then we need to have a good grasp of the two truths. When we do
have a good grasp of the two truths, we will also be able to accumulate and
finish the accumulation of the two collections, and with which we will
achieve enlightenment. So such are the benefits of  the two truths.
This is how it is phrased in the teachings. There are the basis, the path
and the results.
    - The basis is the two truths,
    - The path is the method and wisdom,
    - The result are the two bodies - the truth body and the form body.
It is so important to have some idea of the two truths. That is why I’m am
repeating this over and over again. I have been saying the same thing but
in different ways over and over again. This is how important it is. This is
like the bedrock (foundation) for everything else. The point of saying this
over and over again is to drive home the point that this is important. It
is also for you to think about it over and over again.  If somebody were to
ask you what the two truths are, at least you should be able to decisively
say “The two truths means this, this is the name and this is what it is”.
This is the minimum you must be able to say. It doesn’t matter whoever ask
you the question about reality or the two truths. It doesn’t matter how
they phrase the question or how they ask it. If they are trying to find out
what reality is, then it doesn’t matter how they ask or  what words they
use, you should be able to deliver the answer without any change. That
means you don’t have one answer for one person and another answer for
another person. It is like a standard answer which is reflective of
reality.
There are many people whose ears are very light, that mean if somebody says
“It is like that”, then he says “Yeah! Yeah! It is like that.” Then when
another person comes along and say something different, then he will  also
say “Yeah! Yeah! It is like that.” It is like here and there and
everywhere. It is  not stable at all. What I’m trying to say is that
whatever understanding we gained from our learning, the conclusion has to
be damn  solid and unshakeable. You must be convinced it is like that and
not anything else.  That is one of the points I’m trying to drive home. I’m
not saying that we all are aiming to be foolishly stubborn. By holding on
to a position and being decisive about it is not being foolishly stubborn.
“Because my guru said so! Because my teacher said so! Therefore it has to
be so.” No! It is never like that.  The kind of decisiveness is that you
understand what you are saying because having thought about it. Also you
know your position is backed up by reason.
The result of learning and reflection should be this kind of decisive
conclusion which is unshakeable, especially when we are dealing with
Buddhist philosophy. The end result has to be that. You cannot be wishy-
washy with it.  What I’m just describing here is not something new. You
have already studied in Tenets that describes about the  Great Exposition
School (GES), Sutra School (SS), Mind Only School (MOS) and Middle Way
School (MWS) in which they all have their own exertions or presentation of
what the two truths are. If you remembered of what you have studied, then
this shouldn’t be anything new. We have to know the presentation of the two
truths from these four Buddhist tenets. With an understanding of the
presentation of the two truths of the lower schools, only then we will see
how special, how unique, and how extraordinary the presentation of the two
truths according to the higher school is as it does stands out.
Although we don’t like suffering, but we do experience suffering in many
ways. There has to be an answer to that. Why? We don’t like it but how come
it comes our way. We get angry and we have attachment for all kinds of
things. The question is why? We don’t like to be upset and we don’t like to
be angry, but why? There has to be an answer. The question has to be
answered.  We can talk about reality “Reality is this two truths. It is
this and that”. But you still have to answer the questions: Why we get
upset? Why we get attached?
The way to listen to a teaching when you are hear an explanation like this,
for example,  just a minute ago I asked the question “Why do we get angry?
Why do we get upset? Why do we get attached?,  simultaneously you should be
analyzing. It is not just sitting there “He is asking why we are angry” and
then just register “Why we are angry”. What we should do is to analyze at
the same time. We have to ask ourselves the question and look for the
answer. We have to think. That is why there is an art to learning the
dharma, there is an art to studying the dharma, and the art to listening to
the teachings. It is not just sitting there  and registering the words. If
we don’t think of what we have read or heard, then it is impossible to
develop insights and any understandings. Impossible! Many a times people
think “You are saying this again. I have already heard this for how many
times. I already know them as you have said this numberless times already.
I have heard it before”.  With this kind of attitude of not analyzing, we
don’t get to taste the dharma. The dharma doesn’t go in us. That is why we
don’t change. That is the problem. We should ask ourselves on this. Many of
us, if not all of us here, have heard numberless  teachings in our lives
over many years but nothing much has happened and has no change, right? So
it is important to ask ourselves “Where is the problem? What happen?” This
lack of change despite of having heard so many teachings over so many years
is not due to a lack of teachings. It is not due to being experiencing the
poverty of dharma teachings. It is also not the fault of the teachings
themselves. If we do analyze and think carefully, it is evident that we
have never ever seriously analyze about what we have heard and what we have
read. We never seriously sit down and think about stuff. The whole problem
comes from that lack of reflection. The problem is just hearing and reading
and no reflection.
It is said in the teachings that when we look at our own body or the body
of somebody else, the body that we are looking at present itself  to us as
something real solid right there, as something we can touch, grasp and an
point to; whether we call it as inherently existent pleasant body, or truly
existent pleasant body. The point is that in our experience, something is
real right there and we assent to the appearance. When we see somebody that
we don’t like, what is the basis for feeling unhappy with that person? Just
the mere appearance of the body of that person makes us feel uneasy. It is
said in the teachings the feeling of unhappiness is based on the
fundamental view and the belief that there is a real bad and terrible
person right there from its own side. This is what the teachings tell us
but whether it is really true or not remains to be seen by ourselves and
only by ourselves. We have to check on our experience and see whether what
the teachings say is true or not. We have to think about it.
The big analysis is that we need to do this “Whether our object of
attachment or our object of anger for a particular person or for our body
or somebody else’s body, in the view of the attachment that is clinging on
to that pleasant body is appearing in a certain way to the mind of
attachment. The big question is “Yes, this is how it appears. Is that
representative of how it actually exist? Is that how the body exist
although that it is how it appears.? That is the big question that we have
to think deeply. Likewise, for the enemy or whatever person that just
drives us crazy and we hate so much, in the view of the mind of aversion or
anger, that enemy or that bad person is appearing in a certain way. Is that
appearance representative or indicative of how that person actually exist
or not? That is what we really need to think.
The correct conclusion upon thinking about of what I have just said is the
same as what the line “Form is empty” is trying to say. The correct
conclusion voice down to that.  When we say that things do not exist  in
and of themselves although they appear in that way, whether it is our
object of attachment or object of aversion., when the phrase “Form is
empty” is applied to an enemy or a friend or an object of attachment, the
person that we hate or the person we cling on to so much don’t exist in the
way that our attachment or anger believes them to exist. Our object of
attachment is devoid of existing in the way we believe he exists.  When we
see the form or enemy or the friend or love one does not exist in the way
our mind believes them to exist, and just by understanding well that they
do not exist in the way they appear, the emotion behind, whether it is
anger or attachment, will be reduced substantially. There is no force
behind that anger or attachment anymore. When we have developed this
understanding, then it is said that we not just reduce the emotions but
actually we can eradicate those emotions totally because, in the first
place, there is no basis for them to arise.
Sometimes when adults play game with children, they clench their fist and
pretend to be holding something inside the fists. Then they tell the
children “I am holding onto something special. You guess what it is. If you
guess it correctly then it is yours”. The children get excited and
fantasize. They analyze and looking forward to getting that object inside
the fist. Actually there is nothing there. It is completely nothing there.
Likewise, we are like children in that the thing that we cling on, whether
it is the enemy, friend, loved one or object of attachment, with so much
hopes and expectations. We pile up the hopes and expectations in our views
of that object or that person that lead to either very strong clinging or
very strong aversion. But, at the end of the day, we are clinging to
nothing. We actually also getting upset with nothing.  Just like the child
who is so excited with all kind of hopes for that empty fist and when the
fist is opened up, there is nothing.
Khen Rinpoche: You get the idea? You fully understand?
It is very clear evidence that we have been suffering and we will continue
to suffer all because of nothing. It is because of hallucination. While
there is nothing, we think that it is everything although reality is not
liked that.
In terms of the two truths, we understand how reality exists. Not knowing
that they are empty and existing in mere name, we lead life based on our
made up reality. Our hallucination is the bedrock  or foundation of all our
views. Based on that we lead our life thinking that whatever our
hallucination tells us is true. We follow after the projection of our
hallucination. While it is not true, we think that is true. We accept
whatever we think is correct. We accept whatever appears to our mind. “It
appears like that, the person appears like that, the object appears like
that, then it has to be liked that. What I think is correct. How it appears
to me is correct. There is nothing more than that”. There is no other
possibility of reality. So, that is how we lead our life. Based on this
hallucination then we create our suffering life.
That is why it is important to get an understanding of what actually exist.
When we talk about reality, what actually exist? Because we don’t know that
at all that is why we suffer and we continue to be in samsara. If we don’t
understand the two truths there is no way we can see what is like the cream
that goes on top of the cake; the finest tasting thing of the entire
Buddhadharma. What is the essence or the very heart of the entire
Buddhadharma? If we don’t understand the two truths, there is no way to see
the intent of the Buddha. Also without understand the two truths there is
no way to see how the Buddhadharma is a class of its own. We will not able
to see how special and different it is from other beliefs or other
traditions.
The ability to see that the Buddhadharma is something extra ordinary. It is
a class of its own, and it is something that is not shared by any other
beliefs or traditions. It is something so wonderful and special, and it
will only come from understanding well the presentation of the two truths -
the Buddhist’s explanation of what reality is. Otherwise, there is no way.
This is liked a hallmark of Buddhism. So without understanding our
presentation of reality, we don’t have the spark or the thing that makes
Buddhism stands up from all the other traditions.
Arya Nagajurna in his “The Commentary on the Mind of Enlightenment”, he
said that if one comes to understand the emptiness of all phenomena, how
things do not exist inherently and yet at the same time able to explain how
actions can give rise to their effects, i.e. if your realization is such
that you can put these two together - the emptiness is complimentary with
the working of karma and its effects - then that understanding and
realization is more marvelous than marvelous. It is also something
exceeding amazing - more amazing than amazing, and more marvelous than
marvelous.
Many people think that they have some understanding of emptiness and yet
they are the same people who say “Everything is empty. There is no karma
because it is empty. That is why there is no karma and no effect”.  There
is no way to understand the heart of Buddhadharma. There is no way to
understand Buddhism. Our discussion is kind of tied in with the illusion
from the verse of Vajra Cutter Sutra; “A star, a visual aberration, a flame
of a butter lamp”. Next is “an illusion”.
We circle in samsara because we live a life based on our hallucination
assenting to the appearance that things exist inherently. That is where all
the anger and attachment come. That is like describing what reality is in
general and how our life in reality get stuck in samsara. Then what is the
method to overcome or to get out or at least to start reducing our
sufferings?
Next is “A drop of a dew.” One starts with the meditation on impermanence.
Through the meditation of impermanence, we can at least reduce our
sufferings because we reduce the strength of our negative emotions like our
attachment. A drop of dew can cease to exist very quickly as it is so
fragile. All we need is the sunrise. That’s it. The drop of dew dries up
and then cease to exist. That is analogous of our life - how our life is
quickly disintegrating and how our body or the body of our object of
attachment is disintegrating and undergoing change. We talk about the
process of change. If we talk about impermanence in the very gross level
(coarse level) then we talk about change over a long period of time. If we
give it a hundred of year, in a hundred years we will not be around and our
object of attachment will not be around. There will come a time when our
body, our life and the life and bodies of others will cease to exist. That
is the coarse impermanence (obvious impermanence). Based on this obvious
impermanence, and in order for change to happen over a long period of time,
if we look at the smaller moment of unit of time, even within a month,
change is happening. Then if we go down to smaller unit of moment of time,
then it comes to a level when we think about subtle impermanence –
momentary change.
From gross (obvious) impermanence, we then think about subtle impermanence.
GES posit that production, abiding, cessation are not simultaneous but
happen serially. Of course, that is not the reality. If we think about it
well, in one moment, that one moment of an impermanent phenomenon when it
exists, that moment of production is also the moment of disintegration. A
composed (compounded) phenomenon is something that undergoes momentary
change. What is the cause for a composed phenomenon undergoes momentary
change? The cause is none other than the cause of its production. There is
no separate cause for an impermanence phenomenon disintegration. If we
analyze and think well about it, the cause for its disintegration is the
very cause of its production. If we think well and using reason, this is
the conclusion of subtle impermanence
It is a different thing if we talk about coarse impermanence when we look
at thing in terms of change over a long period of time. But the very basis
for coarse impermanence is subtle impermanence. We do understand things
undergo change. Impermanence phenomenon undergoes momentary change. If we
were to ask what is it that causes an impermanence phenomenon to change
momentary, we always think there is something else and there is a different
cause. In the first place, the cause for its undergoing momentary change is
exactly the cause that brought about that phenomenon. So, the cause of
production is the very cause of its disintegration. As such, if we think
about how our object of attachment or our object of anger, whatever it is,
will not exist or last forever, in fact, they are disintegrating in each
and every single moment. If we really can have a feel of that and see that
then it really will help to lessen whatever negative emotion we may have in
relation to the object; whether it is the object of attachment or anger.
If we look at how our attachment or anger works, one of the conditions that
makes our attachment and anger arise,  although not the root cause, it is
the belief that the object of attachment and anger would always been like
this and will never be something else. That is what we say grasping at
permanent. In the view of our anger or attachment, that is how our anger
and attachment appear. That is very clear.  “He will always like me, stably
and will never change. It is impossible to change. He will be always
remaining like this”. Or “my enemy has always been like this and there is
no hope for it”. Only if we have think about it and see the reality is not
like that, they will undergo momentary change. They will change but if we
can add in “momentary change” then it really helps because it takes away
one of the supports of our attachment and anger. When we reflect on
impermanence, it takes away one of the conditions for those emotion.
While there is not a single one of us here who doesn’t have attachment, and
there is not a single one of us here who doesn’t have anger, so whenever
those emotions arise then we check for ourselves to see whether all these
things we have been talking about is true or not. We have to think and to
see for ourselves. We need to meditate on our experience. When we reflect
on the momentary nature of our object of attachment or enemy, we see
whether that leads to a diminishment of our attachment or anger or not. We
have to see because it does.
Like how we think about our own body. We always think our body will kind of
always remain the same. Not exactly the same but basically still the same.
That is what we think. We always think the two arms, one head, the shape,
and color are pretty much within the acceptable range. This is what we
think and this is what we expect. There are so many people get so upset and
worried when they put on weight. It causes them so much distressed when fat
is accumulating on their waist line. They get so disturbed.
Khen Rinpoche: Those who go to the gyms building the muscles, when their
muscles a little bit loosen, they become so much worried. It is the same
thing. Men also have problem. Girls also have the problem. Everybody have
problem.
I am not saying that we shouldn’t take care of our health or our body. That
is not the point. But it has to be done within reason. There are many
people who make it the sole purpose of their life to look good forever and
to have a healthy and strong body. They make it like that is the only thing
that worth striving for in life. They put in so much time, effort, energy
and money. They just spend the whole life doing that. That really makes
life goes to waste. I am not saying we shouldn’t keep fit. Yes, we need to
keep fit. The body needs to keep fit. Those people who are so worried about
their health, on their physical appearance and how their bodies look
because they never ever accept it is the nature of the body to change;
whether they like it or not. That is the reality. Their pain and worries
come from not seeing the reality. They are not accepting the reality. If
from day one, if we accept it is like that whether we like it or not, it
will age, it will sag, it will look bad, it will go out of shape, and when
it does actually happens then it is either no pain or less pain.
Therefore it is important to reflect and to remember impermanence all the
time. Soon we will start on the 37 aspects of the path. Of the 37 aspects,
they are classified under different groups. The very first group is called
Four Closed Placement of Mindfulness. Of the four, the first one is the
closed placement of mindfulness on the body. That is an exercise and
meditation on seeing the momentary nature of the body and how it is
impermanent.
When we are sick there is no use to hold onto the idea that it is terrible.
Part of the reason why we feel like that is because we look at the sickness
as something unchanging and will be there forever.  But if we just accept
it then we will not worry and suffer unnecessarily. We can just reflect on
how even the sickness itself is an impermanent phenomenon in that it
undergoes change. It does help the mind a lot. Or even if thing goes well,
a lot of happiness and so called happiness or bliss or whatever, we also
have to remember that it will not last forever.
Even if we are talking about our own happiness, whether there is some
pleasure or whatever, right from day one we are aware that it will not
last. It is changeable. If we have that attitude right from day one, and we
have the expectation that comes the day when we actually ceases, and
whatever the pleasure or happiness disappear then we will not be so shocked
because we have already expected it to happen.
Also a recollection of impermanence or a recollection of momentary nature
of phenomenon is very important. It is something that we need to remember
all the time. If we keep that in the back of the mind actively then it
doesn’t matter whatever we meet and whatever things we experience in life.
Then there will be less up and down, at least less upheaval. We are able to
remain very kind of constant not too affected by it. In fact, that leads to
more peace in the heart, more happiness, less upheaval, less disturbance,
less unhappiness.
That is why the very first teaching that the Buddha taught is impermanence.
This is because it is important. It is very helpful right from the
beginning that we have something that is ready accessible and we can use to
deviate the cause of our problem, mainly attachment. It is very useful.
Just by thinking about impermanence, it does really helps to pacify our
desire and attachment. What the four close placement of mindfulness
actually means is recollection as mentioned in the calm-abiding section in
the Lamrim Chenmo about what mindfulness is. In the Lamrim Chemo in the
section when it talks about not losing the object of observation in
developing calm abiding. mindfulness is developing familiarity associating
and remembering object that is familiar. That is what is mentioned  in the
Lamrim Chenmo as developing association and remembering a familiar object.
Many of you attended the module on minds and mental factors.
Khen Rinpoche: We have completed that, yeah? No? Yeah, we did. We completed
the topic. We left one more topic. I think we have covered everything.
What is the object of mindfulness? The mental factor of mindfulness has an
object. The object cannot be a new object. We can only be mindful of an
object that we remember, something that we are familiar with or at least we
came into contact with. That is why it is posited as a familiar object. So
that is the object of mindfulness.
What is the function of mindfulness? It causes one do not forget. Because
if we forget then there is no way to remember. I mean forgetting and
remembering will not happen at the same time. If we apply mindfulness and
vigilance on impermanence with whatever we do in our life, then whatever we
do in our life we actively bring to mind that it is not going to last
forever and  it will come to an end. While it is there, it undergoes change
momentary all the time. If we can have that kind of remembrance, not
forgetting this all the time, we apply this remembrance of impermanence and
changing nature of our own bodies and also of our object of attachment, it
will make a significant impact and difference to our life.
Next is the “water bubble”. The analogy of the water bubble can be used to
illustrate impermanence as well. Water bubble is used to illustrate how
everything included in samsara is in the nature of suffering. Reflecting on
the suffering nature of everything that is included in samsara is a mean
also to reduce our grasping on our attachment, our desire. It is not
sufficient just to reflect on impermanence. It is not sufficient just to
reflect on suffering. It is not sufficient just to reflect on empty. In
order to achieve liberation and especially enlightenment, we need to
reflect on the meaning of selfless.
These are the four characteristics of the First Noble Truth: impermanence,
suffering, empty and selfless. In order to achieve liberation and in
particular enlightenment we have to reflect on the meaning of selfless in
order to overcome the root our afflictions such as attachment and anger and
in particular ignorance, from which all the other afflictions arise. So, in
order to illustrate that, there are analogies of a dream, a flash of
lightning, a cloud.
The analogies of a dream, a flash of lightning and cloud illustrate how we
can come to an understanding that the past phenomena, present phenomena and
future phenomena respectively are devoid of true existence. Basically how
phenomena of the three times are empty of existing truly, empty of existing
inherently.
It is one thing to say it is liked that, it is another thing to really know
and be able to explain. For example, how does the analogy of dream will
help us to understand that all the phenomena that happen in the past are
empty of existing truly, how a flash of lightning serve to illustrate that
phenomena in the present or the present is empty of existing truly and how
the analogy of cloud serve to illustrate that phenomena of the future is
empty of existing truly. Then we have to go deeper, think and analyze.
(Refer to the handout) On the chart on the 8 categories and 70 topics were
given out on Tuesday, for those of you who really want to study and who
really want to know, then you have no choice but to look at this, read it
and if possible memorize them. Otherwise, there is no basis to even
understand the explanation. Even if you do understand the explanation, you
will not find it applicable now. You  may not see the point. But the point
is that this is the foundation. You are laying the foundation if you were
to study something more profound. This is the foundation. If you want to
have success in the future then you have to know this. You have to
understand the explanation. In order to understand the explanation you have
to at least be familiar with the words even if you don’t know what it is
talking about. You have to know, for example, the first one got ten, this
one got eleven. Roughly, at least you have to go through the words.
Khen Rinpoche : Anyway, first thing go through the words,okay? Hopefully I
can explain a little bit. We can’t go through everything.
Well, it is true that this is very profound and  is really tough. Seriously
it is tough. But that shouldn’t be a reason to therefore  be discouraged
and give up. Rather we must try.

Announcement
Vajrayogini Retreat at Kopan
October Oct 14 to Nov 4 (20 days)
Prerequisite: Has taken Vajrayogini Initiation
