Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/lesson13.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:53.362646
================================================================================

I thought to speak a little bit about the life story of the bodhisattva who was called Always Crying One 
Khen Rinpoche: You heard that? Why he always cry? Why that bodhisattva always cry? So suffering and cry?
Student respond (Inaudible)
Khen Rinpoche: Anyway, I mean that can be long story. I don’t know but just to make sure. 
This bodhisattva Always CryingOne obviously was someone who had developed bodhicitta and was working hard to achieve enlightenment. He had a very strong interest in wanting to hear the teachings on the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra. He was thinking how he could find someone who could teach him the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra.  He went into isolation and was wondering how he can receive teachings on the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra. He was always thinking about that to the extent of crying over the matter. 
Then one day, out of nowhere there is a voice that said to him “In the eastern direction there is a land called Incense Smell and there resides a bodhisattva by the name of Chopa.He is someone whom you have karmic connection with over many lifetimes. Look for this bodhisattva and you will be able to hear the Perfection of Wisdom Sutrafrom him.
After having heard that voice, he went to look for this bodhisattva. He went in the eastern direction and travelled for a very long time. Then he thought to himself “How much further will I have to travel before I could see this bodhisattva”. After having travelled for quite a long time, he began to get discouraged as he didn’t know how much further he had to go.As the bodhisattva Always CryingOne was someone who had already achieved concentration, he went into meditative equipoise and had the vision of many buddhas and bodhisattvas who told him to just continue going in the eastern direction and he will meet the bodhisattva Chopaafter certain number of kilometer. He was advised to go with determination and not togive up. The buddhas and bodhisattvas also gave him teachings while in that vision. He then continued with his journey after the vision. 
As he continued with his journey, he was wondering to himself “Where did the buddhas and bodhisattvas come from? Where did they returned to?” He also started to wonder what offering he should make when he meet the bodhisattva Chopa. He thought “I must offer something when I meet the bodhisattva Chopa but I have nothing to offer. The only thing I have is my body. I will sell my body and whatever I get in return from selling my body I will make offering to the bodhisattva Chopa so I can receive the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra”
After the bodhisattva Always Crying One has reached the town, he thought “Finally I can get somebody to buy my body”. So he shouted in the market “I’m here to sell my body. Are there any buyers?” He just advertised loudly but no matter how much he advertised, he could not find any buyer. As the maras knew what he was up to, sowith their magical powers the marascause everyone in the market not hearing what he was saying. The people in the market couldn’t hear that there is a guy who was willing to sell his body. After a while of not finding any buyers, this bodhisattvaAlways CryingOnegot very worried and thought “If I am not going to find any buyers, as such I’m not going to get my teachings on the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra.
The god Indra knew what the bodhisattva Always Crying Onewas trying to sell his body so that he could receive the teachings on the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra. Indra wanted to test his resolve of whether he really meant what he said. Then Indra manifested himself as a brahmin and went up to the bodhisattva Always CryingOne and said “I need some stuff for my rituals. I need blood, a human heart, a human bones, a marrow and human flesh. Are you willing to sell me of what I need?”
The bodhisattva Always Crying Oneagreed and began to cut off a piece of flesh from his leg for the flesh, he bled himself for the blood, he broke his leg bone with a rock for the bone. As for the bone marrow, while he was about to break the bone to extract the marrow, there was aqueen with an entourage of 500 other women saw what was happening. Out of curiosity, the queen asked the bodhisattva Always Crying One what he was doing. The bodhisattva replied by saying that he was selling his body as he needs to get offering so he can make offering to bodhisattva Chopa in order to receive the teachings on thePerfection of Wisdom Sutra. After having heard that, the queen and the entourage felt very inspired and generated great faith. Then the queen said to the bodhisattva: “You don’t have to do that. I will provide you whatever you need so you don’t to break your leg”. The queen and the entourage made many offerings and gave many things to the bodhisattva Always Crying One. It is said that together they rode in the chariots to look for the bodhisattva Chopa. 
Indra is not an ordinary god as he is someone who possesses the speech of the power of truth. So whatever prayers he utters can be actualized. AsIndra was convinced that this bodhisattva Always CryingOne was resolved to receive the teachings on the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, he uttered the phrase to invoke the power of truth. The bodhisattva Always CryingOne’s health and body was fully restored. 
As the bodhisattva Always CryingOnetogether with the queen and her entourage of 500 peoplewere nearing the place where the bodhisattva Chopa was residing, the bodhisattva Always Crying One said “I think we better stopped here and get off our horses or chariots as it would be inappropriate to ride all the way in”. They then got off their horses and chariots and walked the remaining distance to where this great bodhisattva was residing. When they reached the land called Incense Smell, the bodhisattva Always Crying One saw that place like a pureland. He saw a very beautiful house, a pavilion like structure, celestial mansion where the Perfection of Wisdom Sutrawas housed and worshipped. He also saw the place where the bodhisattva Chopa stayed. There is an account of how the bodhisattva Always Crying Onetogether with the entouragewent to the place where the Perfection of Wisdom Sutrawas placed and honored. The bodhisattva Always CryingOnemade many wondrous offerings in honor of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra. It is also said that the bodhisattva Chopawas not in the aspect of a fully ordained person,but in an aspect of a lay person with an entourage of many females around him.
Then the bodhisattva Always CryingOnefinally met the bodhisattva Chopa. He then paid homage, made prostration and offered body and his entire being to bodhisattva Chopa. Then the bodhisattva Chopa asked the bodhisattva Always CryingOne “With you are the queen and an entourage of 500 people, are you able to offer all of that to me as well?”  Then the bodhisattva Always Crying Onesaid “Of course. If I can offer my body, what else can I not offer?” So he offered everything. I seemed to remember that at the end of it, the bodhisattva Chopa offered back whatever the bodhisattva Always Crying One had offered.
However, the bodhisattva Chopa did not give the teachings on the Perfection of Wisdom Sutraright away. On that night before he went into meditative equipoise, he said “I will remain in concentration for 7 years.” For 7 years, he did not give any teachings that the bodhisattva Always CryingOnewas looking for. The bodhisattva Chopa entered into concentration and remained in it for 7 years. So during that 7 years, day and night the bodhisattva Always CryingOne, the queen and the entourage circumambulated the place where the bodhisattva Chopa was absorbed in concentration.  After the 7 years had passed, then bodhisattva Chopa gave teachings on the Perfection of Wisdom Sutrato the bodhisattva Always Crying One. As a result of receiving the teachings, then the bodhisattva Always Crying One was able to see the truth directly, i.e. herealized emptiness directly. 
This is not just a fairy tale or a story. It is a historical account and it did happen. In fact, if you lookin the last couple of chapters near to the end of the short Perfection of Wisdom Sutrain the 8000 stanzas, this long story is mentioned in the sutra. This is an account of something that did happen. 
What is the point of me narrating this accountto you? From this story, you can see that how precious is the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra. The Perfection of Wisdom Sutrais precious because of their subject matter which is the natural perfection of wisdom.
What is it that keeps us suffering day in and day out? What is it that binds us to our own samsara? You really have to think about it. If you see that then you will know that it is only through realizing emptiness, the natural perfection of wisdom, the object of emptiness, and only that can free us from our own samsara. Therefore, when we have opportunity to learn about emptiness, we should do it with joy and enthusiasm. You must see the purpose, and then you are able to do it with joy and enthusiasm. In order to realize the perfection of wisdom, besides the teachings themselves, you also need a teacher, i.e. somebody who can teach you the perfection of wisdom. If you can find someone that you have karmic connection with, then it makes it easier. Because of the karmic affinity and the connection, his explanation will be clearer and also it makes it easier for you to understand. 
So this historical account is of a bodhisattvawho has mind generation i.e. he possesses bodhicitta. Look at how hard he worked to realize the perfection of wisdom. If he need that much of sacrifice and hardwork,then what about us? We have nothing. We don’t have bodhicitta at all, and nowhere near it. Then obviously we have to work even harder, isn’t it. So we have to put in hardwork and should never ever get discouraged. What we are trying to do here in this module is starting to look a little bit at the subject matter of Perfection of Wisdom Sutra. The 8 categories and 70 topics are the subject matter that are taught in the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra. Yes, it is not easy and is not like a walk in the park. Therefore, you should work hard. You have to work hard and never give up. 
KhenRinpoche : Never give up. 
So in order to really understand and realize the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, we need a lot of meritand we need so much purification. As such, in the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra itself, it says "Therefore honor and worship the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra by write it out, make offerings to it, prostrate and so on and so forth. We need a lot of merit and a lot of strong purification. 
Earlier on when we are looking at the knower of the paths, we looked at the path of meditation of belief. Thebelief means the belief in that the mothers are the source of one’s and other’s aims. During that time, we look at how making offerings to the Perfection of WisdomSutrais the same as making offering to the buddhas themselves. But you have to understand why. 
The main point is “Where did the buddhas come from?” They originate from actualizing the perfection of wisdom. In order to actualize the perfection of wisdom, they have to depend on the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra; which subject matter is emptiness. Even the buddhas themselves came about in dependence upon the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, the subject matter that is contained in those sutras. As such, when we worship or make offerings to Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, the merit is similar to what we get when we do the same thing to Buddha himself.For that reason, whether it is a Perfection of Wisdom Sutra or any other sutra or dharma text (including the one that we study and learn about so that we can practice), we have to respect all these texts. It is being mentioned in the training that after one has taken the refuge in the Three Jewels, one has to respect the dharma texts and regards it is as the Dharma Jewel. We have to respect the Dharma text by putting it in a clean place, respectful place, high place and if possible also make offerings to the text. Of course that depends on whether we have the belief in the first place (the mental factor of belief)? If you have the belief then you are able to respect all the Dharma texts, worship, honor, and make offerings to them. When we make offerings to them, worship them, and prostrate to the scriptures and texts, we will accumulate a lot of merit. It is said that with merit, we will come to understand and realize the emptiness of the perfection of wisdom.
Anyway, it is not as if you don’t know what I have just told you. You already know about all these. Knowing is one thing and doing is another. Just knowing that there are benefits and knowing what ought to be done alone does not bring any benefit at all. When we do it then we will get the benefit. As say in the teaching, the whole point of knowing is to do it and the whole point of studying is to put what we have studied into practice. As mentioned in the Lamrim, if we don’t practice what we hear or what we learn, then that learning and hearing has no benefit whatsoever. 
As it is clearly being mentioned in the Lamrim that there isn’t such a thing as the Dharma to be learned or studied and then there is another Dharma to be practiced. To think the Dharma in that way is wrong. It is a huge mistake. So, if we think what we have learned is not meant to be practiced and when come to practice there is some other special instructions, then that is a mistake and is wrong. Whatever we learned is meant for practice and whatever we practice it is that what we have learned.
Now I am going to talk about the knower of bases. In order to know what a knower of bases, we have to think about the definition. There is no other way out. 
Definition of the knower of bases: an exalted wisdom abiding within a lesser vehicle class of realizations that is conjoined into wisdom directly realizing selflessness in the continuum of the person who possesses it.
Are there any of you here who has successfully memorized the definition of the knower of bases?
Khen Rinpoche: Can put your hand up? Is anybody knows the definition by heart, not by reading? Reading you know how to read. You know how to say from your heart?
In the definition of a knower of bases, it says it is anexalted wisdom abiding within a Hinayana class of realizations that is conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing selflessness in the continuum of a person who possesses it. We have to understand that this explanation is from the perspective of YAMWS. The selflessness here is not talking about emptiness, but it is selflessness of a person. When we talk about selflessness of a person here, we are talking about selflessness of a person that is asserted by the YAMWS and below because their way of asserting the selflessness of a person is pretty much the same.
Just because a mind is conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing selflessness, that alone does not qualify that mind to be a knower of bases. In order to be a knower of bases, on top of being conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing selflessness, it has to be amind that abides within the Hinayana class of realizations. So, in order to understand the definition fully you have to understand what abiding within a Hinayana class of realizations means. 
Khen Rinpoche: Are you following? I am repeating.
Question: What is the measure of abiding within a Hinayana class of realizations? 
If that exalted wisdom is taken by a Hinayanist as his main object of cultivation with a similar observed object and aspect of it then that makes that mind a mind that abides within the Hinayana class of realizations. 
If you were asked “If the wisdom directly realizing selflessness in the continuum of a Mahayana superior a knower of bases or not?” You have to say yes. 
That wisdom directly realizing selflessness in the continuum of a Mahayana superioris a knower of bases, is it a Hinayana path? Yes. Is it a Mahayana path? Yes.
If you heard the subject of enquiry here, you will automatically know that it is a Mahayana path because we said that the wisdom realizing selflessness in the continuum of a Mahayana superior, and that is the subject. It is a Mahayana path, isn’t it? 
Is the person who possesses this wisdom a Mahayanist or not? 
If he is a Mahayanist then the knower in his continuum is a Mahayana path. 
Isthe wisdom directly realizing selflessness in the continuum of this Mahayana superior a Hinayana path? Yes. The Hinayana path is not necessarily a path that is included in the continuum of a Hinayanist. 
In our discussion of a knower of the paths, what is its boundary? Where does it exist? 
Knower of the pathsonly exists in the continuum of Mahayana superior.
What is a knower of the paths? If you look at the etymology, not the definition, aknower of the paths is a knower that knows all the three Paths. 
1. The knower of the Hearers Path
2. The knower of the Solitary Realizers Path
3. The knower of the Mahayana Path
A knower of the paths is a knower that knows all the three paths completely in entirety. 
Question: Why there is a need for Mahayana superior to know everything?
Bodhisattvas work for all sentient beings and not all sentient beings are Mahayanist i.e. not all sentient beings are of the Mahayana lineage. All sentient beings mean everyone. Here everyone means the disciples of the object to be subdued of the three lineages: Hearers, Solitary Realizers and the Mahayana lineage. So, bodhisattva works for the disciples of the three lineages. In order to work for the disciples of the three lineages the bodhisattva has to show the Dharma that is in accordance with their respective dispositions or aspirations.
In the continuum of the Mahayana superior, there are Hearers path, Solitary Realizers path, and it goes without saying that definitely there are Mahayana path. 
When the bodhisattva achieves the Mahayana Path of Seeing, the bodhisattva sees the truths directly and realizes the selflessness of person directly as well. From then onwards, he doesn’t need to go over and over with that realization because there is no need to. The purpose of going over and over again with a realization is either to abandon the afflictive obscuration or the knowledge obscuration. As we have seen earlier on, how the bodhisattvas do not take the abandonment of the affliction as their main task. As such on the Path of Meditation, they don’t put in special efforts to go over the realization of the selflessness of person over and over again as in YAMWS.
The wisdom directly realizing the selflessness of a person exists on the Mahayana Path of Meditation. Of course, it exists. We are not saying it doesn’t exist. So, the bodhisattva superiors possess the wisdom directly realizing the selflessness of a person in their continuum. The Buddha is also the same.
The wisdom directly realizing the selflessness in the continuum of the Mahayana superior is a Hinayana path. That means the Hinayana Path do exists in the continuum of the Mahayana superiors. 
Why is it a Hinayana path? Why is it a Hearer path? 
It is a Hinayana path because it is a wisdom that is abide within a Hinayana class of realizations. Since that exists in the continuum of a Hearer then we say that it is a Hearer path.
Khen Rinpoche: Should be clear? I don’t know. You should cry everyday not understanding the knower of bases. The bodhisattva that cried not hearing the wisdom of sutra then you can cry not understanding this.
In order to know what a knower of bases is, you have to look at its definition. There are two parts to the definition. If the two parts are present, you can call its definiendum (the thing that is defined by the definition) a knower of bases. So if the thing possesses the two parts of the definition then it is a knower of bases.
If you really have the interest to learn and want to know, and if you want to discuss or debate, you have no choice but to memorize the definition. Not only just memorize the definition, you also have to have some ideas of what the definition is. However, if you don’t have any interest then it is okay as nothing to be done.
We have already went through the definition of the exalted knower of all aspects, knower of paths and knower of bases. If you want to know the topic, then you have to approach your understanding starting with the definition.So you have to understand the definition, memorize the definition, and knows the definition. You can write it out on your own and think about it. You also have to know the boundary. For the time being, don’t worry about the topics that illustrate or characterize those topics. For the time being, just think of the definition of the three knowers and their boundaries. This is the homework and you have to do them. One of the techniques for us to understand a subject matter is to explore its possibilities in relation to another object. Now we have the three knowers: exalted knower of all aspects, knower of paths and knower of bases. For example, first you compare the exalted knower of all aspects and knower of paths, how many possibilities between the two? 
Is there something that is an exalted knower of all aspects but not knower of paths?
Is there something that is knower of paths but not the exalted knower of all aspects?
Is there something that is both exalted knower of all aspects and knower of paths?
Is there something that is not exalted knower of all aspects and not knower of paths?
Of the maximum 4 possibilities, how many exist? Of the possibilities that do exist then you have to give an illustration. You cannot just yes or no whatsoever. For example, if you say there is an exalted knower of all aspects but not knower of paths then give an illustration.
Khen Rinpoche: You have to write down. Next time when I ask you to read, and you read whatever you have prepared. You just read that. If possible, you should be preparedthe examples. From there, you can learn more. 
Likewise, do the same for the knower of paths and knower of bases. How many possibilities exist between the knower of paths and knower of bases? Whatever number of possibilities you can come out with, you have to give an illustration for the possibilities. It requires thinking in order for you to be able to give an illustration. If you don’t think, you will not be able to come out with any illustration. For example, if you say something is A but not B and give an illustration, then you must be able to explain why your illustration is A and not B. In the first place, without understanding there is no way you can come out with an illustration. So, that is the exercise.
For example, if you find something that is A but not B then you write down an illustration. There must be a reason why you are writing down that as the illustration. You must have something in your mind that is telling you the illustration isdefinitely A but not B.You are able to write it down because you are clear with that. You can write it down because you are able to find an illustration.You will find it easy in the future asyou don’t have to think about it again. Because you have thought about it, and when someone were to ask you, it will just come out “It is like that”. In order to be able to come out with the number of possibilities between A and B and the illustrations, what is your basis? It is the definitionof whatever you are comparing plus their boundaries.
Do you understand when I said explore the numbers of possibility? It is about permutations. For example, so how many possibilities are there between phone and I-phone?
Khen Rinpoche: How many possibilities for phones? All four possible or no? Three or four? Three? Which is missing? From the four which does not exist?
Question: Is there such a thing as an I-phone but not phone?
If you don’t understand this then it is pointless to do the exercise. 
Khen Rinpoche: It is very simple. You understand? It is like A, B, C now. It is like teaching A, B, C, D.
Question: Is there something that is both I-phone and phone? 
Student 1: Yes, I-phone
VenGyurme: That is not the way to give an illustration. You cannot use the thing that you are comparing as an illustration.
Khen Rinpoche: For example, VenGyurme’s I-phone. Okay? It is clear. Same thing, you are compared the meaning which I just give the example.
Question: Is there something which is an I-phone but not phone? 
That is nothing that is an I-phone but not a phone. It is impossible.
So, there is something that is both but there isn’t something that is an I-phone but not a phone. That possibility is eliminated.
Question: Is there something which is a phone but not I-phone?
Student 2: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: Illustration?
(Inaudible from students)
Khen Rinpoche: Samsung is not a phone
(Inaudible from students)
Khen Rinpoche:  Don’t just say Samsung, Samsung phone.
Is there something that is not both?
Student 3: Yes
Question: Is there something that is not both?
Student 4: Pager
Khen Rinpoche: Pager?
VenGyurme: What about Buddha?
Khen Rinpoche: That is the example.
You then compare exalted knower of all aspects and knower of paths. Then you compare knower of paths and knower of bases. How many possibilities exist? If there is a possibility that does not exist, you also have to know why. If you think about this in terms of the possibilities then the understanding of individual categories will become clearer. Your understanding of knower of paths become clearer, knower of bases become clearer and the exalted knower of all aspects become a bit clearer.
Question: How many possibilities are there between a sentient being and a person who has entered a path? 
Khen Rinpoche: How many possibilities? You have already know what it means entering the path and not entering the path. You know this thing, isn’t it? Now just compare.
Student 5: Four
VenGyurme: Four? I would like to hear your exposition.
Khen Rinpoche: Four? Some say four, some say three. Four or three? Three? How many fingers you have? Five? How many? I mean we just do the exercise then you know what to do. How many? Somebody says three, somebody says four. Somebody says three, what is missing? 
(Inaudible from student)
VenGyurme: Anybody who enters the path is necessary a bodhisattva? So, you kick away all the Hinayana?
Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know what happen. You must listen to question carefully. I think it is a very simple thing. I just wondering why you don’t understand. Just now, I-phone is such a simple example. Same logic. Now comparing this person who entered into the path and the sentient beings, how many possibilities? Same technique. Now you trying to compare these two different things - the sentient beings and the person who entered into the path. How many possibilities?
VenGyurme: What are you doubting? What is it that you are doubting?
(Inaudible from students)
Khen Rinpoche: How many possibilities, four or three? Then you give the example like I-phone give example, one by one.
Student 5: Sentient being who has not entered the path - me.
Khen Rinpoche: For example,Swee Kim
Student 5: Sentient beings and a person who entered the path – arhat.  Person who entered the path only and not sentient beings – Buddha. Not sentient beings and not a person who entered the path - paper bag.
Khen Rinpoche: You understand what he said? Yes, four possibilities. You have to compare same as what he has said. I am just giving idea. You have to go back to the topic there and find out.
Question: How many possibilities are there between a Hinayana path and Mahayana path?
Khen Rinpoche: This is not for homework. This is just for you to understand how to work with the homework. If you work that everyday, there is no dementia. How many? Come, come, come. Kelvin said four. Tell and give example. Say clearly.
Student 6: Both are Mahayana path and Hinayana path - wisdom realizing selflessness of a self-sufficient substantial existence within the continuum of a Mahayana superior is both a Hinayana path because it abides in the lesser vehicle class of realization and also in the continuum of a Mahayana superior.
Khen Rinpoche: Correct
Student 6: Something that is a Mahayana path but not a Hinayana path–example is the mind generation in the continuum of a bodhisattva.
Khen Rinpoche: Correct.
Student 6: Something that is a Hinayana path but not a Mahayana path – example is the wisdom realizing the selflessness of self-sufficient substantial existence within the continuum of a Hinayana superior.
Khen Rinpoche: Correct.
Student 6: Something that is neither can be non-mind, person or form.
Khen Rinpoche: Correct. I mean these examples are okay. Now back to knower of paths and knower of bases, compare and write down. Make more clear like that. Okay? Anyway, next class …..
We will start with Complete Aspects Application in the next lesson. That is a bit tough but just to give you some ideas about the Complete Aspects Application. After that we will move into the 4 close placements of mindfulness which are useful. The 4 close placements of mindfulnessare:
The close placement of mindfulness on the body
The close placement of mindfulness on the feeling
The close placement of mindfulness on the mind
The close placement of mindfulness on the phenomena
“On the phenomena” is basically talking about the stuffs that we should abandon and of that should be cultivated. Those points are very useful for reflection and meditation.
(Below tables are for reference only)