Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/lesson8.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:51:03.987072
================================================================================

You have heard about the four reliances. One of them says "Do not rely on the person but rely on the doctrine”. So in this context here, it is not so much paying attention to the person who is speaking but to what is being said by the person. So pay attention to what is being said, think about it and see whether you agree with what is being said. 
Four reliances
Do not rely on the individual, but on the Dharma
Do not rely on the words, but the meaning 
Do not rely on the provisional meaning, but on the definitive meaning
Do not rely on the ordinary mind, but rely on wisdom
(One student presented his chosen verse from Chapter 8 of Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds as part of the exam process)
Knower of paths
A knower of paths is essentially a path that is in the continuum of a Mahayana superior.
There are 11 topics that illustrate the knower of paths. We have gone through:
the limbs of the knower of paths, 
the knower of paths that knows hearer’s paths, 
the knower of paths that knows solitary realiser’s paths, 
the Mahayana Path of Seeing,
the function of the Mahayana Path of Meditation (the benefits  or effects of Mahayana Path of Meditation)
After the Mahayana Path of Seeing is the Path of Meditation. 
The Mahayana Path of Meditation consists of two divisions:
contaminated Path of Meditation 
uncontaminated Path of Meditation
The contaminated Path of Meditation consists of:-
Mahayana Path of Meditation of belief, 
Mahayana Path of Meditation of dedication,
Mahayana Path of Meditation of rejoicing
The uncontaminated Path of Meditation consists of:
The Mahayana Path of Meditation of achieving
The completely pure Path of Meditation 
What is the support for newly generating the Mahayana Path of Meditation? 
As we have seen, to newly attains or generates the Mahayana Path of Meditation, the support must be that of the desire realm. 
The support (rebirth or kind of body) for newly generating the Mahayana Path of Meditation is the support of the desire realm. Within that, specifically humans and desire realm gods are the supports for newly generating Mahayana Path of Meditation.
If we speak about it from the Buddhist cosmology point of view, in terms of the continents, with the exception of the northern continent, the humans of the other three continents are the suitable supports for newly generating Mahayana Path of Meditation. Of all the possible supports (bodies) for the newly generated Mahayana Path of Meditation, the best is human beings of the southern continents.
There are some desire realm gods, while as human beings in their previous lives, have cultivated the path and planted very strong imprints in their minds. Such individuals are then born as desire realm gods. It is said that these individual can also newly generate the Mahayana Path of Seeing. What it is saying here is that those desire realm gods who can newly attained the Mahayana Path of Seeing are those who already have cultivated the path and planted very strong imprints while they were human beings in their previous lives. So those who are not like that cannot generate newly Mahayana Path of Seeing.
It is also said in the text that it is not possible to newly generate a superior path in the higher realms – form and formless realms. This is in the Lamrim Chenmo in the section where it talks about the freedom and the endowments. It is also stated very clearly in the Lamrim Chenmo that most of the desire realm gods are in inopportune state; which means they lack freedom.  It is also said that the human body is the best support for generating a path, and this point to the preciousness of a human rebirth.
All of us having this human body possess the supreme basis; the best support for newly generating a superior path. On the basis of this human life, we can newly attain the realization of truth. This is something that most desire gods, no matter how powerful they may be, do not have this quality and potential. Even though the form and formless gods have calm abiding and amazing concentration, they cannot newly attain a superior’s path.
Khen Rinpoche: When we say “newly”, what do you understand when I say cannot newly attain? If I don’t use the word “newly”, what is the problem? 
Student 1:  When you say “cannot newly attain the path” that means there are some who have the path in their mind in the form and formless realms. This is because they have acquired in the past before and are reborn in the form and formless realms. 
Khen Rinpoche: Be alert to what he is saying and what I am saying.
Student 2: If you just say that there is no one that can attain the path on the form and formless realms, that means there will be nobody at all in the form and formless realms who has attained the path. That means no one can attain it. If you say that there is no one can newly attain it, that means there are some who has acquired it before and are reborn there.
Khen Rinpoche: You got it? After getting that, do you have any examples?
The support for generating the Mahayana Path of Meditation is generally a desire realm support, and within that are human beings and desire realm gods. So the Mahayana Path of Meditation cannot be generated with the support of the higher realms. Here higher realms mean form and formless realms. That means one cannot generate a Mahayana Path of Meditation with a form or formless realm support.
While you cannot newly generate a Mahayana Path of Meditation with a form realm support, but there are individual or person with a form realm support are on the Mahayana Path of Meditation.
Khen Rinpoche: Anyway what Student 2 was saying and I am saying is same thing. 
Why one cannot newly generate the Mahayana Path of Meditation with a form realm support? Because the support for newly generating Mahayana Path of Meditation has to be the same support for generating Mahayana Path of Seeing. It is said that one cannot newly generate a Mahayana Path of Seeing with a form realm support. 
Why can’t the form realm support be the basis for newly generating the Mahayana Path of Seeing? Because the support for newly generating the Mahayana Path of Seeing has to be a support whereby one can generates very strong disenchantment (in samsara).
The person in the form realm is abiding in single-pointed concentration. With that kind of mind, they are not able to generate strong renunciation, which is necessarily for seeing the truth directly for the first time. It is stated very clearly that one cannot newly generate Mahayana Path of Seeing with the support of the form and formless realms. 
What about the Path of Preparation? It is also stated very clearly that one cannot generates the Mahayana Path of Preparation with the formless realm support? 
Then what about the form realm support? It is also stated clearly that one cannot generate the Supreme Mundane Qualities level of the Path of Preparation with a form realm support. However, it is possible to generate the heat level and the peak level of the Path of Preparation with a form realm support. 
What is not mentioned is the forbearance level of Path of Preparation, and that is not clear.
Why one cannot generate the Supreme Mundane Qualities level of Path of Preparation with a form realm support? Because the support for generating the Supreme Mundane Qualities level of the Path of Preparation has to be the same support for newly generating the Path of Seeing. 
Why it has to be same support? Because one move from path to path in the same meditative equipoise. Just as one moves from the Mahayana Path of Accumulation into Mahayana Path of Preparation in one meditative session in the same support, likewise, when one moves from the Path of Preparation to the Path of Seeing, it is done in one meditative equipoise. Hence, if it is in one meditative equipoise then it is the same support.
One can newly generated the Path of Preparation with a desire realm support and with the form realm support. What about the formless realm? I think we would have to end up saying it is not possible to newly generate the Path of Preparation with a formless realm support.
In the Stages of the Path in the section on the freedoms and endowments, one of the eight freedoms is the freedom from being a long life god. What exactly is this long life god? This refers to two types of beings. Of the two, one of them is a being of the formless realm hat is an ordinary being. So when we say freedom in a human life of freedom and endowments, it means freedom from obstacles to cultivating the path and doing the dharma practice.
[Freedom from birth of long-life god: 
1. Rebirth as a god of no discrimination 
2. Rebirth as god of the formless realm].
Now you know roughly what are the support and the basis on which one can generate the Path of Preparation, Path of Seeing and Path of Meditation. What about the Path of Accumulation?
Khen Rinpoche: You have to tell me. That is the question. Up to there, I keep the last one.
Who can generate the Path of Accumulation? There are three realms - desire, form and formless realms. Of the beings that are in these three realms who are the ones can generate the Path of Accumulation?
Khen Rinpoche: Desire realm? [Responded to student answer] Okay. That’s all? When you say all three, so you are not listening to the first sentence of what I said.
One of characteristics of a perfect human rebirth is that having the freedom from being a long life god. Of the long life god, there are two different beings - one of them refers to all the ordinary beings in the formless realm. Why are they in the inopportune state? Why do they lack the freedom? Because they cannot generate the path. If they cannot generate the path, then we have to say that ordinary being of the formless realm cannot newly generate the Path of Accumulation, isn’t it?
Khen Rinpoche: Can all three realms generate the Path of Accumulation?
That is why I said that you have to revisit your Lamrim. It seems that a lot of times many people think they know the Lamrim. From this, it is clear that perhaps some of you do not really know the Lamrim. We are just talking about the human life of freedom, which is the entry level topic. One of the freedoms is the freedom from a long life god.  What is posited as a long life god? There are two meanings to this, and one of which is ordinary beings of the formless realm. 
It is saying that the ordinary beings in the formless realm are in an inopportune state, i.e. they lack the freedom, in general, to practice the dharma. What does it means that they lack the freedom? They do not possess the freedom to newly generate a path.
That is why when you learn and think about stuff, you need to put all these together, so much so that when I ask you “Is it possible to newly generate the Path of Accumulation in the form realm?” What are you going to say? Whatever you are going to say, it should be right away. I have given you many different pieces of information. So, when you put all of them together and if you have thought about it and understand them, then you should be able to provide the answer quickly.
Khen Rinpoche: By giving all these, can you can understand? Yes or no? Are you able to immediately say yes or no?
Is it possible to generate the Path of Accumulation in the form realm? Desire realm?
Khen Rinpoche: Everybody think. What is the conclusion? You have to say Yes or No? 
Pertaining to form realm, you are not able to say “Yes” right away?
Khen Rinpoche: Answer immediately by conclusion. If somebody ask question, immediately say “Yes” with confident. (Responded to student’s answer) Do you know why? Why you are so confident to say Yes? 
Are you able to say right away “Yes! It is possible to generate the Path of Accumulation with a form realm support?
Khen Rinpoche:  I think you are able to say what I said. Conclusion answer is there. Yes? Good. Why?
Student 3: Because Lamrim doesn’t say no.
Khen Rinpoche: Does Lamrim say Yes? Lamrim didn’t say yes or no.
You should be able to figure the answer out quickly. Why? Didn’t I say earlier on that it is possible to newly generate the Path of Preparation with a form realm support?
Khen Rinpoche: Did I? You remember?
Having said this, then is it possible to newly generate the Path of Accumulation with that same support?
If one can newly generate the Path of Preparation with a form realm support, there is no reason to say one cannot newly generate the Path of Accumulation with a form realm support. 
If one can newly generate the Path of Preparation with a form realm support, then there is nothing to stop one from saying that one can newly generate the Path of Accumulation with a form realm support.
Khen Rinpoche: Okay? It is very clear.
Then what about the desire realm? Can one newly generate the Path of Accumulation in the desire realm? 
Khen Rinpoche: Yes? There is no doubt, isn’t it? 
There shouldn’t be any doubt with the Path of Accumulation. If it is possible to generate almost every other single path including enlightenment, then what is there to stop one from generating the Path of Accumulation in the desire realm? So there is no doubt about that.
There are six types of transmigrators or migrators. Human beings are not just the only inhabitants of the desire realm. So all can? 
Question: Is it possible to newly generate the Path of Accumulation on the basis of these six types of migrators?
Khen Rinpoche: You are supposed to be long time studying one, and if people ask that, what are you going to answer? Not the beginner, the senior ones.
Question: Are all six types of migrators of the desire realm are support for newly generating the Path of Accumulation?
(Student’s response in inaudible)
Khen Rinpoche (in English): There is no doubt about human and god. Already made clear about that, so there is no doubt.
Question: Are the six types of migrators of the desire realm the supports for newly generating a path?
Khen Rinpoche: Give example. This cannot, and only this can. Give example. 
(Student’s response in inaudible)
Student 4:  I like to refute you. When Buddha Shakyamuni was in the hell realm he saw the sufferings of his fellow comrades. Because of that, he generated bodhichitta for the first time and immediately he was reborn in the upper realm. So it is possible to generate bodhichitta in the lower realm. That means once you generate you enter the Path of Accumulation. So at least for the hell being I think can.
(Student’s response in inaudible)
(Responded to student) He is saying “It follows that the hell realm is not an inopportune state”.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Hup Cheng is good. I think other people’s mind is not functioning. Only Hup Cheng’s mind is functioning. Surprised that other people’s mind not functioning. 
(Student’s response in inaudible)
Student 4: Lama Tsongkhapa is not wrong.
If Lama Tsongkhapa is not wrong then obviously you can’t generate the path as a hell being, because it is an inopportune state. 
Student 4:  My understanding is that it is the best state to generate the path but it doesn’t mean that in the other states you cannot generate the path. When it say that you have the freedoms and endowments in the human realm that means it is the best opportunity to generate the path. But it doesn’t mean that in the other states you cannot generate the path at all. 
Based on what you said, then the formless realm god is not a supreme basis because the human life is the supreme basis. If it is not a supreme basis, by the way they can if they want to even though they are not the best at doing it, right? 
Student 4: Formless realm is very special. When they are born they straight away enter into concentration. Then the next time when they are aware of what is happening is when they are going to pass out from that state. It is like they are in a state of meditative concentration. I think it should be a very blissful experience so it would be quite impossible for them to newly generate renunciation in that state.
Question: When those formless realm gods are born, they immediately space out? Why?
Khen Rinpoche: What’s your reason?
Student 4: Due to the throwing karma from their previous practice. I think is calm abiding.
Khen Rinpoche: What’s your reason?
Student 4: They cannot generate renunciation because they are in a very blissful environment. How to generate renunciation when they are meditatively bliss out? Because they are formless and don’t experience gross suffering. That is my thinking. Can you imagine the mind without any suffering is able to generate renunciation and enter the path? I think it is not possible for formless realm. 
But there are individuals in the form realm who do generate the path.
Student 4:  Not newly acquired. 
Didn’t I said five minutes ago that 100% for sure that you can newly generate the Path of Accumulation in the form realm.
Student 4: Now you are talking about form realm? Form realm, you can. 
Ven Gyurme: If form realm can, then why formless realm cannot?
The gods of the form realm don’t experience the suffering of pain or the suffering of change, and many of the gods in the formless realm also don’t experience the suffering of change.
Student 4:  But there are some who can experience. If they do experience then they can generate renunciation. 
But the formless realm also has. All of them in the formless realm don’t have suffering of change. 
Student 4: All of them don’t have suffering of change?  
Ven Gyurme: There is no suffering of change in the formless realm. 
Student 4: I don’t get the point that you are trying to dry at. Sorry. My mind is not working.
Basically, all six types of migrating beings of the desire realm can generate bodhichitta, and of the six the best support for generating bodhichitta is the human being. If you can generate the uncontrived bodhichitta, that means the Mahayana Path of Accumulation can be generated, isn’t it? 
It is said clearly in the text that of the six types of migrating being, migrators of the desire realm can newly generate bodhichitta, and as such, the Mahayana Path of Accumulation. There are accounts in the sutras, for example, in one of the Buddha’s lives while on the path as a sentient being, he generated bodhichitta first time in the hell. There are also accounts of generation of bodhichitta as a preta, as a naga (which I think are put under the animal category). 
This is what they said in the teachings, and we can always put it up for discussion. For example, like that short discussion about whether the being born as a hell being an inopportune state or not? If you can generate bodhichitta as a hell being, then does it make the hell rebirth not an inopportune state? Then we also have to think about the reasons why it is not possible to generate a path in the formless realm, i.e. why one cannot generate bodhichitta with a formless realm support?
It is said that the best support for newly generating a superior path, or another way of saying is that the best support for newly seeing the truth directly, is human being. 
Who can newly generate a superior path? Human being and the desire realm god. This means that the persons in the form and formless realm who have not attain the Path of Seeing would have to take rebirth in the desire realm in order to newly attain the Path of Seeing.
In our earlier discussion we saw how one can newly generate the Path of Accumulation and the Path of Preparation with a form realm support. Even a person on the Path of Preparation with a form realm support would still have to take rebirth in the desire realm in order to newly attain the Path of Seeing. 
Even if you are on Path of Preparation but if you have a form realm support, in order to achieve the Path of Seeing which you have not achieved, you have to take rebirth in the desire realm.
Khen Rinpoche: Do you understand what I’m talking? 
If you understand all of these, one of the lessons that one can draw from this discussion is that the human rebirth that we have is very precious. Because on the basis of this human support, one can generate the Path of Seeing and Path of Meditation. 
You cannot newly attain the superior path, the Path of Seeing, in the form realm or the formless realm. Of all the different kinds of bodies one can take in the desire realm, a human basis (body) is the supreme to generate these paths. 
So those in the form realm who are on the Path of Preparation are the bodhisattvas. They have a form realm support and they need to get a desire realm support in order to newly attain the Path of Seeing. How do they take rebirth? Is it through the power or force of karma and afflictions? 
(Student’s response inaudible)
Khen Rinpoche: Why not? You cannot achieve the Path of Seeing in that life, why not?
We have to think about how the bodhisattvas in the form realm do actually take rebirth in the desire realm? Mind you that when they are in the form realm, they have already achieved calm abiding and special insight and have achieved an actual concentration. Because those who are in the form realm have achieved an actual concentration, for example, the gods, they have suppressed the manifest afflictions of the desire realm. 
Because the bodhisattvas of the form realm on the Path of Preparation have achieved an actual concentration, the afflictions of the desire realm does not manifest in their mental continuum. If it doesn’t manifest, then you see where it is headed to? 
If they take rebirth under the control of karma and afflictions, then their process of taking rebirth have to be included within the twelve links of dependent origination. This means that prior to dying and taking rebirth in the desire realm, the actualizing karma has to be nourished by craving and grasping of the desire realm. How is it explained? It is explained that these bodhisattvas take rebirth in the desire realm through the force of their prayers. As they see how important it is to get the desire realm support for newly attaining the Path of Seeing, as much they need it, they make many aspirational prayers to be born in the desire realm. So you see how precious it is.
Student 5: Is the Supreme Mundane Qualities level of the Mahayana Path of Preparation an entirely a meditative equipoise or post meditative equipoise?
I cannot say for sure but I think might have to say it is.
Student 5: Entirely, because you have to account for the crossing over to the Path of Seeing.
Khen Rinpoche: Yes.
Student 5: If that is the case, then how would one account for this Mahayana achieving through the collections where they say that they accumulate the two vast collections including the collections of methods (merits) at the great level supreme mundane quality of the Mahayana Path of Preparation? 
Achieving through the collections is one of the topics that illustrate the exalted knower of aspects. The boundary for the achieving through collections starts from the great level of Supreme Mundane Qualities level of the Path of Preparation. The Supreme Mundane Qualities level of the Path of Preparation itself has three divisions (– small, middling and great). 
Within that, achieving through collections starts from the great level of Supreme Mundane Qualities of the Path of Preparation. The [student’s] question is that the Supreme Mundane Qualities is necessarily a meditative equipoise, then how does one accumulate collections? Here collections would have to include the collections of merit.
You can find the answer in the definition. The definition of achieving through collections ends with “by way of being conjoined with the two vast collections” and it doesn’t say that one has to accumulate the collections of merit during meditative equipoise. As that mind is already conjoined, by then one has accumulated some collections of the collection of merit and wisdom. Hence by looking at the definition of achieving through collections, there is no problem. 
Khen Rinpoche: If you think about, it is a good question. 
Student 6: If I heard correctly in one of the lessons it was stated that female body is not suitable basis for newly entering the Path of Seeing, but both male and female body are suitable basis for entering the Path of Meditation. There seems to be a contradiction here.
I didn’t say you necessary have to be a male in order to newly generate the Path of Seeing. I say that there are texts that say that you have to be a male. It is clearly stated that one can newly attain the Path of Meditation whether you are male or female. If that is the case, there is no reason why you cannot newly attain the Path of Seeing as a female. However, there are texts that say that you have to be a male in order to newly attain the Path of Seeing. 
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You have to be very wise and very intelligent. Otherwise, Buddha said everything. Buddha said yes no yes no. So you have to be very intelligent. Otherwise, you will be confused. 
Charts For Reference Only (extracted from ILTK)