Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/lesson3.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:50.922598
================================================================================


I am going to give a brief introduction to the eight categories and the
seventy topics.
How did these eight categories come about?
These eight categories are the subject matters of the text called the
Ornament of Clear Realization or the Abhisamayalamkara composed by
Maitreya. In this text, there are eight chapters. The eight categories are
the subject matters of these eight chapters.
The Buddha taught the Perfection of Wisdom sutras of which there are the
extensive, middling and short. These  are the three mothers.
    • The short Perfection of Wisdom sutra is contained in one volume.
    • The middling Perfection of Wisdom sutra is contained in three volumes.


    • The extensive Perfection of Wisdom sutra is contained in twelve
      volumes.
Collectively these are known as the extensive, middling and short mothers;
the mother of the Perfection of Wisdom. In these sutras there are the eight
chapters and the subject matters of these chapters are put into the eight
categories.
The Ornament of Clear Realization (Abhisamayalamkara) by Maitreya is
essentially a text that clarifies the meaning of the Perfection of Wisdom
sutras. It is to make it easier for beings to realize the subject matter
i.e. the meaning that is taught in the Perfection of Wisdom sutras.
In the opening verse of the Ornament of Clear Realization, Maitreya first
paid homage to the three knowers.
Of the three knowers, the first knower is called the exalted knower of all
aspects. That is basically the wisdom truth body.
With the wisdom truth body as the basis, then there are two form bodies :-
    - the complete enjoyment body and
    - the emanation body
These two bodies are manifested for benefiting sentient beings through
teaching them the dharma i.e. turning the wheel of dharma. It is through
the form bodies that Buddha works for us sentient beings.
The basis upon which these two form bodies arise is the wisdom truth body.
So the wisdom truth body is the empowering condition for the two form
bodies.
What is it that causes the supreme emanation body to turn the wheel of
dharma for the disciples of the three lineages? The empowering condition
that enables that to happen is the exalted knower of all aspects [Tibetan:
rnam mkhyen].
The function of the exalted knower of all aspects is acting as the
empowering condition for the manifestation of the form bodies that turn the
wheel of dharma for the sentient beings.
The knower of paths is something that is included within a bodhisattva
superior i.e. it is a bodhisattva superior’s knower.
The function of knower of paths is that which allows the bodhisattva
superior to accomplish the welfare and goals of the disciples of the three
lineages.
It is the exalted knower of all aspects that is able to completely fulfill
the welfare, purposes and goals of the disciples of the three lineages.
Prior to the achievement of the exalted knower of all aspects, one must
have the knower of paths which is like a cause for the exalted knower of
all aspects.
The function of knower of paths is also for the bodhisattva superior to
accomplish the welfare, goals and happiness of the disciples of the three
lineages. But it is the exalted knower of all aspects that is able to do
that perfectly.
The function of the knower of bases causes the Hearers and the Solitary
Realisers to be able to achieve complete peace of nirvana or liberation.
These are the brief functions of the three knowers - exalted knower of all
aspects, knower of paths and the knower of bases.
In the opening verse of the Ornament of Clear Realization
(Abhisamayalamkara), homage is paid to these three knowers. Through
praising these three knowers through expressing their individual functions,
it causes the disciples upon hearing and upon seeing these to generate
faith and aspirations to achieve the different goals of the person of the
three lineages.
In this context, there is an extensive discussion on the way faith is
gained in the listeners’ mind. Here, there is a discussion of the two kind
of followers in term of their capacity (faculty) of whether dull or sharp
:–
   1. Follower of faith
   2. Follower of doctrine
Follower of faith - those trainees who generate some kind of faith just by
hearing this verse of homage.
Followers of doctrine (dharma) - those trainees who do not generate faith
so simply but rather they need to think about stuff deeply.
The eight categories consists of:
3 knowers
    • Exalted knower of all aspects
    • Knower of paths
    • Knower of bases
4 applications
    • Complete aspects applications
    • Peak application
    • Serial application
    • Momentary application
1 result
    • Resultant truth body
Why are there these 8 categories?
From the perspective of that which is to be achieved, there are three
knowers. The means of achieving that are the four applications, which is
then followed by the result.
The 3 knowers are that which we are suppose to cultivate.
From the perspective of the path that cultivates then there are 4
applications.
The cultivation of the path is essentially for abandoning the two
obscurations - the afflictive obscurations and the knowledge obscurations -
which then results in the achievement of the result, the truth body.
In order to abandon the two obscurations, one must meditate on the aspects
of these 3 knowers in a complete way.
As for the cultivation of the aspects of the 3 knowers, one’s cultivation
can be that which has not achieved mastery over yet, but there can be a
cultivation of aspects of the 3 knowers that have achieved mastery.
If one has not achieve mastery, but is trying to cultivate completely the
aspects of the 3 knowers, that is the complete aspects application.
Then a meditation that cultivates fully the aspects of the 3 exalted
knowers that have gained mastery, that is the peak application.
In order to manifest the resultant truth body, prior to that, the
application that connects the one to that resultant truth body is such that
one must be able to meditate on all the aspects of the 3 knowers in a very
short moment of time. We are talking about the application that must
precede the achievement of the resultant truth body. That application must
be able to meditate on all aspects of the 3 exalted knowers in one short
moment.     It means all the objects of meditation must arise, without any
effort, in that bodhisattva’s mind. For example, when the bodhisattva is
thinking about impermanent, and in the shortest moment of time, at the same
time, able to cultivate all the aspects of the 3 exalted knowers.
Before one can manifest the resultant truth body, one must actualize the
application that is able to cultivate completely all aspects of the 3
exalted knowers in the shortest moment of time without any effort. Before
that can happen, one must cultivate aspects of the 3 exalted knowers
serially. That is before one can do everything in one shot, one must be
able to cultivate the individual aspects of the 3 exalted knowers serially.
As such there is the serial application. So this is how there are 4
applications.
First one has not gain any mastery, that is the complete aspects
application.
After one has gained mastery, that is the peak Application.
Whether one has gained steadiness or not, while one is meditating on the
aspects of the 3 exalted knowers to gain steadiness, that is the serial
application.
After one has achieved steadiness, that is the momentary application. By
cultivating these 4 applications at the time of the path, then one achieves
the resultant truth body.
In the Ornament of Clear Realization, the eight categories are explained.
With regards to the statement in the Ornament of Clear Realization “The
Perfection of Wisdom is perfectly explained by the eight categories”, what
exactly is the Perfection of Wisdom? Now is the short explanation of that.
According to the Autonomy Middle Way School (AMWS) and the philosophical
views below that, the Perfection of Wisdom exists only on buddha ground
because it is perfection. That means it can only be achieved on the buddha
ground.
However, the Prasangika, the Consequence Middle Way School (CMWS) do not
posit that. According to the Prasangika, the Perfection of Wisdom also
exists during the time of training. The word “perfection” is not read to
mean only culmination, but is also read as the process progressing towards
perfection. Hence it exists at the time of the path.
Since the Ornament of Clear Realization (Abhisamayalamkara) is generally
explained through the philosophical view point of the Yogic Autonomy Middle
Way School (YAMWS), as such the Perfection of Wisdom does not exist at the
time of the path, but it only exists on buddha ground.
If the Perfection of Wisdom is explained from the perspective of the name,
etymologically, it can be divided into four:–
   1) Natural perfection of wisdom
   2) Scriptural perfection of wisdom
   3) Path perfection of wisdom
   4) Resultant perfection of wisdom
[BP1: Etymologically, the perfection of wisdom can be divided into four:
1. The natural perfection of wisdom is illustrated by the emptiness of the
mind with stains (the tathagata essence).
2. The scriptural perfection of wisdom refers to the extensive, middling
and short Perfection of Wisdom sutras.
3. The path perfection of wisdom refers to the wisdom realizing emptiness
in the continuum of a bodhisattva.
4. The resultant perfection of wisdom is the final result and only exists
at the buddha ground.
These four are the etymological divisions of the perfection of wisdom. The
actual perfection of wisdom primarily refers to the resultant truth body
(or dharmakaya).]
In our earlier discussion about the verse from Vajra Cutter Sutra that
starts with the star, that are the brief description of the two levels of
reality or the two truths – the conventional truth and the ultimate truth.
The natural perfection of wisdom refers to the ultimate truth, the deepest
level of reality of each and everything that exists. As for the tathagata
essence (buddha nature, clear light of the mind), the natural perfection of
wisdom is also that.
    - From the perspective of sutra, the clear light nature of the mind, the
      natural perfection of wisdom is the basis Mahamudra.
    - From the tantric perspective, the basis Mahamudra is the extremely
      subtle mind of clear light that arises after the dissolution of the
      winds supporting the four elements and after the dissolution of the
      minds of white appearance, red increase and black near-attainment.  To
      this mind of clear light that manifests at the time of death, nothing
      appears except vacuity. This comes about through a complete subsidence
      of all duality. You can also call this the clear light of death. That
      is the basis Mahamudra.
The scriptural natural perfection of wisdom is the subject matter that
points to the natural perfection of wisdom. That which has the natural
perfection of wisdom as the subject matter expresses the subject matter.
Essentially the main subject matter that is expressed by the scriptural
natural perfection of wisdom is emptiness. So the mind that realizes this
emptiness is the path perfection of wisdom. As for the meaning, this is
what the path perfection of wisdom is. Simply speaking, it is the mind that
realizes emptiness.
I am just explaining roughly the meaning of the path perfection of wisdom.
Generally speaking, it is the mind realizing emptiness, but that is not it.
If we do analyze deeper, in order to be a path perfection of wisdom, it is
not sufficient for it just to be a mind realizing emptiness. It has to be a
mind realizing emptiness that is conjoined with the mind generation
(bodhicitta).
The resultant perfection of wisdom is the exalted knower of aspects. At the
time of the result, the exalted knower of aspects is like the resultant
perfection of wisdom. But in order to have the result we need to have the
path that brings about the results, and that is the path perfection of
wisdom.
On the basis for generating that path, what makes it possible for there to
be path perfection of wisdom?  In reality, that is how things are, the
ultimate nature of reality, the ultimate truth. That is why there are the
natural perfection of wisdom. That is the reality, the deepest nature of
all that exists. Because that as the basis exists, therefore, we can have
the path that realizes that.
On the basis, the natural perfection of wisdom, then we can have the path,
in this case the path perfection of wisdom. By depending on that path, then
we actualize the result, the resultant perfection of wisdom. That is why
there are the basis, path and result.
What about the path Mahamudra from the tantric perspective? I would think
that if through the force of meditation, one causes the winds supporting
the four elements to dissolve, and together with the dissolution of the
minds of white appearance, red increase and black near-attainment, and
culminating in the extremely subtle mind. At the time of death, if one is
able to mix that with death, perhaps that is path Mahamudra. As to whether
this extremely subtle mind needs to realize emptiness in order to a path
Mahamudra is, I am not sure. This is something you need to think.
The natural perfection of wisdom is the mind’s emptiness of true existence
(emptiness of inherence existence, the emptiness of the mind). This deepest
nature of our mind is not something newly fabricated or is not something
that came before the mind. For as long as the mind was in existence, this
emptiness of true existence of the mind has always been one with the mind.
Although this is the case, this deepest nature of the mind, its emptiness
of true existence, has always been one entity with our mind. As we have yet
to see the emptiness of our mind, therefore we have been circling in cyclic
existence up to now. Come the time when we see the empty nature of our
mind, and along with that the empty nature of all that exists, the very
seeing is done by the path perfection of wisdom. When the path perfection
of wisdom arises in our minds, that is when the process of achieving
permanent everlasting happiness or the process of achieving full
enlightenment or the process to really eradicate the obscurations. It
starts when the path perfection of wisdom arises.
In order to develop this path perfection of wisdom in us, we have to depend
on the scriptural perfection of wisdom. It is through the threefold process
of hearing, reflecting and meditating on the subject matter that is
expressed by the scriptural perfection of wisdom that we will one day be
able to generate the path perfection of wisdom with which we will eradicate
our obscurations and then achieve the resultant perfection of wisdom. As
such, learning, analyzing, and critically thinking about the subject matter
of the scriptural perfection of wisdom becomes so important.
Je Rinpoche Lama Tsongkhapa stated very clearly that the very heart of the
entire Buddhadharma, the essence lies in the subject matter of the
scriptural perfection of wisdom, basically emptiness. It is important for
ourselves to see this is the case.
In the life story of Lama Tsongkhapa, in the earlier part of his life he
showed the aspect of not realizing emptiness. Then he asked Manjushri what
he needs to do in order to see the ultimate nature of reality, to realize
things as they are. In response to his request, Manjushri told him: “In
order for you to see the ultimate nature of reality, to realize things as
they are, there are three things that you need to do:
1) Work hard at accumulating merit and purifying the mind of negativities
and obscurations
2) Make heartfelt single pointed request over and over again to the guru
inseparable from one’s meditational deity. 3) Study and engage in
listening, reflection and meditation on the great treatises.”
Lama Tsongkhapa took it to heart and engage in practice, learned, studied
and meditated and put in a lot of effort and bear hardships. Then it came a
day when he showed the deed of realizing things as they are and realizing
emptiness. By depending on these three conditions, then came the day when
he saw the reality as it is and he experienced it for himself. It was at
that time that he developed an irreversible faith in the Buddha and see the
Buddha as someone very special, unparalleled, and realized as a valid
person. He then developed tremendous unshakable irreversible devotion and
faith towards the Buddha. Based on that, he composed that praise to the
Buddha “In Praise of Dependent Origination”.
Near to the end of that composition of In Praise of Dependent Origination,
he said “it is only through the kindness of my own teachers, my gurus, that
I have really met with the teachings of the unparalleled teacher, the
Buddha. As such I dedicate the merit that may all sentient beings be guided
and taken care of by qualified virtuous friends, qualified teachers”.
In order to see for ourselves how unparalleled the Buddha’s teachings are,
how it is completely in a class of its own and unrivalled, it all comes
down to knowing the ultimate nature of reality. This is the hallmark of the
entire Buddhadharma. Therefore, if we understand the presentation of
reality, what we call the basis, in particular, if we gain a decisive
conviction and understanding in the natural perfection of wisdom, in the
path perfection of wisdom, and in dependent on that, the resultant
perfection of wisdom comes about. Only then we can really taste the very
distinctive flavor of the Buddhadharma.
In order to illustrate the exalted knower of aspects there are ten topics
and they illustrate the exalted knower of aspects by illustrating via
object and subject and via the presentation of cause and effect.
|Definiendu|Definition    |Boundary  |No of|Topics                               |
|m         |(Seventy      |          |topic|                                     |
|          |topics)       |          |s    |                                     |
|Exalted   |A fully       | Only on  |10   |1) Mind Generation                   |
|Knower of |developed     |the buddha|     |2) Precepts                          |
|Aspects   |exalted wisdom|ground    |     |3) Four branches of definite         |
|          |directly      |          |     |discrimination                       |
|          |realizing the |          |     |4) Naturally abiding lineage, the    |
|          |ten topics,   |          |     |basis of mahayana achieving          |
|          |mind          |          |     |5) Observed objects of mahayana      |
|          |generation and|          |     |achieving                            |
|          |so forth.     |          |     |6) Object of intent                  |
|          |              |          |     |7) Achieving through armor           |
|          |              |          |     |8) Achieving through engagement      |
|          |              |          |     |9) Achieving through the collections |
|          |              |          |     |10) Definitely issuing achieving     |
|          |              |          |     |                                     |
|    |    |


Khen Rinpoche: When I studied in the monastery, we have to memorize this
text by heart. Everything. How many?  I think so that time I have to
memorize them that become seventy topics. You see that in the handout. I
mean if you really want to learn, you really want to discuss, then you have
to memorize this. If you don’t memorize, of course, then nothing to
discuss. You don’t know how to pronounce the word, what to discuss. There’s
nothing much. That’s why in monastery you have to memorize all these texts.
When you go to debate you are not allowed to carry any text. Nothing. You
just go empty hand. You have to ask question. You have to say the word. If
you have nothing to say, then you just sit down. You don’t learn any single
word. In the monastery it is like that. They are trained. You have to
memorize everything. That is how you improved your memory. If you don’t
know anything then you say “I show tomorrow yeah”. A lot of competition
goes there. So like that. That helps you to improve. Anyway, not like that
here. So I just try to explain as much as possible. Read if possible, but
I’m not sure how much you really can catch this, I’m not sure. Anyway I’m
not going to talk so much on this topic also. That is why our class is
quite short. If I were to explain everything, of course then go back to
master level. Now it is just basic. Just give some idea.
The ten topics that illustrate the first knower, exalted knower of aspects.

The first topic is mind generation. Why is it the first topic? It is to
show that for those specific trainees (disciples) of the Ornament of Clear
Realizations must possess this particular quality. So in order to be that
special trainee (disciple), one must first possess that quality.
In the presentation of the seventy topics, the first one is mind
generation. In the text, there is quite a long discussion about what is the
nature of the mind generation. It starts with definition, then divisions,
aspirational mind generation, engaged mind generation, and the debates
which is really quite long.
For example, there are explanation of the 22 types of mind generation by
way of simile and the description of the source from various sutras.
The main object of attainment of those special trainees of the Ornament of
Clear Realizations who possesses mind generation is the exalted knower of
aspects. In order for these trainee who possesses the mind generation to
achieve the exalted knower of aspects, he needs to listen to the
instructions for achieving the exalted knower of aspects. Therefore, after
mind generation,  then there is the topic of precepts.
When these precepts are divided by the way of mode of instructions, then
there are 10. Of the 10, the first is called precepts which instruct on
achieving, its own entity. Essentially, it is talking about the importance
of understanding the basis, what constitutes reality, the two truths.
The second one is the precept which instruct on the object of observation;
which is the Four Noble Truths. On the basis of knowing the basis, what
constitutes reality, the two truths, next is the understanding the Four
Noble Truths.
Third is the precept which instruct on the reliance, which is the Three
Jewels. Why that comes after the Four Noble Truths? After knowing what
constitutes reality, upon which one come to really know what the Four Noble
Truths are. It is only after knowing the Four Noble Truths well, then one
really can talk about the Three Jewels, what we are relying on. This is
really important.
One has to have a real understanding and conviction of what constitutes
reality. As for reality, there are these two levels – the superficial level
and the deeper level i.e. the two truths. On the basis of the two truths,
then one  can talk about the Four Noble Truths in which there is a
discussion of the paths as well. After having understand the Four Noble
Truths really well, then one can really understand what exactly are the
Three Jewels, our object of refuge and to whom we are supposed to rely on.
So this order of looking at things is really important.
Without knowing the Four Noble Truths deeply and well, there is no way to
know the Three Jewels. Without a thorough and full understanding of the
Four Noble Truths, whatever understanding we have of the Three Jewels is
mere expression of the sound “Three Jewels.” That’s just about it and
nothing more than that. So in order to know the reason why we are taking
refuge in, then we really have to know what the Four Noble Truths are well.
So these are the first three precepts.
The remaining precepts are taught in order to be able to perfectly
accomplish the practice.  After having sorted out what reality is, the Four
Noble Truths, and the Three Jewels, and in order to achieve the object of
attainment by engaging in the practice perfectly, we have to overcome one
of the discordant factors which is laziness. There are three kinds of
laziness.
[ 1. The laziness of procrastination
  2. The laziness of attraction to meaningless activity
  3. The laziness of inadequacy]
In order to overcome the three types of laziness, next are the three
precepts:
   1. the precepts which instruct on effort in non-clinging,
   2. the precepts which instruct on tireless effort
   3. the precept which instruct on effort that thoroughly upholds the path.


In order to explain how exalted the practice can become, then there is next
precept, the precept which instructs on the five eyes. In order to fully
complete all the qualities of the practice, then there is the precept which
instructs on the six clairvoyance.
In order to instruct on achieving the final results of the training, then
there is the precept which instructs on the Path of Seeing and the precept
which instructs on the Path of Meditation.
Ten precepts
   1. Precepts which instruct on achieving, its own entity
   2. Precept which instruct on the object of observation
   3. Precept which instruct on the reliance
   4. Precepts which instruct on effort in non-clinging,
   5. Precepts which instruct on tireless effort
   6. Precept which instruct on effort that thoroughly upholds the path.
   7. Precept which instructs on the five eyes
   8. Precept which instructs on the six clairvoyance
   9. Precept which instructs on the Path of Seeing
  10. Precept which instructs on the Path of Meditation
In the study of this, it is not just listing down the names, the
presentations of each of those ten and their respective definitions, and so
forth.  That is why there is very extensive presentation of what reality
is, the two truths, then the very extensive presentation of what the Four
Noble Truths are, and the very extensive presentation of what exactly the
Three Jewels - Buddha, Dharma, Sangha - is. This is something akin to what
we covered on the explanation on the presentation of the Three Jewels in
the module on the Tathagata Essence.
Then there are discussion on the special methods to achieve the goals such
as the different kinds of clairvoyance. As in order to work for the benefit
of others and to be able to work for others, one needs all abilities such
as  clairvoyance and so forth. That is why there is the presentation of
five eyes, six clairvoyance.
Next, are the four branches of definite discrimination. The branches of
definite discrimination is Mahayana Path of Preparation. By listening to
the precepts, one will come to achieve the branches of definite
discrimination. On the basis of knowing that there are four divisions of
the Mahayana Path of Preparation: Heat, Peak, Forbearance and Supreme
Mundane Qualities, then there is extensive discussion on how the manifest
of apprehension of apprehended and apprehender are suppressed as one
progresses through the Path of Preparation.
The fourth topic is talking about the naturally abiding lineage which is
the basis of Mahayana achieving. Then there are four achievings:
   1. Achieving through armor,
   2. Achieving through engagement,
   3. Achieving through the collections,
   4. Definitely issuing achieving
These four achievings have to be done with the naturally abiding lineage as
the basis, which is presented as number four before achieving.
First, what is a Mahayana achieving? You have to understand that Mahayana
achieving to be a Mahayana path. In order for that to be a Mahayana path,
it must be relied on something. That basis of the Mahayana achieving is the
naturally abiding lineage.
When we talk about how the naturally abiding lineage is the basis of the
Mahayana achieving, basically it is saying that the basis of the Mahayana
achieving is an understanding of the reality, the two truths. So we have to
understand what constitutes reality.
At the end of the day, whatever phenomenon in question, why can it exist in
the first place? What makes it possible? Emptiness!
Because of not knowing the basis on which everything exist, which is
emptiness of true existence, that is why we still circle in cyclic
existence. Whatever phenomenon comes to mind, we think that there is
something true right there, we hold on and grasp so tightly. That is why we
get stuck in our own samsara.
That is why there is a verse in the Heart of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra
on the fourfold emptiness which  starts with “Form is emptiness.” The
purpose is to overcome our grasping at a self by bringing to mind and
understand that there is really nothing there. What we think really exists
and holding onto actually has never existed, it is never been there, and it
has always been empty of existing truly.
While all phenomena, everything that exists, arise from emptiness, all
phenomenon’s deepest nature is emptiness. That is the ultimate truth, the
deepest nature of reality. Having said that, if one goes on to grasp
emptiness as truly existent, then one is going to be stuck as well and will
never be free from samsara. That is why there is the emptiness of emptiness
- emptiness does not exist in and of itself, and emptiness does not exist
truly.
I guess that is the reason why the next phrase says “Emptiness is form”.
Form and its emptiness are not separate distinct entities. Form and its own
emptiness are one entity.
The Mahayana achieving is being the Mahayana path, and the basis upon which
the Mahayana achieving is based is the emptiness of true existence of
phenomena. As for the Mahayana achieving, or the Mahayana paths, what do
the paths have as their object of observation? In short, it is all
phenomena.
Under the observed objects of Mahayana achieving is topic number 5 that
generally covers all phenomena. However, when divided,  then there are:
- virtue that which is to be adopted,
- non-virtue that which is to be discarded,
- phenomena that are unspecified i.e. neither as virtuous or non-virtuous
One has to pass beyond all the superimpositions i.e. one has to eliminate
all the superimpositions, fabrications or impositions of things or
phenomena.





