Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/lesson22.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:51:03.882540
================================================================================

Recently we have seen that there are many ways to meditate on the close placement of mindfulness of the body. There are so many ways we can approach that topic. One can reflect on how the body is impermanent, impure, empty and selfless. Indeed, there are many important reasons why the meditation on the close placement of mindfulness of body is done. We regard our body as permanent. Innately and very naturally we misconceive our bodies as permanent and not changing. We also misconceive the body as a self. Anyway, there are many misconceptions we have on our bodies and that leads to all kinds of clinging and attachment to the body.  Due to the attachment to the body of this life, many people concentrate all their efforts and spending all their time in this life just taking care and maintaining their body. Due to putting all their effort and time everyday to just taking care of this body of this life, many people say they don’t have enough time and are not able to put aside time for dharma practice and spiritual development. This is what happens and this is what is being said in the teachings. Whether this is true or not, we have to analyze and see for ourselves. For example, if we focus on the impermanent nature of the body by bringing to mind that this body is disintegrating and there will come a time where it will cease to exist. If we recollect that we are going to die and definitely come a time we will have to die and leave the body behind. Not just remembering this but to have mindfulness and vigilance with regards to this fact throughout the day and it should be kept somewhere in our mind as we go about doing whatever we do in our daily lives. If we maintain this kind of mindfulness and vigilance with regards to our impending death, it will really does make a difference in reducing or stopping us from accumulating negativities. 
When there is this mindfulness on our impending death and also mindfulness of our impermanence, we keep it active in a part of our minds while we go about doing whatever we do in our daily lives. It will really makes a huge difference to our minds in that if it is active at the back of our head, then we will not have strong attachment for wealth, power, and possessions. We will not have strong attachment to people, relatives, loved ones, friends and so forth. With this mindfulness of our death and impermanence, these things will not cause us great mental disturbance and there will not be strong attachment. As such, we will not be mentally disturbed. It is not an issue and it doesn’t cause pain in our heart. It really makes a big difference if we have that at the back of our heads, as opposed to not having that somewhere in the forefront of our mind in our daily lives. With this strong mindfulness of the impermanence of our body, and if there is that understanding and constant awareness, then even when we do experience pleasant bodily feelings, it is alright for the pleasant bodily feelings to arise because we have the body, so bodily feelings will arise.
The point is that when we have the strong awareness or mindfulness of the impermanence and momentarily nature of our body, suchness when we apply that understanding and mindfulness to our feelings, we will also then recollect and aware that the feelings themselves are also momentarily and they are not going to last. They have a reason to be there, and when it is manifest, they are not going to last. With that understanding that it will not last will help us to not to be so attached to those feelings. This will also not lead us to cling so strongly to those feelings. In the absence of strong attachment and clinging to these pleasant bodily feelings, then we will not accumulate many of the negative karmas that are usually accumulated in search for these pleasant bodily feelings.
Since our body is impermanent, the bodily feelings that arise in dependence on our body are therefore impermanent and momentary. They are not static and they are not permanent. Although this is the case, most of us are not aware that our pleasant bodily feelings are actually impermanent. Not only are we not aware of this, we misconceive of the pleasant bodily feelings that we experienced to be permanent. We feel it is natural and hold on to them as permanent and wishing that they never change and will always be there and thinking that they are stable. But our pleasant bodily feelings are impermanent and won’t last forever. When the feeling high of that pleasant body is gone, we feel the low feeling again. And in the absence of the high feelings, the mind that is feeling low again will lead to void feeling. Then that will leads to craving and grasping for a new experience of another pleasant feeling. Then we do whatever we can in our lives to look for the experience of the next pleasant bodily feelings. I think this is how most people lead their lives day in and day out by just running after the pleasant feelings out of attachment for them. If you think about this, you can see how easy for those people who give in to the strong attachment to accumulate not only negative karma but very strong negative karma. Since all of you here know the Lamrim, the Stages of the Path. In the Lamrim literature in the section on karma, it explains how from just one non-virtue, we have to experience four results. Here we are talking about a non-virtue. So just from one instance of a non-virtue, there are four results. This is something that we need to meditate on. When we meditate on how from just one non-virtue, there are four results, then the mind will think “I better not engage in non-virtue, otherwise, I will suffer greatly for it”. 
We have to think well of those general characteristics of karma:
How karma increases, 
How karma is never wasted. This mean that once karma is done, the result will definitely come about. 
On the basis of the meditation on the impermanent nature of our body, we can also think about the impermanent nature of the pleasant bodily feelings that we experience in our lives. We will definitely experience pleasant feelings, in this case pleasant bodily feelings. The point is not getting attached and not to cling onto pleasant bodily feelings. They will arise and we will experience it but we experience it without clinging or attachment to it. We have to see for ourselves what is wrong with the attachment to the pleasant feelings. If we get attach or if we cling onto pleasant feelings, what do we lose? What is the problem? Is there any harm? That is something we have to see for ourselves. 
The body is impermanent. Our feelings are impermanent as well. Back to the body again, the body is impermanent and the body is in the nature of suffering. The reason why we experience suffering of birth, suffering of ageing, suffering of sickness, and suffering of death is because we have the body. Without the body, there is no way to have these four sufferings. Whatever unpleasant feelings or suffering, in particular bodily suffering, that we do experience now, and those physical pains that we will suffer in the future can only happen because we have a body. In the first place, our body is a cause of our physical suffering. We are the owners of a vessel of suffering and we possess this vessel of suffering, which are those contaminated appropriated aggregates. The next thing is that we have the understanding and awareness active in our mind all the time that we possess the vessel for suffering, the body, and that is why we suffer. We also have to have the constant awareness that we possess contaminated body and therefore we possess true suffering. The body is true suffering. This is the next thing to be constantly aware of.
You have to see for yourself what the benefits are in order for you to keep this in the forefront of your mind and be aware all the time. “Yeah, I know this and now you are telling me that I have to remember this all the time. For what? What is the point?” For this you have to think for yourself and you have to see the reason for yourself. We don’t just experience physical bliss all the time. In fact, many a times, we do experience unpleasant bodily feelings, suffering bodily feelings, and painful bodily feelings. If we don’t know how to think, many a times when people experience physical discomfort, unpleasant bodily feelings, they get upset, their mind get disturbed and they are not happy and sometimes they get angry. Individually we suffer. This unhappiness “Why am I suffering? Why am I in pain? Why I have unhappy mind?” show how we behave in relation to others. Some people, out of their frustration due to their physical disability or are in physical pain, they might even inflict physical harm on others or maybe to say unpleasant things to others. Basically, it is just reacting in a negative way with the body and speech.
When we experience physical discomfort or bodily pain, we should also put our attention on the impermanent nature of those unpleasant bodily feelings. Just as we meditate on the impermanent nature of our pleasant bodily feelings, we should also place our attention on the impermanent nature of our unpleasant bodily feelings by recognizing them and be constantly aware that the unpleasant bodily feeling is there, but is not going to last forever because it is not permanent. When we experience a particular painful sensation, we blow it up and exaggerate it and making it worse than it is. One of the reasons why it becomes difficult to handle is because when we look at our experience of this unpleasant experience, we naturally think that it is going to be there forever; “I’m not going to get well and it is going to be forever.” We make our suffering greater. If at the back of our mind we remember that this is impermanent and is disintegrating momentarily, of course, there is a painful experience but while we undergone the painful experience, there will not be as much suffering added on it if we remember the impermanent nature.    
Our body is in the nature of suffering. It is a fact. So it will be very helpful to be constantly aware of that. Even though we might just sit down and don’t feel anything in particular, neither happy nor sad nor pain. By itself, the body is conditioned for pain and to experience any kind of suffering. Even though we are not suffering, we are bound to experience suffering. Our body is made to suffer at any time. All we need is just a condition. For example, we need is just to press the body and we will feel some discomfort. The body is born to suffer. That is its nature. So it shouldn’t be surprising when we experience difficulties or pain in life when conditions come together. If there are conditions but without the body, then there is no way to suffer. It shouldn’t be so surprise to us. It is important to see this that we have the cause of suffering with us. Because we have the body, therefore all the other conditions can disturb us. This is the reality. If we don’t remind ourselves about this, then many times people get disturbed very easily. When health goes wrong, there would be pain. We would think “It must be my diet.” And there is so much worry and the mind is so disturbed thinking “Must be my diet. It is spirit harm or naga harm.”
It is not so much saying that the conditions are the harm for us to get disturb and worry “How come I have pain? How come I have this and that?” Actually there is no need to be surprised because the cause of suffering is already there as we possess the body all the times. We have to acknowledge why we have suffering in our lives. This is because we are the source of suffering. So it shouldn’t be any surprise but to acknowledge and to accept it. So if we acknowledge and accept it, I think life is much more easier. There are some people who live with the idea “Nothing bad must befall on me. I must not experience suffering. It is incorrect for there to be suffering in my life”.  If we were to live life with this kind of attitude, it doesn’t take much to rile up the person. Even with small little problem, and discomfort comes a lot of unhappiness.
As explained in the previous class, if we don’t want to experience bodily pain in life, what is the solution? The solution is to achieve the mental body. In order to achieve the mental body, there are two ways. One way is to become a foe destroyer. Another is to achieve the Mahayana Path of Seeing. When the Mahayana Path of Seeing is achieved, one’s mind generation becomes the mind generation of pure resolve. As there is special mind generation on the Path of Seeing, then life is great. There shouldn’t be any surprise as there are these two types of sentient beings that don’t have pain like us. So we shouldn’t be surprise when people entering the path; it doesn’t matter whether it is Hinayana path or Mahayana path. Those who are not these two types of beings will have to suffer. If they have to suffer, needless to say that whether they like it or not, there will be problems and suffering in life. 
It is a different matter if you already have achieved the mental body and still experiencing pain. Then you have the right to protest. Otherwise, there is no need to ask questions such as “Why my life is suffering? Why I have this pain? We are not the kind of people who should be asking these questions.
We will have problems in life and we will experience sufferings and pain. We have to just deal with it. It is not saying that we just meditate on it and not doing anything. You have to do something. Life is like that. At times we will have problems, then there is no problem and then another problem comes again. We will have pain one after another. Depending on the kind of issues, we have to see the doctor. It is not saying that we just meditate, and don’t need to see the doctor. We have to see the doctor and take whatever measure that is appropriate according to the illness or the pain. The point is that we have to do something about it and be practical and be constantly aware of how our body is impermanent and is in the nature of suffering. It is very helpful. So when we do experience problems or pain, then our mind is more stable and is not disturbed. 
It is really very helpful and with real practical benefit when we put our mind to the attention of this reality. Our life and our body are impermanent and are in the nature of sufferings. It is very helpful to think of this. The idea here is it will be very helpful to be constantly aware and be mindful on this, and be active somewhere in the back of our mind as we go about our daily lives. The point is we have to hold this awareness with mindfulness and keep it there as we go about our lives. That is what we need to do. We have to practice this mindfulness all the time. Otherwise, we would not be any different from somebody who doesn’t know anything about impermanence. We would not be any different from a person who doesn’t know that the body is in the nature of suffering. We may know how to explain impermanence but if we don’t remember it constantly, then at the end of the day, we are no different from somebody who doesn’t know impermanence. There is no practical benefit. But if we remember this at the back of our minds actively as we go about living our lives, we will see the difference and the positive effect on our lives and on our minds. Only then we start to taste the Dharma. Then we really can say “There is something about the Dharma. It is really useful and helpful”. That is how we really taste the Dharma and enter into real practice. Otherwise, just thinking on other stuffs and hoping to taste the Dharma, I think it is probably difficult. On top of that, if we can place our mindfulness on how our bodies are selfless then it is said that the benefit is much greater. 
If we can remember and place our attention on how our bodies are selfless, then we would experience more benefit than what was explained earlier. The word “selfless” literally means no self, absence or lack of a self. Here the explanation is according to the majority of the Buddhist tenets; which means we are not looking at the ultimate view. If we look at the presentation of a selflessness of a person from the highest school, it is considered as a coarse presentation. But nevertheless, the presentation is accepted by most of the Buddhist tenets. Self here refers to self-sufficient substantial existence. So when applied to the person here, selflessness of person here means the absence of a self-sufficient substantially existent person.
What is this self-sufficient person? If it exists, how does it exist? We certainly grasp on to such a person. What is this self-sufficient person like?  We have this innate feeling that there is an “Ï” who is an experiencer of pain and joy, an "I" that exists separate from the body, an "I" that is independent of the body i.e. it does not depend on the body. So we have that grasping. It is a very natural and innate kind of grasping. There is feeling that there is a “me” an experiencer of pain and joy that exist somewhere inside this thing that constitutes our body, and yet at the same time it doesn’t depend on the body.
There is a natural feeling that there is a “me” somewhere inside this confined boundary of the body here. It is somewhere which is a controller of the body. It is somewhere there but it is separate from the body and it doesn’t depend on the body. It views the body as its possession. Therefore, based on the apprehension of a self-sufficient person, there is apprehension of mine, my body. This self-sufficient person feels like the controller, or the owner of the body. Then mix with grasping, there comes to be also a regard of my things, my side, my friends, my loved ones. This attitude induces attachment, aversion, anger and so forth. 
When there is this apprehension of such a self-sufficient person, independent of the body yet the controller of the body or owner of the body, there is this very strong and natural feeling. When this is established, naturally there is also a feeling or attitude of concept of real others. This innate grasping at such a self-sufficient person is the basis for afflictions like anger and attachment to arise. 
If you think about how your own attachment and anger arises, you will see whether it is inevitably linked with a natural feeling of "I". If you think about it, it is very clear. For example, we may be attached to an object. Why are we attached to that object? Because the object is very pleasant and attractive. But pleasant and attractive to who? To me! It is not to somebody else, right? It is attractive to me! Basically it comes back to the "I", the “me”. So this feeling of the "I" is the reason.. Because it is attracted to me, attachment arises. The stronger the feeling, the stronger that sense of "I", then the stronger the mind whether it is attachment or anger. 
The psychology is so clear if we think about it. Why we get attached? Why we get upset? It is not because “That object is appearing very nicely to another person or because there is another person out there who thinks that person is bad. Or I am attached because he appears attractive to somebody or he appears negative to somebody, therefore I’m angry”. It never happens like that. It is always what the "I" or the person thinks. “That object appears pleasant to me”, then attachment comes in. Or that person or object appears unattractive to me, then that becomes a reason to be upset or angry. 
Khen Rinpoche: Why that does happen?  Because this person appears beautiful then you feel attached? Or no?  What do you think? 
When you think about it, it is clear that whatever afflictions such as anger and attachment, it always comes back to the "I". It’s related to the "I", oneself, "I", me, self, person whatever.
When we say selfless means absence of such self-sufficient substantially existent person, that is what selflessness of person means. So it is saying that such a self-sufficient person which we think exist naturally all the time, there is this self-sufficient person that exist as a controller of the body, separate from the body yet is the owner of the body. Such a person does not exist although we think it exists. This is what selflessness of a person means. This is the root from which the afflictions such as anger and attachment arise. So if this mind is harmed and this wrong concept of the apprehension of a self-sufficient person is cut, then there is no way for attachment and anger to arise as their roots would have already been cut. This is how it is explained in regards to the selflessness of person, particular in the Hinayana tenets.
If you remember from what you have studied in the Hinayana tenets, only the selflessness of person is taught. There is no presentation of selflessness of phenomena in the Hinayana tenets. It is only in the Mahayana tenets of the Mind Only School, Autonomy Middle Way School and Consequence Middle Way School that selflessness of phenomena is presented. 
If you are asked “Why you have to talk so much about this selflessness of phenomena? You told me the selflessness of person and when the root of afflictions has already cut, what else you want to do? Why is there the need to look at the selflessness of phenomena?”  Then what are you going to say?
In the Mahayana tenets they don’t stop with the presentation of the selflessness of person. There is an explanation of the selflessness of phenomena. In the Mahayana tenets there is an explanation and presentation of selflessness of phenomena. According to the Mind Only School, what do they say about the selflessness of phenomena? The emptiness of subject and object as different entities.
Khen Rinpoche: You found the "I"? "I" is here (pointing at the chest)? Where is "I"? What do you think? Where is "I"? At the heart? Any answer? 
In the Mind Only School, they refute external objects existing as different entity from the mind. When we add this presentation on top of the presentation of the selflessness of person which we have just talked about just now, they also accept it as the selflessness of person. It is said that the impact on the mind is even stronger. The effect of taming the mind is even stronger. Just as the person does not exist in the way it appears, although the person appears to exist in a self-sufficient substantially existent way, it is empty of existing in the way it appears. Likewise, although phenomena appear to exist as a different entity from the perceiving consciousness, nevertheless, they are empty of existing in that way. Although they appear to exist in that way, according to the Mind Only School, phenomena are empty of existing as a separate entity from the perceiving consciousness. 
The Autonomy Middle Way School has their own explanation of what is selflessness of phenomena. According to the Consequence Middle Way School, the ultimate explanation, whether we are talking about the person or the phenomena other than the person, when we look for the imputed object, whether amongst the basis of designation or outside of the basis of designation, we will not find the imputed object. The imputed object when sought cannot be found. Whether is person or phenomena, they do not exist in the way they appear. That is like really the most powerful thing that eliminates the arising of afflictions. When we have some understanding of that, then we have some understanding or feeling of what nirvana is. “We have talked about pacification of afflictions on nirvana or liberation, maybe it really does exist”. 
In short, when we say we meditate on the close placement of mindfulness of the body and by seeing how it is selfless then the effect in terms of pacifying the anger and attachment is even greater than the positive effect that we get from meditating on the body as impermanence and is in the nature of suffering. Why? Because when we see that the person that we always thought have existed as self-sufficient substantially existence when in fact has never existed, and there is no such a controller or an “I” that exists without depending on the body., that takes away one of the reason for getting upset or attached when we experience pain or bliss or joy. That is why it is very powerful. 
When we meditate on the close placement of mindfulness of the body primarily these couple of points are one of the main things to think about to first to understand and to realize and then to not forget it and be constantly aware of what we have understood with regards to how the body is impermanent, how the body is misery, how the body is in the nature of suffering and how the body is selfless.
As I have mentioned in one of the earlier classes, we can use the different antidotes in order to counteract attachment	that we have for either our own body or others’ bodies. We might be attached to the shape, color, touch, and service (literally respect, honor, worship) of the body of either our body or somebody else’s body,
As there are so many different aspects of the body that we might attach to, as such there are these different antidotes which we have talked about this recently. The antidotes are suggested in the Abhidharmakosa and also in the vinaya. As I have mentioned already, there is one antidote that counteracts all the attachment to the different aspects of the body and that is the meditation to the skeleton. The meditation on skeleton is visualization. It is something that our mind imputes on to our body or on to the body of others. Although in reality, our body may not be a skeleton yet or the body of somebody we are attached to may not be a skeleton yet but it is only a matter of time, that either our body or somebody else’s body will be a skeleton. So, it is not purely just a complete like imagination but rather it is just like imagining or bringing something that will be definitely happened in the future to the mind now. So, it is taught as a method to counteract the strong desire and attachment. When strong desire and attachment arises, if we want to do something then this is what can be done – the skeleton meditation.
I thought to also mention the antidote to those discursive thought. Some people’s mind has a lot of conceptualization (namtog?). The suggested antidote is mindfulness of inhalation and exhalation of the breath. In the Abhidharmakosa (Treasury of Manifest Knowledge) and in the auto-commentary, six points are taught in relation to this meditation.
The first point in the practice is called counting. In the Lamrim we talk about the nine-point meditation on breath. Here in the Abhidharmakosa (Treasury of Manifest Knowledge), it talks about counting up to the10 cycles of inhalation and exhalation. 
As we inhale, we put our mindfulness just on the inhalation; “I am inhaling.” Then as we exhale “I am exhaling” and that is counted as one. Inhalation and exhalation, then is one. We have to count up to 10 cycles without letting the mind be distracted to something else. If the mind is distracted to something else, we have to count all over again. 
This is the initial level of practice in which you have to be able to count up to 10 cycles of inhalation and exhalation without any distraction. Whether we are inhaling or exhaling, and during the whole process the mind cannot be distracted to something else. So, we have to at least be able to do that for 10 cycles.
When we have some experience and are able to count up to 10 cycles of inhalation and exhalation without any distraction, then we go to the second level, which is called pursuing in that as we inhale, we imagine the breath going down our throat, then going down to the heart, then the navel, then to the waist, then into the thigh, then into our calf, the soles of the feet and exit from the soles of the feet and goes into the ground. 
Depending on our breathing capacity, it says that when we inhale, it goes up to your body through your soles of your feet. As it leaves the soles of our feet, it goes into the earth. However, if our breathing is not strong, i.e. we cannot really take it through the length of one’s body, then it can travel for a distance of about one arm span or one metre. 
Khen Rinpoche (in English): One meter, you can say I think one meter.
Ven Gyurme: Can we call this a hand span?
Khen Rinpoche: In ancient time, we do not have this ruler. They measure by the hand. This I don’t know, a centimeter? How big is this one? One inch? Then this how many inch? 12 inches? 6 inches? Maybe 8 not 12? Anyway, I don’t know exactly. So, then they count on this. In ancient time, all the text measurement is like that. So, we don’t have this.
It is said that when we inhale, we inhale in and it goes all the way down to our throat  heart  navel  waist  thigh  calf  soles of the feet. Then depending on our capacity, it spreads out into the earth for a distance for a hand span or an arm span. When we pull up the wind again, we imagine the wind entering our soles  calf  thigh  waist   navel  heart  throat  leaves your nostril again; whether it is for a hand span or an arm span.
The point is during the whole process, the mind cannot be distracted, and must be placed on the breath itself. The wind whether we are inhaling through the nostril, all the way down to the soles of the feet and then when we exhale it comes back up again. 
When we breath in, when the wind goes down to our nostril and down, does it really go beyond our stomach or not? Does it go into our thigh, calf and your soles of your feet?  When we inhale or exhale, does our energy channel vibrate? If we breathe in and out, if there is no movement of wind or breathe in the channel then there is no difference from being a corpse. If there is no movement of wind, it doesn’t matter which part of the body. I don’t know what science says if any of you here who knows?
Khen Rinpoche: Anyone is scientist?
When you breathe in, only your stomach moves or the whole body or there is something that is vibrating inside moving? Your blood vessel? What is inside?
Khen Rinpoche: All these done by the wind.
Ven Gyurme: The scientist will say it is done by the heart. The heart pump the blood, right?
Khen Rinpoche: Heart pump by the wind. No wind heart cannot pump.
Ven Gyurme: But the heart pumps and makes the wind, they say.
Khen Rinpoche: In order to pump you need the wind. No?
Ven Gyurme: Scientist point of view, it is muscles movement, right?
Khen Rinpoche: But you need the wind to pump? Anyway, I don’t know.
The third meditation is called setting where we imagine the breath as a string of jewels. Imagine the breath as a string of jewels running down from our nostril to the heels. So, it is like a string of jewels, from the nostril to the heels and then comes out again and then going round and round and round and then putting the mind on that without any distraction. On top of that then there is the mental factor of investigation. There are two mental factors:  investigation and analysis. Of the two, the mental factor of investigation examines an object in a rough way without going into fine details. With that mental factor we investigate whether the breath is benefitting the body or harm the body and whether it is cold or warm. 
When we are doing this string of jewels like meditation, we inhale through the nostril and it goes up to the heels and comes up and comes back again. It is like these cycles that is going on.  We are supposed to keep our mind on that without any distraction. At the same time, we are investigating, and this mental factor of investigation performs just the rough investigation; it is not analysis. It is investigation. Just examining and just knowing whether it is warm or cold, whether it is helpful to the body or harmful to the body. 
The mental factor of investigation here is one that is part of the four changeable mental factors. Out of the 51 mental factors, there is a set of what we called the changeable mental factors, of which there are four - regret, sleep, investigation and analysis.  I think this mental factor of investigation is one of the four changeable mental factors. These four mental factors are called changeable mental factors because we cannot say that there are definitely virtuous and non-virtuous. There could be instances of mental factor of investigation or analysis that is virtuous but also there could be instances of it that is non-virtuous. So, it can change. 
As an example, if with the motivation to be freed of this suffering body in order to achieve freedom and to achieve liberation from samsara, and then if we then engage in either rough examination or a fine analysis of the impermanence nature of the body or the suffering nature of the body or how the body is selfless, whether it is a coarse investigation or subtle analysis, these two mental factors become virtuous because of that motivation. Or if someone is motivated by strong attachment to the body, and the motivation then proceed to kind of roughly investigate the body, our body or somebody else’s body or we do a subtle or more even final analysis of the body then this investigation and analysis becomes non-virtuous. Likewise, it is same with sleep and regret. If we fall asleep within a virtuous frame of mind with a virtuous thought motivation then that entire sleep becomes virtuous. But if we fall asleep while within the state of attachment, anger, or whatever then the whole sleep becomes non-virtuous. As for regret, if we regret doing virtue, then that regret becomes non-virtuous. But if we regret having engaged in non-virtue then it is a virtuous regret.
Anyway, I think that is about it. There are three more points with regards to the mindfulness of the inhalation and exhalation. Perhaps if there is the time in the future, and opportunity arise then we will talk about that.