Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/lesson27.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:52.697712
================================================================================

Khen Rinpoche: When reciting the Heart Sutra, the next class I want somebody to use the mike to recite the Heart Sutra and chant together loudly. When chant together, there is some kind of energy there together. I didn’t say so far as it doesn’t look so nice as it is boring to chant together. So next one I point to some of you to hold the mike. Actually at that time Rinpoche recommended to chant Heart Sutra slow one, the very slow type. Anyway, we are not going to do that but at least we chant with group energy.
Student 1: Can I just clarify about this topic on the 37 branches of enlightenment are in that category for the path common with the hearers’ path?  I’m trying to reconcile between the definitions that it is the path common with the hearer’s path and what we discussed so far all are in the context of the Mahayana paths and grounds. It is not mutually inclusive, is it? If it is the path common with the hearers’ path then the hearers do not have a Mahayana in their continuum. 
Khen Rinpoche: In general, the 37 harmonies of enlightenment are common to the Hinayana. When we say it is common, it is the objects to be meditated by both Hinayanist and Mahayanist. If we ask: Do the Hinayanist meditate on the 37 harmonies of enlightenment like the 4 close placement of mindfulness, 4 correct abandonings, 4 legs of magical emanations, the 5 powers, 5 strengths, 7 branches of enlightenment and the 8-fold paths of superiors? Then we say “Yes, they do”. 
The reason why these 37 harmonies of enlightenment are explained here in the context which primarily is explaining from the Mahayana perspective is that this explanation is part of the Chapter Four of the Ornament of Clear Realization and the intended trainees or disciples or the target audience of this text are those of the Mahayana lineage. 
Recently we looked at the five powers. They are 
Power of faith
Power of joyous effort
Power of mindfulness
Power of meditative stabilization
Power of wisdom
It is explained and meditated primarily at the heat and peak level of the Path of Preparation. 
The heat level of the Path of Preparation is so called because just like how the heat will be a sign of a fire that will soon arise, likewise, the heat level of the Path of Preparation is a sign indicating that the bodhisattva or that individual will achieve the non-conceptual wisdom, the meditative equipoise of the uninterrupted path of Path of Seeing. 
The five powers are so called because from the heat level of the Path of Preparation onwards, they are essentially knowers that are self-powered with respect to generating the arya path; which is its result.
It is said that those who have achieved the heat level of the Path of Preparation will never be born in any inopportune states, which means that whatever rebirths they get are necessarily endowed with freedoms and endowments. 
The peak level of the Path of Preparation is so called because they have reached the peak, the highest point, whereby the roots of virtue can never ever be destroyed.
It is said that on the heat and the peak level of the Path of Preparation, the discordant factors, the opposites of the 5 powers, such as laziness, non faith, distractions, forgetfulness and corrupted wisdom can arise. I think we have discussed on whether the discordant factors can arise in meditative equipoise or not in the last lesson. When one enters the heat level of the Path of Preparation, let’s say when one is in the meditative equipoise, is it possible for the discordant factors such as non-faith to arise or manifest?
As for post meditative equipoise it is straight forward and it is quite clear. Definitely it is possible for them to arise in the post meditative equipoise. However, during meditative equipoise, is it possible for these discordant factors to manifest? That was a question. 
It is said that on the heat and the peak level of the Path of Preparation in meditative equipoise focusing on emptiness, there is dualistic appearance in the subject (the wisdom meditating on emptiness) and the object (emptiness) that is meditated upon. There is a sense of duality as these two appears separate. There is a feeling of separateness and the bodhisattva is aware of that. It is said clearly in the Ornament of Essential Explanation by Gyaltsab Je that there is dualistic appearance. 
In meditative equipoise on the heat level of the Path of Preparation or on the peak level of the Path of Preparation, which is essentially a special insight and calm abiding focusing on emptiness, do the discordant factors like non faith and laziness arise or not?
It is clear in the text that it is possible for the discordant factors to manifest during post meditative equipoise but nothing much is said about meditative equipoise. If we say that they don’t arise or manifest in meditative equipoise then it is easy to say.
When those five powers- faith, joyous effort, mindfulness, meditative stabilization and wisdom - grow and increase in strength such that once one reach the forbearance level and the supreme mundane qualities level of the Path of Preparation, those five power are not called the five powers anymore but rather they are called the five forces. It is essentially pretty much the same thing but it is just that it is a stronger version of those five powers.
While prior to the forbearance level on the Path of Preparation, the bodhisattva will not be reborn in the lower realms but it is said that on the forbearance level on the Path of Preparation, the bodhisattva gains the confidence that he will not be reborn in the lower realms. 
The supreme mundane qualities level of the Path of Preparation is so called because it is like the highest level that one can reach as an ordinary being.
Then on the forbearance and the supreme mundane qualities level of the Path of Preparation, the discordant factors are such as non faith, laziness and so forth, is said will not arise and  manifest even in post meditative equipoise. On the forbearance level of the Path of Preparation, there is some kind of subsiding of the dualistic appearance while in meditative equipoise. 
There isn’t that kind of appearance of duality, distance between the person meditating on the subject and the object that is meditated upon. The meditator probably does not have that sense of him as a meditator, the subject, diminishes. So it is an achievement that is more exalted than the peak level of the Path of Preparation.
Because these five - faith, joyous perseverance, mindfulness, meditative stabilization and wisdom- are so powerful on the forbearance and the supreme mundane qualities level of the Path of Preparation such that the five discordant factors cannot manifest and arise. As such, on the forbearance level and the supreme mundane qualities level of the Path of Preparation, they are called the five strengths or five forces. 
The next set is called the seven branches of enlightenment. This is tie in with the Path of Seeing. 
According to the Compendium of Knowledge, the Four Noble Truths are posited to be the objects of observation of the seven branches of enlightenment.
Of the seven branches of enlightenment, the first is the branch of enlightenment of the perfect mindfulness. It focuses on true suffering and causes one to not be distracted from that. 
The first branch, the branch of enlightenment of perfect mindfulness, has the Four Noble Truths as the object of observation.
By focusing on the true suffering, one comes to know suffering. 
By focusing on true origins, one comes to develop a desire to be separated from true origins. 
By focusing on true cessation, one understands that is to be actualized. The perfect mindfulness here causes one to focus on that and not to be distracted, and to forget. 
By focusing on true paths, one comes to understand that that is something to be meditated upon.
Likewise, I think the rest of the branches are explained in terms of the manner of meditation in a similar way to the first one, the branch of enlightenment of perfect mindfulness.
The purpose of meditating on the five powers and five strengths is to quickly generate the arya paths. 
By cultivating the five powers and five strengths, the result is of which one will quickly achieve the arya path. So in this case, one enters the Path of Seeing. Even upon achieving the Path of Seeing, the arya path, the object of observation is still the Four Noble Truths. Even after achieving the Path of Seeing, the bodhisattva superior still meditates on the Four Noble Truths. Why? In this case on the Path of Seeing, they meditate on the Four Noble Truths to abandon Path of Seeing abandonments. 
Let’s look at the Path of Seeing abandonments. In this context, we have to talk about it from the Autonomy Middle Way School (AMWS) point of view. According to the AMWS, there are:
- Path of Seeing abandonments which are afflictive obscurations and 
- Path of Seeing abandonments which are knowledge obscurations. 
According to the AMWS, there are:
112 Path of Seeing abandonments which are afflictive obscurations 
108 Path of Seeing abandonments which are knowledge obscurations. 
Why are there 112 Path of Seeing abandonments which are afflictive obscurations? There are 112 because:
- 40 belonging to the desire realm
- 72 belonging to the two higher realms
Why are there 40 of the desire realm? Because there are 10 for each of the Four Noble Truths. Therefore, altogether that are 40. of the desire realm. 
There are 40 Path of Seeing abandonments which are afflictive obscurations of the desire realm. 
Why are there 40?  There are 10 afflictions related to each of the Four Noble Truths.
What are the 10 in the first place? There are five non-views and five views. 
The five non-views are:
Attachment
Anger
Pride
Afflicted ignorance 
Afflicted doubt
 The five views are:
1  The view of the transitory collections
2. The view holding on to an extreme
3. The conception of bad views as supreme, 
4. The view holding bad ethics and modes of conduct as supreme
5. Wrong views. 
So these are the 10 afflictions related to each of the Four Noble Truths.
That is 40 of the desire realm. 
As I’ve said earlier that there are 72 of the higher realms. 
There are two higher realms:
Form 
Formless realm.
72 divided by 2 means there are:
36 of the form realm 
36 of the formless realm. 
Why are there only 36 abandonments in the form realm and 36 of the formless realm whereas there are 40 abandonments in the desire realm? How do we come to 40? 
There are 10 afflictions related to each of the Four Noble Truths so there are 40. 
Basically there are 10 afflictions of the desire realm and that are multiplied by four – the Four Noble Truths. 
Why there are only 36 for the form realm and formless realms? 
If you exclude anger, the truth of suffering which is anger and so forth, minus four, then there are 36 of the form realm and 36 of the formless realm. The point is that there is no anger in the form and formless realm. 
Khen Rinpoche: Only desire realm anger arises. 
There are the Path of Seeing abandonments which are knowledge obscurations. How many are there? There are 108. There are 36 of the desire realm, 36 of the form realm and 36 of the formless realm. 
There are 36 of the desire realm which are:
The 9 conceptions of the apprehended of thoroughly afflicted phenomena, 
The 9 conceptions of apprehended of completely pure phenomena
The 9 conceptions of apprehenders of substantial existents
The 9 conceptions of apprehenders of imputed existents 
These are the brief of Path of Seeing abandonments according to the AMWS. According to this school, there is a relation of the Path of Seeing abandonments which are afflictive obscurations and of the Four Noble Truths. 
That is just a list. If we go into details, it gets complicated. 
There are the four truths. True suffering which is Path of Seeing abandonment. Then the true origin is Path of Seeing abandonment and so forth. 
What about true cessation? What is its object of observation? What does it focus on? 
What about the true path which is Path of Seeing abandonment? What does it focus on? What is its object of observation? 
One meditates on the seven branches of enlightenment in order to abandon:
The Path of Seeing abandonment which are afflictive obscurations 
The Path of Seeing abandonments which are knowledge obscurations. 
By meditating on the seven branches of enlightenment, they are basically the antidote to the Path of Seeing abandonments which are afflictive obscurations and the Path of Seeing of abandonments which are knowledge obscurations. Through that one moves towards enlightenment. 
They are called the seven branches of enlightenment. Why? Because enlightenment here is the great enlightenment which is full enlightenment. The branch here is understood to be the cause that precedes enlightenment or cause that leads to enlightenment. As such they are called the branches of enlightenment.
When divided, the seven branches of enlightenment on the Path of Seeing are: 
The branch of enlightenment of perfect mindfulness,
The branch of enlightenment of perfect fine discernment of phenomena, 
The branch of enlightenment of perfect joyous effort,
The branch of enlightenment of perfect joy, 
The branch of enlightenment of perfect pliancy, 
The branch of enlightenment of perfect meditative stabilization, 
The branch of enlightenment of perfect equanimity.
Perfect mindfulness, perfect fine discernment of phenomena and joyous effort are pretty straight forward.  I think pliancy in this context here is mainly mental pliancy. Meditative stabilization is quite straight forward. As for the branch of enlightenment of perfect equanimity, I think the equanimity here is one of the 8 antidotes to the five faults. The last antidote, equanimity, is desisting from applying antidote when the mind is not influenced by laxity or excitement while cultivating calm abiding. 
In cultivating calm abiding, there are the five faults which are to be overcome by the 8 antidotes. The 7th and 8th antidotes are intention and equanimity respectively. With mindfulness and vigilance, when the meditator spots the arising of laxity and excitement, he must strive in bringing up the antidotes to counteract laxity and excitement. But when the mind is not influenced by laxity and excitement, the meditator should leave the mind in equanimity i.e. he should desist from cultivating any antidote. I think this equanimity here is also the mental factor of equanimity that is included in the 11 virtuous mental factors. 
If we discuss cultivation of calm abiding according to the nine mental stages, I think the real kind of equanimity comes on the 9th stage. It was explained that on the 6th mental stage, excitement and laxity will be pacified. On the 7th and 8th stages, it is extremely unlikely that excitement and laxity will arise. Even if they do arise, the meditator will be able to counteract them with just a little bit of effort. They can sense the arising of laxity and excitement and all the meditator has to do is just to put the mind with just a little bit of effort and again they are pacified.
It is said that on the 9th mental stage, just by putting the mind into concentration, the meditator is able to enter into concentration with ease. Once he is in it, he is able to abide in it easily without much effort. There will not be any influence of laxity and excitement. Therefore, I think, not sure, it is on the 9th mental stage a fully qualified or fully characterized equanimity will arise. On the 9th mental stage, with equanimity the mind becomes serviceable. When the mind become serviceable, the person then goes on to achieve the mental pliancy first, followed by physical pliancy. 
There is a close relationship between the mind and the energy current or subtle energy, which is the wind. When the mind becomes serviceable or pliant, it beings a sense of peace, but because of that strong connection between the mind and the body, in this case the subtle energy that carry the wind, the body also then becomes very blissful and it achieves a physical pliancy.
In short, the mind becomes serviceable. Then it achieves mental pliancy and physical pliancy. Because of the physical pliancy, because of the wind, then it becomes serviceable. The meditator then experiences the bliss of physical pliancy followed by the bliss of mental pliancy. When that happens, then one is said to have achieved that calm abiding. That is like a measure. 
Calm abiding is not achieved just because one reaches the 9th stage. Calm abiding happens after one reach the 9th stage as. From the 9th mental stage, one is going on to achieve mental pliancy, follow by physical pliancy, followed by bliss of physical pliancy, then followed by bliss of mental pliancy. Only then that person is said to have achieved calm abiding. 
Mental pliancy  physical pliancy  bliss of physical pliancy, bliss of mental pliancy.
It is said that the seven branches of enlightenment can be subsumed into five:
1st branch: The branch of abiding:  The branch of enlightenment of perfect mindfulness comes into the branch of abiding. Mindfulness is subsumed in the branch of abiding. 
The function of mindfulness is that one will not be distracted from the object of observation. The mind is supposed to be abiding on the object of observation. Since mindfulness is critical for that, so mindfulness comes under the branch of abiding. 
2nd branch: The branch of enlightenment of perfect fine discernment of phenomena is subsumed under the branch of nature. Since the branch of enlightenment of perfect fine discernment of phenomena is the main cause of enlightenment, as such it comes under the branch of nature. 
The branch of enlightenment of perfect fine discernment of phenomena is the nature of branch of enlightenment of perfect fine discernment of phenomena. It is like the nature of enlightenment, is that which the main cause of enlightenment. 
3rd branch: The branch of enlightenment of perfect joyous effort is the branch of definite emergence. There are few explanations as to how the branch of enlightenment of perfect joyous effort is the branch of definite emergence. One of the explanations is this: it is a branch by which one comes to be free from being an ordinary person. One definitely emerges from being an ordinary person. That is due to joyous effort.  Since perfect joy benefits the body and mind, so it is called the branch of benefit. 
4th branch The branch of enlightenment of perfect pliancy or perfect stabilization or perfect equanimity are subsumed under the branch that is without afflictions. 
Those three are subsumed under the branch that is without afflictions
The branch of enlightenment of  perfect pliancy
The branch of enlightenment of perfect stabilization
The branch of enlightenment of perfect equanimity
The reason why the branch of enlightenment of perfect pliancy, perfect stabilization or perfect equanimity are subsumed under the branch without afflictions is that when one generates equanimity, let’s say on the 9th  mental stage where there would be an absence of laxity and excitement, the afflictions would not manifest. Likewise, with concentration and with pliancy as well, afflictions would not manifest. As such, these three branches are subsumed under the branch without afflictions.
Under the five powers and five strengths, there is faith. Whether is a power of faith or the strength of faith, you will not find faith as one of the seven branches of enlightenment. 
In the seven branches of enlightenment, you have concentration, meditative stabilization, and joyous effect with the exception of faith. 
If you look at the five powers or five strengths, you have faith, joyous effects, mindfulness, meditative stabilization and wisdom. 
In the seven branches of enlightenment, faith is not there. The rest of the four powers or the four strengths are in the seven branches of enlightenment. Joyous effect, joy, pliancy, meditative stabilization and equanimity are all are related to meditative stabilization but faith is not there.
What has happened to faith? Why is it excluded? 
When the power of faith or the strength of faith is generated or manifested, its opposite non-faith is suppressed to the extent that it cannot manifest. I think non-faith is eradicated on the Path of Seeing, in particular, they give the example of non-faith in the Three Jewels. 
On the Path of Seeing onwards, non-faith in the Three Jewels is impossible to arise. On the Path of Seeing, the individual develops very special kind of faith in the Three Jewels and in the cause and effect. 
Due to seeing the truth directly (seeing emptiness directly) on the Path of Seeing, that induces very special kind of faith, strong faith in the Three Jewels. That individual himself becomes a Sangha Jewel and becomes an object of refuge. It starts being the real object of refuge for others. 
According to this system, when the Path of Seeing is attained, it is only then that in one’s hand the direct antidote to the Path of Seeing abandonments which are afflictive obscuration and Path of Seeing abandonments which are knowledge obscuration. When one enters the Path of Seeing, from the uninterrupted path onwards, one comes to possess the Dharma Jewel because one actualizes the Dharma Jewel. Because of having the Dharma Jewel in the continuum, that person is considered a Sangha Jewel. 
Actually you should have known about the evolution of the jewels because we have talked about this before.  Because of possessing the Dharma Jewel in the mental continuum, then that person is Sangha Jewel. Whether one is a Sangha Jewel or not, it depends on whether one possess the Dharma Jewel or not. Likewise, whether one is Buddha Jewel or not, also depends on whether one possess the Dharma Jewel or not. That is why, of the three objects of refuge, the Dharma Jewel is said to be the actual refuge.
Anyway, the thought of kind get into me: Why in the five powers and the five strengths, faith is mentioned but it is not mentioned in the seven branches of enlightenment. So I just thought to mention to you that thought and my observation and view on it.
What is left is the seventh group - the eightfold path of the superiors. I think we will finish that in two sessions.
Khen Rinpoche: Any question then you ask. I stop here. From my side, I finished talking. Now your side?
Student 1: (Audio: 79:09 – 80:32)  The accumulation or collection Why faith is not included in the seven branches of enlightenment? I thought it wasn’t explicitly mentioned but is implicit. 
Khen Rinpoche: What is your question?
Ven Gyurme: If there is non-faith, what kind of non-faith is that?
Student 1: (Audio: 80:45 – 81:01)  No exactly. I can’t imagine if one would enter the path without faith in the first place.
Ven Gyurme: We cannot imagine what kind of thing they do not have faith in?
Student 1: (Audio: 81:08 – 81:35) Summary: It is only mentioned here in five powers and five strength in Path of Preparation. Can’t imagine to work through the Path of Accumulation without strong faith.
Ven Gyurme: How is it possible to have non-faith basically?
Khen Rinpoche: There are many kinds of non-faith.
Khen RinpocheL I didn’t get your exact question. What do you asking? Make short your point.
Student 1: (Audio: 82:16 – 82:53) Summary: Why faith is highlighted in the Path of Preparation?
Khen Rinpoche: Actually there is no need to talk about really the importance of faith. Faith is really important. Whether it is prior to entering the path, before entering the path or when one is on the path, faith is important in all contexts. In the context of cultivating calm-abiding, the very first antidote is faith. One need strong faith to benefits calm-abiding before one can even have a chance want to develop calm-abiding. 
If you remember, the four close placements of mindfulness primarily explain in relation to the small Path of Accumulation. 
Then the four correct abandoning primarily explains in relation to the medium Path of Accumulation.
The four legs of magical emanation is explained primarily in relation to the great Path of Accumulation. 
This is not to say that therefore they cannot exist prior to entering the path or they do not exist outside of those paths or it cannot exist prior to that. It is not to say they can’t.
In order to be a power, the knower must have that potential to produce an arya path. It must be self-powered with respect to generating its result – an arya path. The strength is so-called because it has the power or strength to quell its discordant class.
The power of faith does not exist prior to that being a power. Of course faith exists prior to that but it is not the power of faith. It is not necessarily the power of faith because in order to become the power of faith, it must be self-powered with respect to generating the result – the arya path.
The Path of Accumulation is explained as that time when the /individual is accumulating the collection. On the Path of Accumulation, the accumulation the collection is done primarily through hearing and reflection.  Just as the wisdom arisen from hearing and wisdom arisen from reflection, there is also the faith that arises from hearing and the faith that arises from reflection.
On the Path of Preparation, whatever wisdom is generated, are those arisen from meditation?  Likewise, the faith is also the kind of faith that arises through meditation. So, obviously have to be stronger than the faith arisen from hearing and reflection. 
The five powers and the five strengths in relation of having very strong concentration. Although the faith on the heat and peak levels of the Path of Preparation is strong faith but nevertheless it is said that it is still possible for non-faith to manifest despite of having the power of faith. 
Through the force of meditation and when the bodhisattva reaches the forbearance level and the supreme mundane quality level of Path of Preparation, their strength of faith enable them to quell in the manifestation of non-faith even in the post meditative equipoise. When he reaches the Path of Seeing, like what I have just mentioned, the faith of that bodhisattva is very different and special.
Student 1: Can you give an example of what kind of non-faith?
Khen Rinpoche: Let’s say on the heat level of the Path of Preparation, the bodhisattva has the union of calm-abiding and special insight focusing on emptiness investigating the nature of the body and aggregates. In meditative equipoise “It is empty. Realizes that it is empty.” But when he gets up of the meditation, in post meditative equipoise, it is possible for that bodhisattva to doubt and maybe lack of conviction and absence of conviction.
On the heat and the peak levels of the Path of Preparation while in meditative equipoise, there is coarse dualistic appearance and the bodhisattva is aware of that. As such, I think because of that in post meditative equipoise it is possible for the bodhisattva to have lack of conviction and lack of belief. 
Do this bodhisattva in post meditative equipoise experiences appearance of true existence or not? Yes. Does he have experiences of true existence? Yes. He has not abandoned and not even started abandoning it, so he has the apprehension of true existence. Of course, everything appears as truly existence. As such then it is possible for him to wonder “Does thing really empty?”