Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/lesson6.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:50.441991
================================================================================

We have been looking at the 10 topics for the last two over weeks. If there is anything that you would like me to clarify or if you have specific difficulty pertaining to what we have covered, you can ask me right now. As you know we are not studying the 8 categories and 70 topics in details because it is just not possible here. What we have been doing and will continue to do is to get a rough idea of what the 8 categories are and what the 70 topics are. For most of you, probably this is the first time that you are looking at these topics. There are so many new terms that you have to digest. Even learning the terms alone will take some times. So you have to pay attention to the terms. Yes, you may be unfamiliar with the terms but you have to learn them. For those of you who really want to study in the long run, these are necessary as it act as a basis for the future, especially if there is an opportunity to study the great treatises in details. So your works start like now.
Student 1: In relation to the Mahayana achievings, can Khen Rinpoche clarify about the objects of intent, something about the bodhisattva when practicing to achieve the objects of intent of the Mahayana achievings, and something about focusing on the particular objects such as virtue, non-virtue and unspecified. I didn’t understand what is meant by focusing on virtue, non-virtue and unspecified. [Mic breakdown]
The definition of exalted knower of aspects is a fully developed exalted wisdom directly realizing the ten topics, mind generation and so forth. The “so forth” refers to the rest of the topics that make up the topics that illustrate the exalted knower of aspects.  As I have mentioned earlier, the main trainees for whom this text is intended for are those who are seeking to achieve the exalted knower of aspects, i.e. those who are looking to achieve full enlightenment. 
For these trainees who are looking for omniscience, what kind of attitude must they possess? The attitude that the main trainees of this text must possess is the mind generation - an uncontrived mind seeking to achieve the state of full enlightenment. So the main object of attainment of such trainees is the exalted knower of aspects - to achieve omniscience (full enlightenment). 
Such trainee must possess the special attitude - the thought of wanting to achieve full enlightenment. One must have the uncontrived mind generation. 
What is his main object of attainment? It is the exalted knower of aspects - full enlightenment (omniscience). 
In order to achieve this goal, he must cultivate the path that will lead him to the goal. Before he can cultivate the path, the trainee must receive instructions or must listen to the instructions in order to achieve his goal, which is omniscience. As such, there is a topic of Mahayana precepts (Mahayana instructions). This primarily happens on the Path of Accumulation. After hearing the precepts (instruction) i.e. the trainee listens to the teachings, he reflects on the teachings. This is primarily on the Mahayana Path of Accumulation. 
Through hearing and reflecting on the Mahayana precepts (instructions) on the Path of Accumulation, the bodhisattva achieves the Path of Preparation, which is also called the branches of definite discrimination. The branches of definite discrimination or the Path of Preparation arises from meditation. 
The fourth topic is the naturally abiding lineage, the basis of Mahayana achieving. The main discussion is still in the context of the Path of Preparation. The Path of Preparation essentially is based on the suchness of the mind. That is being the case then using the opportunity to put in the discussion on the naturally abiding lineage. In this fourth topic there is extensive discussion on the lineage or buddha nature. The naturally abiding lineage is the basis of the Mahayana achieving. 
So the Mahayana achieving comes about with the naturally abiding lineage as the basis. So with that as the basis, what are the objects of observation of the Mahayana achieving? As such, there is this fifth topic where there is a description of the observed object of the Mahayana achieving. Another way of saying the objects of observation of the Mahayana achieving is what the objects of observation of the practice is. When we talk about the objects of observation of the Mahayana achieving, what are the objects that one focuses on or one pays attention to in the practice. There are
-  virtue, that which is to be cultivated
-  non-virtues, basically the class of the thoroughly afflicted phenomena, such as attachment, desire which are to be abandoned.
What is the intent or the purpose behind focusing on virtues? The virtue is that which is to be adopted.
What is the intent behind focusing on the category of non-virtues? The non-virtue is that which is to be abandoned. 
So what is the goal for abandoning non-virtues and cultivating virtue? The intent or the purpose is to achieve full enlightenment, but specifically the intent is to achieve these three objects of intent of the Mahayana achievings – the great heroic mind, great abandonment and great realization. In order to achieve these three greatnesses – the great heroic mind, great abandonment and great realization - which are the objects of intent, one must cultivate the path. One must practice to achieve these three greatnesses, without which these three greatnesses will not be achieved. 
So what is it that will enable us to achieve these three greatnesses which are the objects of intent? Then we have to practice the four Mahayana achievings: 
Achieving through armor
Achieving through engagement
Achieving through the collections
Definitely issuing achieving.
I have gone through roughly what those four Mahayana achievings are. There is no need to go through them now and there is no way we can do these in details. For now, you need to know that the exalted knower of aspects is as illustrated by these 10 topics. You have to know what the 10 topics are, at least their names. Now you should at least have some rough idea why they are there, the relationship between those topics, why the mind generation as first topic, and the precepts is second topic two and so forth. That is what we can do for now. 
For those of you who are really interested and want to read in more details, perhaps we can distribute the root text of the Eight Categories and Seventy Topics. The root text has the definitions of all the seventy topics and divisions, but there is no explanation. It is just listing down the definitions and divisions. Even by just reading it, you will not understand. As you are not going to understand it even you have the text, and that is one of the reasons why we don’t distribute the text earlier. However, for those of you who are really interested, who want to read it, then perhaps arrangement could be made for these people. Another reason why we don’t distribute the text is because some people may get discourage when they look at the text. This is not very helpful and that is the reason why we have not given out the text.
For our purpose here, you just need to know this word “exalted knower of aspects” or rnam mkhyen in Tibetan. Now you should at least have some rough idea of the ten topics. If you look at it, in a way it is quite easy, exalted knower of aspects refers to Buddha’s mind. 
So if somebody asks you, you should be able to say the name “exalted knower of aspects” because the mind of Buddha Superior has a name. Everything has a name. So by coming to the class, at a very minimum you should be able to say the word rnam mkhyen or exalted knower of aspects. Simply speaking, it is just Buddha Superior’s mind.
Khen Rinpoche: Lama khen, you know lama khen? rnam mkhyen, lama khen.
In a way it is very simple, rnam mkhyen, exalted knower of aspects, the Buddha Superior’s mind. That’s it. Where does it exist? Who has it? Only Buddha Superior.  The boundary is only on the buddha ground.
For some of you, it is a new word, and you just need to learn it. What does it mean? From now on, whenever you hear the word rnam mkhyen or exalted knower of aspects, immediately you should know it is the Buddha Superior’s mind. You must at least know this.
Student 1: Follow on this, the exalted knower of aspects, the mind of Buddha Superior, is it wrong then to say it is equivalent to Sangha Jewel?  
Khen Rinpoche: Sangha Jewel? This question cannot be there.
Student 1: So it is not something that belongs to the Buddha Jewel, Dharma Jewel, or Sangha Jewel. Is that correct?
Khen Rinpoche: Your question, you have to think when you said Sangha Jewel. What do you mean? It doesn’t make any connection there.
Student 1: Because you mentioned the mind of the Buddha Superior. Often times, generically, we say Buddha’s holy body, holy speech and holy mind. I am just trying to understand where the exalted knower of aspects belongs to if you say it is the mind of the Buddha Superior.
Khen Rinpoche: It is Buddha’s holy mind. I have already explained this belongs to Buddha’s holy mind. I think I made very clear just now. 
What is the boundary of rnam mkhyen? Only on Buddha ground. If you expand on that, only Buddha Superiors have it.  If it exists only in Buddha Superiors that means it doesn’t exists in those who are not Buddha Superiors. 
Khen Rinpoche: I thought is quite clear.
There are many new terms, so that is the initial challenge of picking up those terms. Try to get around it and see what it is trying to say. As I said, you just have to try. When I present this information, you must try to understand of what I am saying and listen attentively.
Many of you have gone through the topic of Tenets. Of the four Buddhist tenets, our presentation of the 8 Categories and 70 Topics is according to the Middle Way School, and within the Middle Way School, specifically it is the Yogacara Svatantrika (Yogic Autonomy Middle Way School). You have to understand that these 8 Categories and 70 topics are being explained from the position of this tenet. 
According to this tenet, their presentation of the three vehicles – the Hearer’s Vehicle, the Solitary Realiser’s Vehicle and the Great Vehicle, have different objects of abandonment and different objects of meditation. 
According to this tenet, for the Hearers,
the main object of meditation is the subtle selflessness of persons, which is the emptiness of a self sufficient substantially existent person
the main object of abandonment is the apprehension of a self sufficient substantially existent person together with its seeds.
According to this tenet, for the Solitary Realiser,
the main object of meditation is the emptiness of object and subject as different entities
the main object of abandonment is the apprehension of subject and object as different entities, together with their seeds.
According to this tenet, for the Bodhisattva Vehicle, 
the main object of meditation is the emptiness of true existence, which is the subtle selflessness of phenomena.
the main object of abandonment is the subtle self of phenomena, which is the apprehension of true existence, together with its seeds. 
You have to know what are the main objects of abandonment and the main objects of meditation well for the hearers, solitary realiser and bodhisattvas, according to the Yogic Autonomy Middle Way School. You have to know these clearly because the presentation of 8 Categories and 70 Topics is a presentation based on the views of this tenet. If you don’t get this clear, later on as we proceed more into the definitions, then confusion might set in. We have covered these points in tenets, and this is kind of refreshing your memory.
Now, let’s look at the definitions of the knower of paths again. 
The definition of knower of paths is a Mahayana superior’s clear realizer conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing emptiness within the continuum of the person who possesses it.
What is its boundary? Where does it exist? 
The knower of paths exists from the Mahayana Path of Seeing up to buddha ground. It doesn’t exist prior to the Mahayana Path of Seeing. 
What is a knower of Paths? Simply speaking it is a path in the continuum of a Mahayana Superior. So as long as it is a path in the continuum of a Mahayana Superior, that is a knower of paths.
A knower of paths and a path in the continuum of a Mahayana Superior, these two are mutually inclusive. 
If you want to know what the knower of paths in a simple way, you just remember that any path in the continuum of a Mahayana Superior. So at the very least, you must be able to say this. If you are asked “What is the knower of paths? You must be able to say that it is a path in the continuum of a Mahayana Superior.
If we want to go into details, there are many other things that you must already know; without which there is no way to study. That is why there is no way to progress in your learning and understand more stuff. For example, an understanding of the knower of paths, especially its boundary here hinges on your prior study and understanding of the five paths and ten grounds. Otherwise, you may not even know what a Mahayana Superior is. If there is a Mahayana Superior, is there a Mahayana ordinary being or not? As it says here, it exists from the Mahayana Path of Seeing. You might be wondering what a Path of Seeing is? That is why when we study philosophy, we must not forget the things that were covered earlier. 
The definition starts with a Mahayana Superior, so there isn’t a Mahayana Superior who hasn’t realized emptiness directly. If you remember our discussion on the Mahayana Paths and Grounds, it looks like once the bodhisattva is on the middling Path of Accumulation, that bodhisattva would have realized emptiness by then. When does the bodhisattva realize emptiness directly? In terms of the path, it is the Path of Seeing.
A Mahayana Superior is somebody who necessarily has realized emptiness directly. So in the continuum of a Mahayana Superior, whatever practice that exists in that Mahayana Superior’s mind, whether it is a meditation on compassion, bodhichitta, etc, there is not a single practice in the Mahayana Superior’s mind that is not conjoined with the practice of wisdom. There is not any practice of his mind that is not conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing emptiness. 
So what you have to understand from the definition is “If it is an exalted knower in the continuum of a Mahayana Superior, it is necessarily conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing emptiness”. 
If somebody asks you: “If it is a mind in the continuum of a bodhisattva superior, does it necessarily realize emptiness directly?”  Or “If it is a mind in a continuum of a bodhisattva superior, is that mind necessarily conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing emptiness?” 
Khen Rinpoche: You must understand that what I said in the first sentence and now what I am asking is different. What I said before and what I am asking is not the same. Or the same?
Question: If it is a mind in the continuum of a Mahayana Superior is it necessarily conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing emptiness.
Khen Rinpoche: Hup Cheng said yes. He is better, who don’t come to class. You have to think. If I said something then you have an idea. If you don’t think then there is no point. Is it necessary?
If you say it is necessarily conjoined, then it is over. But if you say it is not necessarily conjoined, you must be able to point to at least an example. Otherwise, you cannot say no.
Khen Rinpoche: Hup Cheng said yes. Anybody says no? Okay you said no, but you must think about an example. Anybody say no?  You say no, gives an example.
Student 1: The wisdom directly realizing emptiness itself.
Khen Rinpoche: Everybody must listen what she said, what I am saying back.
So there is a mind in the continuum of a Mahayana Superior that is not conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing emptiness. Here the example cited is the wisdom directly realizing emptiness itself in the continuum of the Superior. Basically, the argument is that can something conjoined with itself? 
Khen Rinpoche: You agree with the example? We must work together.
Question: Isn’t the wisdom directly realizing emptiness in the continuum of Mahayana Superior a knower of paths?
If you say “Yes”, then what is the consequence?
Khen Rinpoche: Your brain must work together. So what are you going to say?
Question: If it is a mind in the continuum of a Mahayana Superior, it is necessarily conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing emptiness? Accept or not? 
[Student response inaudible.]
Rinpoche: Definition says many things, not only that.
Question: There are bodhisattva superiors who have desire; is it a knower of paths?
Question: The desire in the continuum of a bodhisattva superior is conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing emptiness or not?
If you said yes, what is the meaning of conjoined here? When we say the desire in the continuum of a bodhisattva superior is conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing emptiness, how is that desire conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing emptiness?
In short, you should keep this in mind: A knower of paths is a path in the continuum of a Mahayana Superior. As long as it is a path in the continuum of Mahayana Superior, it is a knower of paths. For example:
the wisdom realizing selflessness of person in the continuum of a Mahayana Superior is a knower of paths;
the great compassion in the continuum of a Mahayana Superior is a knower of paths; 
the mind generation in the continuum of a Mahayana Superior is a knower of paths.
Question: Is the great compassion in the Buddha superior’s continuum a knower of path or not? 
Immediate you should be able to say already. There is no need to think. Yes or No?
Khen Rinpoche: Yes? You are able to say this, very simple. Why is it knower of paths?
You just have to give a simple answer. It is because it is a path in the continuum of a Mahayana superior. 
There are the 10 topics that illustrate the exalted knower of aspects. There are a lot of details. Next we have the knower of paths. 
A knower of paths is a knower that knows all the paths completely. Here all the paths mean the Hearer’s path, Solitary Realizer’s path and the Mahayana path. So a knower of paths is a knower that knows all the paths completely. Therefore, it is a knower of the three paths and it knows it fully and completely.
What I have just said “A knower of path is the knower of all three paths completely”. This is just an explanation of the etymology. It doesn’t imply any certain limits of pervasion.
Why is chapter two of the Ornament of Clear Realizations an explanation of the knower of paths? Why does it come after the exalted knower of aspects? 
This is because in order to attain the exalted knower of aspects, one must meditate on the knower of paths completely. Without which one cannot achieve the exalted knower of aspects. 
An exalted knower of aspects is essentially a final wisdom that realizes all phenomena directly. Essentially the exalted knower of aspects is the final wisdom (that means perfect, final, the highest level) that realizes all phenomena directly.
In a way what the knower of paths is saying is that in order to achieve this final wisdom that sees all phenomena directly, cultivating a path that meditates on emptiness alone is not sufficient to attain the exalted knower of aspects. 
Can one achieve the exalted knower of aspects just by the practice of going for refuge to the Three Jewels?
No. The practice of refuge alone will not enable anybody to achieve exalted knower of aspects. Just the mere meditation or the cultivation of renunciation will not enable us to achieve the exalted knower of aspects. 
The point is that without actualizing or cultivating the knower of paths, there is no way one can achieve the exalted knower of aspects. If we do not engage in the complete practice of the three paths – Hearer’s path, Solitary Realizer’s path and the Mahayana’s path - there is no way to achieve the exalted knower of aspects. 
From this, you can see that a Mahayana superior meditates on the Hearer’s path and the Solitary Realizer’s path. It is not that the Mahayana superior do not meditate on the Hearer’s path. It is not that the Mahayana superior do not meditate on the Solitary Realizer’s path. 
So the Hearer’s path and the Solitary Realizer’s path are not the objects to be discarded just because they are lower paths. Although a Mahayana superior has already realized emptiness directly, nevertheless, they still cultivate the Hearer’s path and the Solitary Realizer’s path.
Why does a Mahayana superior need to meditate on the Hearer’s path and the Solitary Realizer’s path? What do Buddha superiors do? When one achieves enlightenment, Buddha superior work to accomplish the welfare of the trainees of the persons of the three lineages – Hearers, Solitary Realizers and the Mahayana lineage. So in order to work for the welfare of the trainees of these three lineages, the Buddha superior has to turn the wheel of Dharma of the three lineages for the persons of the three lineages. As such, in order for him to be able to do that while on the path, the bodhisattva superior has to meditate and cultivate the Hearer’s path and the Solitary Realizer’s path. 
Here we are talking about the bodhisattva superiors. Bodhisattva superiors work for the benefit of sentient beings. They don’t have to wait until enlightenment. This means that they also work for the benefit and welfare of the Hearers and the Solitary Realizers. In order to work for them, they have to show them the path - the Hearer’s path and the Solitary Realizer’s path. The bodhisattva superior can only show the path after he has cultivated it. The bodhisattva superiors will not be able to teach the Hearers and Solitary Realizers if they do not have their own experience of the Hearer’s and the Solitary Realizer’s path. For these reasons, the bodhisattva superiors have to cultivate the knower of paths.
There are 11 topics that illustrate the knower of paths. The first of the 11 topics is limbs of knower of paths. 
One can understand the limbs of knower of paths in terms of the cause of the knower of paths. 
One can understand the limbs of knower of paths in terms of the entity of the knower of paths. 
One can understand the limbs of knower of paths to be the result of the knower of paths.
One can understand the limbs of knower of paths from the perspective of all three together – either the cause or the entity or result of a knower of paths. 
In order to generate the knower of paths, one must be free from the obstacles to the generation of the knower of paths. One of the obstacles is pride. 
It is said that the gods of the desire realm and the form realms, because of experiencing the ripening effects of their past karma, they are the natural emitters of light i.e. it is said that their bodies emit light and they are quite proud about it. As the Buddha has to work for the gods in the desire and form realms, the Buddha has to put on these light display that completely outshines those gods. When the gods are outshined, then they are humbled by it and generate faith in the Buddha. This makes them a suitable basis for the arising of mind generation or bodhichitta in their minds. 
This manifest pride is a manifest obstacle for developing the mind generation and the knower of paths in the continuum. So the first thing is one must be free from that manifest pride, which is a manifest obstacle and that makes the individual a suitable basis for mind generation to arise and for the knower of paths to be cultivated. 
Just possessing the freedom from manifest pride alone will not make the knower of paths arise in that person’s mind. A very important condition is the mind generation. 
In order for the knower of paths to arise eventually, that individual not only must he be free of manifest pride, but that individual must develop mind generation (bodhichitta). The person who can develop the knower of paths in his mind must be a person who has mind generation. 
Those individuals who possess mind generation are the actual basis. Here the “actual basis” means the people who can actually develop the knower of paths. So the people who actually can develop the knower of path are the people who possess mind generation. So the actual basis for cultivating the knower of paths must be a person who possesses mind generation. 
Having said this, some people might wonder: “Only bodhisattvas can develop the knower of paths?”
Then the answer is “Actually all sentient beings can develop the knower of paths because the lineage pervades all sentient beings. All sentient beings possess the lineage (buddha nature).”
Here there is a discussion of whether there are three final vehicles or there is just one final vehicle. There are sutras that said that there are three final vehicles. There are also sutras that say there is just one final vehicle. You can see that the different tenets have different assertions. 
If you take the position that there are three final vehicles, what you are also saying is that not every sentient being can generate the knower of paths. 
There are sutras that talk about there being three final vehicles. The Sutra Unraveling the Thought says right from the beginning that it has always been the case that in each and every sentient being continuum, there is uncontaminated seed that determines their highest potential. It is kind of pre-determined for each sentient being of whether they can achieve the Hearer’s enlightenment, Solitary Realizer’s enlightenment or full enlightenment. It is kind of determined already. As such, there are three final vehicles. Based on this assertion, let’s say a person who is of the Hearer’s lineage achieves the nirvana without remainder of a Hearer, he will be forever and ever be like that. He will be always remain a Hearer’s arhat and cannot become a Buddha. As such, this view says there are three final vehicles. 
In this sutra, it is also said that there are sentient beings that are hopeless, and there is nothing that we can do with them. No matter what we do, they cannot achieve enlightenment and there is no way they can achieve enlightenment. This is just a view.
You will find sutras that make statements about there being three final vehicles. You will also find sutras that say clearly that there is just one final vehicle. Both are sutras, which are we going to believe?  We cannot just say “Because a sutra said so” as we cannot decide on the issue just because a sutra said so. We will find different sutras saying completely different things. Then how do we decide? Therefore, it is very important to distinguish between sutras of interpretive meaning and sutras of definitive meaning. We must know how to differentiate between these two.
Please keep in mind that it was the same person, the Buddha, who said these different things. Like in the Sutra Unraveling the Thought, the Buddha said there are three final vehicles. Then in another sutra, the King of the Samadhi Sutra or the King of Concentration Sutra, the Buddha said there is one final vehicle. So the Buddha sometimes said there is one final vehicle and other times he said there are three final vehicles. 
In the King of Concentration Sutra, the Buddha said there is one final vehicle. Here, we can only settle the issue ultimately by relying on reasoning. That is why we learnt about the tathagata essence (lineage) to establish that at the end of the day there is just one final vehicle. That means everybody can become Buddha. The main argument is that we do have all kinds of obscurations and defilements, but these obscurations and defilements have never abided or resided in the nature of our mind. This is because even the defilements and obscurations are there, they are adventitious, and they can be separated from the mind. 
The Buddha is unceasingly working to help all sentient beings to be free from these adventitious defilements. The Buddha is constantly working for us sentient beings uninterruptedly or unceasingly.  and they do it spontaneously without any effort. The Buddha work for us sentient beings without effort, spontaneously and uninterruptedly at all times.
That is how we kind of use reasoning to prove or to establish that all sentient beings can be enlightened because the defilements are adventitious and there are methods to overcome these defilements. 
What is the purpose behind the Buddha’s teaching that there are three final vehicles? The reason is because sentient beings are of diverse dispositions, i.e. their capacities, interests, inclination are so varied and different. The Buddha taught that there are three final vehicles in order to place them in the different enlightenment for the time being. Actually his real intent, his real position or what the reality is that there is just one final vehicle in that all sentient beings can become Buddha. In order to cause some people to become at least Hearers arhat first or Solitary Realizers arhat just for the time being.
The sutra gives this example of a skilful captain of a ship who is leading to a destination in a faraway place and that takes a long time to reach the destination. In the process, people get bored and tired. The skilful captain then miraculously conjures up an island and says “There we are!” This is to allow some people to take a rest so that they can continue with the journey later on. For the time being the skilful captain leads his flock to this temporary island, which is not the final destination. After the passengers have taken a rest, the skilful captain will then say “This is not the final destination. The final destination  is somewhere else.” Likewise, there are always people who are not ready to enter the Mahayana path at a specific time. So they are guided into the Hearer’s or Solitary Realizer’s path for the time being.  Ultimately all sentient beings need to be enlightened and all sentient beings can be enlightened. That is why the reality is that there is one final vehicle, not three vehicles.