Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/lesson15.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:51:04.150682
================================================================================

(Homework comparing the possibilities between the 3 knowers)
Student 1: State the possibilities between the exalted knower of aspects and the knower of paths. 
First, something that is an exalted knower of aspects but not a knower of paths–is not possible. Because exalted know of aspects exist in the continuum of a buddha’s superior. So long as it is a path in the continuum of a Mahayana superior, that is a knower of paths. 
Khen Rinpoche: What is the example?
Student 1: Wisdom directly realizing emptiness in the continuum of a bodhisattva’s superior.
Khen Rinpoche: First you give the 4 possibilities. Then you tell which one is the first,and make clear one by one. 
Student 1: First one is something that is an exalted knower of aspects but not a knower of paths. 
Khen Rinpoche: Now give the example.
Student 1: This is not possible. 
Khen Rinpoche: Okay, that not possible.Ya, it is correct. 
Student 1: Something that is a knower of paths but not an exalted knower of aspects.
Khen Rinpoche: For example?
Student 1: Wisdom directly realizing emptiness in the continuum of a bodhisattva superior is a knower of paths. It is not the knower of aspects because that knower of aspects only exists in the continuum of a buddha superior.
Khen Rinpoche: Correct.
Student 1: Something that is both an exalted knower of aspects and a knower of paths, the great compassion in the continuum of a bodhisattva superior. 
Khen Rinpoche: One example.
Student 1: The great compassion in the continuum of a buddha superior is aexalted knower of aspects because it exists in the continuum of a buddha superior. It is a knower of paths because it is a path in the continuum of a Mahayana superior, including Buddha.
Khen Rinpoche: Correct.
Student 1: Something that is neither an exalted knower of aspects nor a knower of paths - wisdom directly realizing selflessness in the continuum of a Hinayanist because it is a path in a continuum of a Hinayana superior. 
Khen Rinpoche: Correct. 
Student 1: This is 3 possibilities in this one. 
Khen Rinpoche: You people also must listen. 
Student 1: State the possibilities between a knower of paths and a knower of bases. There are 4 possibilities. Something that is a knower of paths but not a knower of bases, the mind generation in the continuum of a Mahayana superior is a knower of paths because it is a path in the continuum of a Mahayana superior.
Khen Rinpoche: What’s the example?
Student 1: Something that is a knower of paths but not a knower of bases. 
Khen Rinpoche: For example? 
Student 1: The mind generation in the continuum of a Mahayana superioris a knower of paths. 
Khen Rinpoche: Okay. 
Student 1: It is not a knower of bases because it does not fulfil the definition of a knower of bases.
Khen Rinpoche: Okay, correct. 
Student 1: Something that is a knower of bases but not a knower of paths - wisdom directly realizing selflessness of a person in a continuum of a Hinayanist is a knower of bases. This is because it is a path in the continuum of a Hinayanist. It is not a knower of paths because the knower of paths is a path of a Mahayana superior.
Khen Rinpoche: Okay correct. 
Student 1: Something that is both a knower of paths and a knower of bases - wisdom directly realizing selflessness of a person in a continuum of a Mahayana superior.
It is a knower of paths because it is a path in the continuum of a Mahayana superior. 
It is a knower of bases because that realization abides in the Hinayanist class of realization.
Khen Rinpoche: Okay correct.
Student 1: Something that is neither a knower of paths and a knower of bases
Wisdom directly realizing emptiness of true existence in the continuum of a Hearer’s superior because it does not fulfil the definition of a knower of bases. 
Knower of bases is only selflessness, not realizing of emptiness of true existence even he may practice it but that does not fulfil the definition required for knower of bases. Correct?
Khen Rinpoche: Which part of definition is missing there?
Student 1: Actually both are missing. 
Khen Rinpoche: How can? No, you said both. First is missing? Conjoined with realizing selflessness…
Student 1: Because this is true existence. Emptiness of true existence.
Khen Rinpoche: I understand but what missing there?
Student 1: Ya, it’s not the exalted wisdom in the continuum of a Hearer’s superior. Am I right to say that? What is your question about? I don’t get your question. 
Khen Rinpoche: My question is that the example you give is realizing emptiness directly in the Hearers mind. That is not the knower of bases because doesn’t fulfil that definition. What you said is correct. I agree with that. I’m just asking you back that in definition there are two parts, both missing or not? Or only one part missing?
Student 1: Both missing. 
Khen Rinpoche: How can be both missing, my question is. Why first is missing?
Student 1: Let me tell you the two characteristics:
One of them is wisdom conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing selflessness. That is one of the characteristics. 
Second characteristic, it has to abide in the lesser vehicle class of realization. 
So these are the two characteristics. To me, the answer does not fulfil these two characteristics. 
Khen Rinpoche: The wisdom directly realizing selflessness of a person exists in the continuum of a Mahayana superior, isn’t it?
Student 1: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: That is a knower of bases, right? 
Student 1:  Yes. 
Khen Rinpoche: It is a knower of paths, right?
Student 1: Wisdom directly realizing selflessness of a person is in the continuum of a Mahayana superior.
Khen Rinpoche: Is a knower of bases and is a knower of paths, isn’t it? 
Student 1: Yes.
Khen Rinpoche: It is a knower of paths, isn’t it?
Student 1: Ya. 
Khen Rinpoche: Because it is conjoined with the wisdom realizing emptiness isn’t it?
Student 1: No 
Khen Rinpoche: The wisdom directly realizing selflessness of a person in the continuum of a Mahayana superior is a knower of bases, isn’t it?
Student 1: Yes. 
Khen Rinpoche: Therefore, it is conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing selflessness of a person isn’t it?
Student 1: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: If it is a knower of bases, is necessarily conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing the selflessness of a person, isn’t it? 
Student 1: Okay. That is one of the characteristic.
Khen Rinpoche: So it is conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing selflessness of a person, isn’t it? It is also conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing emptiness, isn’t it?
Student 1: In the continuum of a Mahayana superior.
Khen Rinpoche: Yes. 
Student 1: You are tricking me. But it says it is the selflessness of a person. 
Khen Rinpoche: No. First answer that.  It is conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing emptiness, isn’t it?
Student 1: Yes. 
Khen Rinpoche: So in the case of a Hearers superior who has directly realized emptiness, why isn’t that mind conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing selflessness of a person? Why?
Student 1: In your last lesson, you say they can practice it but does not mean fulfil the definition. You say they can practice it but does not mean is the knower of bases. 
Khen Rinpoche: I’m not saying that is knower of bases. We say there are two parts of definition. You say both missing. My question is: How can be first one missing. I’m not saying the knower of bases, I’m not saying that. What you say is correct I said. 
Student 1: So my answer is correct, it is only I gave the wrong explanation.
Khen Rinpoche: Your answer is correct. What you say is because doesn’t fulfil the definition of knower of bases is correct. I’m asking which part of definition is missing. You said both missing. Then I said how come first is missing.
Student 1: Because selflessness of true existence, then I compare with selflessness of a person and they are not the same. Then the exalted wisdom in the Hinayana superior realizing emptiness of true existence, is that the same exalted wisdom conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing selflessness? 
VenGyurme: No. The question is quite simple. Why it is not conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing selflessness of a person?
Khen Rinpoche: Ya that is the question.
Student1: Okay then I’m wrong then. 
VenGyurme: Because he does not have the wisdom?
Student 1: Okay. That means the first part not abide is wrong but conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing selflessness is correct. Is that what you mean?
Khen Rinpoche: Ya.
Student 1: Okay. That means I’m wrong. 
Khen Rinpoche: Yes 
Student1: Okay. That’s all. 
Khen Rinpoche: Almost you get 100 marks. Because of your answer, 1 mark is gone. So 99 marks.
Student 1: Nevermind, I got room for improvement. 
Khen Rinpoche: 99 marks.
Student 1: Good. Never got 99 in my life. 
Khen Rinpoche: Those who are doing homework must prepare and are able to come and share. Make it simple and say. If nobody standing, then I have to ask you to stand. Best you come voluntary. So that’s the best thing to do. 
Student 1: This is pertaining to lesson 13. The question is: What is the measure of abiding within the Hinayana class of realizations?
You gave the answer as:If that exalted wisdom is taken by Hinayanist as his main object of cultivation with a similar observed object and aspect of it, then that makes that mind a mind that abides within the Hinayana class of realizations. 
My qualm is: To whom he has the similar observed object and aspect of it.
Because you say the main cultivation of the Hinayanist with a similar observed object and aspect, who are you comparing this similar aspect and observed object? 
My understanding from the definition was very clear in lesson 12. It says that wisdom directly realizing selflessness in the continuum of a Mahayana superior has a similar observed object and aspect to that of the main object of cultivation of the Hinayana superior. 
But here is the other way round. Here it says that the wisdom taken by the Hinayanist as his main object of cultivation with a similar observed object and aspect of it. So to whom you are comparing this similar observed object and aspect? You have to compare with someone what. 
At least the first one Mahayana has the similar observed object and aspect compared to the Hinayanist main object of cultivation. But here is the other way round. So I don’t understand the two different ….
Khen Rinpoche: I think that both means same but I don’t know how the English works but I mean ….okay. 
Student 1: Because if the Hinayanist main object of cultivation with the similar observed object and aspect similar to whom? Whose observed object and aspect? It has to be connected to someone. 
Khen Rinpoche: The first one what you read is correct.Second one I don’t know how the English phrase, maybe must be same meaning I don’t know. 
Khen Rinpoche: The wisdom directly realizing selflessness in the continuum of a Hearers superior for example is a realization of wisdom abiding within a lesser vehicle class of realization.
Student 1: Ya. But then you say has a similar observed object and aspect of it. 
Khen Rinpoche: It is a realization, a wisdom abiding within a Hinayana class of realization, right?
Student 1: Ya.
Khen Rinpoche: It is not a Hinayana path just because it is a path in the Hearers continuum, for example, right. 
Student 1: Ya.
Khen Rinpoche: So the wisdom directly realizing selflessness in the continuum of a Hearers superior is a Hinayana path because that wisdom abides within the Hinayana class of realization.
Student 1: Yes. 
Khen Rinpoche: There is the wisdom directly realizing selflessness of a person in the continuum of a bodhisattva superior, for example, isn’t it.
Student 1: Ya. 
Khen Rinpoche: What is the object of observation of this mind? The person, right?
Student 1: Ya, Self-sufficient, substantially…
VenGyurme: No. The person. 
Student 1: Person only?
Khen Rinpoche: Observed object is a person. What is the aspect of this wisdom? The selflessness of a person is the aspect of this person.
Student 1: Ya.
Khen Rinpoche: This is similar to what a Hinayana superior realizes, for example, a Hearer. When a Hearer realizes a selflessness of a person, the Hearer superior focuses on the observed object which is the person. 
What is the aspect of the realization? The selflessness of a person.  
So in this case, for the wisdom directly realizing selflessness of a person in the continuum of a bodhisattva superior, this particular mind has a similar observed object and a similar aspect in the Hearers superior.
The selflessness of a person is the main object of meditation of a Hinayanist. 
Student 1: When you say that the wisdom directly realizing selflessness in the continuum of a Mahayana superior has a similar observed object and aspect to the wisdom directly realizing selflessness of a Hinayana superior, I’m very clear with the explanation. Maybe I don’t quite understand the English. I was a bit confused about the main object of cultivation with the similar observed object and aspect.
My question is: Who are you comparing this similar observed object and aspect with? Are you comparing with bodhisattva? Because you say is the Hinayanist main object of cultivation has a similar observed object and aspect. 
VenGyurme: I don’t see whatis the problem.
Student 1: Maybe my English is not good enough to understand this. To me, I’m a bit confused with the way it phrased it. The first one is very clear and I can understand straight away but this one to me it boggles my mind. That is the reason I come here and ask. And you say it’s the same I have to accept it it is the same. 
Khen Rinpoche: You are asking about for Hinayanist, isn’t it?
Student 1: Because here is only talking about Hinayanist, but it doesn’t compare to whom. It just say the exalted wisdom taken by the Hinayanist as his main object of cultivation with a similar observed object and aspect of it. Then that is called abides within the Hinayana class of realization.
VenGyurme: Similar object of observation and similar aspect to a wisdom that cultivates a Hinayana object of cultivation. There is Hearers, and there is Solitary Realizer also, right?
Student 1: Nevermind. I will go back and think about it because I was a bit confused with this whole phrase. Okay thank you. 
We have started the complete aspects application in the last lesson. Simply speaking, any path in the continuum of a bodhisattva is a complete aspects application.
In general, a knower aspect of the antidote class is a path that is able to quell (overcome, destroy) its discordant class.
In particular, in the discussion of the complete aspects application, when we talk about the knower aspect of the antidote class, we are talking about the knower aspect of the antidote class in a continuum of bodhisattvas. 
So in Chapter 4 of theOrnament of Clear Realizations, when the knower aspect of the antidote class indicated in this context is discussed, we are primarily talking about the three:
1.Knower of aspect that is a knower of bases
2.Knower of aspect that is a knower of paths
3.Knower of aspect that is an exalted knower of aspects
In general, when you count the number of object aspects of the 3 knowers, there are 173 object aspects. 
Because there are 173 object aspects, then there are 173 knower aspects that meditates on those object aspects. 
How is the meditation done? 
The 173 knower aspects meditate on the 173 object aspects through removing all superimposition with regards to the object aspects. That is why knower aspect of the antidote class is able to quell or overcome its discordant class by removing all the superimpositions with regards to the object that one is meditating on. Likewise, one is also cultivating or meditating on the knower aspects, not just the object aspects. 
Of the 173 aspects of the 3 exalted knowers, 110 of them pertain to the exalted knower of aspects.
How many aspects are there of the exalted knower of aspects? There are 110aspects of an exalted knower of aspects. 
Of the 110:
- 37 aspects of an exalted knower of aspects concordant with those existing in the Hearers
- 34 aspects of an exalted knower of aspects concordant with those existing in the Bodhisattvas
- 39 uncommon aspects of an exalted knower of aspects
Of the 110 aspects of an exalted knower of aspects, 37 aspects of an exalted knower of aspects concordant with those existing in Hearers. What are these 37? 
These 37 are called the 37 aspects in general or the 37 harmonies with enlightenment.  
What are the 37 harmonies with enlightenment? They are:
- the 4 close placements of mindfulness, 
- the 4 correct abandoning,
- the 4 legs of magical emanation, 
- the 5 powers
- the 5 strengths, 
- the 7 branches of enlightenment and 
- the 8 branches of arya paths. 
The first group of the 37 harmonies with enlightenment is called the 4 close placements of mindfulness. What are they? They are;
1. Close placements of mindfulness on bodies. 
2. Close placements of mindfulness on feelings
3. Close placements of mindfulness on minds
4. Close placements of mindfulness on phenomena.
Keep in mind that our discussion of the 37 harmonies with enlightenment here are in the context of somebody who has already entered the path. This 37 harmonies of enlightenment are all exalted knowers of somebody who has entered the path. 
If we place these 37 harmonies with enlightenment in relation to which paths they are primarily cultivated, from that perspective, the 4 close placements of mindfulness are primarily cultivated on the small level of the Path of Accumulation. 
Next is the 4 correct abandoning which are cultivated on the middling level of the Path of Accumulation. 
Next are the 4 legs of magical emanation which are primarily cultivated on the great level of the Path of Accumulation. 
Next are the 5 powers which are primarily meditated or cultivated on the Path of Preparation, specifically they are cultivated on the heat level and the peak level of the Path of Preparation. 
Nextis the 5 strengths which are primarily cultivated on the forbearance level and the supreme mundane quality levels of the Path of Preparation. 
Next are the 7 branches of enlightenment. Where they are primarily cultivated? If you look at it from the perspective of the Maitreya’s Ornament of the Mahayana Sutras and Differentiating the Middle from the Extremes, the 7 branches of enlightenment are cultivated on the Path of Seeing. 
Lastly, the 8 branches of the arya paths are cultivated on the Path of Meditation.
These 37 aspects are called the 37 harmonies with enlightenment, and “enlightenment” here is posited as the final or the ultimate enlightenment, the state of Buddhahood. These 37 are harmonious with this full enlightenment. You can understand that to mean that these 37 things are favorableor concordant causes for actualizing the enlightenment. 
Let’s look at the first one, the close placement of mindfulness on the body. 
What are the objects of observation of this particular mind? 
The objects of observation of the close placement of mindfulness of the body are three bodies:
The outer body
The inner body
The body that is both outer and inner
Of the 3, the first refers to the outer body. The outer body here refers to form; basically all forms that are not conjoined or included in the continuum of a person. 
The word body is used but the outer body here refers to the outer bodies of forms. So don’t take body here to mean the physical body that we have. In this context here, the word body also includes all forms.
VenGyurme: You understand what is form, right? It is not just visible form. You must understand it in the context of Buddhist philosophy. 
External forms are the forms that are not conjoined with consciousness. The external forms consist of 5 things - visible form, sound, smell (odor), taste and touch. These 5 forms are what we called the outer body of forms. 
The objects of observation of close placement of mindfulness on body are the 3 types of bodies. The first is the external body or the outer body, and here is refers to forms. When forms are divided, there are 5 - visible form, sound, smell (odor), taste and touch. 
Next is the inner body. When we studied mind and awareness, for an eye consciousness to be generated, there are 3 conditions that must be present. One of which is the uncommon empowering condition. 
The uncommon empowering condition for the generation of an eye consciousness would be the eye sense power. 
The uncommon empowering condition for the generation of a ear consciousness would be the ear sense power and so forth. 
These sense powers are the inner body. Therefore, there are inner body of the 5 sense powers. 
In order for eye consciousness apprehending visible form to be generated, we need the 3 conditions, but there are implications. We are talking about causalities because an eye consciousness apprehending visible form doesn’t arise from nothing. The 3 conditions must come together:
An observed object condition. In this case there must be a external visible form
There must be the uncommon empowering condition. In this case is the eye sense power. 
There must be a consciousness that exists immediately preceding the generation of the eye consciousness apprehending form which is called the immediately preceding condition. 
An eye consciousness apprehending visible form be generated only when there are visible form, sound, smell (odor), taste and touch.
If we think about it a bit more, when an eye consciousness apprehending form is generated, the eye consciousness is generated into the aspect of form. Consciousness is aspected. 
When an eye consciousness apprehending form is generated, why is it generated into the aspect of form? Let’s say, if it is apprehending blue, it is generated into the aspect of blue.
Why? What causes that to happen? Because of the observed object condition is a visible form, as such when an eye consciousness apprehending a visible form is generated, it is generated into the aspect of visible form; whatever visible form it is apprehending.
The eye consciousness can only apprehend visible form. It cannot apprehend sound. It cannot apprehend taste, touch and so forth. Why? 
Because of its uncommon empowering condition, the eye sense power which only enables the seeing of form. The eye sense power does not have the capacity or the potential to enable one to smell or touch or taste.
When the eye consciousness apprehending form is generated, it is able to apprehend its object – visible form - clearly. So, there is the element of clarity, luminosity and knowing awareness.  Why does the eye consciousness apprehending form is able to apprehend or aware of its object – form? Because of the immediately preceding condition. 
Because the eye consciousness apprehending form is the continuation of the former moment of consciousness which is essentially clear and knowing, therefore, the eye consciousness apprehending form is that is clear and knowing  which is able to clearly cognize or know its object. Whereas table and chair – the external form - cannot know anything. They are not clear and knowing because their cause which preceded the existence of table is not clear and knowing.
It is not just talking about these three conditions. You maybe are able to state them but the point is “what is its implication”? You really have to think. Here we are using an eye consciousness as an example. Even just for the production or the generation of one moment of eye consciousness, many causes and conditions must come together.
If I ask you a simple question” Why your eye consciousness cannot hear or cannot see sound? Somebody says to you: Your eye consciousness is clear and knowing but yet you cannot see sound? Why? It doesn’t know. So, it is not clear.
Khen Rinpoche: What are you going to answer if somebody asks you that? Cannot see, so, what? Any reason you have to explain?
Khen Rinpoche: Confirmed, double confirmed. He said just now. You don’t have any reason behind that or you have? If somebody asks why eye consciousness cannot hear the sound?  What is your answer?
(Student respond inaudible)
The eye sense power which is the uncommon empowering condition for the generation of eye consciousness apprehending form is the inner body. Similarly, there are the other sense powers. These five are what we called the inner body of the five sense powers. 
We are talking about the object observation of the close placement of mindfulness of the bodies. 
The third object of observation is the body that is both outer and inner. For example, the form that served as the bases of the sense power, which means the sense organ themselves. The sense organ is not the sense power.. 
The third object of observation body which is the body that is both the outer and inner. It is called inner, I guess is because if we compare it to the external form which is not conjoined with a continuum, and compared to that then it is called the inner. 
As about the body that is both outer and inner. If we look at the word outer, why is it called outer? Because in relation to the inner body, the sense powers which are much more subtle. As for the outer one which is like the form that serve as the bases of those sense powers. In relation to them, they are called outer because they are more coarse.
To keep it simple, you can just say there are just two, outer and inner body:
Body that is conjoined with a consciousness that is the inner body.
Body that is not conjoined with a consciousness that is the outer body.
All forms are object of observation of the close placement of mindfulness of bodies.
What are the objects of observation of the close placement of mindfulness of feelings? There are three feelings:
Pleasant
Unpleasant
Neutral
The three feelings - pleasant, unpleasant and neutral - are objects of observation of close mindfulness of feelings. 
Next, you have mind. When mind are divided, there are:
Main (primary) consciousness
Mental factors
Of the two, mind here refers to the primary consciousness.
We are talking about close placement of mindfulness of bodies and feelings and they have their object of observation. 
Then we have close placement of mindfulness of minds. The minds here refer to primary mind (consciousness). 
Then there is close placement of mindfulness of phenomena. What are the objects of observation? Phenomena here refer to all the mental factors except feeling. 
There are 51 mental factors. Excluding feeling, then there are 50 mental factors. In this context, these 50 mental factors come under phenomena.
Besides all the mental factors that are not feelings, the non-associated compositional factors are also classified under phenomena. They include all unproduced or non-composite phenomena - basically all the permanent phenomena. 
Just as they said all existences are object of observation for the calm-abiding, likewise, all objects are the objects of observation of close placement of mindfulness.
Next is the manner of meditation. How does one cultivate the close placement of mindfulness of the bodies? This is done by investigating both the general characteristic of the body and the specific characteristic of the body. 
According to the Abhidharmakosha (The Treasury of Knowledge), when we cultivate the close placement of mindfulness of the bodies, we can meditate with the body as the basis. We can meditate on impermanence, sufferings, it being empty and it being selfless. These four - impermanence, sufferings, empty and selfless- are the general characteristics of the body. 
We are talking about the manner of the meditation. With regards to the four close placement of the mindfulness, we are looking on the close placement of the mindfulness of the bodies. One meditates on it by investigating both the general characteristics of the bodies and the specific characteristics of the bodies. 
The general characteristics are the general characteristics that can apply to many other things. In relation to the body, we meditate on the impermanence, its suffering nature, how it is empty and how it is selfless. 
There are also specific characteristics of the bodies. You have close placement of mindfulness of feelings. What is the specific characteristic of feelings? Basically, it is the entity or the experience. 
If that is the specific characteristic of feelings then what is the specific characteristic of the bodies? 
The text says the specific characteristics with regards to bodies are the bodies’ elements and that arising from the elements (evolute).
The object of observation of the close placement of mindfulness of the bodies is the three types of bodies which include the bodies that are not conjoined with the consciousness.
At the time of meditation, primarily the object of observation is our own contaminated body which is the result of karma and afflictions. This contaminated body of ours is true suffering. 
What is its cause? Its cause is true origins.
We meditate on the four close placement of mindfulness in order to overcome the four erroneous conceptions (or the four wrong views):.
Conceiving that which is impure to be pure
Conceiving that which is suffering to be bliss or pleasure
Conceiving that which is impermanence to be permanence
Conceiving that which is selfless to be self
We meditate on four close placement of mindfulness in order to overcome these four erroneous conceptions.
In the close placement of mindfulness of the bodies, we primarily meditate on the body being impure. This is to counter the erroneous conception of the body as pure. 
When we cultivate the close placement of mindfulness of feelings, we primarily focusing on the pleasurable feelings and meditating on it as in the nature of suffering. This is to overcome the wrong conceptions (erroneous conceptions) which conceive that is in the nature of suffering to be happiness.
When we are cultivating the close placement of mindfulness of feelings the main practice here is to continually realize and to remember that the pleasant feelings that we experience are actually in the nature of sufferings. 
The main focus here for the close placement of mindfulness of feelings is not just feelings but primarily the feeling of pleasure which is actually contaminated pleasure. Why? Because if you look at our life now, day in and out we are looking for happiness. What we are looking for is the next experience of pleasure which is actually contaminated pleasure. That is what we are looking for every day. One finishes then always looking for the next moment or the next experience of contaminated pleasure. We work so hard day in and out for that purpose. We also accumulate a lot of karma in order to experience contaminated pleasure. It is the nature of suffering but we don’t see it as suffering at all. Instinctively we see it as something very pleasurable that we must have. 
By meditating on the close placement of mindfulness of feelings, we need to come to realize for ourselves that this contaminated pleasant feelings that we seek to acquire every day are in fact the source of suffering. 
Perhaps it might be useful to know what the four characteristics of true origins are. Each of the four noble truths has four characteristics each. The four characteristics of the true origins are:
Cause
Origin
Strong production
Condition
Why are there these 16 characteristics of the four noble truths? Because there are 16 erroneous conceptions that need to be eradicated. When we talk about true origins, we are talking about what ultimately are the causes and conditions that have brought and bring about suffering. Primarily, it is our contaminated aggregates, body and mind and with which we experience the suffering of birth, aging, sickness and death. 
The cause of contaminated aggregates is true origins. If you look for the ultimate root cause, it is ignorance. 
This is an important part. Even if you didn’t understand what was said earlier but this is something that you must get. We are talking about the four characteristics of true origins. What are they? They are:
Cause
Origin
Strong production
Condition
How do you get these four? Our contaminated aggregates is the result of true origins - karma and afflictions. If you look at the main root cause of our contaminated existence, it is ignorance. The root cause is how we get into the true origins. The first characteristic is the cause. Cause in this context here means the root that has brought us this contaminated existence. The cause here means the root cause.
The first characteristic of the true origins is cause. The second is origin. In Tibetan is kunjong? literally means origin or the source of all. The root cause is ignorance. Based on that we accumulate karma and when the karma ripened, it brings about different varieties of experiences and all experiences come from that karma. As such, it is the origin of all.From ignorance we accumulate karma. From that, we were thrown into this contaminated body (contaminated appropriated aggregates). 
The second characteristic of true origins is called origin. Literally kunjong? in Tibetan is the source of all. Origin here refers primarily to karma. Karma here is throwing karma or projecting karma because this projecting karma projects all kinds of body and it projects all different kinds of suffering starting with birth, then aging, sickness and death.
The third characteristic of true origins is condition. What is the condition for acquiring a contaminated appropriated aggregate? You have the causes – the root cause being ignorance which leads to the accumulation of projecting karma. Just having accumulated the karma doesn’t mean that this contaminated appropriated aggregates will come into being. There are other conditions that must be present. The condition here refers primarily to craving and grasping of the twelve-link of dependent origination. It is craving and grasping which nourishes the seed of the projecting karma and that gives it power to issue forth this contaminated appropriated aggregates. 
So, condition here refers primarily to craving and grasping of the twelve-link of dependent origination which nourishes the seeds of projecting karma. When the seed of the projecting karma is nourished to the point whereby there is no return i.e. the seed is definitely going to issue forth its effect, definitely going to project the next contaminated body. That is the 10th link out of the twelve-link of dependent origination- the link of potential existence.
That is what the fourth characteristic of the true origins is strong production which means it is the point of no return, and the result that is going to come.	
When we reflect on the four characteristics of the true origins then we get a deeper understanding. By reflecting on the four characteristics - cause, origin, strong production and  condition - we have to reflect on the twelve-link of dependent origination.
Why did we enter into this discussion? Remember we were talking about the close placement of mindfulness on feelings and primarily we are meditating on how all our experiences of pleasure are in the nature of suffering. What is the relation with what we have just discussed? Of the four characteristics of true origins, the third is condition. Without craving and grasping, the seed of the projecting karma cannot be nourished and therefore would not be able to issue forth its effect – a contaminated body. 
Craving comes from what? It comes in dependence upon feeling and in particular pleasant feeling. When we have pleasant feeling, we definitely will get attached and cannot bear to part from it. When we get attached craving comes. From craving then come grasping. Then you know where it leads to.
When we are cultivating the close placement of mindfulness of feelings, of the three types of feelings - pleasant, unpleasant and neutral - we primarily focusing on the pleasant feeling. By realizing and remembering that it is in the nature of suffering, then we are able to overcome the erroneous conceptions that conceive that which is suffering to be happiness. All our experiences of pleasant feelings are in the nature of suffering. What about the things that we use in our daily life? Our phone, house, furniture, you car, food, clothes and so forth? Are they true suffering or not? You have to think. Are they true suffering or not?
Khen Rinpoche (in English): Give me answer, next lesson. Your homework to think. You say yes, you must have reason. You say no, you must have reason. You can use any tenets. There is no difference.
Extract from Fpmt Basic Program Study Manual
Four close placements of mindfulness
Definition of close placement of mindfulness - an exalted knower engaged in a path, which is included in either mindfulness or wisdom, that meditates by way of investigating each of the four − bodies, feelings, minds, and phenomena − in terms of both specific and general characteristics.
There are four close placements of mindfulness on the body, feelings, minds, and phenomena in which mindfulness repeatedly focuses on the thorough investigation of their specific and general characteristics. The specific characteristics of each object are:
impurity of the body,
the suffering nature of feelings,
impermanence of the mind, and
selflessness of phenomena,
whereas the general characteristics − impermanent, miserable, empty, selfless, and empty of true existence - are applicable to all four objects.
Through the close placement of mindfulness on the body, one sees that the body is in the nature of pervasive compounded suffering; from this, one generates a wish to be free from this suffering. In this way, one comes to understand true sufferings.
Through the close placement of mindfulness on feelings, one sees that feeling induces craving, which is a cause of suffering; from this, one generates the wish to abandon craving. In this way, one comes to understand true origins.
Through the close placement of mindfulness on the mind, one realizes that the mind, which is distinct from a self, has the nature of being produced and ceased momentarily. From this, one no longer fears losing the self and generates the wish to actualize cessation. In this way, one engages in true cessations.
Through the close placement of mindfulness on phenomena, one realizes that all phenomena of the thoroughly afflicted class are to be abandoned whereas those of the completely pure class are to be adopted; from this, one develops the wish to cultivate a path. In this way, one engages in true paths.
Thus, with the four close placements of mindfulness, one engages in meditation on the four noble truths.
Application in the Complete Aspects
Application in the complete aspects, the fourth of the eight clear realizations explained in Ornament, is the subject of chapter 4. Application in the complete aspects is a means by which one cultivates the three exalted knowers - the knower of bases, the knower of paths, and the exalted knower of all aspects - in order to attain buddhahood. Thus, application in the complete aspects is a means for attaining buddhahood.
In order to attain buddhahood, a bodhisattva must cultivate each of the three exalted knowers in his continuum.
He must cultivate the knower of bases – an exalted wisdom that realizes all bases, i.e., the sixteen attributes of the four noble truths, as without a self of persons. He does so by meditating on the aspects, or features, of the knower of bases. 
He must also cultivate the knower of paths, an exalted wisdom realizing that all paths are empty of true existence. He does so by meditating on the aspects of the knower of paths. 
Finally, he must cultivate the exalted knower of all aspects - the omniscient mind of a buddha. He does so by meditating on the aspects of the exalted knower of all aspects.
Thus, the bodhisattva generates the three exalted knowers in his continuum by meditating on:
the 27 aspects of the knower of bases,
the 36 aspects of the knower of paths, and 
the 110 aspects of the exalted knower of all aspects. 
There are 173 aspects in all. The 173 aspects are cultivated by means of the four applications .application in the complete aspects, peak application, serial application, and momentary application. 
Application in the complete aspects, the subject of this study guide, is the means by which one familiarizes oneself with the 173 aspects in order to gain mastery over them. This is done by meditating on a compendium of the aspects with a union of calm abiding and special insight. The other three applications further develop and refine this wisdom until the bodhisattva is able to correctly meditate on all 173 aspects serially in the shortest moment of a complete action.[ This happens in the last moment of the bodhisattva’s continuum as a sentient being, just prior to reaching buddhahood. The duration of the shortest moment of a complete action is 1/65 of a finger snap.]
What is an application? Its Tibetan name, sbyor ba, has a multitude of meanings such as .connect,. .join,. or .prepare.. In this case, application in the complete aspects is a method for joining to buddhahood or preparing for buddhahood.
Application in the complete aspects is:
(1) a training in which a bodhisattva cultivates a compendium of the 173 aspects, or \
(2) an exalted wisdom that is conjoined with, or accompanied by, this training. 
An example of the first is an exalted wisdom of a bodhisattva meditating on the sixteen attributes of the four noble truths. An example of the second is the great compassion in the continuum of a bodhisattva.
Application in the complete aspects initially arises on the Mahayana path of accumulation and continues through to the end of one’s continuum as a sentient being. All bodhisattvas. paths, clear realizations, and exalted wisdoms - these terms are all synonymous -. are applications in the complete aspects.
The Eleven Topics of Application in the Complete Aspects
There are eleven topics that illustrate application in the complete aspects, and thus are the topics explained in chapter 4 of Ornament:
1. Subject-aspects of the antidote class - These are the 173 aspects of the three exalted knowers.
2. Principal applications - The principal applications engaged in by bodhisattvas are presented.
3. Excellent qualities of Mahayana applications - Presents the benefits that are attained by cultivating the Mahayana applications that were presented in the second topic explained above.
4. Hindrances to the applications - These are the pitfalls that can interfere with the production, abidance, or completion of an application. 
5. Characteristics of the applications - The characteristics assist one in understanding the principal applications.
6. Mahayana partial concordance with liberation - This is the Mahayana path of accumulation, the initial path in the Mahayana vehicle, during which one practices an application in the complete aspects. The characteristics of the applications can only be generated in those trainees who have entered the Mahayana path of accumulation.
7. Mahayana partial concordance with definite discrimination - This is the Mahayana path of preparation, the second Mahayana path. This topic specifically addresses the subsequent attainment period of the Mahayana path of preparation, which is subsequent to a meditative equipoise focusing on emptiness.
8. Bodhisattva sangha who has attained a sign of irreversibility - This topic presents the signs that indicate to trainees that a bodhisattva is irreversible from complete enlightenment.
9. Application in the equality of cyclic existence and peace - This presents the applications that give rise to the truth body of a buddha.
10. Application in a pure land - This presents the applications that give rise to the complete enjoyment body of a buddha.
11. Application in skillful means - This presents the applications that give rise to the emanation body of a buddha. These three applications are practiced on the three pure grounds (bodhisattva grounds eight, nine, and ten).
In short, chapter 4 first presents the 173 aspects that are to be cultivated in order to attain the three exalted knowers and ultimately buddhahood (topic 1). Following that, the principal applications of a bodhisattva are presented (topic 2). Then, the excellent qualities of the applications (topic 3) and the hindrances to practicing them (topic 4) are presented in order to inspire trainees to practice them and to help them avoid potential pitfalls. The characteristics of the applications (topic 5) are presented in order to help trainees understand the applications’ individual characteristics, enabling them to practice the applications appropriately. Following that, the Mahayana partial concordance with liberation (topic 6) and partial concordance with definite discrimination (topic 7), the initial paths on which application in the complete aspects is practiced, are presented. The signs of irreversibility (topic 8) first arise for sharp-facultied bodhisattvas on the Mahayana partial concordance with definite discrimination, so this topic is presented here. By the time the bodhisattva reaches the eighth bodhisattva ground, he has definitely attained the signs of irreversibility. At this time, the bodhisattva has entered the three pure grounds and is creating the causes for attaining the three bodies of a buddha through engaging in the application in the equality of cyclic existence and peace (topic 9), application in a pure land (topic 10), and application in skillful means (topic 11).