Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/lesson28.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:52.962610
================================================================================

At the beginning of the class, all of you will chant the Praise to Shakyamuni. Thereafter, we will chant the Heart Sutra, which is part of the practice of this class. 
In the monastery, before the debate, we will just recite prayers for almost two hours. Sometimes we even chant Heart Sutra for 21 times. Sometime long tune of the Heart Sutra was made and which takes about 45 minutes to complete. We also do 21 Tara Praises for 70 to 80 times. Therefore, before the debate, we normally do almost two hours prayers. 
Here we do only about 10 to 15 minutes. Even that, you have no energy to chant. You should put some energy there as it is part of your practice. You should do with joy. When reciting Buddha’s prayers, you think of Buddha Shakyamuni and just put your palms together and remembering his kindness and qualities and praise to Shakyamuni on each verse. If you do well from your heart, you know how much benefit you will get. You know that is important. You will get the benefit by doing prayers in the beginning. You will have peace in your mind before listening to the teaching. Do the meditation by visualizing Buddha Shakyamuni and the nectar comes from Buddha Shakyamuni will purify your negative emotion, negative mind, difficult mind, jealous mind, angry mind, and whatever we have should be purified. Meditation will calm down and bring the energy as a group to listen to the teaching. 
When you recite the Heart Sutra, which is an extremely powerful wisdom sutras. You can’t find any more powerful sutra than Heart Sutra.  We have gone through the topic before which mainly talks about emptiness. Looking oneself and everything is empty. As much as possible, understand impermanent and emptiness. Contemplate on that while you recite. Or if you don’t want to recite, just think that you are listening to Heart Sutra from Buddha Shakyamuni. You can visualize like that and understand the meaning. It is very very powerful. One self created so much merit just by reciting Heart Sutra. After that, you contemplate on the meaning. There you will get much more benefit. 
In monastery, the teachers used to say all the time “You don’t need any separate puja for yourself if you do chanting well by yourself when you come to the class. Think well, chant well and that become the best puja for yourself. You don’ have to order monastery for somebody to do the puja for you to clear obstacles. You can do yourself.” That is what I mean. When you chant the prayers as a group, it should be a little bit louder. When you are alone in the house, whether you make noise or doesn’t make noise, it doesn’t make any difference. When as a group, you should chant louder for any kind of prayer. Not only in the class, you should chant loudly on any puja as a group energy is needed. When I say louder, it doesn’t mean it is a matching voice within the group. It doesn’t mean louder than the  ?? voice. It is not like that. Bring your voice together and make it as the group energy pleasantly. The chanting has some kind of a power to peace our mind if you chant well. Also at the same time, you will think well. 
In Tibet, they said the very very long tune Heart Sutra in Tibetan, from Sera to Lhasa i.e. when one start with Heart Sutra, one walk from Sera to Lhasa and then come back. Only then, one will finish the Heart Sutra. That means maybe it takes one and a half hour or two hours. I don’t know how long it takes. Anybody knows where Sera and Lhasa is? That’s kind of distance they mentioned in the past. We did only one time in Sera with chanting master back in Tibet. So he did that one time. It took long time to do it. I am not used to it. I just making long…..one word. “Thus I” how long it takes? 3 seconds. There could some reason, it is not just killing time or passing time. I don’t think so. Those who have good understanding, “Thus I heard one time’ can mean many things. You can think of it in many ways. You can contemplate with just one sentence in different ways. “Thus I head one time.” If you know emptiness, you can contemplate on that.  
I don’t want to repeat these words again and again. Sometimes it is good to say, good to tell, and to remind. Please chant loudly with group energy. This is important. When you do mandala offering which is also good to chant, but it is not making mandala offering to me. It is nothing to do with me. You can visualize Guru Shakyamuni, His Holiness to create the merit if you do well. It is nothing to do with myself here. Think well and create merit for oneself. As the class is finishing soon, I think the group energy is important from every angle for success and to complete the class. Only by myself, I cannot do much. We all need this energy to go through these classes. Rinpoche and His Holiness have mentioned that studying is the most important thing. For those who have been to Dharamsala, His Holiness always mentioned that. Also Rinpoche always mentioned that. ABC exists here to do dharma study. Of course, dharma study boils down to dharma practice. From every angle, the students also need some effort to learn, listen, and do prayers. 
As I have mentioned, studying Buddhist philosophy is extremely challenging. I have gone through myself. I had studied full time for about 19 to 20 years. Not easy. I have mentioned that there are about 30 monks in my class. Not everybody can study. Not everybody can complete their studies. Not everybody can become Geshe. It is not easy. It is challenging. As I have mentioned before, from 36 or 37 of us and only 4 of us completed our studies. It is not a joke. It is really difficult. Really completed all exams, this and that. About half of them got disrobed. They really completed their studies. Some didn’t study well. I mean they do come to the class, come and sit there, debate here debate there. Times goes and then they didn’t learn much. So I see the challenges there. Of course, it could be individual karma, could be your own effort and own interest. There are many things to complete the studies. It is not easy. We studied full time, but here we talked about part time studies. I know you people working from morning 8 until 6 and I can’t expect much. After come back, you are tired and have no time to read. You take a little time for your dinner and come to class. Wonderful! Not everybody can do. When I look at it, sometimes I look at different ways. People come and just listened. Wonderful! Just come and listen and it is wonderful! There are peoples whom sometimes I think about the two pigeons. It is possible you know the story. I really think about that. It is wonderful! It is better than sitting in the house. Come here and listen to one or two words and leave some imprint. Or just come here to recite the Heart Sutra together. It is wonderful!  On top of that, you read, you think, you study, and that much benefit you gain and that much you understand the Buddha’s teaching. That much may help you to change your mind. I have mentioned before, study is to know the knowledge, but knowing the knowledge doesn’t mean much. It is helpful, definitely it is helpful. Having all the knowledge is helpful.  
Even for myself, when I have difficulty or problems, I have ten words to think on that problem. If I really put in deep practice, it is no question, I will able to change oneself. I am saying that just hearing that, the power of hearing is powerful. It is extremely powerful. I see the benefit there. I have mentioned before. When I was young, I don’t know what is killing. My parents don’t kill. Not good. Only that! I have no idea. Because of that, it helps me not to kill from young time, before I become a monk. I don’t know much knowledge as what happens to killing. That is the power of hearing! I am giving you just one example. Extremely powerful!  
I have mentioned that before. In the last Basic Program, we did some pujas. We collected some small amount of money to do Hayagriva puja every year. I think we did for the first Basic Program. The second round, we never do that much. It is ok. What I am saying here is that when you do the prayer, do with joy and happy feeling. Do with joy even when you do three prostrations. Believing in the benefits and make some kind of feeling in the heart. I think this is important. 
Praising Buddha Shakyamuni, recite the Heart Sutra, mandala offering, and do the seven-limb practice before the class depending on the object of the merit field can be really very powerful if you can do that. Then your mind becomes more purified and more subdued. Use the dharma in according with the Lamrim by setting up the motivation. The whole point is to subdue your own mind. Not so much of about anything. Whatever topics you have learned something, try to put these topics into the Lamrim as much as possible and then try to meditate on it. This is extremely helpful. So when you do the prayers, the group energy is needed. Do the prayers and request success for the class to complete. So energy is needed for every angle to complete the classes. If you want to continue the classes after this, we need the energy. Otherwise, we just do the practice of 35 Buddha practice once a week. That is easy for everyone. For some practice, we can come together to do some puja once a week if that suit you people. It is much much easier and you don’t need to squeeze your brain so much. You just do your simple practice on this topic and that topic. We do 35 Buddha practice. But this is not Rinpoche’s wish as he wants the centre to study deeper. As he have mentioned three times to study the Master Program. Those who want to study more please have some kind of encouragement and make strong prayers. If you wish to learn more, we all need that, so it is important. That is why I want to tell now. As I mentioned that it is not easy. What you are learning is really learning. Sometimes, I feel you are really go to the monastery and studying Geshe. You study the same thing and nothing more. Sometime I feel that you people are even better than some of the Geshes. I am not kidding you. I have mentioned that I have 37 or 38 monks classmates and they come class. If you ask question, they know? Not everybody knows. So it is not easy. I really appreciate of what you are doing here. After a long working day and come to class and putting up some effort to listen. I cannot hope much and my job is the need to push. But how much I can push, I don’t know. I cannot push you with a cane. You have this PSLE. Not only the kid. The exam is like an exam for the mother. The parents get stressed up. The children get stress and the parents get stress. Anyway, one way is still need to work harder. That is the most that I can say.  
When you do the prayers, sometimes it is a little bit down like that. So when you chant, please chant loudly. Also good, as when you chant loudly, it is like some kind of exercise. Normally the chant leader chant very loudly and they live very long. It is true. All the chant masters normally live quite long. They put a lot of energy for the chanting. When you chant “Ooooor…”  for long time, your lung get expanded and then can live longer. If I know the long tune of the Heart Sutra of two hour one, we sit there and “Oooor…’ for two hours. I don’t know myself. We did only one time. It is extremely boring. At that time we were young, we don’t know what is going on. We don’t even know the tune. Which word they are chanting, we also don’t know. Where is the sentence, we don’t know. Actually when you reciting quickly, they “Oooor…” then you lost the sentence. Then the umze “Ooor…..you really can’t hear the word. We don’t know much of the meaning, no meditation and no chanting, and nothing there.  It is very long and boring. 
So make your prayer enjoyable. Before teaching, put it aside whatever it is. Give some energy and bring your mind energy here and listen to the teaching as much as possible. Of course, sometimes you are tired and can’t do much but a little bit alerts. What are you trying to talk? Of course, myself, I never think that I am a good teacher as I never ever taught in my life. What I feel is that I have tried my best. I have no regret. I have tried my best. So what I want to say is the same thing. From your side, never regret yourself for not putting the effort when you have the opportunity. That is what I want to say.
Of course, everybody has different intelligence. Some people learn by hearing just one time. Some people learn by hundred times repeating. Everybody has different level of intelligence. Myself also is not a fast learner as I am a very slow learner. For me, according to my wisdom, I need to work harder for myself. If you have intelligence, maybe you don’t have to work hard because it is easy to learn. For me, I don’t have that much intelligence so I need more effort to learn. Because of your own effort you can learn smoothly. Therefore put in some effort. It is good. So don’t have regret at the end of the day, “Oh, I didn’t put enough effort.” Sometimes when you come to class, this does happen. When Buddha’s teaching, all come to class, it become regular class and we don’t really think so much. Today goes like that, your mind doesn’t want to listen, “Maybe next class I do, or maybe next year I will put in more effort and study deeply”. As times goes like that. Sometimes we really need to tell one own self “Today, now, I must do something.” Don’t wait next time. When you have the opportunity, now, as much as possible, put effort and learn even some words. Even you don’t know the meaning, you just learn the words. You know about the different 37 topics that we are talking about that, for example, all these four mindfulness. Only then you go deeper, “What is that? How to meditate on that?” Also able to explain on that. So that is the way to learn. Otherwise, it is not easy. Sometimes, we are not mindful, then “Oh, this is difficult and that is difficult” and then your mind just shut down. Some of your mind shut down. Then you go to another topic. Of course, it is difficult. Then you shut down and go on like that until you get totally tired. At the same time, to understand this topic is extremely difficult. But we all want to learn something new. You don’t want to learn Lamrim every year, isn’t it? If I repeat Lamrim every year, I don’t think you want to learn it. But you want something new. Sometimes the topic can be very difficult. But if you really want to learn then put in some effort. At least you must be able to say the names and this and that. Also at the same time, work hard, pray and bring your own mind energy. Only then you can succeed and achieve something. Otherwise, is difficult. Anyway this class is finishing, and I want to say this as you still have another module to complete. So think about that, and do the prayers with joy. Also listen to the teaching as much as possible with joy and put some effort. What is this topic about? Ask question whatever you don’t understand or discuss with each other. Like this will help to succeed in the studies. That is what pleases Rinpoche. That is what pleases His Holiness. So you all need to think on this. It is nothing individual. We are all working for Rinpoche’s centre, pleases Rinpoche, please His Holiness. The only thing that we can do is by studying. That is their main goal. Always the same advice. All the time. So not to disturb but only pleasing Rinpoche’s wishes. Their thought is everybody. Energy is needed to succeed in the study. Please think about it. Everyone, including myself, do take note. This is important. I don’t want to repeat this over again and again. So please keep this in mind. So study with joy. Everything you do, you do with joy. Otherwise, sometimes it is not easy. 
The seven branches of enlightenment are:
The branch of enlightenment of perfect mindfulness
Perfect discernment of phenomena
Perfect joyous effort
Perfect joy
Perfect pliancy
Perfect meditative stabilization
Perfect equanimity
The seven branches of enlightenment principally are said to be meditated on the Path of Seeing. The purpose of meditating on the seven branches of enlightenment is to abandon the Path of Seeing abandonments. 
As we saw in the last lesson, with regards to the Path of Seeing abandonments, there are:
Afflictive obscurations 
Knowledge obscurations
According to the Autonomy Middle Way School (AMWS):
The afflictive obscurations are primarily posited as the apprehension of a self-sufficient substantially existent person together with its seed
The knowledge obscurations are posited as the apprehension of person as truly existent and its seed
When the two obscurations are further elaborated into coarse and subtle:
The coarse apprehension of a self of person would be the apprehension of permanent, unitary and independent self
The subtle apprehension of a self of a person would be the apprehension of a self-sufficient substantially existent person
With regards to the self of phenomena, there are both coarse and subtle as well:
The apprehension of coarse self of phenomena would be the apprehension of subject and object as different substantial entities 
The apprehension of subtle self of phenomena would be the apprehension of a truly existent person
Because there are both coarse and subtle forms of the apprehension of a self of person and phenomena, as such there are:
-  coarse self of phenomena, 
-  subtle self of phenomena,
-  coarse self of person 
-  subtle self of person.
Hence the presentation of both coarse and subtle self of person and self of phenomena are according to the AMWS: 
With regards to the afflictive obscurations:
There are afflictive obscurations which are abandoned on the Path of Seeing 
There are afflictive obscurations which are abandoned on the Path of Meditation
Here we were looking at the Path of Seeing abandonments that are afflictive obscurations, but there also Path of Seeing abandonments which are knowledge obscurations.
How many Path of Seeing abandonments that are afflictive obscurations?
There are 112 afflictive obscurations that are abandoned on the Path of Seeing. 
There are 108 knowledge obscurations that are abandoned on the Path of Seeing. 
This is just telling you how many of the afflictive obscurations and knowledge obscurations that are abandoned on the Path of Seeing. As for the specific breakdown, we have already talked about it in the last lesson.
When we talked about Path of Seeing abandonments which are afflictive obscurations, which are afflictions, we are primarily talking about the intellectually acquired or artificial afflictive obscurations (or artificial conceptions). There are innate afflictions as well. So the Path of Seeing abandonments are primarily the artificial ones. 
Of the 112 acquired (artificial) afflictive obscurations, 40 of them belong to the desire realm. 
Why are there 40? The explanation is done in relation to the Four Noble Truths.
Takes True Origins as an example, there are 10 afflictions (which are Path of Seeing abandonments) that focus on True Origins. If you understand this, you just have to apply it to the rest of the noble truths. 
The 10 are:
Attachment
Anger
Pride
Afflicted ignorance
Afflicted doubt
View of the transitory collection
View holding on to an extreme
Conception of bad view as supreme
View holding bad ethics, and modes of conduct as supreme
Wrong view
These are the 10 afflictions which are Path of Seeing abandonments of the desire realm which focuses on True Origins. Then there are True Suffering, True Cessation, and True Path. There are 10 focusing on each of them as well, so all together there are 40.
 Khen Rinpoche: Okay? So intelligent. One time, you said okay. When we were young, my teacher tells 10 times we still don’t understand. Of course when we are kids, the study is different. We don’t know anything. We can say the word but we have no idea at all. What is ignorance, what is view of transitory collection, this and that – we have no idea. We can debate, we can say, we know the word, but you people have some idea. That also depends on age. The older, you have more knowledge and you can think better. When you are kid, somehow you are not able to think. Also my teacher, who have passed away, when we go to his class, he repeat so many times. Sometimes we feel very boring, “I know this, why is he repeating again?” He repeated many times. At that time, we know some topics already, but he thinks is important so he repeat again and again. Now I know why. That time I didn’t know why he kept on repeating. Because of his repetition, it is still in my memory. Some of my teachers, they don’t repeat. He teaches one time, okay you understand. At that moment you understand, after one or two years, you forget. One of my teachers repeat and repeat. For me, because I am not the intelligent person that is why keep in my memory when he talked 10 times. On some of the topics which he thinks so important, he repeat, repeat, repeat. Some of that is still in my memory. Now I see why. But at that time, I don’t see the point.
Since there are three realms in the cyclic existence, as such there are also afflictions of the form realm and afflictions of the formless realms. How many are posited for the form and formless realm?
There are 36 each for each realm, which give a total of 72. 
If there are 40 afflictions of the desire realm, how come it is not the same for the form and formless realms? Why there are only 36 for the form realm and 36 for the formless realm?
The reason is because anger is excluded:
There is no anger of the form realm that is observing True Origins. 
Likewise, there is no anger of the form realm that is observing the True Suffering. 
There is no anger of the form realm observing True Cessation. 
There is no anger of the form realm observing True Path
As 40 minus 4 = 36, therefore, there are 36. It is the same with the formless realm.
That is how you end up with 112 acquired afflictive obscurations which are Path of Seeing abandonments. (40+36+36 = 112)
According to AMWS, there are Path of Seeing abandonments which are knowledge obscurations as well. They posited 36 for each of the 3 realms, so together there are 36 x 3 = 108 acquired knowledge obscurations.
What makes up these 36 acquired knowledge obscurations of the desire realm, form and formless realms? They are:
- 9 conceptions of apprehenders of thoroughly afflicted phenomena
- 9 conceptions of apprehended of completely pure phenomena, 
- 9 conceptions of apprehenders of substantial existent
- 9 conceptions of apprehenders of imputed existent
In general, we can look at the existent or phenomena in terms of two categories:
Thoroughly afflicted phenomena 
Completely pure phenomena.
Let’s give an example of a conception of apprehended.  There are conception of apprehended of thoroughly afflicted phenomena and conception of apprehended of completely pure phenomena. 
Let’s give an example of a conception of apprehended of a thoroughly afflicted phenomena. 
There is artificial conception of a truly existence ignorance focusing on ignorance. 
Ignorance is the object of observation. Then you have an artificial/intellectually acquired apprehension of true existence apprehending that ignorance to be truly existent.
This example of the two obscurations – afflictive obscurations and knowledge obscurations - it is a knowledge obscurations. Within knowledge obscurations it is an acquired or artificial knowledge obscuration.
Why are there 9 of such conceptions? Because that is what is said in the sutra. The sutra gave 9 examples and posits the object of observation, this and that. Why are there not more than 9? The answer is because that is what the sutra says.
There are 9 objects of observation that are posited in the sutra. Because there are 9, there are 9 apprehension of true existence apprehending those 9 objects of observation as truly existent. That is how you arrived at 108 because 
There are 36 artificial knowledge obscurations of the desire realm, because there are 36 different conceptions. 
Likewise there are 36 of form realm and 36 of the formless realms.
Therefore, 36 x 3 = a total of 108.
Next are the eight branches of the Arya paths. These are primarily meditated on the Path of Meditation. They are meditated because the purpose is to abandon the Path of Meditation abandonments. According to the AMWS, the Path of Meditation abandonments are also divided into two:
Afflictive obscurations 
Knowledge obscurations.
There are Path of Meditation abandonments which are innate obscurations. 
There are Path of Meditation abandonments which are afflictive obscurations. 
There are those which are knowledge obscurations. 
Let’s look at the afflictive obscurations. There are 16.
Path of Seeing abandonments which are afflictive obscurations numbered 112, 
Path of Meditation abandonments which are afflictive obscurations numbered only 16.
Khen Rinpoche: Already reduced many.  Less. Only 16 left.
These 16 innate afflictive obscurations abandoned by and on the Path of Meditation.
These afflictions belong to the three realms. 
6 of them belong to the desire realm which is:  
Attachment
Anger 
Pride
Afflictive ignorance
View of the transitory collection
View holding to an extreme
Unlike the Path of Seeing abandonment which are afflictive obscurations, there were 10. Why is it only 6 now? What is missing?
The afflicted doubt is missing which was already abandoned on the Path of Seeing. 
The conception of bad view as supreme is missing, which has already been abandoned. 
There is no view holding bad ethics and modes of conduct as supreme as that has been abandoned. 
There is no wrong view, as that is abandoned. 
These were abandoned on the Path of Seeing, which means that they are artificial.
From these points, you can probably say that these four -afflicted doubt, view conception of bad view as supreme, view holding bad ethic and mode of conduct as supreme, wrong views - we can probably say that they are artificial. That means there is no innate form.
There is Path of Meditation afflictions of the desire realm, there are 6 afflictions. 
There are 5 afflictions of the form realm which are Path of Meditation abandonments
There are 5 afflictions of the formless realm which are Path of Meditation abandonments. 
Why are there 5? Similar to what we saw on the Path of Seeing, anger is excluded.
So these are the 16 afflictive obscurations abandoned on the Path of Meditation. 
What about the Path of Meditation abandonments which are knowledge obscurations? 
There are 108, which is the same as before. 
There are 108 innate knowledge obscurations abandoned on the Path of Meditation. The enumeration is the same like before:
36 of the desire realm, 
36 of form real, 
36 of the formless realm. 
It is exactly the same thing, as it is just that the artificial form are abandoned on the Path of Seeing and on the Path of Meditation, the innate formsare abandoned on the Path of Meditation. This is according to the AMWS.  
In short,
there are Path of Seeing abandonments which are afflictive obscurations and which are knowledge obscurations, 
there are Path of Meditation abandonments which are afflictive obscurations and which are knowledge obscurations.
There is an explanation of some relations or symbolism of the seven royal possessions to the seven branches of enlightenment.
First, branch of enlightenment of perfect mindfulness, there is a symbolism between that and the precious wheel. Just as the wheel overcomes or victorious, that which is to be conquered through revolving or moving. Likewise, with mindfulness, one is able to overcome that which can be overcome. 
The branch of enlightenment of perfect fine discernment of phenomena which is wisdom is likened to the precious elephant. Because this perfect fine discernment of phenomena, this wisdom is able to overcome the apprehension of signs, or apprehension of true existence, just like how the precious elephant is very powerful can overcome the many discordant factors.
Next is the branch of enlightenment of perfect joyous effort. That is some link related to the precious horse. It might be interesting if we look at the individual meanings of the 7 royal possessions because they have their own characteristics and so forth. Since they are trying to draw the link between the 7 royal possessions and the 7 branches of enlightenment, in terms how do the 7 royal possessions can symbolize these branches of enlightenment?
Here the branch of enlightenment of perfect joyous effort is likened to the precious horse. It is said that this precious horse can travel the world within the morning and then be back. In order to do that, there is effort. It is striving, so you need joyous effort. Here joyous effort referring to striving in order to develop the different concentrations. 
You need perfect joyous effort to actualize the different supernatural powers with different concentrations, clairvoyance and so forth. In fact, to achieve enlightenment quickly, joyous effort is needed. The explanation of this is in relation to the precious horse.
Next, there is the branch of enlightenment of perfect joy and there is an explanation of that relating it to the precious jewel. With perfect joyous effort as a condition, one is able to develop the concentrations, clairvoyance and so forth; one is able to engage in many avenues, aspects, many different dharma, thus bringing joy to benefit the body and mind. It is like how the precious jewel is said to be able to confer happiness upon the people. It is said even just the light emitting from the precious jewel is able to do that. 
Next is branch of enlightenment is perfect pliancy. With perfect pliancy, one is able to pacify the mental and physical dysfunctional tendencies. Due to that, pacifying of those dysfunctional tendencies of body and mind, one comes to experience great joy and bliss. This is symbolized by the precious queen who is said to be able to confer or bestow uncontaminated bliss.
Next is the branch of enlightenment is perfect meditative stabilization. When one has meditative stabilization one is able to achieve many different goals. Of the 7 royal possessions, there is precious householder which symbolizes this. The precious householder is said to be able to satisfy whatever necessities, needs or desires we have, he can give us that. 
I remember reading in one text but don’t remember which text now. I could be wrong but I remember it is mentioned in a text that when one achieves the Mahayana Path of Seeing, one achieves the space or sky treasury. When one achieves the space treasury or sky treasury, there is no way one will be poor hence after. I guess there is no poverty of material. . 
Khen Rinpoche: You become Zambala. When you achieve that you become real Zambala.
 The 1st ground (bodhisattva bhumi) is called Very Joyful. The bodhisattva on the 1st ground is so happy and very joyful because at that time he really sees soon he will achieve enlightenment and will be of benefit to many sentient beings. That is why he is very joyful. That’s why that the very first ground is so called the Very Joyful because the bodhisattva is very happy as he will achieves enlightenment soon.
The branch of enlightenment of perfect equanimity – of the seven royal possessions is the minister.
How does the precious minister go with equanimity? 
Khen Rinpoche: The last one is equanimity. How does these two go together? Democracy. All become minister.
Earlier in the meditative stabilization or concentration, it is more in the context of meditative equipoise. Equanimity here is probably what happens when you arise from meditative equipoise. In post-meditative equipoise, you have to continue to realize the things that are not yet realized, through knowing what to be abandoned and knowing what is to be cultivated. One strives to abandon what needs to be abandoned and cultivate that which needs to be cultivated. I guess that is what ministers do. Ministers see and do what they have to do. 
Next we have the 8 branches of the aryas path. Just list them for now:
Correct view 
Correct thought 
Correct speech 
Correct aims of action 
Correct livelihood
Correct exertion
Correct mindfulness 
Correct meditative stabilization
These 8 branches of aryas path are also being emphasized in the Pali tradition and they called it the 8-fold noble path. Anyway it is the 8 branches of aryas path. These 8 branches of aryas path is the explanation and extension of True Paths.
Like what I have mentioned earlier, when you are coming to this kind of class, at the very minimum you should be able to say individually what the 37 harmonies of enlightenment are. When we were looking at the 7 branches of enlightenment, what those 7 branches are? With regards to the 8 branches of aryas paths, you should be able say what they are: Correct view,  Correct thought,  Correct speech,  Correct aims of action,  Correct livelihood, Correct exertion, Correct mindfulness,  Correct meditative stabilization.
The minimum you should be able to say what the 37 harmonies of enlightenment are. If you know what they mean, then that is very good. That is perfect. That is excellent. But the minimum you have to be able to say at least enumerate, make a list of what they are. This is the minimum. You must put in the effort, and that is the minimum.
Remember when we talk about the symbolism that is related to mindfulness earlier, the point about mindfulness is become victorious over things that you were not victorious before. When you become victorious, you win and you conquer. That is done by mindfulness. Those that were unconquered, you conquer with mindfulness. Mindfulness is very important. You see it everywhere.  It doesn’t matter where you turn left or right, up or down, mindfulness is always there. Right from the beginning you have close placements of mindfulness. After that then again in the other categories like 5 powers and 5 forces, mindfulness comes up at the end.  In the 7 branches of enlightenment, mindfulness comes up again. Here in the 8-fold path of the superiors, mindfulness is there. So mindfulness is very important. You just need to get at it. With regards to material, you have to memorize minimum the words. If you remember, then the next day you have to refresh your memory again and through your own power you think. That is how things stick in your mind day after day after day. So because of mindfulness you get used to it, it sticks in your mind.
Some people ask me “Why do I forget things so easily?” The answer is very simple. It is a sign that you are not mindful, you have not relied on mindfulness, you have not memorized stuff . That is clear. It is clear. When you recollect and memorize stuff you get at it everyday, you review and you review, then there is no way you can forget. Because when you review and review and rely on mindfulness over and over again, the imprint that is left in your mind is very thick and very strong. Otherwise, if you look at it once or twice of course it just slips away quickly.  That is evident and that is our experience. All of us are like that.
With regards to the material that in general when we talk about learning stuff, the things that we have already learnt we have to review every now and then so we don’t forget. Otherwise, we can’t remember anything. So whatever have been covered you have to review with mindfulness.  It is mindfulness that is recollecting over and over again. When you start accumulating stuff over time then your interest comes because you see the connections “Yes, it is like that”. You get more interest and get more encouraged. Then you really want to do it. That is how you start to be able to learn more. You will be able to keep stuff in your head. So there is no way out other than effort. You just have to get at it. 
Like what I have said, if you come to class then you have to do something. The minimum you have to put in effort to memorize the stuff. I am not talking about the meaning. We are talking about the words. You have to put effort to memorize. If you don’t do that, then coming to class is just like that. Is there imprint? Of course, there is imprint. But in order for the imprints to be strong imprints then you have to work. You really have to remember stuff. First, for minimum, memorize the words.
Khen Rinpoche: So next life much easy. If there is strong imprint, then next life easy. Otherwise it is the same. You understand. If  you don’t have to work hard, then like now. 
We will go through the 8-fold Noble Path the next class.