Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/lesson21.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:50.988914
================================================================================

Student 1: It was mentioned that bodhisattva move from Supreme Mundane Qualities (SMQ) level on the  Path of Preparation to the Path of Seeing within one meditative equipoise using the same desire realm support. Can this bodhisattva on the Path of Preparation newly attain the Path of Seeing with a desire realm support that is true suffering due to karma and delusion? Or the newly attainment of the Path of Seeing is necessary done with a desire realm support that is due to the power of prayers. Or it can be both ways? 
When he newly attained the Path of Seeing, he has a mental body and he is a superior. There is some kind of contradiction there. True suffering that becomes aggregates that are no longer true suffering as true suffering becomes the mental body. So I am just wondering is this done based on a support that is true suffering, or is it necessarily done based on the support that is due to power of prayer? 
Khen Rinpoche: If you remember the assertion of the Hinayana tenet, the Vaibashika (Great Exposition School), from the Path of Preparation all the way till the Path of No-more-learning, enlightenment, was done in one sitting. As such, for the proponents of the GES, the Buddha’s body is not the Buddha Jewel. They are like you cannot fathom how can something that is true suffering be otherwise.
Khen Rinpoche: So you are still in Vabaishika tenet. You have to upgrade. Don’t live there forever.
When you think about it, you see that the body of a Hearer on the Hearer’s Path of Accumulation, on the Hearer’s Path of Preparation, on the Hearer’s Path of Seeing and on the Hearer’s Path of Meditation are true suffering.
From one of our earlier discussion, within the many different kinds of Hearer on the Hearer’s Path of Meditation, there are some of those Hearer superiors who still have to take rebirth in cyclic existence for seven more times. The Hearer superiors have seen the truth directly, and they don’t newly accumulate projecting karma but nevertheless they still have the imprints of karma accumulated in the past. As such, there are some Hearers on the Hearer’s Path of Meditation still take rebirth in cyclic existence under the power of karma and afflictions.
If you think about it, you can say that the physical body of the Hearer superiors on the Path of Meditation is true suffering because it is a product of karma and afflictions. If you think about it, you can say it is necessarily true suffering.
What do you think? Do you think that the physical body of a Hearer superior that is on the Path of Meditation is necessary true suffering? Do you think it is alright to say that is necessary true suffering?  I think perhaps it is alright to say that it is necessary true suffering..
These Hearer superiors on the Path of Meditation then go on to actualize the Hearer’s Path of No-more-learning and become foe destroyer. They become foe destroyers on the current support, the body that they have while on the Path of Meditation. On the basis of that support, they achieve liberation and become foe destroyers. If you look at the assertion of the tenets of the Autonomy Middle Way School and below, in terms of order of actualizing the two different kind of nirvana, first the nirvana with remainder is actualized and then followed by the nirvana without remainder. So going by these shared assertions many of those Buddhist tenets, this nirvana with remainder is the true suffering.  
The Hearer superior on the Hearer’s Path of Meditation become an arahat with the basis of the physical support that he has which is true suffering. When he actualizes full nirvana he actualizes nirvana with remainder. 
Why his state of achievement is called the nirvana with remainder? This arahat does not have any more afflictions in his continuum. He had achieved the abandonment of the afflictions, but nevertheless, his state of achievement is called nirvana with remainder. Why? Because he still possesses the aggregates which are true suffering. As such, something is still left behind.  
Khen Rinpoche: Haven’t forgot? Or forgot? We did talk this before.
If you are asked “Do arhats who have achieved the nirvana with remainder possess true suffering?”
You have to say “Yes”. 
Do they possess true origin? 
Possibly have to say “Yes” as well.
Do arhats achieve nirvana with remainder possess true origins or not? Do they have true origins? Yes or no? 
When this arhat (foe destroyer) achieves the nirvana without remainder, he is separated from the aggregates which are true suffering. As such, it is said that he achieved nirvana without remainder.
One can manifest or actualize the results of the Hearers foe destroyer on the basis of a desire realm support, on the basis of a form realm support and is also possible on the basis of a formless realm support. As such, the three realms are support for actualizing the Hearer’s enlightenment. 
Yes, one achieves the Hearer arhat (foe destroyer) on the basis of the support that he has while he is on the Hearer’s Path of Meditation. As such, when this Hearer arhat achieved the nirvana with remainder, his aggregates are true suffering. Having said that, it is also being mentioned very clearly in the teaching that the aggregates of those arhats are not samsara. The support of the Hearer superior on the Hearer’s Path of Meditation is true suffering and it is samsara. But the support of the Hearer arhat that has achieved the nirvana of remainder is true suffering but not samsara.
Then this begets a question “Why is that the form aggregates or the aggregates of the Hearer arhat who had achieved the nirvana with remainder is true suffering but not samsara?”
In general, what is samsara? The factor of having to move from life to life under the power of karma and afflictions is posited as cyclic existence or samsara. 
The Hearer superior on the Hearer’s Path of Meditation still has karma and affliction in his mental continuum because they have not been abandoned yet. As such, he possesses the potential in his continuum to connect to another life of existence, another existence, another birth. As such, his aggregates, the support of the Hearer superior on the Hearer’s Path of Meditation is samsara, and is true suffering.
A Hearer arhat (foe destroyer) obviously must be someone who has liberated or freed himself from cyclic existence. Otherwise, how is he going to say “I have achieved liberation!” They have achieved liberation and are freed themselves from samsara. Why? Because they don’t possess the potential in their mind the cause to take another rebirth a set of aggregates in cyclic existence due to karma and afflictions.
But we said that these arhats who have achieved nirvana with remainder possessed true suffering and also true origins. When we are talked about true origins, generally true origins means the true origin which is karma and true origin which is affliction.  
Do the arhats who have achieved nirvana with remainder with have true origin which is karma? The answer is no. 
Do they have true origin which is affliction? No.
What is this true origin that is possessed by Hearer arhat? 
When this Hearer arhat achieved a nirvana with remainder, I guess probably they do take on a mental body. Upon achieving the nirvana without remainder, they take on a body which is a nature of mind, i.e. literally having a mental nature. In short, we say a mental body. It is said that they also possess that capacity to emanate.
As for the bodhisattva on the Supreme Mundane Qualities (SMQ) level on the Path of Preparation, one achieves the Path of Seeing in one sitting.  When we say in one sitting, it means one body. In this case, the body of the bodhisattva on the SMQ level of the Path of Preparation is true suffering. Since it is in one sitting then he achieves the Path of Seeing on the basis of that support. 
For someone who is of the definite Mahayana lineage, his body on the SMQ level on the Path of Preparation is necessary true suffering. On the basis of that support he moves on to the Path of Seeing. When the Path of Seeing is achieved, it is said that body transforms into mental body. Upon achieving the Path of Seeing, the suffering of birth, aging, sickness and death are abandoned. In this case we are talking about bodhisattvas.
In term of mind generation, there is a way of classifying into four, mind generation of belief.
The mind generation on the Mahayana Path of Accumulation and the Mahayana Path of Preparation is the mind generation of belief or aspiration.
When the Path of Seeing is achieved then the mind generation of that bodhisattva is called the mind generation of pure resolve.
When one achieves the Mahayana Path of Seeing, the bodhisattva directly sees the truth i.e. realizes emptiness directly. 
When the Hearer’s Path of Seeing is achieved? It is also achieved when emptiness is realized directly. So the manner of seeing the emptiness of the Hearer superior Path of Seeing and the bodhisattva superior Path of Seeing are the same, but there is a huge difference in the mind that sees emptiness directly. Although their way of seeing emptiness is the same, as they both realize emptiness directly, but in terms of the quality of the mind, the mind is very different. The difference comes because the bodhisattva superior direct realization of emptiness on the Path of Seeing initially is accompanied by mind generation. When the Mahayana Path of Seeing is achieved, his mind generation becomes more exalted than before. Because of this mind generation which accompany his direct perception of emptiness, the quality of his mind realizing emptiness directly surpasses the mind of the Hearer superior that realizes emptiness directly. 
When the bodhisattva achieves the Path of Seeing for the first time, he sees emptiness directly. It is said this bodhisattva who has just newly sees emptiness directly far outshines the foe destroyers. At that moment when he achieves the Path of Seeing, he far outshines the arhats (foe destroyers). Mind you that the foe destroyers have already abandoned the afflictive obscuration i.e. all afflictions have been abandoned together with the seeds. But this is not the case of the bodhisattva superior who is on the Path of Seeing. But nevertheless this bodhisattva far outshines the arhat. An example is given: no matter how great a minster might be or how high the minister might be, whenever you put the minister besides the king, the king always surpasses and outshine the minister just by fact that he is the king, in the sense, he has the royal blood. 
When the bodhisattva newly achieves the Mahayana Path of Seeing, he sees emptiness directly for the first time. Because of this direct perception of emptiness, he also achieves the elevated state of mind generation. His mind generation becomes the mind generation of pure resolve. Why his mind generation becomes more powerful? Because of the direct perception of the ultimate nature of reality on the Path of Seeing. It is said that the bodhisattva superior on the Path of Seeing achieves the mental body as well.
Can we draw a connection between achieving this special mind generation and taking on the mental body? I am not sure. Is there a connection? 
Can we say that “He has a mental body and is not true suffering because due to mind generation”
It is said that once one has achieved the Mahayana Path of Seeing, one will never ever end up as a senior citizen. So if one doesn’t  want to be a senior citizen, then one has to achieve the Mahayana Path of Seeing.
The description of those inconceivable qualities of the Mahayana grounds are said to be achieved starting from the Mahayana Path of Seeing, and it go all the way up to the 10th ground. If you think about all those qualities that these bodhisattvas are said to possess is something that is very difficult to believe and it cannot just fit the mind. For example, on the 1st ground, bodhisattvas can emanate a hundred bodies, on the 2nd ground a thousand bodies, on the 3rd ground a hundred thousand bodies, and then the numbers get more. The bodhisattva only achieves surpassing practice of the perfection of generosity only on the 1st ground. The ten perfections relate to the bodhisattva achievement of surpassing practice of the different perfections according to the ten grounds.  Starting with the perfection of generosity and the presentation of surpassing practice of perfection of generosity only starts on the 1st ground, and not before that. It is said that the bodhisattvas on the 1st ground (bhumi) are able to give away their own bodies without difficulties. To them it is as easy as giving away a plate of vegetables. Whoever comes along and ask for any parts of the body such as the head, the hand, the leg and so forth, the bodhisattvas will just give away without any difficulties or pain. Prior to the Mahayana Path of Seeing, the bodhisattva does not have this kind of courage or determination. But once the bodhisattva achieves the Mahayana Path of Seeing and enters the 1st ground, with his extraordinary mind generation he is able to give. Because the quality of the mind is so different, he has this surpassing practice of perfection of generosity where there is no difficulty of giving away his body. At this stage, his body has already transformed to a mental body.
I would think that why the bodhisattva support changes into a mental body is because of the extraordinary mind generation which is attained when the Path of Seeing is actualized. This is what I think and I am not sure. Generally question will arise: What happened to the body? Why makes it change and become a mental body? If you really think about it, it is very difficult to explain. I guess there is no real explanation. 
What about if we look at it from the perspective of tantra? From the perspective of Highest Yoga Tantra (HYT), one can achieve enlightenment in one life one body. So when you achieve enlightenment in one life one body, is your body true suffering or not? 
If you achieve enlightenment in one life one body by depending on HYT, then your body is also is true suffering. So Buddha’s body is true suffering!
Student 2: If I recall correctly, last time you mentioned that you achieve mental body due to level of predisposition of ignorance and uncontaminated karma. Am I right to say that? 
Khen Rinpoche: I think we have talked about this when we studied buddha nature, Uttaratantra (Sublime Continuum). The usual presentation of the twelve links of dependent origination is according to the thoroughly afflicted class of phenomena. But there is also a subtle of twelve links of dependent origination that is included in the knowledge obscuration.
If you look at the presentation of the Sublime Continuum, the talk about the mental body that arises from the level of the predisposition of ignorance and uncontaminated karma comes only in the context of the discussion on the three pure grounds. 
So if you go by the presentation of the Sublime Continuum (Uttaratantra) and if the discussion is related to the three pure grounds, then it also saying that it doesn’t happen before the three pure grounds. It is also said in many texts, upon achieving the Mahayana Path of Seeing, the bodhisattva takes on a mental body. That will beget the question: What will be the substantial cause? What do you posit as the substantial cause of the mental body that the bodhisattva on a Path of Seeing acquires? I believed I have settled this as I already gave you my opinion.
What are you going to say about the substantial cause of the mental body that is acquired on the Mahayana Path of Seeing?  Anyway, it is said in the text that when one achieves the Mahayana Path of Seeing, one acquires the mental body. The questions are: Why? What is it? How long? 
Student 3: If the explanation for the samsara is actually this factor of taking rebirth due to karma and affliction, the bodhisattvas on the impure ground don’t have true suffering and also do not take rebirth in this samsara due to karma and affliction and also haven’t abandon afflictive obscuration, so where are these bodhisattvas? They neither in samsara nor in nirvana.  Basically bodhisattvas at the seven impure grounds don’t have true suffering and also don’t take rebirth due to karma and affliction. So in term of that explanation with regard to samsara being a factor of being taking rebirth in cyclic existence due to karma and affliction, the bodhisattvas do not have. They also have not abandoned afflictive obscuration.
Khen Rinpoche: Between there.
Student 3: So there is a location that is neither samsara nor nirvana? That is quite cool.
Khen Rinpoche: There is a place between there. 
Student 3: Serious? You mean that is the answer? Neither nirvana nor..
Khen Rinpoche: Why not?
Khen Rinpoche: Bodhisattva superiors take rebirth in samsara to benefit sentient beings. That is clear, right? But they do not take rebirths due to karma and afflictions. Then how they take rebirth? They take rebirth intentionally, as they wish.
They say that these bodhisattva superiors can take rebirth anywhere in samsara according to their wish. As long as they think they can help someone, they will go. It is said bodhisattvas take all kinds of rebirths such as a bird, an animal or whatever they like. There are many accounts of how Buddha in his past life as a bodhisattva took rebirth as a monkey, bird, deer and also the accounts of how he gave up their lives to help sentient beings. All these were done intentionally and within their control.
Student 3: The second question is about this bodhisattva attaining the Path of Seeing based on the desire realm support.  The need to have strong disenchantment of samsara which is based on the desire realm support, my guess, is because this person still has suffering of suffering. That is why they need the desire realm support. Is that why?
The reason given about why a bodhisattva can only attain a Path of Seeing newly on the basis of desire realm support because they need to have this strong disenchantment of cyclic existence. My guess is because desire realm body has suffering of suffering. Is that the reason?
VenGyurme: My question is “They lost their renunciation?” 
Student 3: Yeah. That is a very strange thing. Because they would have their uncontrived disenchantment of samsara. When we say they need strong disenchantment of samsara, how strong? Why do you need desire realm support? Form and formless realms also have suffering and it is just different. There are also have suffering of change in form realm, and compounded pervasive suffering in formless realm.
Venerable Gyurme: So going by logic, it is not possible to see the Path of Seeing newly in pureland, isn’t it? 
Student 3: Also very strange. If you says the basis of strong disenchantment is based on desire realm body, by the time the person is at the Path of Seeing, the person already have mental body. Then it doesn’t matter what kind of body; it can be desire realm, form realm or whatever realm of mental body. Don’t need the same reason for this strong disenchantment of samsara in order to attain the Path of Meditation. It doesn’t really matter, short or long duration. It cannot also be the reason for short duration as they can emanate to hundreds of purelands. I cannot accept the two reasons of why must have desire realm body to attain the Path of Meditation. 
VenGyurme: So why you take so long to object? Now only you come out.
Student 3: Actually long time already got objections. That time, too many questions. Still have questions.
Student 2: Just now you mentioned about the substantial cause of the mental body. If you take the level of predisposition of ignorance to be imprints that are planted by the apprehensions of the true existence, then the imprints will produce the appearance of true existence. Because there is a appearance of true existence, then it leads to the accumulation of karma. This karma is uncontaminated karma. If uncontaminated karma is accumulated then the effect will be mental body. The cooperative condition is the level of predisposition of ignorance. 
Mu qualm is that if bodhisattva acquired a mental body on the Path of Seeing due to level of predisposition of ignorance and uncontaminated karma. Uncontaminated karma is normally related to the pure grounds 8, 9 or 10, but Path of Seeing is still in the impure ground. 
Khen Rinpoche: When bodhicitta is generated one enters the Mahayana Path of Accumulation. On the Path of Preparation, the bodhisattva has mind generation. Although it is mind generation, it is different. It is not the same mind generation but a more powerful kind. When he goes into the Path of Seeing, the mind generation is even more exalted and more powerful. Likewise, we have to say the same for renunciation. The renunciation would have increased. 
According to Buddhist cosmology, this human world of ours is called the Southern Continent. According to Buddhist cosmology, there are 3 other continents - north, east, and west. They say that of all these four continents, our continent the Southern Continent Jambudvipa (Dzambuling) which is the best environment to generate the paths. It is said it is very difficult to generate the paths in the other human worlds. 
It is said that the humans in the Northern Continent, Uttarakuru (Draminyen) have definite life span of 1,000 years. They are all financially equitable i.e. equally rich. It is said that they have about the same level of wealth and enjoyments. There is no poverty.   In the East Continent Purvavideha (Lüpakpo) and West Continent Aparagodaniya (Balangchö), the lifespan is fixed for 500 years, and they also have enjoyment and wealth. As such, it is difficult for the path to be generated in the continuum in those worlds. The humans and god realm supports included in the desire realm is said to be the best support for generating the paths. In particular, the human support of the Southern Continent is very much the basis for generating the paths. Because the lifespan is not definite here, enjoyment is not definite, and suffering is obvious (as one see one’s own suffering and other’s suffering), as such it is easier to develop renunciation. From the perspective of tantra, the human body of the Southern Continent is the supreme basis because the human body of the Southern Continent is made up of the six constituents. 
When it is said one newly attained path in the form realm but not newly attained supramundane path, that means no Path of Seeing. 
In order to newly attain the Path of Seeing, one need not just renunciation but a very strong form of renunciation. As such, the form realm support is not the support to newly attain a Path of Seeing as there is not enough disenchantment. You need a very strong renunciation to newly attain the Path of Seeing. By the virtue of the support, the beings in the form realm cannot newly attain the Path of Seeing, i.e. they have limited support of the existence. . 
Vasubandhu wrote in the Abhidharmakosa that one cannot newly attain the Path of Seeing in the higher realm because of the lack of disenchantment. That is the sign. That is the reason he posits.
Khen Rinpoche: Based on this logic, you have to think deeper, why. You can be more clever than Vasubandhu. You have a question or answer. Did you say something just now?
VenGyurme: He is saying how the bodhisattva on the Path of Seeing accumulates uncontaminated karma. 
Student 2: Does Path of Seeing still got the contaminated karma?
Khen Rinpoche: You have probably have to say they do accumulate uncontaminated karma.  Do they accumulate karma? Yes. Do they accumulate contaminated karma? No
If we say they accumulate uncontaminated karma, what motivate them? Do the bodhisattvas on Path of Seeing accumulate uncontaminated karma that is motivated by the level of the predisposition of ignorance?  Is it the level of the predisposition of ignorance motivate them? 
If you say that the bodhisattvas on the seven impure grounds do accumulate uncontaminated karma, then you must account for what it is that motivates that accumulation. If you say that it is due to the level of the predisposition of ignorance, is there any fault or not? 
It is clear at the three pure grounds, the bodhisattvas accumulate uncontaminated karma due to the level of predisposition of ignorance. So there is no argument about that. 
We have to think whether the bodhisattva superiors on the seven impure grounds undergo the inconceivable transference of death that happens due to uncontaminated karma which comes about in dependence upon the level of predisposition of ignorance. You have to think whether it happens or not. 
It is clear that these happen on the three pure grounds that they do undergo the inconceivable transference of death that as the result of the uncontaminated karma accumulate in dependence upon on the level of predisposition of ignorance. Can we say also the same for all the seven impure grounds? If we say yes, is there any fault?  
Student 4: What is the cause for someone to be of definite Mahayana lineage? What determines whether one is of definite Mahayana lineage or not. Because the knower of bases that is distant from the mother is someone who is not of Mahayana lineage. 
VenGyurme: Are you asking “Is it pre-determined? Can a definite person be made or trained or is it pre-determined like in the nature of the person? 
Khen Rinpoche: Can somebody, a senior in the BP class talk? Can talk something. I need to think a little bit. While I am thinking you can talk. 
First thing, I don’t think it is pre-determined since beginningless lifetime, that means this person is definitely will enter the Mahayana path and not anything else. It is not something like if you have it, means you have it, and if you don’t have it, means you don’t have it. It is not like that.
We talked about the activation of the Mahayana lineage. When is the Mahayana lineage activated? When great compassion arises and is generated in the heart, then that person’s Mahayana lineage is activated.  
As for the person who has activated the Mahayana lineage, there are two. One who is of the definite Mahayana lineage. It is possible to say that that person who has activated the Mahayana lineage could be also someone who is not definitely of the Mahayana lineage. 
As for the person who has awakened the Mahayana lineage and has generated great compassion and if his pledge or determination to achieve full enlightenment is very stable, i.e. he has irreversible faith, pretty much like those of sharp faculty, who has very strong determination and unchanging resolve to achieve full enlightenment for sentient beings. As it is so stable, he is definite to enter the Mahayana path and not entering any other path before that. Once he has entered the Mahayana path, he will proceeds to enlightenment. So I guess whether a person is of the definite Mahayana lineage or not comes down to the resolve in the heart, how strong and how stable it is. 
I am not sure whether you can explain those of the definite Mahayana lineage to be someone who generates bodhicitta and enter the Mahayana path. I wonder whether it is sufficient to say that if you generate bodhicitta and enter the Mahayana path, then you definitely are of the definite Mahayana lineage. Obviously not! Because some people may fall down. But I guess if the person’s resolve is very stable and enters the path and generate bodhicitta and never gives it up, nothing changes their mind completely and dedicated to enlightenment, then you can say this person is of definite Mahayana lineage. 
I think to become a person of definite Mahayana lineage requires to work of many lifetimes. Not just thinking about it in one lifetime. Rather it is a result of training which then leads to planting many imprints in the mind for many lifetimes to become very strong and stable. I don’t think it is something that just happens in one lifetime like you do something and then suddenly ‘I am of the definite Mahayana lineage’.  I think one of the conditions for someone to become of definite Mahayana lineage need very strong imprints of Mahayana.
So if we make strong prayers and generate strong determination and aspirations for enlightenment, and make as many imprints as possible over time to reduce the self-cherishing, and to increase more and more the thoughts of benefiting others, and by putting all these conditions together and work at it for lives, then there is hope to be someone who is of definite Mahayana lineage. Otherwise it is very difficult. 
Sunday BP Discussion on 28 Aug 2016
Q1. Is the attainment of the knower of path necessarily preceded by the attainment of the knower of who has activated the Mahayana lineage bases?
Q2. Of the 10 topics that characterize the exalted knower of aspects, why is the mind generation the first? 
Q3. Are there bodhisattvas who have realized the emptiness who fall into the Hinayana path?
My questions are not for you to come and say yes or no. It doesn’t matter whether yes or no. You must explain why you put yes or no.
Q4. From the perspective of sutra, can you achieve Buddhahood on the basis of the desire realm support? 
You must think before you answer.  Whether you say yes or no, you must explain.
Q5. It is taught that the roots of virtue of oneself and others accumulated in the three times are the substance to be dedicated in the dedication. How does our dedication of the roots of virtues of others transform those roots of virtues into the cause of enlightenment?
Q6. What does achieving steadiness with respect to the aspects of the three exalted knowers mean?
Q7. How does one enters into the four noble truths through the meditation of the close placements of mindfulness?  In particular how does one engage in true cessation when one meditates on the close mindfulness of mind?
Q8. It is taught in the teachings that every single virtue in our continuum is the result of the wisdom truth body acting as the empowering condition. How?
(We all do develop virtuous thoughts. It could be new kind of virtuous thoughts. Whatever illustration you can find in your own life, you can use as an illustration and explain how that new or special virtuous thought is the doing of the wisdom truth body. You have to think about it to see how it works. Perhaps it can bring you closer to Buddha.)
Q9. Is there something that is just one of those 8 categories, something that is just 2, just 3, just 4, up to 6 of those categories? If you can find 7 or 8 categories, that is wonderful.
The point of this exercise is to get a clearer idea what the 8 categories are. 
Actually this discussion is mandatory and you have to come for discussion. That is why we have BP groups and you are assigned to one group and each group is taken care of by one person. 
You just finish whatever number of questions this Sunday. Just try what you can.