Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/lesson10.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:51.172683
================================================================================

(One student presented her chosen verse from Chapter 8 of Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds as part of the exam process)
Khen Rinpoche: What she talked about the drawing, the conclusion is that if you train, you will able to carry the elephant. Something like that. The drawing is that how small you are, if you train, then you are able to carry the elephant. I see the drawing as like that. As she mentioned, we all know that if we put effort in anything, we will be able to achieve something. I think I have mentioned long time ago. I think in 2004 or 2005, I went to America, New Mexico for two months to study English. The teacher who taught us knows Buddhist philosophy. He is a lay person. That time he mentioned to me that he can read Tibetan but he can’t really speak. He can read and can understand Tibetan. Also he knows all the definition by heart. He mentioned how he memorized all the definitions by just like chanting Om Mani Padme Hung. Each definition, I don’t know how to express in English, he read the definition 101 times. Each definition he did like that. In this way, he memorized the definition. So he can tell everything by heart. Of course, one week you can memorized, and after one week you forget. Of course after one week, you have to memorize again. After one month you have to memorize again. After six months you have to memorize again. You cannot keep it there. Today I remember, but it doesn’t stay forever. After one week, you check whether you still remember or not. If you still remember, it is quite stable. After one week you check, you still remember or not. If not, then have to memorize. It goes like month, year, year after year, until ten years if you could remember, then it is quite stable. Sometimes we remember any kind of topic, definition for one week, one day. If you don’t memorize it again but just leave it there, then slowly you will totally forget. If you memorize that, week or months like that, it will become more stable in your mind. After one year, and after two years, it becomes very stable and able to remember. Even you forget, somebody says one word, then immediately you can remember. So you need a lot of effort to remember the thing and also remember the topic. This is one way and there is no other technique. Also to remind oneself again and again. This way tobe able to remember like that. This topic is challenging and so difficult at time. I understand why this is difficult because I can’t give every details now. It is not possible. I just giving some overview like the picture such as overview of the 70 topics. Just give some idea. But don’t expect to know each and every 70 topics right now. It is not possible. Just some idea. What are the 70 topics, why so much, what is there to learn so much on this topic? Just give some idea.
Knower of paths
We were at the 5th topic of the Knower of Paths -the function or the effect of the Mahayana Path of Meditation. On the 6th topic, one goes into the discussion of the Mahayana Path of Meditation of belief.
The 5th topic - the function or effect of the Mahayana Path of Meditation -has six divisions. The fifth is the ability to achieve enlightenment. The bodhisattva on this level have entered into the path leading to enlightenment, and they are traveling towards enlightenment with the special practice of unifying method and wisdom. Because of this particular practice, it is said that wherever they reside, that place becomes a place that is worthy of worship. The reason why the place where a bodhisattva on the Path of Meditation resides becomes a place of worship is mainly due to their practice of the perfections, especially the Perfection of Wisdom.
This topic Mahayana Path of Meditation of belief comes as a side discussion, is the sixth topic of the function of the Mahayana Path of Meditation. I thought to say this. In the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, the king of gods, Indra, asked the Buddha: “Which brings about greater merits -writing down the words of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra and after having written it down, one makes offerings of garlands, flowers, unguents, parasols, victory banners and so forth, versus making the same offerings to the relics of tathagata?”
After being asked this question by Indra, Buddha then turned to Kushika and asked him what he think. Kushika thought about it and he asked Indra, “What do you think? Where did the tathagata come from? What practice did he do? What did he depend upon through which he became a tathagata?”
Indra thought about it and said “One becomes a tathagata and achieves the omniscience through practicing and actualizing the Perfection of Wisdom. It is through the Perfection of Wisdom that one becomes inconceivable, one becomes equal to the unequal, and one becomes unsurpassed.”
Then Indra asked Buddha “Even if all sentient beings were to write down the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra and make offerings of unguent, flowers, garlands, victory banners, parasol and so forth, what is the purpose of doing that?”
Then Kushika replied “It is difficult for those who are lazy, who do not have joyous perseverance, who has faulty wisdom, and who don’t have high aspirationto achieve full enlightenment. Therefore, those who want to achieve enlightenment should strive to honor the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra by writing and making offerings and so forth.”
If you remember in one of the earlier classes, when the Perfection of Wisdom Sutrais terminologically divided, there are four:
Natural Perfection of Wisdom, 
Scriptural Perfection of Wisdom (posited as the text or sutra containing the words and teachings of the Buddha on this topic)
Path Perfection of Wisdom
Resultant Perfection of Wisdom
If one writes out the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, honors it, worships it, and makes offerings of flowers, unguents, garlands, victory banners and so forth, then one will accumulate great amount of merits. Through that one will come to actualize or realize the Path Perfection of Wisdom, and through that, one will be able to achieve the state of unsurpassed full enlightenment.
This is kind of encouragement for those who are lazy, who lacked joyous perseverance and who don’t have high aspiration.  There are so many virtuous actions or practices that we do physically and verbally such as reciting mantras and sutras, even studying and so forth. Whatever it is, we should hold in mind that one of the purposes for doing these practices is to actualize the Path Perfection of Wisdom one day. That is why we need to accumulate merits..We need to accumulate merit as we need to purify our mind. That is why we engage in prostrations, reciting mantras and texts and so forth. We need to keep this in mind.
It is very important to work towards actualizing the Path Perfection of Wisdom. Until we generate the Path Perfection of Wisdom in our own mental continuum, it is going to be difficult for us to overcome the root of samsara. Also without this Path Perfection of Wisdom, it is impossible for us to achieve the states of full enlightenment (omniscience).Until we realize selflessness, essentially emptiness, we will not be able to cut the root of our own samsara and we will not be able to stop taking rebirths in samsara. Hence forth, whatever practice we engage in and whatever virtues we accumulate, we should do so with the goal of actualize the Path Perfection of Wisdom in our own minds.
We may spend our lives reciting many mantras, and we may be able to gather great number of recitation in our lives. In fact some people do managed to recite tens of millions of mantra in their lives, even hundred millions this mantra and hundred millions that mantra. Yes, one does accumulate quite a fair bit of merit if one managed to recite that many mantra.Even though one may accumulate some merits from having recited so many mantras, but those tens of millions of mantrathat one may have recited will not even come close to touching the root of samsara. 
We may spend our livesputting a lot of effort into our daily recitation of this prayers and that prayers but doing that alone also will not even come close to touching the root of all our problem – ignorance. Even those people who do a lot of meditation every day, maybe for 5 to 6 hours, no matter how profound the meditation it may be, and no matter how stable the concentration he might be able to focus his mind without any distractions for hours and hours, it itself is not big deal. Forget about harming, it will not even touch the root of samsara. The point I am trying to make is that it is not correct just to be content with doing practice of focusing on prayer and recitation for a whole life time. We should not be content of just doing the practice that is just physical or verbal such as some kind of recitation or prayer. The whole point of doing these practices is that it should motivate and contribute to the achieving the Path Perfection of Wisdom one day. You have to understand the importance of the purpose of actualizing the Path Perfection of Wisdom, which is essentially the wisdom realizing selflessness or wisdom realizes emptiness. Here, in particular, we are not just talking about any wisdom realizing emptiness but we are talking about Path Perfection of Wisdom. We are talking about the wisdom that sees the ultimate nature of reality - wisdom realizing emptiness that is conjoined with mind generation (bodhicitta). This is where our effortshould be directed at. At the end of the day, this is what we should be aiming for this. This is the main purpose of whatever practice we do.
As I have said earlier, we accumulate a lot of merits when we write out the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra and then honors and worship it with offerings like garlands, flowers, unguents parasol, and victory banners and so forth. The main reason is that the Path Perfection of Wisdom is generated in dependence upon the Scriptural Perfection of Wisdom, which is contained in the words that make up the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra. With the motivation holding onto the motivation of quickly actualizing the Path Perfection of Wisdom in our own lives and write out the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra and honors it and worship it with flowers, garlands, unguents, parasols, victory banners and so forth, we will accumulate a lot of merits. It will become a favorable condition for us to actualize the Path Perfection of Wisdom. At the same time, we engage in learning about emptiness, engage in reflection, learning about emptiness and then reflecting to gain an understanding of it.
The Path Perfection of Wisdom is generated in dependence upon the Scriptural Perfection of Wisdom. That is why we venerate and highly respect the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra. When there is a sutra around, it is important to honor it and respect it.
As Shantideva said in the Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deed,:
“For one who is seeking to achieve enlightenment, both the Buddha and the sentient beings are equally important.” You need both to achieve enlightenment. 
If we are just respecting Buddha but not the sentient beings then Shantideva ask” “Why is that so?” This is because we need both to achieve enlightenment.
As such, Shantideva said we should respect the sentient beings just as we would respect the Buddha because we need both to achieve enlightenment.
As mentioned in earlier lessons that there are:
- contaminated Path of Meditation and 
- uncontaminated Path of Meditation. 
Here the Mahayana Path of Meditation of belief is a contaminated Path of Meditation. 
What defines contaminated and uncontaminated in this context? 
There are conceptual and non-conceptual consciousnesses. 
Here the contaminated Path of Meditation are Path of Meditation which are conceptual. 
As for the difference between a non-conceptual and a conceptual consciousness, there is no need to repeat that again as this was already covered in the module of Mind and Awareness.
The word contaminated in general means to be accompanied with defilements (afflictions).  When we say that there is Path of Meditation which are contaminated and some which are uncontaminated, you should not take the general meaning of contaminated and apply in this context here. 
In this context, contaminated refers to Path of Meditation which are conceptual in entity (nature). 
An uncontaminated Path of Meditation are those Path of Meditation which are non-conceptual in nature (entity).
Of the three contaminated Mahayana Path of Meditation, the first it the Mahayana Path of Meditation of belief. 
Why does this come first? Because if there is belief then there is the accumulation of merit. It is said in the Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds that the root of all virtues is belief (translated as aspiration). The root of aspiration is meditating on cause and effect.
The word belief can mean different things. Here the belief is related to aspiration and in particularly related with faith. Within the different kinds of faith, it is the faith of conviction.
Here in this context, belief is more like this faith of conviction. From our study of mental factor, the mental factor of belief is one of the five object ascertaining mental factor. 
Belief is a mental factor which is a mind that is certain of the fact that one hasalready realized with a valid cognition. The certainty is such that one knows it is this and not anything else, it cannot be anything else, and it is like that. That is the mental factor of belief.
What are the objects of the Mahayana Path of Meditation of belief? 
They are the Scriptural Perfection of Wisdom, the Path Perfection of Wisdom and the Resultant Perfection of Wisdom. 
The main object of this Mahayana Path of Meditation of belief is not the Path Perfection of Wisdom but rather is the Resultant Perfection of Wisdom. This is similar to what was stated at the beginning of this text that the actual Perfection of Wisdom is the Resultant Perfection of Wisdom, and is not the Natural Perfection of Wisdom, not the Scriptural Perfection of Wisdom and not the Path Perfection of Wisdom.
The main object of the Mahayana Path of Meditation of belief is the Resultant Perfection of Wisdom. With this as the object, the Mahayana Path of Meditation of belief is an ascertainment or a beliefthat this Resultant Perfection of Wisdom has the potential or power to fulfill one’s aim, to fulfill one’s and others’ aims, and to fulfill others’ aims.So it is this faith of conviction that the Resultant Perfection of Wisdom has the power to fulfill one’s own aims, one’s and others’aims and others’ aims.  
How does one generate this kind of belief, which is a faith of conviction? What is the method? 
The method is scriptural authority and reasoning.
What are the function of this faith of conviction (belief) in the Resultant Perfection of Wisdom’s power to fulfill one’s aims, both aims and others’ aim?
Essentially, one will accumulate immeasurable heaps of merits.
Through cultivating the Mahayana Path of Meditation of belief, then comes the beneficial qualities of the Path of Meditation of belief, which when divided there are three sets of nine things:
The nine praises, 
The nine eulogies 
The nine laudations.
Due to cultivating the Mahayana Path of Meditation of belief, then one accumulates immeasurable heaps of merits. Due to that then comes to be praises. Because of cultivating the Mahayana Path of Meditation of belief, the praises come because of having this immeasurable amount of merits. So even one is not looking for it or one doesn’t desire or not interested in it, but it comes for these bodhisattvas.
Even if we desirepraise, it doesn’t come. Not only does it not come, but sometimes in place of praise, criticisms come. This happens because of not having merit; not just merit but not having a lot of merits.
One of the beneficial qualities of the Path of Meditation of belief is that there are praises, eulogies and laudations. Why do the praises come for these bodhisattvas? Because they have accumulated immeasurable heaps of merits. If that is the case, then the opposite must be that if one doesn’t get praise, this mean one doesn’t have merits.
Next is the Path of Meditation of dedication.
Through the Mahayana Path of Meditation of belief the bodhisattva accumulates immeasurable heaps of merits. Because he has a heap of merits and so strong roots of virtue, next is the dedications. 
What dedication does is it transforms the collection of merits into a cause for enlightenment. In order for there to be a dedication of merits, there must be a substance to be dedicated. 
What is the substance that is to be dedicated by dedication? 
It is all the roots of virtues of the three times.
Khen Rinpoche:  You know three times?
The substance to be dedicated is all the roots of virtues of that three times. Within that, there are one’s own root of virtues, and the roots of virtues of others.
Dedication is a mind. Essentially dedication is a mind that transforms the roots of virtues of the three times of oneself and others into a cause of enlightenment. That is what dedication is. It is a particular mind.
Question: If that is the meaning of dedication, then how does dedication transform the roots of virtue of others into a cause of enlightenment? 
If we are talking about our own roots of virtue, since we own it, then it is not difficult to see how one can transform those roots of virtue into a cause of enlightenment. 
Question: How does dedication transform the roots of virtue of others into a cause of enlightenment? 
In the first place, is it possible that we dedicate the roots of virtue of others? 
If it is possible, that means that one can necessarily transform others’ roots of virtue into a cause of one’s own enlightenment, right? In layman English, I use your merit for my enlightenment. 
Student 1: From my own simple understanding of why we can use the virtue of others for our own enlightenment, this is because, as you mentioned just now, Shantideva said to be enlightened we need sentient beings to be enlightened. So if we need sentient beings to be enlightened, why not use their virtues to be enlightened also? That is the extension of my thinking of why the virtues of sentient beings can be dedicated as a cause of enlightenment. You need the sentient beings to be a fully enlightened Buddha; the bodhichitta to work with them to become a Buddha. Because that done virtues, by riding so to speak on their virtues, you use as aspiration to become a fully enlightened Buddha. That is my understanding of this statement. Correct? I don’t know.
Ven Gyurme: So you are saying that Shantideva said that we can usesentient beings? 
(Student response inaudible)
It is not so much to do with aspiration or rejoicing. The meaning translation is this: how do you dedicate somebody else’s virtue? 
Let’s say now there are bodhisattva superiors who possess this Mahayana Path of Meditation of dedication. Are you saying that these beings have been and are still dedicating our merit now as a cause for enlightenment? 
Question: Can we dedicate somebody else’s virtue?That means you create merit then somebody comes along and dedicate for you? 
Student 2: Maybe by first exchanging oneself for others then we can dedicate other person’s virtue. But it would require first exchanging oneself with others.
Ven Gyurme: So the bodhisattva hasn’t exchanged yet? Why is he a bodhisattva? 
Student 2: I don’t understand. The only way you can dedicate someone else’s virtue for your own enlightenment, I think, is you would have to first exchange yourself with others. 
Khen Rinpoche: It is interesting. I don’t know. Need to think more.
Student 3: Let’s say the bodhisattva is already on the Path of Meditation, they have already seen emptiness directly. There is no self and other. So it is actually selfless. That is why they can dedicate merit of self and others. Actually it is selfless.
Khen Rinpoche: Anybody has different idea?
Student 4: In the seven limbs prayer, there is rejoicing in other people’s merit, like your own merit as well as other people’s merit. So I think it is possible to dedicate other people’s virtue because at the end of the seven limb prayer, you do like sort of a collective dedication and within that dedication it includes that rejoicing part of your own merit and other people’s merit. I do think it is possible to dedicate other people’s merit. 
Khen Rinpoche: Can we transform the virtue of others into a cause of enlightenment or not? The main point of dedication is to transform the roots of virtue into a cause of enlightenment. 
Question: Can we transform somebody else’s virtue into a cause of enlightenment? 
Student 5: Can I clarify: Are you transforming into enlightenment of our self or enlightenment of them? I think maybe not possible to use their virtue and transform into their enlightenment. I think this is not possible.  Because if not Buddha, would have done it to us. 
Khen Rinpoche: What you say? I didn’t get you. 
Student 5: The question is whether the virtue of otherstransforming into enlightenment. But whose enlightenment? My enlightenment or their enlightenment, right? So there are two possibilities. So I’m saying the possibility of transforming their virtue into their enlightenment.  I think this is not possible.
Khen Rinpoche: That is not possible? 
Student 5: Not possible 
Khen Rinpoche: The other one possible?
Student 5: That one is a question still. But that is not possible with the reason because Buddha would have done it to all of us. He would have transform all our virtue for our enlightenment already. But yet there is still samsara. 
Khen Rinpoche: Second one also not possible then?
Student 2: I don’t know. That is still a question. I haven’t figure it out yet
Khen Rinpoche: I mean it is interesting. Sometimes we say, dedicate dedicate but….
Student 6: If I were to dedicate the merit of other beings’ into enlightenment, I would be thinking like by virtue of sentient beings’ merit, may it be a cause for them to have a connection with me, so that when I become Buddha, due to the merit they have accumulated, this merit that they accumulated will not be wasted to be resulted into other worldly things. May the sentient beings’ merit be dedicated to enlightenment. By this dedication may I have the connection with them so that when I become Buddha I will be able to guide them into enlightenment.
Khen Rinpoche: I didn’t get you everything.
What you have just said is essentially no different from dedicating the roots of virtue of others for your own enlightenment or for their enlightenment.Even if you do dedicate it for your own enlightenment, you are achieving enlightenment for their purpose. 
Is it possible to dedicate the roots of virtue of others for your own enlightenment? 
Our enlightenment is for others, right? Is it possible or not to dedicate the roots of virtue of others?  
Student 7: I’m just thinking like we are making the assumption that when these sentient beings in virtue, they have actually dedicated their merit already.
Khen Rinpoche: Not necessary.
Student 7: Yeah, so it’s not necessarily so,right? Actually I’m dedicating the merit, if they have not dedicated it anyway, it sounds terrible, I’m doing them a favor. The thing about dedication is we are always told that the reason we dedicate is to give a sense of direction to the merit that we have generated; directing it towards a particular goal. 
The main question now: Is it is alright to dedicate the roots of virtue of others towards your own enlightenment? 
We can say “I dedicate all roots of virtue of others for my enlightenment, ” does it actually contribute to your enlightenment or not? 
Khen Rinpoche: So that is the question. You have to answer on that. 
Student 7: My thinking when this discussion was taking place was I keep on thinking about Rinpoche’s advice that when we dedicate our merit, we dedicate merit of the three times of myself, sentient beings and all the buddhas and bodhisattvas. 
Ven Gyurme: We know. Just yes or no. 
Student 7: The answer is yes. Because my own merit is not enough to get me there so I need other people’s merit. 
Are you not a thief?
Student 7: No, I don’t think. 
Khen Rinpoche: Now is whether you are robbing from other people’s merit or not? 
Student 7: Sorry, we are not kind of like stealing their merit. 
Ven Gyurme: This doesn’t even involve a piece of paper.
Student 7: No but I don’t think the motivation is to kind of steal their merit for my own gratification. 
Ven Gyurme: It doesn’t matter, is it stealing or not? Because it’s taking something that is not given. Yes or no? Just answer the question. 
Khen Rinpoche: That merit doesn’t belong to you. You didn’t work hard for that merit. Then you just use up others’ merit. You have to answer now. 
Ven Gyurme: Yes or not? Stealing or not? 
Student: No, I don’t think so.
It belongs to others, it doesn’t belong to us. That is why it’s called others’ merit.
Student 7: For example, when we make offerings, we are offering those that belong to ourselves and making offerings of others like when we visualize offerings of other people’s altar as well. Is that stealing then? 
Ven Gyurme: We are not supposed to do that. If we have no permission we are not supposed to do that. 
It is not correct. It is incorrect to visualize offering things that belong to others if you have not been given permission. It is wrong. You are not supposed to do that anyway in our offering practice. 
Student 7: Yeah, fundamentally I do not agree that it is a form of stealing. 
It is not correct to make offerings of things on the altar of somebody without any permission. 
Student 7: Right. 
Why it is not correct? What’s the reason?
Student 7: I think this thing with the issue with merit there is always exception to the rule. I think if you going to use their merit. Number one, many people who do virtue may not have the benefit of learning the Dharma, and even knows how to dedicate. They probably just did virtue and then next moment they have anger and the merit has disappeared.
Khen Rinpoche: Then you come and dedicate for them.
Student 7: Yeah, I’m helping them dedicate. I’m helping protect their merit. I don’t see that as a form of stealing. 
Khen Rinpoche: Who don’t dedicate she will come. 
Student 7: The enlightenment is actually at the end of the day for their benefit. It is not for my benefit. Yes, ultimately my goal is not to work for my own benefit. I don’t feel that it should be for one’s own benefit. It’s really for others, to repay the kindness of others. If we don’t have that idea in our minds then….
Ven Gyurme: That’s not the dispute.
Student 7: Like I said I don’t think it’s a form of stealing.
Student 8: So perhaps if you think that something is common property like the lights that belongs to the citizens of Singapore, you take that light and visualize the light, that becomes common property, then it will not become stealing. If it is private property, if you take it, of course it becomes stealing. So if it is common property, then how do we think about merits being common property that does not become stealing? So if you think about what we learnt in the tathagata essence, it says in verse 27 “A perfect Buddha’s body is pervasive, suchness is without differentiation”. So without differentiation and all sentient beings merit are carried along with them by their clear light mind. The clear light mind being the carrier of merit or imprints, both virtuous and non-virtuous. If it is without differentiation, you understand that the ultimate nature is emptiness, perhaps with the clear light mind being so-called common property, and that being the carrier of merit. If we take that the clear light mind, it is a different thing in Tantra which is the most subtle clear light mind. If we take that as the merit and dedicate it towards enlightenment, I think you are taking all sentient beings merit towards dedicating for you as your own merit to become enlighten. Common property number one. Number two how is that common property? Clear light mind is without differentiation. Clear light mind is a carrier of imprints. So maybe can understand in that sense? 
Khen Rinpoche: Anyway, 0pen for discussion. You just say whatever you like to say. Please come and say. It’s good.
Student 9: My answer is yes, it is because it is to fulfill the aims of oneself and others and it is also to fulfill the aims of others. Right before this, we are looking at the Mahayana Path of Meditation of belief which Khen Rinpoche just explained to be aspiration which is mainly faith of conviction. It is the bodhisattva practice andit starts with making aspiration and coming down to oneself as ordinary people. We too generate that aspiration. That is why we make that dedication prayer basically, which it is in the Medicine Buddha practice, dedicating the virtues of oneself and others to the great enlightenment. If not, then it doesn’t make sense if we make that prayer every day. But the answer is yes because it is to fulfil the aims of others.
Khen Rinpoche: I’m saying the prayer doesn’t make sense. I’m saying that now. 
Student 9: But we are trying to make it make sense. 
Khen Rinpoche: I’m asking the question - the prayer doesn’t make sense, then why are you doing this prayer?
It doesn’t make sense. It doesn’t work.
Ven Gyurme: Because he can say the prayers can be subject to interpretations. How are you going to argue?
Student 10: I was thinking in terms of dedicating one’s roots of virtue and other sentient beings’ roots of virtue into a cause for collective enlightenment. I was looking at it in terms of cause and effect. At the time of the cause of one’s dedication, one not only dedicate one’s roots of virtue but also others’ roots of virtue for their enlightenment and also for my own enlightenment. That means that if you compare dedicating one’s roots of virtue alone and dedicating one’s roots of virtue combined with other sentient beings’ roots of virtue into a cause of our collective enlightenment, so at the time of dedication, that mind is a more expansive and is a more vast mind compared to dedicating only one’s roots of virtue for one’s enlightenment. That is how I interpret that there is no stealing of other people’s merit in that sense because the dedication of one’s roots of virtue and other sentient beings’ roots of virtue is for our collective enlightenment. 
Ven Gyurme: So you are saying it works?
Student 10: Yes
Khen Rinpoche: Okay. Works or not we see next class. Hope it works.