Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/lesson16.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:50.740680
================================================================================

If you have thought about the question which I have asked in the last lesson about whether the physical environment is true suffering or not, and if you have opinion for it, please come up to the mic. The physical environment is the place where sentient beings live, is that true suffering? 
Khen Rinpoche: Seniors in dharma knowledge, please come and say something. The answer is either yes or not. But it is not just that, whatever you said yes or not, the why is important.
Student 1: Yes, this is because it is a product of karma and afflictions.
Khen Rinpoche: Can explain deeper than that or that is it?
Student 1:  Which results in appearances to the sentient beings both in terms of his…..Well, they are all belonging to his aggregates. It is explained that the aggregates of the environment belongs to the fourth aggregate of the consciousness. I am not really sure about that. It is included in that. Where do they assert that, I am not very sure, but it is in one of the four aggregates.
Khen Rinpoche: What, can you repeat?
Student 1: Appearances to the sentient beings includes the environment that he is born into is the result of his past actions – karma and his afflictions.
Khen Rinpoche: Anybody has any other answer? You agree with that?
Student2: I think that not all things around us are true suffering, Those that give us feelings especially pleasant feelings are the conditions for attachment, craving and grasping which in turn nourishes the seeds of karma and that gives it the power and issue forth the contaminated appropriated aggregates. So not everything. 
Khen Rinpoche: Only pleasant things?
Student 2: Any feelings, but specifically pleasant feelings. Anything that cause the experience of feelings especially pleasant feelings. This is true suffering.
Khen Rinpoche: Cause of feeling? Anything that cause the arousal of feelings, you are saying that?
Student2: Yes, including pleasant feelings. Not only pleasant feelings, but pleasant feelings in particular.
Ven Gyurme: Are you saying that there are somethings that don’t give rise to feelings? There are certain things that would not cause us to have any feelings?
Khen Rinpoche: Give me one example?
Student 2: Space. Nirvana. No feelings.
Ven Gyurme: You think of space, no feelings? No neutral feeling?
Student 2: No feeling. At the moment yes.
Khen Rinpoche: When you see very cloudy day for one month with no sun, very cloudy, and moody day. Then one day, sunshine, you see the blue sky. Do you feel happy or not?
Student2: This is no space. This is weather.
Khen Rinpoche: You don’t see the blue sky?	
Student 2: Yes, I have feeling for the sky but not for the space.
Khen Rinpoche: You see the blue space, isn’t it? You enjoy the space, no?
Student 2: I have no feeling for free space. I have feeling for sky, cloud, weather, but no feeling for free space.
Ven Gyurme: You like big house or small house?
Student2: I like big house, but it is not space. It is not space, it is a big house. Okay?
Khen Rinpoche: Not okay. When you see the blue sky, you see the sky? You enjoy, isn’t it? 
Student2: Yes, I see the sky. Yes I do enjoy it.
Khen Rinpoche: You happy, isn’t it? You enjoy means you are happy. Happy means happy feeling arise, isn’t it?
Student 2: Yes, but as I said it is not space, it is sky. Yes, to me it is not space. It is sky.
Khen Rinpoche: What is the difference between space and sky?
Student 2: Space is where nothing exist, where is nothing. Empty space, no object at all. That to me is space. No object, free space, no sky, nothing.
Ven Gyurme: So what is in the sky? If there are things in the sky, can the plane move through or not?
Student 2: Yes, but space is where there is no sky, nothing. Nothingness.
Ven Gyurme: Okay, then you go out of the planet earth, so is space?
Student 2: Space to me is like an abstraction, like triangle or sphere.
Ven Gyurme: So therefore don’t give you feeling? Triangle don’t give you feeling?
Student 2: For instance, yes. But space even less feeling. Okay?
Khen Rinpoche: So space no feeling. Sky you have feeling.
Student 2: Sky I have feeling.
Khen Rinpoche: You feel the sky but you don’t the space?
Student 2: Yes, To me is different.
Khen Rinpoche: For me, it is the opposite. I enjoy the space but I don’t know how to enjoy the sky. For me is like that, different way.
Student 2: I have not feeling towards space.
Khen Rinpoche: You are able to move because of the space. It is not about the sky. Because of the space you are able to enjoy the move. If there is no space, you are not able to move, then how are you going to enjoy?
Student 2: I have never thought about it. So now I have a feeling. Yes, now I am suffering. Space makes me suffer.
Ven Gyurme: Good that he accepts.
Khen Rinpoche: I think for me is opposite. Space is something we can use. When you say sky, this is just the label. On the space you label the sky, and there is nothing else. Is space, we can use. Because there is space, dark, light happens. If there is no space, there is no darkness, no light. Space we can use. I don’t know whether is object of attachment or not, this is the discussion about that.
Student 2: So space is suffering.
Khen Rinpoche: Everything is suffering. Left to right is suffering, up to down is suffering. Where we live, nothing is perfect. No?
Student 2: I have to think about it.
Our contaminated appropriated aggregates are very good example of true suffering. It is very clear that it is true suffering. On the basis of these contaminated appropriated aggregates, we are born, we have to die, and we have to suffer aging, sickness and so forth. That is clear and there is no dispute about that. We utilize many things in our lives. Whatever objects we utilize can be categorized under the five types of form - visible form, sound, smell, taste and touch. The main question is: Are these true suffering or not?
When I think about it, I would say that for us ordinary beings who are under the control of our karma and afflictions, the objects of utilization of beings like ourselves, whether is form, sound, smell, taste or touch, we have to say all these are true suffering.
If we think along the line that these objects of utilization of us ordinary beings who are under the control of karma and afflictions induces suffering in us, then when we come into contact whenever we utilize them, they cause suffering in us. Because of that reason, perhaps it is better to say that the objects of utilization of us ordinary beings are all true suffering.
During the time when one is an ordinary being under the control of karma and afflictions, things that appear to this individual like forms and so forth are considered true suffering. But when an individual’s mind is separated from the afflictions (purified of the afflictions) then we can say that the form that appears to that individual whose mind has been purified of affliction is also purified of the afflictions of that person. 
If you compare the two modes of appearance of form and object, any of the five types of forms, when an individual’s mind is still not purified of the afflictions, that particular form appears to that individual, but it has its own way of appearing. That same form will also appear to that individual when his mind is purified of the afflictions. Although it appears, the mode of appearance is different.
As an ordinary individual whose mind is under the control of karma and afflictions coming into contact and experiencing form induces suffering in that individual. For that reason, we say that it is true suffering. But when that individual’s mind is purified of the afflictions, he might come into contact with the same form, but that form does not induce suffering. As such, we can say that for that individual whose mind is purified of the afflictions that form is not true suffering.
We can use the example of practitioner’s experience of a particular form prior to realizing emptiness and after realizing emptiness. Prior to realizing emptiness, whatever appears to that individual, it appears as truly existence, existing right there from its own side. But after realizing emptiness, that meditator has the experience of viewing things as illusory like. Form appears as truly existence, but that meditator has the experience of that appearance being like illusion. 
In Asanga’s “Compendium of Knowledge” (The Higher Abhidharma), he said that true suffering is divided into two: 
the world of the impure environment (Tibetan is jigten?), and
the world of the impure inhabitants
The environment is literally called the container and the inhabitants are literally called the essence. But if you do a more meaning translation, then there are the environment and the inhabitants. Both the world of the impure environment and the world of the impure inhabitants are both true suffering.
From where did the world of impure environment arise from? 
The world of the impure environment arises from the collective karma of the world of impure inhabitants. 
Perhaps I think we can think along the line of the environmental effects as one of the effects of karma. We can say that the world of the impure environment is the result of the collective karma of the world of the impure inhabitants is the environmental effect, in which we as individual have to experience. Just as we say that environment in which we have to live in, experience and utilize is the result of collective karma; which means it is a result of karma. Likewise, the objects of utilization, things that we use in our daily lives, whether it is form, sound, smell, taste or touch, all arise from karma.  So the object of utilization of us ordinary beings, no matter how we interact with them, somehow they act as the basis for us to experience suffering.
If you accept that the world of the impure environment is a result of karma, then you have to say the object of utilization of us ordinary being in our daily lives, form, sound, smell, taste and touch, all of these are the result of karma.  
Before we continue on with the four close placement of mindfulness, let’s look at the second application which is called the peak application. 
Definition of peak application: a bodhisattva yoga conjoined with the wisdom highly transformed from the Mahayana Path of Accumulation that cultivates a compendium of the three exalted knowers. 
Boundary: The heat level of the Mahayana Path of Preparation through the end of the continuum (of the sentient beings).
The first of the four applications is the complete aspects application. What does this mind do? It cultivates a compendium of the aspects of the three exalted knowers. 
On the Mahayana Path of Accumulation, the bodhisattva cultivates a compendium of the aspects of the three exalted knowers. That cultivation becomes more exalted on the Mahayana Path of Preparation. So the cultivation of the aspects of the three exalted knowers is more exalted than the cultivation that was done on the Mahayana Path of Accumulation.
The complete aspects application that is taught mainly in the Fourth Chapter of the Ornament of Clear Realization is an application (training, cultivation) for the purpose of achieving mastery in the cultivation of aspects of the three exalted knowers.
At the time of peak application the bodhisattva has gained mastery over the aspects of the three exalted knowers. It is not exactly very clear in the treatises as to what is the definition or the measure of gaining a mastery over the aspects of the three exalted knowers. I think you can say that when one achieves the Mahayana Path of Preparation, one achieves the special insight focusing on aspects of the three exalted knowers. Because of that, the bodhisattva gained the mastery over the aspects of the three exalted knowers.
If we put it simply, on the Mahayana Path of Accumulation the bodhisattva cultivates (meditates) on the complete aspects application which is a cultivating a compendium of the aspects of the three exalted knowers. He trains it well and then comes a point in time he gains mastery of that cultivation.
When that bodhisattva does a good cultivation of the compendium of the aspects of the three exalted knowers on the Mahayana Path of Accumulation, it comes to a point in time where he gains a mastery over it, which is on the Path of Preparation. Henceforth, because of having gained mastery over it, his cultivation of the aspects of the three exalted knowers is given the name peak application.
If you remember that there are four achievings which are topics of the exalted knower of all aspects. 
There is this achieving through armor, and the meaning is the same as the complete aspects application. 
Achieving through armor means cultivating this sense of determination and courage where the bodhisattva mentally put on this armor literally on their mind to generate the strong sense of determination and courage. In doing the achieving through armor, when the bodhisattva cultivates the perfection of generosity, for example, he has this great determination and intention wanting to include the practice of all the other perfections in his practice of generosity. 
If you remember what achieving through armor is, the bodhisattva has the great intention, courage, and perseverance of making sure that in his practice of each of the perfections, he is very determined that the practices of the other perfections are included in the practice of a particular perfection.
If you understand this, now it will give you a better idea of what cultivating a compendium of the aspects of the exalted knowers is. This is what a complete aspects application is. A complete aspects application is basically is this mind that cultivates, not just aspects of the three exalted knowers, but a compendium of the aspects of the three exalted knowers i.e. in a collective way. 
I am just explaining in such a way to help you to gain some idea, not so much on the definition on defining things strictly. This is just an idea.
While achieving through armor is mainly referring to this mental quality of this strong determination to include the practice of all the perfections within a practice of a specific perfection. When you come to the achieving through engagement, it is not just that strong determination to include the practice of all the perfections within a practice of a specific practice of perfection, but it is actual engagement. The bodhisattva actually does it. That is roughly what happens during achieving through engagement.
So achieving through engagement and peak application means the same thing. 
The Mahayana Path of Preparation is achieved when the bodhisattva achieves a union of calm-abiding and special insight observing or focusing on emptiness. That mind is a realization of emptiness, and the way that particular mind sees emptiness is different from the mind that sees emptiness while on the Path of Accumulation. As such, it is called special insight - it is an insight that is more special than something else. That is what it is saying. 
When the bodhisattva enters the Mahayana Path of Accumulation, because of that union of calm-abiding and special insight observing emptiness, he gained that ability to be able to start suppressing the manifest apprehension of true existence. His ability to suppress the manifest apprehension of true existence increases as he progresses on the Path of Preparation. The Mahayana Path of Preparation is divided into four stages - the heat, peak, forbearance and supreme mundane quality.
When the bodhisattva enters the Path of Preparation, because of the union of calm-abiding and special insight focusing on emptiness, he gained this ability to suppress the manifest apprehension of true existence. As such, the afflictions do not manifest that frequently or easily. As such, the bodhisattva does not really accumulate much karma that are motivated by afflictions. 
I guess you can say that once the Mahayana Path of Preparation is achieved, the bodhisattva will not be born in any inopportune states. This is what I think you can say: Once the Mahayana Path of Preparation is achieved, the bodhisattva will not be born in any of the inopportune states. So that is a rough idea of what the complete aspects application is and what the peak application is. In order to get a clearer idea of what these two applications are, the homework is to think how many possibilities are there between complete aspects application and peak application.
Khen Rinpoche: That is the homework. To make oneself more clear, so think about that. If you try, if you exercise, I think you will get something.
We started on the four close placement of mindfulness last week. The four are:
Close placement mindfulness of body
Close placement mindfulness of feeling
Close placement mindfulness of mind
Close placement mindfulness of phenomena
There is a mind that apprehends our body as clean and pure. What body is it apprehending it as pure and clean? It is the body that is the basis of the self i.e. the body in which the self resides. There is a mind, an erroneous conception, which apprehends this body which is the basis of the self, as pure and clean. This is an erroneous conception. If the person, a self, does not reside in the body, you will not see the body as pure or clean. For example, a corpse.
Essentially the body in which a self or a person resides and a corpse is same in being a body. But we instinctively think the body in which the self resides in as pure and clean and we instinctively apprehend a corpse as impure and dirty. Actually the difference between these two bodies is just one breath. When the person is breathing, we are attached to whomever bodies that is still breathing. The moment he/she stop breathing, in which the next moment is already a corpse, then you feel like “I don’t want to have anything to do with it”.
Khen Rinpoche: You won’t sleep there. You will run away. You be so scare and immediately you will run away. There is no feeling of beauty at all, immediately and in one second.
So there is a big difference whether the person resides in the body or not. When the body is a residence of a person i.e. when a person is residing in it, and because the “I” comes into the picture, “is mine”, it relates to the person, then attachment comes into being. That is why people work so hard day and night to take care of this body. Because we hold on to the body as being the residence or the place where the “I” resides, then we apprehend this body as pure and clean, and that leads to attachment and desire. Then we accumulate karma.
By holding on to this body as being the place where “I” resides, and because the “I” comes into the picture “is mine”, then we see it as pure and clean. Because of that, we crave for body. Through that craving we accumulate new karma. This craving also nourishes the seeds of previously accumulated karma.
This is the process when we meditate on the close placement of mindfulness of the body. We first have to see and look into our minds how we instinctively view our body as pure, clean and desirable. The second thing is to ask ourselves whether it is really clean and pure or not.  If we do discover that it is really not pure and not clean at all, then the third question is: “What do I need to do to counteract this wrong thought?” Once we understand what we need to do, what kind of mind we need to generate to counteract this wrong thought, then we cultivate it. The more we cultivate this correct thought, which is the antidote to the wrong thought, then we accumulate less karma. We need to counteract this wrong concept that we have of the body as being pure and clean. 
The antidotes were already explained extensively in Chapter Eight of Shantideva’s Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds. All the information is there, and what we need to do is to practice. We just have to sit down and think about it and see for ourselves. In particular, in the explanation of the impurity of the body in the Chapter Eight, one of the outline is that not just seeing the body as dirty or impure but also seeing how the body is a source of impurity also. We just have to sit down and ask ourselves and think about it whether what the text say is true or not. Just look at the different orifices of the body. Just think of the stuff that comes out of the nose, that comes out of the mouth, and that comes out of the ears. Is the stuff that comes out is anything we can point to that as clean or pure? There is no need to talk about the stuff that comes out of the lower orifices. It is clear that it is definitely impure and is filthy. What about the stuff that comes out of the upper orifices of the body - the eyes, the nose, the mouth, and the ears? Are they impure or pure? Are they clean or dirty? It is not rocket science. We just have to think about it and I think the answer is clear.
Khen Rinpoche (in English): What is very interesting is your own hair. When the hair is with you, then is clean. You know that. You clean and wash it especially you have long hair. It is so clean that some of you put in the mouth. I mean this is how you feel it is really clean and you don’t feel dirty. Because still it is part of me, that’s why it is clean. But same hair, one piece drops in your food, maybe still not too bad because your own hair drop is still clean. It’s still not too bad and you may still eat the food. But still you consider it dirty, immediately feel not nice. But if you go to restaurant, sometimes you find a hair in the food, and you immediately you reject the food. Then you complain, “Here inside got hair”. What they do? Go back they take out and give back to you. Actually you are eating same food. Interesting really. Once you separate from your body, the hair drops, you never see it is clean and you don’t cherish at all. You feel dirty throw in the dustbin. You don’t put inside your pocket.  I’m just giving example. Here there is no mentioned about this. I don’t think so anybody collect this.
It is always the self comes into the picture all the time. Because we view this body as the place of residence of me, the “I”, the person, so we always think “My body must be good. My body is clean and pure”. Like the example that I gave you about the hair, when the hair is still stuck on your head, some of you have no qualms about playing with your hair and putting your hair in your mouth. However, the moment the very same hair falls on the ground you will never put it in your mouth. When the hair drops and is separated from the body, then we have this idea “It is now separated from me, and is no longer part of me”. Because that feeling, the connection to the “I” is cut and we begin to see it as dirty.
Khen Rinpoche: Same thing. You cut your hair still you can keep and you don’t really throw. Some people really keep their hair. Because it is my hair, it is still not too bad, my hair still we can keep. But you won’t keep somebody else hair. Somebody give you their hair you won’t keep. But your own hair you cut, it’s still separate but you still keep because it is still my hair.
Basically comes back to this connection with the feeling related to me, as long as we have this idea it is me or it is part of me.
When we talk about the close placement of mindfulness of body here, first we look at our contaminated body of how it is by nature impure and dirty. How it is also a source of filth and is the source of impurity? If we consider the stuff that comes out of our body as impure and filthy, then what need is there to say that the origin of those impure substances, the body? It must be impure. It, must be dirty. Anyway this is the argument that Shantideva made in Chapter Eight:
1) Our body, this contaminated body is by nature dirty, filthy, impure. 
2) It is the source, origin of impurities. 
3) Even if you examine the cause of our body, what is the substantial cause of our body?
Do we consider the egg and sperm of our parents clean or dirty? Do we consider it pure or impure? You think of it as impure and dirty. If the cause is dirty, impure, and filthy, then what is there to say about the result? It is dirty and impure. So no matter how you think about it, in reality the entity of the body is impure and dirty. Its result is impure and dirty. Its cause is impure and dirty. Although that is the reality, but that is not how we look at our body, and that is not how we see it.
Shantideva gave additional advice in Chapter Eight for those whose minds might not even change after thinking about all these -so stubborn. Then he says that you should visit a cemetery, a place where you are able to see corpses. You just observe how the dead bodies decompose over time. By observing how the corpse decomposes over time, then one also comes to understand that our own body has the same nature i.e. one day you will be like that. By thinking along this line, maybe we can do something to counteract our attachment and desire for the body.
You can also mentally dissect your body start by taking off the skin to expose the flesh. Then you go deeper where you will find blood, bones, joints, veins and so forth. That is another way to counteract attachment. 
In Chapter Eight of Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds, Shantideva made it a point to really elaborate on how the body is by nature filthy, dirty and so forth. Why is there that emphasis? Because all of us are not able to meditate and not able to practice Dharma due to strong attachment. We are attached to many things. In this context here we are talking about attachment to our bodies. Why are we so attached to our body? Because instinctively we think “My body is very pleasant, very nice, very clean, very pure and very desirable and ought to be taken care of”. There is a very elaborate explanation in Chapter Eight. We are challenged to question our attachment by asking “If you are attached to your body, what exactly are you attached to? The color? The shape?” There is an extensive examination in Chapter Eight. Also by examining how the cause of the body is impure and how the result of the body is impure, then we can also come to understand that the body is indeed impure. 
Next is the close placement of mindfulness of feelings. Essentially it is an exercise on meditating on how the feelings are in the nature of suffering. When we talk about experience, when we utilize something, we are enjoying different things. When we utilize objects, we are not enjoying the object. We say we are enjoying the object, we are enjoying the activity, whatever it is, but what is that enjoyment? It is essentially the experience which is feeling. So what we are looking for is feeling. Within feeling, the main thing we are looking for is the pleasure. 
We work day and night in order to enjoy life. We enjoy doing many different things. We enjoy interacting with different objects or people. Yes, we say we enjoy this, we enjoy that, but at the end of the day, what exactly are we enjoying? We are not enjoying the objects. It is the experience which is the feeling, isn’t it? We work day and night is basically to experience this pleasant feeling over and over again. That is the bottom line. It is not so much about the person or object but the feeling, especially the pleasant feeling and the pleasure that comes. That is what our object of attainment is. That is the focus in life and that is what we work day and night to achieve for. 
Ultimately what we are working for day and night is this experience. We want to experience these pleasant feelings over and over again. When we experience problems, suffering, or unhappiness, we want to be separated from that suffering, that unpleasant feeling and we want to go back into the pleasant feeling. That is what we do in life. Of course, we do have this experience of pleasant feeling but we regard this pleasant feeling as the most important thing, the real happiness. Instinctively the pleasant feeling is very important, is so wonderful and is so good. Because of this idea and strong belief that this is the most important thing and the most wonderful thing, then we get attached to it. We get emotionally involved with it and so attached. Because of that, we do many things in our life to achieve it. That is why we accumulate all kinds of karma. 
We need to stop the cravings for feelings. Until we can stop the craving for the feelings, there is absolutely no way to get out of suffering and there is no way out of samsara. The antidote is to see for ourselves that whatever feeling in question it is, it is actually in the nature of suffering. 
We have this very strong feeling of the self, me, “I”, person. We feel that there is really something that we can identify as self, person at the end of the day. If we were asked or if we do sit down and ask ourselves “What this “I” is?” We will probably point to our mind as being “I”. Between the body and mind, we will think the mind has to be the “I”. This is me. This is the self. Then we think the mind as the “I”. At the end of the day, that is me, “I”, mine. We also regard this self as permanent, unchanging, static “I” and is permanently there. Based on that, the concept is real me, permanent “I”. Then we also accumulate karma. 
We have the strong feeling of “I”. At the end of the day, very strongly we think naturally that the mind is “I” and we conceive this “I” as permanent and stable. We do have this feeling, right? We feel the ‘I’ as everlasting thing and will be always there. What kind of emotion does it invoke or induce? Definitely it is craving. The strong “I” invokes craving again and again and we then accumulate karma. 
Therefore, we meditate on the impermanence of the mind, and how the mind changes in each and every single moment. It is a momentary phenomenon. Through that we counteract the wrong concept of the self as permanent. That is the close placement of mindfulness of mind. 
Last one is the close placement of mindfulness of phenomena. Phenomena can be divided into:
Thoroughly afflicted class of phenomena 
Thoroughly purified class of phenomena
If we look at our mind, there are many different kinds of mind. There are minds which are thoroughly afflicted class of phenomena. There are also virtuous states of mind like love, compassion which are belonging to the pure class of phenomena. Whatever it is, even if it is an object belonging to the pure class of phenomena, we think of them as existing in and of themselves. There is a self in it. There is something about them: they have their own self, their own core and real identity. We have this apprehension of phenomena in that way. Because we conceive of a self-identity, literally it is a self-conceive of a self in each and everything that exists. That also induces craving which then leads to accumulation of karma. 
In short, 
By meditating on the close placement of mindfulness of body, we dispel or overcome the erroneous conception of the body as pure. 
By meditate on the close placement of mindfulness of feeling, we overcome the erroneous conception of feeling, in particular the pleasant feeling as really pleasurable. 
By meditating on the close placement of mindfulness of mind, we overcome the erroneous conception of the self as permanent. 
By meditating on the close placement of mindfulness of phenomena, we overcome the erroneous conception of phenomena possessing a self; whether it is a thoroughly afflicted class phenomena or pure class of phenomena.  
This is one way of explaining but there is also another way of explaining that is related to the Four Noble Truths. In the Four Noble Truths, each of the truths has four aspects or four characteristics. 
The four aspects of true suffering are impermanence, suffering, empty and selfless. Why are there these four aspects of true suffering? Because they are there to counteract the erroneous conception of purity, bliss, permanence and self. 
I’ve just said that these four aspects of true suffering are the antidotes to the four erroneous conceptions of purity, bliss, permanence and self. 
The homework is to explain how these four aspects are antidotes to the four erroneous conceptions of purity, bliss, permanence and self.
Khen Rinpoche: You got the homework? That is homework. Listen one more time. He will repeat again.
Question: How are the four aspects of true suffering antidotes to the four erroneous conceptions of purity, bliss, permanence and self?
If I ask you whether you know the Four Noble Truths or not, you say know or you say you don’t know?
Khen Rinpoche: You know Four Noble Truths? 
Think about how the four aspects of true suffering are antidotes to erroneous conceptions.
Student: 3: In the Great Exposition School(GES), permanent objects are considered as non-contaminated objects. Does it necessarily follow that permanent objects are not true suffering? Because I see non-contaminated object as that which not giving rise to afflictions in the GES. Non-contaminated object are objects that does not increase one’s afflictions. Therefore, my qualm is,due to this argument, can we say that permanent objects are not true suffering? 
Are the appearance of holy objects or forms of holy objects true suffering? 
How do enlightened activities act upon us if samsara is pervaded by true suffering?
If every object you come upon and every moment of the mind is true suffering, then how do Buddhas enlightened activities be possible to act upon us?
Khen Rinpoche: What is your question again? 
Student 3: Because tonight’s presentation on true suffering, ..
Khen Rinpoche (in English): You question last one is what? 
Ven Gyurme: Why do you have to say samsara is pervaded by suffering? Is there a samsara that is not pervaded by suffering? 
Student 3: If samsara is pervaded by suffering, then the buddha’s activities acted upon us, how to say? 
Ven Gyurme: How does Buddha help us since samsara is suffering? 
Khen Rinpoche: You are saying how Buddha can help you? You saying that? Are you saying Buddha cannot help you?
Student 3: If every object that we interact with will only induce in us the three feelings of pleasant, unpleasant or neutral feelings..
Ven Gyurme: Including Buddha you are trying to say is it? Including Buddha because you interact with Buddha right? So you are saying the Buddha is also true suffering?
Student 3: Let’s say I see a statue of Buddha and I develop a desire towards the Buddha. 
Ven Gyurme: Statue of Buddha is Buddha?
Student 3: Let’s say me and my friend go to a shop and both of us fighting over a Buddha statue because the form of the Buddha is so nice. So even from the side of the Buddha the nirmanakaya trying to help us, but from our side, due to our attachment to the form of the Buddha statue, attachment and desire arise. 
Ven Gyurme: So your main question is whether holy object is true suffering or not?  
Student: Yeah.
Khen Rinpoche: Whatever the basis you are interacting with the object, in dependence upon that basis, whether you experience suffering or happiness, you have to think about that. If you experience suffering, then it is true suffering. You are fighting for the holy object that brings you suffering. No? 
Student: Then the Buddha statue become true suffering. 
Khen Rinpoche: You cannot say Buddha statue in general. You have to say the Buddha statue that is the object you are interacting with. 
Student 3: Yeah. In relation to my object of observation.
Ven Gyurme: In relation to your experience it brings about suffering, then it will be true suffering. So you have problem accepting, that is it?
Student 3: But Lama Zopa Rinpoche always say that from the side of the holy object, even with an angry mind, you go around a stupa, you see…. 
Ven Gyurme: Angry mind come from where? Statue right?
Student 3: No. Even with attachment and afflictions, one engage in activity towards the holy object. Due to the power from the side of the holy object, one will create virtue. So this is against my earlier example that if I develop attachment to a Buddha statue, and that Buddha statue which is my object of observation will be true suffering. So I’m saying there is a contradiction.
Ven Gyurme: So you are saying because it is true suffering for you, therefore you cannot accumulate merit in relation to that object. You cannot reconcile these two, right? 
Student: Yes. 
Ven Gyurme: That’s the main thing right? 
Student: Main problem. 
Ven Gyurme:  How you can accumulate merit at the same time when you are angry or attach, right?
Khen Rinpoche: The answer is given by Lama Tsongkhapa in the Great Treatises on the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment. This is due to power of the object.
Ven Gyurme: Sometime you read Dharma book at home you get fed up, right?
Student 3: Can I say that due to the power of the prayer of the Buddha, we receive merit. However, from our side, when we interact with the holy object with affliction, we do accumulate negative karma. So when we interact with holy objects, there are two karmas. Both virtue and non-virtue. If we engage the holy object with a negative mind, we do accumulate the karma due to our afflictions but at the same time due to the power of the prayers of the Buddha when he was a bodhisattva, we do accumulate merit. So we do accumulate both virtue and non-virtue if we were to interact with a holy object. Can we say that? 
Khen Rinpoche: We have to think about it. I don’t have exact answer myself. We can think about it. Can discuss more.
That can be debated. You can think about it. You should think about it. The main point about stating the world of the external environment is true suffering is to start with the things that we interact in our daily lives, the things that  we use day in and out, the thing in front of us, things that you find in your left, things that you find in your right. You need to understand that for us ordinary beings, they induce attachment, anger. They therefore induce suffering, which extends basically to the environmental effect, the world, the space that we live in. We need to understand that it is in the nature of suffering for the purpose of generating renunciation and to generate a sense of disenchantment with life. That is the main point.
Student: 4: Just to clarity about the Hinayana path, if the path is in the Hinayanist continuum, even though it is not a Hinayana class of realization, it is still a Hinayana path, is that correct?
For example, wisdom realizing emptiness in the continuum of a Solitary is actually a Hinayana path but not a Hinayana class of realization. That itself is a knower that is neither of the three. 
Khen Rinpoche: It is the knower of bases. 
Student 4: But it doesn’t fulfil the Hinayana class of realizations. It doesn’t fulfil the part of the definition that says it is a Hinayana class of realization. It is definitely not the first two because it is not in the Mahayanist continuum. So you will have a path that is neither of the eight.
Khen Rinpoche: What is the definition?
Student 4: It is an exalted wisdom abiding with a lesser vehicle class of realizations conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing selflessness in the continuum of the person who possesses it.
Khen Rinpoche: Then you have to say it is not knower of bases.
Student: Yeah. It is not knower of bases, it is not knower of paths, it is not exalted knower of aspects. In fact it is none of the eight.
Khen Rinpoche: The main intended disciples of Ornament of Clear Realizations are Mahayanist. So the explanation of the three knowers and the four applications are mainly for the bodhisattvas.
Student 4: Can you explain a bit about what it means by conjoined? Under the knower of paths, when you talk about the path of meditation of belief, dedication and all that is actually subsequent clear realizations. 
Khen Rinpoche: Dedication and rejoicing are post meditative equipoise. 
Student: 4 Yeah, they all states as subsequent clear realizer. Are they are all subsequent cognizer?
Khen Rinpoche: I think we talk next time.
Student 4: Anyway, just to follow up on that is because, I mean there is a reason why I ask the question, because in the Yogic Autonomic School, subsequent cognizer are not valid cognizer. For them if they are subsequent cognizer they would have to say that their paths are actually not valid cognizer.
Ven Gyurme: So whether they are subsequent cognizer or not, that is the question. We need to check.
The Autonomy Middle Way School didn’t say that a path is necessarily a valid cognizer. A path is necessarily a mind that realizes its object, but it doesn’t have to be a valid cognizer according to what they define as valid. To be non-valid doesn’t mean wrong. 