Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/lesson30.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:50.750944
================================================================================


We have been looking at the 37 Harmonies of Enlightenment. How do we come
to that? Because we were looking at the knowers aspects. Of that we looked
at the 110 knowers aspects that are exalted knowers aspects. And of those
110 knowers aspects there are 37 aspects that are similar to those existing
in the Hearers. That is how we got to the 37 harmonies.
[pic]
We are kind of finished with the eight branches of the arya’s path. Perhaps
you can think about whether the correct aims of action and correct
livelihood are forms or not?  There are two different views as to whether
karma can be form or not. The Great Exposition School (Vabhashika) asserts
that there is karma that is form. It seems the Consequence Middle Way
School (Prasangika) also asserts karma that is form. The rest of the
Buddhist tenets assert karma is necessary a mental factor of intention.

|The eight branches of the arya’s path are|
|as follow:                               |
|1. Correct view                          |
|2. Correct thought                       |
|3. Correct speech                        |
|4. Correct aims of actions               |
|5. Correct livelihood                    |
|6. Correct assertions                    |
|7. Correct mindfulness                   |
|8. Correct meditative stabilization      |


We already went through eight categories. In the eight categories, there
are three knowers and the four applications. The last category is the
resultant Dharmakaya. In that, there is an explanation or discussion of the
four bodies of Buddha.
[pic]
[pic]
What are the results of meditating or cultivating the four applications?
The result is dharmakaya.
What is the resultant truth body? Here there is an explanation of the two
nature bodies:
    - The naturally pure nature body
    - The adventitiously pure nature body
The naturally pure nature body refers to the emptiness of the Buddha’s
mind.
According to the Autonomy Middle Way School (AMWS),
    - The naturally pure nature body is the Buddha’s mind.
    - The adventitiously pure nature body is the factor of purity which is
      the purity of the adventitious stain. The purity of the adventitious
      stain is a conventional truth and not an ultimate truth.
The complete enjoyment body is explained as the final form body that
possesses the five certainties:
   1. Certainty of abode - it is certain and is definite that the complete
      enjoyment body resides only in Akanistha.
   2. Certainty of the body -  the enjoyment body is definitely always
      adorned with the signs and exemplifications
   3. Certainty of retinue - the complete enjoyment body is always only
      surrounded by bodhisattva superiors; no ordinary beings.
   4. Certainty of doctrine - the complete enjoyment body teaches only
      Mahayana doctrine
   5. Certainty of time - the complete enjoyment body exists or remains as
      long as cyclic existence is not emptied. So as long as cyclic
      existence exists, it will not display the aspect of passing away into
      the sorrowless state.
Is Amitabha Buddha a complete enjoyment body or not? What do you think if
you are asked?
The practice of the seven branch of worship is normally done from the
perspective of relating to the emanation body. In the seven branch worship,
there is the practice of requesting the buddhas to turn the wheel of dharma
and beseeching or imploring them not to pass away to parinirvana. So that
is done in relation to the emanation body and not done in relation to the
enjoyment body. There is no need to do that in relation to the enjoyment
body.
So in relation to the enjoyment body, the request is not make to them to
not pass away into parinirvana, and there is no need to request them to
turn the wheel of dharma. That is why in the practice of tantra, the
practice does not involved requesting them to turn the wheel of dharma and
beseeching them not pass away into parinirvana. So that is one difference.
The enjoyment body is the final form body possessing the five certainties,
whereas the emanation body is a form body that does not possess the five
certainties.
    - It is not certain that the emanation body will teach the Mahayana
      dharma.
    - It is not certain that the emanation body will remain forever. As
      such, in relation to the emanation body, there is a practice of
      requesting the emanation bodies to turn the wheel of dharma and
      imploring them not to pass away into parinirvana. That makes a
      difference in relation to the emanation body.
    - It is not definite that the emanation body will reside in Akanistha.
    - It is not definite that an emanation body will have the aspect of
      signs and exemplifications.
    - It is not certain or definite that the emanation body are always
      surrounded by bodhisattva superiors.
So an emanation body is a final form body that is distinguished by not
possessing the five certainties. When divided, there are three emanation
bodies:
   1. Supreme emanation body
   2. Birth emanation body or incarnate emanation body
   3. Artisan emanation body
An illustration of the supreme emanation body is the kind founder,
Shakyamuni Buddha. So the supreme emanation body is the form body that
performed the twelve deeds such as how kind is Shakyamuni Buddha descended
in this world and displayed all the twelve deeds. Buddha and resultant
truth bodies they are mutually inclusive.

|The twelve deeds carried out by a supreme emanation body, such as the Buddha   |
|Shakyamuni, are:                                                               |
|Descent from Tushita, the Joyous pure land                                     |
|Entering the mother’s womb                                                     |
|Taking birth                                                                   |
|Becoming skilled in various arts                                               |
|Delighting in the company of royal consorts                                    |
|Developing renunciation and becoming ordained                                  |
|Practicing austerities for six years                                           |
|Proceeding to the foot of the bodhi tree                                       |
|Overcoming Mara’s hosts                                                        |
|Becoming fully enlightened                                                     |
|Turning the wheel of Dharma                                                    |
|Passing into mahaparinirvana                                                   |


We are kind of done with this module. Now I will give an overview or
summary of the eight categories. So you try to pay attention.
These eight categories were taught by Buddha himself in the Perfection of
Wisdom Sutra. There are extensive, middling and short or brief Perfection
of Wisdom Sutra. In those sutras, the Buddha taught these eight categories.

The explicit subject matter of Perfection of Wisdom Sutra is emptiness of
true existence. The hidden subject matter which was taught implicitly in
those sutras is the various stages of clear realization. In the Maitreya’s
The Ornament of Clear Realization, these eight categories are taught
primarily focus on presenting the implicit subject matter of the Perfection
of Wisdom Sutra, which are the various stages of the clear realization that
is explicitly taught in The Ornament of Clear Realization and the stages of
emptiness that is implicitly taught in The Ornament of Clear Realization.
At the beginning of The Ornament of Clear Realization, it is stated that
the Perfection of Wisdom is perfectly explained by the eight categories.
Since the word of Perfection of Wisdom comes out in the text, then there is
a need to explain what the Perfection of Wisdom is. When the Perfection of
Wisdom is terminologically divided, there are four:
   1. Natural Perfection of Wisdom
   2. Scriptural Perfection of Wisdom
   3. Path Perfection of Wisdom
   4. Resultant Perfection of Wisdom
The first terminologically division of Perfection of Wisdom is the Natural
Perfection of Wisdom, and that refers to the ultimate nature of every
phenomena, the final mode of abiding of phenomena, which is emptiness. This
emptiness of all phenomena, final mode of abiding of phenomena, is said to
be by nature pure. As such, it is explained as perfect perfect perfection.
The Natural Perfection of Wisdom refers to the final mode of abiding of all
phenomena, the ultimate and deepest nature of everything that exists i.e.
the real ultimate truth of everything that exists.
If that is the reality then you need an explanation of that reality. As
such you need a text, a teaching, an instrument to show this final mode of
nature of mode of abiding of all phenomena. As such, there is the
Scriptural Perfection of Wisdom.
The practice of taking to heart the meaning of the Scriptural Perfection of
Wisdom is the Path Perfection of Wisdom. When the Path of Perfection of
Wisdom is explained, it only exists in the continuum of bodhisattvas.
When this Path of Perfection of Wisdom is cultivated and is brought to
culmination. Then you have the result, which is the Resultant Perfection of
Wisdom and this exists only on Buddha ground.
At the beginning of the Ornament of Clear Realization, in the verse of
homage, you will see that the three knowers are praised, i.e. salutations
and praise are offered to the three knowers. Homage is paid to knower of
bases, knower of path and to the exalted knower of aspects.
The knower of bases is primarily the wisdom directly realizing selflessness
and that is cultivated mainly for the purpose of achieving the sorrowless
state.
The knower of paths is primarily the wisdom directly realizing emptiness.
The knower of paths is taught primarily in order to enable the bodhisattvas
to be able to take care of the trainees of the three lineages.
The knower of paths exists only in the continuum of Mahayana superiors.
They are taught so that a bodhisattva can work for the welfare to benefits
and to guide the disciples of the three lineages.
However, in order to completely turn the wheel of dharma for the three
types of trainees, one needs to have achieved the exalted knower of
aspects. As such the exalted knower of aspects is taught.
One needs to cultivate the knower of paths in order to actualize the
exalted knower of aspects, enlightenment. Normally one needs to depend on
the Path Perfection of Wisdom One cultivates that and achieve the Resultant
Perfection of Wisdom.
Now there is the explanation of the four applications.
The first of the four applications is Complete Aspects Application. If you
look at the word ‘complete aspect application,’ it means to cultivate all
the aspects in a complete way, fully.
What aspects are cultivated? They are the three aspects of the three
knowers.
How many are there? There are a total of 173 aspects of the three knowers,
and they are cultivated and meditated completely.
That is like looking at the meaning of complete aspects application is. It
is said that a complete aspects application is the cultivation of the
aspects of the three exalted knowers, and cultivating it as a compendium.
At the beginning, one cultivates the complete aspects application for the
purpose of gaining mastery over the 173 aspects of the three exalted
knowers.
On Path of Accumulation, through cultivating a compendium of the 173
aspects of the three exalted knowers, then comes the time when the
bodhisattva attains the Path of Preparation. At that time, he achieves the
peak application.
Upon attaining the Path of Preparation, that bodhisattva is still
cultivating a compendium of the 173 aspects of the three knowers. However
his manner of cultivating that compendium of the aspects of the three
exalted knowers is more exalted than the manner of cultivation on the Path
of Accumulation. As such, the bodhisattva on the Path of Preparation is
said to have achieved mastery of the aspects of the three exalted knowers.
As such, his cultivation on the Path of Preparation is given peak
application.
On the Path of Preparation, the bodhisattva attains the peak application
and achieved the mastery of the aspects of the three exalted knowers. This
mastery is a result of cultivation while on the Path of Accumulation. This
didn’t happen without a reason. It is because of his cultivation on the
Path of Accumulation, only then he is able to achieve the Path of
Preparation. Only then he is able to achieve this mastery of the aspects of
the three exalted knowers.
While the complete aspects application is a mind that cultivates a
compendium of the 173 aspects of the three exalted knowers i.e. cultivating
them collectively. A serial application is a wisdom (knower) in the
continuum of the bodhisattva that cultivates the 173 aspects of the three
exalted knowers serially.
Even on the Path of Accumulation, the bodhisattva has two ways of
cultivating the aspects of three exalted knowers:
    - On one hand, he has a knower in his continuum that cultivates the
      aspects of the three exalted knowers collectively, as a compendium
    - At the same time, he also has a knower that cultivates the aspects of
      the three exalted knowers serially.
In short, he cultivates the aspects the three exalted knowers collectively
and serially.
The purpose of meditating on the aspects of the three exalted knowers
serially is to achieve steadiness with respect to those aspects. As such,
they have this peak serial application and they cultivate the serial
application. This serial application is cultivated on the Mahayana Path of
Accumulation, Path of Preparation, Path of Seeing, Path of Meditation and
right up to just before the last moment of the Path of Meditation, which is
the wisdom of the end of the continuum.
It is at the very last moment of the Path of Meditation that the
bodhisattva achieves steadiness with respect to the aspects of the three
exalted knowers. Only then will he achieves the cultivation that has
attained steadiness with respect to the aspects of the three exalted
knowers.
On the last moment of Path of Meditation, which is a wisdom of the end of
continuum, only then does the bodhisattva attains the steadiness with
respect to the aspects of the three exalted knowers. That means in the
shortest moment of a complete action, if he brings his mind to a particular
fully ripen phenomenon, and when he manifests that phenomenon, in that
short moment of time, he also has the power to manifest all the other
phenomena that are concordant with that.
To make it simple, at the end of the continuum of a sentient being, the
last moment of the Path of Meditation, the bodhisattva has the power to
meditate on the 173 aspects of the three exalted knowers serially in a
correct order, without mixing things up, in the moment it takes to snap a
finger, which is called in an instance of a complete action.
The bodhisattva who is at the last part of the Path of Meditation, is
someone who is about to achieve enlightenment. By this time, he definitely
must have achieved that power, the potential and ability to be able to
meditate on the 173 aspects of the three exalted knowers serially without
mixing up the orders and so forth. He will be able to do that in the moment
it takes to snap a finger.
Khen Rinpoche: Can imagine? (snap finger) 173 aspects? He is still not
enlightened and still not a Buddha.
Only after achieving this, only then will the Resultant Truth Body happen,
the eighth category.
The Buddha is omniscient and he sees every single thing as it is. He
doesn’t need time to look at things; it is there and seeing everything as
it is and like that.
Student 1: Regarding the last one you mentioned, a serial application
exists from the Path of Accumulation up to prior to the end of the
continuum of a sentient being. At the end of the continuum of sentient
being, how can the bodhisattva bring to mind all the aspects serially?
Serial application only exists prior to the end of the continuum of the
sentient being. Just now you said that the end of continuum of sentient
being is serial application. It should be momentary application.
VenGyurme: We didn’t say it is serial application.
Student 1: I thought we heard serial. That’s why I came out and asked.
Sorry about that.
Khen Rinpoche: You know that serial application exists up to just prior to
the last moment. At the last moment of continuum of sentient beings, there
is no serial application, and that we know.
Explanation on the Examination Process
I want to explain about the exams. This piece of paper is the exam
questions (see below) for those who signed up and want to study. Those who
didn’t sign up, then don’t have to worry about this paper. It is only for
those who sign up and want to study. Please take this and do.
|FPMT BASIC PROGRAM (AMITABHA BUDDHIST CENTRE)                                  |
|EXAMINATION QUESTIONS FOR MODULE 8 – THE EIGHT CATEGORIES & SEVENTY TOPICS     |
|1. Read all the transcripts of the classes in this Module and reflect on it.   |
|[50 marks]                                                                     |
|2. Can the Mahayana Path of Accumulation, Mahayana Path of Preparation,        |
|Mahayana Path of Seeing, Mahayana of Meditation and Mahayana Path of No More   |
|Learning be newly attained on the basis of the support of the three realms? [15|
|marks]                                                                         |
|3a. Of the Eight Categories, is there a phenomenon that is only one of the     |
|Eight Categories? Please provide an illustration and explain why it is not of  |
|the other categories.                                                          |
|Repeat this exercise and change “one” to:                                      |
|3b. “two”                                                                      |
|3c. “three”                                                                    |
|3d. “four”                                                                     |
|3e. “five” [20 marks] marks]                                                   |
|4. What are the 37 Harmonies of Enlightenment? How does one enter into the Four|
|Noble Truths through meditating on the Four Close Placements of Mindfulness?   |
|[15 marks]                                                                     |


You have to know the purpose of an examination or test. The whole idea of
taking an examination is for the purpose of learning. To really learn of
what you have heard and what you have learned. That is why we have an
examination. Please think well and then do the exams. Do it properly with
thought.
Q1. The first question is essentially an exercise where you have to read
all the transcripts as much has been said. We have spent a fair amount of
time on this topic and much explanation has been given. So please read all
the transcripts mindfully. As you read, you have to think about what you
have read so as to gain an understanding of what has been taught so far. If
you are able to read all the transcripts and as you read, you think about
what you read and analyze, then you get 50 marks.
Khen Rinpoche: This one is 50 marks. You can put there in case you don’t
know the number. Better write down. If you want the number better write
down. I forgot to put the number.
Q2. For the second question, for example, let’s look at the Mahayana Path
of Accumulation. As there are 3 realms - the desire realm, the form and
formless realms:
1. Can the Mahayana Path of Accumulation be newly attained on the basis of
   the desire realm support?
2. Can the Mahayana Path of Accumulation be newly attained on the basis of
   the form realm support?
3. Can the Mahayana Path of Accumulation be newly attained on the basis of
   the formless realm support?
Whether the answer is yes or no with regards to these 3 realms, please
provide a reason for it. Whether it is a yes or no, you have to explain.
Likewise, do the same for the Mahayana Path of Seeing, Mahayana Path of
Meditation and Mahayana Path of No More Learning.
If you are able to answer from your own side without the help from anyone,
it is fine and wonderful. If you need to discuss with other people, you can
go ahead and discuss. The point of discussing is to gain an understanding
and to come to your own understanding. Then you write your own
understanding as the answer. And not go tothe discussion and say “He is
saying this and it sounds good and I am going to write whatever he is
saying”. I don’t want that. You can discuss but based on the discussion, if
there is an explanation that you come to your personal understanding, then
you write that down but not somebody tells you or somebody’s else’s
opinion.
You can discuss but the point is that you have to come to your own
conclusion based on your own understanding, and how you feel about it so
much so you have to be confident of your answer. So when you are asked then
you should be able to answer with confidence; not because somebody say so
or from copy or cut and paste whatever. You have to be able to say it is an
answer from your own side. It has to be your own answer. (15 marks)
Khen Rinpoche: Correct, okay? This one is 15 marks. You write down. 15 not
50. You are clear?
Q3. We have talked quite a bit on the 8 Categories. That is why we have
this question here. It is not easy. So answer the question by giving an
example.
Question: Of the Eight Categories, is there a phenomenon that is just one
out of the Eight Categories? It is just that and none of the seven.
You have to provide an illustration and explain why your illustration is
just one of the 8 Categories. You also have to provide an explanation why
your chosen illustration is not of the remaining seven categories. In this
case if it is one so it cannot be the any of seven. Then you repeat the
exercise by changing the ‘one’ to ‘two’, ‘three’, ‘four’ and ‘five’.
Is there a phenomenon that is just five out of the eight categories? Will
you be able to find something that is five out of the eight? You have to
explain why your chosen illustration is five out of the eight. You also
have to explain why your chosen illustration is not the remaining three.
You can discuss, but the answer you write down is something you understand.
You can discuss, and at the end of the day what you should write is only
the thing that you understood. You are certain it is this and not that; not
because of somebody said so. Not cut and paste from some notes. You write
that down after having thought about it. Please do that. Because this is an
exam you have to write what you understand. You can go and discuss. If you
don’t understand but just write the answer of someone else who tells you
“It is this”, then this is wrong. If at the end of the discussion, and you
still don’t understand “why it is this and not” despite the discussion,
then don’t write anything. Just leave it empty.
Q4. What are the 37 Harmonies of Enlightenment? Of course this is not going
to cut and paste from the notes. That is not the point. You can only write
down what you are able to verbally say. If you are tested verbally what are
the 37 Harmonies of Enlightenment, you can only write of what you can say.
That is the point of the exercise. It is not the point whether you know all
those 37 are. You should be able to say the name the “close placements of
this and that”, and all the individual names. So if you are able to say any
time like that, then you write down.
Listen carefully. If you are asked to stand and say, and you cannot say it
out, please don’t write anything on the paper. Don’t put in the answer.
Please don’t write anything. Leave it empty.
The next part of the question is important. We spent quite a bit of time on
that. It is important and is helpful you.
Q4. How does one enter into the Four Noble Truths through meditating on the
Four Close Placements of Mindfulness?
You need to think well in order to understand and write down what you
understand. It doesn’t really matter how you do it, whether you read, and
then think or discuss, or have discussion with people. The main point is
that you have to learn. The aim of the exercise is that you learn
something. This is an exam. You cannot cut and paste from the notes and put
it down or just copy word for word from somebody’s notes or the
transcripts. That is not the point. You can discuss all you like, read all
you like, think all you like but please write down only from your own side
without consulting anything. When you write, write down what you know. If
you still don’t know after reading or discussing then just don’t write
anything. Just leave it. Then you will know what you have been able to
understand, and what you don’t understand. If you just cut and paste, or
just consult the notes and just point blank just write everything then we
will not be able to tell. This doesn’t become an examination because we
will not be able to tell.
Khen Rinpoche: That one, number 4 is 15 marks. 15 marks for that. So that
become 100 marks.
Student 2: As for question number 4, the 37 harmonies of enlightenment are
we going to say in details for mindfulness, four abandonment in details? Or
no need but just put 4 mindfulness, 4 abandonment, 4 leg magical
emanations.
Khen Rinpoche: Not only that.
Student 2: Must we write in details?
Khen Rinpoche: Yes. Not the definitions. You have to write what the four
mindfulness are. You must write each one. What are the mindfulness. Each
one you have to write.
Student: That is all. No need to elaborate further.
Khen Rinpoche: No need. I want the 4. These are the 4, these are the 5,
these are the 8. You must. Don’t write four mindfulness, only the number.
You must write what the 4. But you don’t need to explain on that. If you
want to explain, I give 100 marks.
The dateline: Until March 2017.
You have Oct, Nov, Dec, Jan, Feb, March. Half year. Enough? You need one
year? Anyway, you have 4 to 5 months. So you have plenty of time. Also we
have long break 3-4 months break. So we just go and study.
Last time when we have group leaders, and I don’t know how much the group
leaders are involved there. In this case, these types of thing you invite
your own group together and discuss and make sure everybody understand
something. From there you write down your answer. Also it is important for
the group leaders to bring their own group together and make sure everyone
in your group understands something. This is just an idea but you can find
out whatever methods.
However you do it, just do it. The whole point of the exercise is to read
and to learn. Whether the method is reading, thinking, coming together to
discuss and so forth, at the end of the day the objective is to learn
something since we have talked about this for a fair amount of time. So
that is the main point. Just try. How much effort you put in now and how
much you understand, this will affect your future education, as there is
something in the future if you were to continue.
If you say you really want to learn something over time, and this is a
lifelong learning and you want to just continue learning and learning, then
putting effort is important. It is only when you put in effort then you
really come to at least understand something. You feel encouraged when you
do get something. Only then you have an interest to learn more. Of course
you can sit and listen and listen and listen, but at the end of the day you
don’t understand anything, then it is difficult to have interest to
continue in the long run because you are just moving from one not knowing
something to another not knowing something. Then it is difficult to really
learn something in the long run. That is why there is no other way out
other than putting in effort.
In the last module about Shantideva’s text, most of people did the exam
very well. Very good and well done.  They wrote very well and the marks are
also pretty good. Everybody put effort and wrote something there. As there
were many writing so it is impossible to put in detail. Whatever you write
here I hope you understand what you write. It is very good as some people
want to come here and read out. That is very good. They really read out. So
that is very very good. Actually this text not a challenge and it is ok.
These 70 topics,  one may need read more. Use your brain and mainly need
logic.
Student 3: One of the previous modules when we did some writing for our
exam answers. I think Khen Rinpoche also gave us the opportunity to write
down any qualms that we may have. I can foresee that now we have more time
to go over the module again in greater detail, there may be qualms that
might come up that we may not have the opportunity to think about because
the lessons are quite hectic. So should the students be encouraged then to
note write down any questions or qualms that might actually come up in
their mind while they are doing the revision in preparation to give answers
to the exam questions?
Khen Rinpoche: Of course, any qualm you can write down.
