Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/lesson11.docx
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:52.739863
================================================================================

We do try very hard to work for our own happiness. Even if we do achieve some happiness through looking out for just our own interest, that happiness is not really that special. It would notbe as great as when compare to the happiness that we experienced when we are able to extend some help tothose who are in need, the destitute, or to those who really need help.When we do extend our help and then succeed in giving them some joy, or when we do see joy in their faces, or when we see they do experience some happiness as a result of our actions, then we also experience somekinds of satisfaction and joy.I think that kind of joy and satisfaction would be really very different from the joy that we may experience from just working for our own welfare. 
Let’s sayat the time of our death we do remember that kind of joy that we experience from helping others, perhaps it might bring about some real satisfaction, and be a cause for us to rejoice and feel even more joy. I don’t think by remembering the happiness that we have achieved for our own purpose at the time of death will bring that same level of satisfaction and joy. What I have just said is not rocket science, as it is pretty obvious. We should look into our own experience and see it for ourselves. 
We work very hard physically and mentally to achieve our own happiness. We have put in so much time and effort for it. If we can just put that same amount of time and effort into helping others, then that will bring about a kind of joy and happiness that is really cannot be compared. In order for us to remember that kind of happiness and joy that came from benefitting and helping othersandto be able to rejoice especially at the time of death, we first must experience the joy that comes from benefitting othersin this life.If we can prioritize others over ourselves and do things to help and benefit others, then whatever we do things to help others, it has to be done from the heart sincerely. If this is done, then the special kind of bliss, happiness and joy that we may experience will be very different. If that happens, then one will get a good rebirth. 
You have to know the point of why we have to help and benefit others. We just have to try as much as possible to cultivate the thoughts of benefitting others. On a practical level, it is possible that we do something practical to the effect. 
Student response inaudible 
Khen Rinpoche: It sounds like bodhisattva. Actually only 2 days ago I notice today is the Guru Rinpoche’s birthday. Especially this is the Monkey year, and Guru Rinpoche was born in Monkey year. Not only that, but have to be born in Monkey month. You know in 12 months, every month is different. Tibetan 5thmonth, why is this month, is the Monkey month. Monkey month, Monkey year, then Tibetan 10thtsog day is special day for Guru Rinpoche’s birthday.  Actually 10th of the 5thmonth of Tibetan is the tsog day and is Guru Rinpoche’s birthday. I saw the news says today, that His Holiness going to Tso Pema doing the Guru Rinpoche’s tsog and teaching.So today is like that.
Knower of paths
In the last lesson, we looked at the Path of Meditation of dedication. In order for there to be a dedication, there must be substance to be dedicated. What is the substance to be dedicated? All the roots of virtue that are accumulated by oneself and others.
Simply speaking, the Path of Meditation of dedication here refers to the dedication that is performed by a bodhisattva superiors who are on the Mahayana Path of Meditation, and their dedications are conjoined with this special method and wisdom possessed by them in their continuum.Such bodhisattva superiors on the Path of Meditation dedicate the roots of virtue while non-objectifying the merit (roots of virtue) which is to be dedicated, non-objectifying the dedication, and non-objectifying the dedicator; while knowing that they do not exist truly, they exist conventionally. They dedicate the roots of virtue so as to ripen the three types of trainees - the hearers, the solitary realizers, and the bodhisattvas.
We have went through the etymology of knower of paths. So knower of paths is a knowledge of full understanding of the hearer’s path, solitary realiser’s path and the Mahayana path. The bodhisattva superiors know these path and through experience they teach these three types of trainees so as to enable them to achieve their own goals. For the purpose of achieving this, the bodhisattvas dedicate the roots of virtue towards this. 
In one of the sutra stated that one dedicates one’s roots of virtue together with the roots of virtues of others.What it is saying here is that we deposit the roots of virtue together with the roots of virtues of the buddhas and bodhisattvas, and by placing our roots of virtues together with theirwith the intention of becoming an aid to benefit others.
So when we deposit our roots of virtue together with the roots of virtues of all the buddhas and bodhisattvas, we can dedicate that lump of roots of virtue as cause for all sentient beings to achieve full complete enlightenment. 
I guess this is what it is being said in one of the sutrathat saysone dedicates one’s roots of virtue together with the roots of virtues of others.When our roots of virtues are lumped together with the roots of virtues of the buddhas and bodhisattvas, it becomes a cause (condition, branch, aid) for the fulfilment of the welfare of all sentient beings, in particular for them to achieve the state of full enlightenment. 
Theroots of virtue is the substance to be dedicated. There is also the witness or the witnessesof the dedication, and here are the buddhas and the bodhisattvas. 
We dedicates the roots of virtue as a cause for all sentient beings to achieve enlightenment in the presence of the buddhas and bodhisattvas, and by taking them as our witness. 
Why do we need to think the buddhas and bodhisattvas as our witnesses when we dedicate the roots of virtue towards the enlightenment of all sentient beings? 
It is said that if we do that, then the buddhas and bodhisattvas will grant their blessings. As such, the aim that was dedicated will be actualized quickly. 
What is the object of intent of the dedication? What is the purpose of dedication? 
One dedicates the merit for the welfare of others, for all sentient beings and also for the buddhas teachings to flourish. Whether we say we are dedicating the merit for the welfare of all sentient beings or for the Buddhadharma to flourish, essentially at the end of the day, the meaning is the same. The whole point of dedicating the merit is for the buddhas’ teachings to flourish.
The bodhisattvas are always working for sentient beings. Whatever they dedicate is always for sentient beings. Even when one achieves enlightenment, whatever one does is for sentient beings. So, at the end of the day, dedication is about that. That is the substance of the dedication. 
We have the witnesses of the dedication, and the objects of intent of the dedication. What is the purpose of the dedication? One of the purpose of dedication is that it can transform an inferior result into a perfect result. Without dedication, a particular roots of virtue might only bring forth a very insignificant result, or a very small result. If dedication is done promptly, then something that would otherwise have transformed into an inferior result will transform into a perfect result.An example given in the sutra is that if one put a drop or water into the ocean, and for as long as the ocean exist, it is said that the drop of water that we put in will exist. It will not cease to exist. Likewise, the roots of virtues that are dedicated towards enlightenment will not be exhausted. You must understand how does the analogy apply to the meaning here. If we put the drop of water into the ocean, and as long as the ocean exists, the drop of water will not cease to exist.
How does dedicating our roots of virtue towards full enlightenment makes our roots of virtue becomes inexhaustible?
Our roots of virtue is like the drop of water. The roots of virtues of all the buddhas and bodhisattvas are like the ocean. If we lump our roots of virtues together with the roots of virtues of all the buddhas and bodhisattvas, then that will make our roots of virtues inexhaustible. 
You have to understand how byputting a drop of water into the ocean, the drop of water will becomes indistinguishable.
Question: How do we mix our roots of virtue with the roots of virtues of all the buddhas and bodhisattvas? 
Khen Rinpoche: This is question. How do you mix with that?
Student 1: Let’s say we meditate on emptiness, all sentient beings, buddhas and bodhisattvas don’t exist inherently as well. With that as a basis by meditation on emptiness, we then dedicate the merits that is empty also and send together. 
VenGyurme: Because it’s empty, all the merits become the same? 
Student 1: I was thinking by meditating on emptiness will actually help. 
VenGyurme: So don’t meditate on emptiness cannot? Must meditate on emptiness then one can mix together. 
Student 1: I would say soif you want to go on that basis. 
Khen Rinpoche: Can you mix your virtue with that of bodhisattva virtues or not? 
Student 1: If you meditate on emptiness then you can.
Khen Rinpoche: If you don’t meditate on emptiness then you cannot?
Student 1: If I go on that basis and I have to stand on that ground. If I say don’t meditate on emptiness, and if it work as well, then my basis will not work.
VenGyurme: So no emptiness, no work. Emptiness then work?
Student 1: Because if I say both work then it doesn’t work anymore.
Student 2: I think you rejoice at the virtues that the buddhas and bodhisattvas have accumulated. Then by rejoicing you dedicate that merits out. So it becomes merge as one. 
VenGyurme: How?
Student 2: Rejoicing?
VenGyurme: How does it merge?
Student 2: Because when you rejoice…
VenGyurme: Okay what’s the meaning of merging maybe.
Student 2: Sorry, maybe I should not use the word merge. I think by rejoicing at the virtues that the buddhas and bodhisattvas have accumulated, you do accumulate some merits. When you dedicate that it becomes one.
VenGyurme: How become one? What’s the meaning of becoming one I guess maybe.
The analogy is to help you to understand the meaning. In this case, it is the way of thinking, i.e. how you think about it and not so much like you have to think squarely inside the box - a drop of water put inside the ocean, therefore the merit also must put in the ….You shouldn’t think of it like that. Something similar along the lines, more of the spirit rather than being so literal. 
What if we say that when we dedicate our merits towards enlightenment, our small little merit becomes a branch (an aid) for the fulfilment of the welfare of other sentient beings?As such, then is said that our merit to have mixed with the roots of virtues of the buddhas and bodhisattvas. That is what the buddhas and bodhisattvas want. Can we say that is the meaning? 
So if we say that the meaning of our roots of virtue mixing with the roots of virtues of the buddhas and bodhisattvas, the meaning is that our roots of virtues becomes a branch (aid) for the buddhas and bodhisattvas to work for the welfare of sentient beings.  
Now, in this discussionhere, do you think there is any relation to another discussion that we had in the Tathagata Essence module where it is said that all roots of virtue in the continuum of the sentient beings are the enlightened activities of the dharmakaya?
In the first place, we also need to think whether it is correct to dedicate somebody else’s roots virtue towards enlightenment? 
Is it right to dedicate the roots of virtue of others or not? Is it even possible or not? 
If you can dedicate the roots of virtue of others towards enlightenment, does it really happen or not? That means just because we think and pray, does the roots of virtue in the continuum of other sentient beings actually becomes a cause and has the effect in contributing to somebody’s enlightenment; whether it is your enlightenment or somebody else’s enlightenment. 
We also need to think when we say we dedicate the roots of virtue of others towards full enlightenment - whose enlightenment? When you dedicate the roots of virtue of others to your own enlightenment or it means to the enlightenment of others? Or for all others to be enlightened except you? Or for both yourself or just the other party?
The Hearersaccumulate merits for their own liberation – the Hearers’ enlightenment. Then a bodhisattva superior on the Path of Meditation comes along and dedicate his roots of virtue for him to become a Buddha, can or not?
If you say ‘Yes’, the bodhisattva superior on the Path of Meditation dedicate the Hearers’ roots of virtue towards enlightenment. Just because he dedicated therefore that Hearer’s roots of virtue suddenly become a cause for him to gain enlightenment? Will it happen? 
Student replied at the background: Yes.
Therefore there is no need to dedicate your own merits. Why do you need to dedicate merits? Because all the numberless buddhas and bodhisattva have been doing since beginninglesstime. Then there is no need to dedicate. It follows that there is no need to dedicate your own merits because your merits have been dedicated by others towards your own full enlightenment. 
The dedicator is not some Tom, Dick and Harry. It is a bodhisattva superior on the Path of Meditation. Their dedications are very powerful.That is why there is no need to dedicate your own merits. What are you going to say?
Khen Rinpoche: You understand what I am saying?
Student 3: The other person can dedicate but if it is not my wish then it doesn’t work.
VenGyurme: So, you are saying it doesn’t work. Our roots of virtue does not transform into cause of enlightenment right?
Student 3: Prayer is the condition, the person needs to create the substantial cause for enlightenment to happen.
Student 3:  The Buddha can do his part by keep on pushing you. But if you don’t act on it, the Buddha can’t do anything.
VenGyurme: The roots of virtue in your continuum is the enlightened activity of the dharmakaya or not?
Student 3:  Yes
VenGyurme: When you want to do virtue it is up to the Buddha right?
Student 3: No, because Buddha cannot wash away your sin. If you don’t move, Buddha can’t do anything.
VenGyurme: So there are some virtue that are not enlightened activities of the Buddha? There are some there are. Is it what you are saying?
Student 3: No
VenGyurme: All enlightened activities are Buddha.
Student 3: Yes
VenGyurme: That means Buddha making you to do virtue, right?
Student 3: He is actually creating the condition for you to actually do virtue. The actual presentation of the virtue or the accumulation is still has to be done by that person.
Khen Rinpoche: That is correct? Why clap hand?
Question; A bodhisattva on the Path of Meditation dedicates the roots of virtue in the continuum of a Hearer towards his full enlightenment. After the dedication, does the roots of virtue in the continuum of that Hearer become a cause for his enlightenment or not? 
The same bodhisattva then dedicates the roots of virtue in that Hearer’s continuum towards his own (the bodhisattva) own full enlightenment. Will the roots of virtue in the Hearer’s continuum become a cause for this the bodhisattva’s (the dedicator) enlightenment or not? 
The bodhisattva can either dedicates the Hearer’s roots of virtue towards the Hearer’s full enlightenment or the bodhisattva’s own full enlightenment. Can or not?
Student 4: Perhaps we can explain it in the form of how does the Buddha’s enlightened activity actually work. The Buddha’s enlightened activitymanifesting as the qualified guide to the disciple eventually. So we are talking about karmic connection. You think about the sutra mentioned by Buddha, he is always talking about all the karmic connection he had in his past life with certain person and disciple. Eventually the time will come for the karmic connection to materialize in the person who he has met before or he has benefitted before and dedicated merits towards as a fish, as a deer or whatever in that life to become his disciple and drop their hair fall down and ripened their continuum. So, I guess even the countless buddhas and bodhisattva or rather the Buddha manifested into parinirvana and attained the state of Dharmakaya, we cannot in the way do away with this very important of karmic connection that we have accumulated between the superior person and the inferior person in the past. 
When the superior person becomes a Buddha eventually the inferior person under his care in the past will become his disciple one day. Because of that his continuum is ripenedand guided by the qualified teacher. 
To answer the question: When you dedicate toward the lower trainees toward enlightenment or you dedicate his virtue towards your own enlightenment, I think it works that way. Eventually manifesting from the Buddha enlightened activities into the actual guides between a guide and a disciple. That is how it works all the time. You look at the Buddha’s story himself how it works. From the disciple side, they must have their own substantial cause of aspiration to achieve enlightenment. Also there is this cooperative condition of the qualified guide. These two acts together, the disciple can become enlightened.
VenGyurme: Karmic connection is formed by the prayers of the bodhisattvas?
Student 4: Let’s say if you benefited somebody like in Buddha’s sutra cited by him when he was bodhisattva, he sacrificed himself to five tigers and he dedicated merits toward their enlightenment. The five tigers become arhat and bodhisattva.
Khen Rinpoche: Anyway, can discuss more on this thing.
Why dedication is possible in the first place? Because of the tathagata essence (tathagatagarbha) is the substantial cause of enlightenment. That is why enlightenment is possible. In this case that is why dedication is possible. But having that alone is not enough. You need to have the condition to activate. 
The Buddha can appear in all kinds of form.  For example, the Buddha is not going to turn the wheels of Dharma for us via the dharmakaya. The buddhas come in different aspect such as our friends. We need this external condition for the buddhas and bodhisattvasto cause us to develop virtue thoughts like remembering impermanence, death and so forth. 
So we need both the substantial cause and cooperative condition. In this context here, the substantial cause is our own buddha nature (tathagata essence) and the cooperative condition is the Buddha. Without the Buddha, it is not possible also.
Next is the Path of Meditation of rejoicing. 
Because of belief then the bodhisattva is able to accumulate immeasurable heap of merits. Because they do accumulate the immeasurable heap of merits then they have the substance to be dedicated. As such then they dedicate the merits. 
Because they have the opportunity to accumulate so much merits, they rejoice at that fact “I have opportunity to accumulate so much merits”. As such, because of the Mahayana Path of Meditation of belief, then there is thePath of Meditation of dedication. Because of that, then there is the Path of Meditation of rejoicing which it is said to be the method to increase the roots of virtue that has already been accumulated.
When there is a stable belief, one is able to accumulate great amount of merits (the roots of virtue). Having that belief is likened to finding a gold mine. When we do find a gold mine, we can fashion the gold into jewelries and into all kinds of statue. Of course, how the gold is fashioned is dependent on the person who possesses the gold. In the same way dedication is that which transforms the roots of virtue.
With gold we can fashion it into the most wonderful thing. We can make the best jewelries and the best ornaments. Likewise, with dedication, one can transform one’s roots of virtue into the cause of full enlightenment. 
Even though the roots of virtue that we accumulate maybe inferior and if left to be its own device, it will only bring about inferior result. But with dedication, one can transform that small perhaps insignificant roots of virtue into a cause of full enlightenment. That is made possible by dedication. Dedication is that which transform a cause which otherwise would be result in inferior result, but instead transforming into something that will bring forth a perfect result.
It doesn’t mean that once you dedicate your roots of virtue towards full enlightenment that roots of virtue would continue all the way up to enlightenment. There is no pervasion, right? Why? You may dedicate your roots of virtue as a cause for full enlightenment but along the way, it can be destroyed by anger. When it is destroyed by anger it doesn’t go all the way up to enlightenment and it doesn’t become a cause for enlightenment. Therefore, when dedicating merits towards full enlightenment, the dedication should be dedicated while non-objectifying the three spheres. It is said that if dedication is conjoined with the wisdom realizing emptiness, it is said that roots of virtue dedicated in that way conjoined with the wisdom realizing emptiness can never be destroyed. 
It is said that just merely dedicating the roots of virtue towards full enlightenment doesn’t necessarily guarantee that those roots of virtue will become a cause for enlightenment, and will go to enlightenment. No! If the act of dedication of the roots of virtue towards full enlightenment is conjoined with the wisdom realizing emptiness, then yes, it is guaranteed that the roots of virtue so dedicated in that way can never be destroyed.
As such, you can see the reason why the wisdom that see the ultimate nature of reality (the wisdom realizing emptiness) is so important. Until we have this wisdom, there is no way that any dedication that we do can be conjoined with it because it is not there in the first place.
Even if you don’t have the wisdom realizing emptiness for the time being, it is not so bad if you are not the angry kind. We are all like that, isn’t it? When it comes to virtue, we really have to try very hard before even we get something. After trying very hard, we get some virtue but then we get angry. When we get angry, it is not some small little anger but is of the fully developed kind that has the great power. That is how we destroy our roots of virtue all the time. 
That is why when Lama Zopa Rinpoche leads us into dedicating merits, he always throw in this is empty, that is empty, and may the I which is empty. The dedication is conjoining with emptiness. That is why he does that. That is the point. 
That is why it is so important for us to try at least to gain some ideasof emptiness as much as we can and then using whatever we know and put it into practice. When we dedicate the merit, as much as possible, non-objectifying the three spheres - the dedicator, the act of dedication and the merit that is dedicated don’t exist truly (don’t exist inherently).
It is said that when we rejoice in the roots of virtue of somebody who is inferior, i.e. somebody who is lower than us in whatever way, thenthe merits that we accumulate from rejoicing in that person’s merits is more than his merits that he has accumulated.
Then it is said that if we rejoice the roots of virtue of our peers, people who are roughly on the same quality, then we will get the similar amount of merits. 
This is actually said in the sutras that to the effects if you rejoice in the merits of those who are lower or inferior or who are your peers, you are going to accumulate more and similar merit respectively. If we rejoice in the virtue of somebody who is superior or better than us, we get a portion or a fraction of it. For example, it is said that if we rejoice in the merits of the buddhas and bodhisattvas, then we get like ten percent of it or something.
I don’t know who said this but I seem to remember somewhere there it is written that if you want to accumulate merits and at the same time want to remainlazy and want to have a relax life, for example you wantto accumulate merits while you are lying down or sleeping, then it is said that you should rejoice. 
As you have studied the Lamrim, the Lamrim texts says that if you rejoiceon this, you will get this and that. The fact is that when you rejoice, it acts against our jealousy. If you are able to rejoice in anybody’s merits, it doesn’t matter who, it is really a practical solution to our negative sense of competitivenesswhen it is manifest or when we feel jealous. At that time, if we really can feel happy, right there and then those negative sense of competitiveness and jealousy will just goes away. If we really able to feel happy and how wonderful whoever is creating merits, we get the bliss. We will experience that peace and happiness in the heart. So, in order for it to be rejoicing there must be real joy in our hearts. Otherwise, it is not. 
The meaning of rejoicing is that the happy mind that comes about through observing the merits or virtue or the good thing of others. Then we really feel wonderful in the heart and there is the real joy. That is rejoicing. 
When we truly feel the joy, then that is rejoicing. When the joy is there and we feel it and at the same time there is no room for negative competitiveness and jealousy. Rejoicing is something that we just really have to try as much as possible to feel that happiness while observing our merits or somebody else merits. What it does it increases our roots of virtue. 
The Path of Meditation of achieving and the completely pure Path of Meditation are the uncontaminated Path of Meditation. Essentially they means the same thing but just that conceptually we can isolate them as two different things.
In meaning they are the same thing in that:
-from the perspective of that which establishes the imprint of the final realization, it is posited as the Path of Meditation of achieving.
- from the perspective of that which establishes the imprint of the final abandonment, it is called the completely pure Path of Meditation. 
So, that is about it for the Knower of the Path. 
Next lesson will be the Knower of Bases.