Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/Transcript pdf/ORN_GTTnotes_13.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:51:40.172531
================================================================================

Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
1  
Masters Program: Ornament for Clear Realization 
Commentary by Geshe Tenzin Tenphel 
 
 
Monday afternoon, 12 May 2008 
 
Q: Could Geshe-la please give some clarification re garding the statement on the top of page 80: 
“Since the modes of the perfection of wisdom are di fficult to realize at all times—and not simply on 
this occasion—they are only to be realized through having pleased the spiritual guide for a long 
time.” 
A: The modes of the perfection of wisdom are only r ealized through having relied on the spiritual 
guide for a long time. In other words, without havi ng relied on a spiritual guide for a long time, the y 
will be difficult to realize. In addition to relyin g upon a teacher, one should also please him/her; i n 
that way the meaning would be complete. It is impor tant to rely upon a teacher, so we must be 
careful in regard to choosing the teacher we rely o n. 
  “To please the spiritual guide” means to please t he mind of the spiritual guide. How does one do 
this? The best way is by offering him/her one’s pra ctice. In particular we should not deceive the 
teacher by behaving well when he is around and misb ehaving when he is not. There are two types 
of spiritual guide, the outer and the inner. The ou ter is important, but the inner one is even more 
important. because without the inner spiritual guid e, no matter how good the outer spiritual guide is,  
one will not receive benefit.  
 
Q: What is the inner spiritual guide? 
A: The inner spiritual guide is what urges us towar d the positive side, the class of virtue. For 
example, when we’re about to do something negative,  our mind tells us that it is not good to do this; 
that it is not appropriate, not honest, or not conc ordant with the Dharma. 
 
Q: In Pabongka Rinpoche’s Lam-rim it says that Atis ha had a cook who had higher realizations than 
his student who was a meditator. How is that? Becau se it seems that the meditator was following 
Atisha’s instructions and offered his practice of m editation. 
A: It all boils down to what it means to practice. “Practice” means to transform the mind. The fact 
that someone is doing retreat in a mountain hermita ge does not necessarily mean that he is 
practicing Dharma. This depends on the mind. If thi s person is thinking about worldly activities he 
is not practicing the Dharma. On the other hand, so meone who is cooking, sweeping, and so forth 
can at the same time be transforming his mind, wher eby he is practicing the Dharma. To practice 
the Dharma does not mean to sit up straight in the meditation posture! 
 I myself saw an elderly monk in the monastery, who  was in his 60s or 70s, who would do 
activities like cleaning, working in the garden, an d so forth. I was surprised by that because he was 
doing the kind of work that young monks usually do,  whereas the older monks can spend their time  
reciting prayers and doing formal Dharma practices.  However, the fact that the monk was doing 
mundane activities did not necessarily mean that he  was not practicing the Dharma. There are many 
opportunities to practice Dharma while doing such w ork, for example people can say unpleasant 
things to you while you are working in the garden, so then you have the opportunity to practice 
patience. There are such opportunities to undertake  serious practice, so when I saw this elderly 
monk working in such a way, I was astonished. 
 
Q: Would it be better to memorize the definienda an d definitions in Gyeltsab Je’s text or those 
found in Jetsun Chokyi Gyeltsen’s text, given that sometimes they are different? 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
2 A: The main thing is to get the meaning. Sometimes Gyeltsab Je has a long definiendum and a brief 
definition, whereas Jetsun Chokyi Gyeltsen has shor ter definienda and longer definitions. You can 
put the two side by side and compare them. The main  thing is to make sure that the meaning is 
complete. If you have the capacity to memorize, you  can memorize Jetsun-pa’s definitions. If not, 
you can memorize Gyeltsab Je’s definitions which te nd to be shorter.  
 Gyeltsab Je, for example, uses the term “bodhisatt va activity,” but it would be better to annotate 
this term and use “bodhisattva yoga,” because “yoga ” has a more accurate meaning than “activity.” 
So in certain cases you have to annotate Gyeltsab J e’s definitions a little, otherwise the meaning is 
quite complete.  Why do the definitions not agree in some cases? Gye ltsab Je posited his definitions 
mainly from the point of view of helping students t o understand the meaning, whereas Jetsun 
Chokyi Gyeltsen’s definitions are posited more from  the point of view of decisive analysis, such 
that if you use them in debate, you would not run i nto faults or difficulties.  
 
Correction (middle of page 80) : 
 
Joining the [brief] indication and the [extensive] explanation, “Truth body” is stated. An 
assertion of the Acarya took them to be the words j oining the [brief] indication and the 
[extensive] explanation. {111} However, it is asser ted that there is no fault of not 
having engaged the meaning of the words of the trea tise, even though  if this is taken to 
indicate  the four  fourth  exalted body. ies  has been indicated by this [stanza].   
 
Correction (footnote, bottom of page 80 in the text , and also page 35 in the notes from week 12) : 
 
Translator: There was an explanation Geshe-la gave last week of the two divisions of the nature 
body:  a nature body that is a purity in being free  from inherent  stains, and a nature body that is a 
purity in being free from adventitious stains.  I t hink it would be better to replace “inherent” with 
“natural,” because in this Autonomy school they hav e an unusual assertion regarding inherent 
existence which is not accepted by the Consequence school, so it is better to say “natural stains” 
rather than “inherent stains.” Regarding this point , Geshe-la explained that the stains do not enter 
the nature of the mind, and by becoming free from o bscurations that obscure the seeing of the 
nature of the mind, then the nature of the mind is pure. The Tibetan term rang bzhin  is sometimes 
translated as “inherent” (as in “inherent existence ”) and sometimes as “nature.” In this case it seems  
better to use the word “natural.”  
 
Correction (page 60, root text 1.5c):  
 
In order to keep the translation consistent, as “ma nifest complete enlightenment” is used on page 
79, v. 1.17bcd, make the following change to the ro ot text and the Explanation: 
 
1.5c Clear  Manifest  complete enlightenment in one instant, 
 
EXPLANATION 
The definition [of an application in complete aspec ts ] is: a bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined 
with a wisdom cultivating the aspects of the three exalted knowers.  
 
The object characterized is: “ clear  manifest  complete realization of all aspects .” … 
 
The Tibetan word mngon par (Skt : abhi)  is sometimes translated as clear , sometimes as manifest.  
In Abhisamaya  we translate the word Abhi  as clear , but in the context of Abhidharma,  Abhi  is 
translated as manifest . So there are 2 common translations.  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
3 Ornament of the Essence , p. 85. 
2B2C-1A2. Explaining the ten topics extensively 
2B2C-1A2A. Explaining the promise in attitude in whi ch one makes a commitment for the sake of attaining  an 
exalted knower of all aspects 
2B2C-1A2B. Explaining the instructions which reveal the methods for accomplishing the aim of the promis e 
2B2C-1A2C. Explaining the achievings which accomplis h the aim of the instructions accordingly 
2B2C-1A2A. Explaining the promise in attitude in whi ch one makes a commitment for the sake of attaining  an 
exalted knower of all aspects 
2B2C-1A2A-1. General meaning 
2B2C-1A2A-2. Meaning of the branches 
2B2C-1A2A-1 General meaning 
2B2C-1A2A-1A. Supports who generate the Mahayana gen erated mind  
2B2C-1A2A-1B. Cause 
2B2C-1A2A-1C. Entity 
2B2C-1A2A-1D. Benefits 
2B2C-1A2A-1A. Supports who generate the Mahayana gen erated mind 
In regard to the support who generates the wishing mind [of enlightenment], even desire 
realm gods, nagas, and so forth who are inclined to  the Mahayana and desire to attain 
buddhahood generate it. As for the explanation in [ Asanga’s] Bodhisattvas’ Grounds  
(Bodhisattvabhumi ) and [Atisa’s] Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment  
(Bodhipathapradipa ) that the support of the engaging mind of enlighte nment must be 
individual liberation (pratimoksa) vows 1, this is in terms of the special support, because 
it also exists in the continua of some bodhisattvas  who bear the support of desire realm 
gods and the support of the upper realms [form and formless realms]. 
 
This passage discusses the support of the mind of e nlightenment but does not specifically mention 
the body support and the mental support. It is impo rtant for you to understand these two supports:  
• The body support is the six types of migrating bein gs; 
• The mental support is either a preparation of the f irst concentration or an actual 
concentration.  
From this we can know that without meditative stabi lization, there is no generation of the mind of 
enlightenment.  
 In terms of the body support, it is said that all six classes of migrating beings can generate the 
mind of enlightenment or bodhichitta. Gyeltsab Je s pecifically mentions desire realm gods and 
nagas, but in fact all migrating beings can generat e it. So you may wonder whether hell beings can 
generate it? There are debates about this point. It  is said that our Teacher, Buddha Shakyamuni, in 
one of his past lives was born in the hell realm an d while in that realm, he generated the mind 
aspiring to supreme enlightenment. At that time did  he have an actual concentration? The answer is 
no. To summarize the debates and present the conclu sion: he did not have an actual concentration at 
that time, because as a hell being the attachment o f the desire realm is manifest. However, he did 
have a preparation of a concentration and that did not degenerate when he was in the hell realm. In 
order to be reborn in the hell realm, which is in t he desire realm, it is necessary to manifest 
attachment. When the attachment of the desire realm  is manifest, an actual concentration 
degenerates. Therefore, he did not have an actual c oncentration but he did have a preparation of a 
concentration.  
                                                 
1 According to Gendun Drup’s commentary to stanza 4. 13cd of Vasubandhu’s Abdhidharmakosha (Treasury of 
Manifest Knowledge ), the definition of an individual liberation vow i s: a morality of definite emergence included within  
the desire realm. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
4  If one has a preparation of a concentration, even if attachment becomes manifest at the time of 
death, the preparation of a concentration does not degenerate. At the time of newly attaining a 
preparation of a concentration, one has not abandon ed manifest afflictions. It is through the process 
of abandoning the manifest afflictions that one att ains an actual concentration. If manifest 
afflictions were to be generated, the actual concen tration would degenerate, however a preparation 
for a concentration does not need to degenerate, be cause even when manifest afflictions are present, 
a preparation of a concentration can be present.  
 
Q: What is a preparation of a concentration? 
A: A preparation of a concentration is attained whe n one newly attains calm abiding. The extensive 
explanation regarding this comes in the context of the topic of achieving of engagement, which is 
one of the more important topics of the first chapt er. 
 
Q: If through abandoning the manifest afflictions o ne attains an actual concentration, it would seem 
that one attains a clear realization. 
A: It is not necessary that upon attaining an actua l concentration, one attains a clear realization. 
 
Q: Did the Buddha have bodhichitta before he was re born in the hell realm, or did he already have a 
preparation of a concentration and then newly gener ated bodhichitta in the hell realm on the basis of 
that?  
A: He had attained a preparation of a concentration  before being born in the hell realm, and after he 
was born in the hell realm he newly generated bodhi chitta. There are two schools of thought 
regarding this description of the Buddha generating  bodhichitta in the hell realm. One school 
accepts that he actually generated bodhichitta on t he support of a hell being, while another school 
says that he generated the cause of bodhichitta, gr eat compassion, on the support of a hell being.  
 
Q: If Buddha Shakyamuni had attained a preparation of a concentration he should have been reborn 
in a form realm, not in the hell realm. So how is i t possible that he was born in the hell realm? 
A: In order to be born in the form realm one needs to have attained an actual concentration; one will 
not be born in the form realm with a mere preparati on of a concentration. Someone who has 
generated an actual first concentration has abandon ed the manifest afflictions of the desire realm; 
this refers principally to the manifest attachment  of the desire realm. Without abandoning the 
manifest afflictions of the desire realm it is not possible to be reborn in the first concentration of  the 
form realm. If one has attained an actual first con centration, it is not possible for attachment of th e 
desire realm to become manifest. If the attachment of the desire realm does not  become manifest, 
the karmic seed to be reborn in the desire realm wi ll not be nourished. Due to that, a person who has 
attained a first concentration will be reborn in th e form realm.  
 
Q: But the attainment of calm abiding is not a desi re realm mind. 
A: When one attains a preparation of a concentratio n, it is possible for the afflictions of the desire  
realm to become manifest because a person who has a ttained merely a preparation of a 
concentration has not abandoned the manifest afflic tions of the desire realm. Indeed, calm abiding is 
not a mind of the desire realm, however, when manif est afflictions of the desire realm are 
generated, this preparation of a concentration does  not degenerate.  
 
Q: If one has attained calm abiding and then dies, is one reborn with calm abiding? 
A: It is possible that someone who has attained cal m abiding can be reborn with calm abiding—this 
calm abiding has not degenerated—but there is no pe rvasion. Thus, there are cases of people who 
have attained calm abiding but lose it after being reborn in another life. It all depends on the 
determination of the person. Thus, there can be a p erson who has attained calm abiding, but at the 
time of death has little determination and a lot of  fear, and then this calm abiding can degenerate. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
5 There can also be a person who has very strong dete rmination and mental courage, and at the time 
of death this person can maintain their calm abidin g without degeneration. 
 
Q: It seems that a preparation of a concentration d oes not degenerate, whereas calm abiding can 
degenerate. 
A: It is not necessary that a preparation of a conc entration degenerates; it is possible that it does not 
degenerate at the time of death. It is possible tha t it does  degenerate, but there is no pervasion that it 
will degenerate.  
 To clarify the relationship between calm abiding a nd a preparation of a concentration: calm 
abiding is  a preparation of a concentration, whereas a prepar ation of a concentration need not be 
calm abiding.  
 
Q: If one has calm abiding and afflictions arise an d one follows them, is the calm abiding lost? 
A: When a person follows afflictions, it is possibl e for calm abiding to degenerate, but there is no 
pervasion. In general, when one is cultivating calm  abiding, it is said that there are obstacles that 
arise such as scattering. Specifically the obstacle s to attaining calm abiding are laxity and 
excitement. When this presentation is looked at in detail, manifest attachment can be divided into 
nine levels: the great of the great, middling of th e great, small of the great and so forth through th e 
small of the small. When one abandons  these nine levels of manifest attachment, one atta ins an 
actual concentration. In order to attain calm abidi ng, it is not necessary to have abandoned even the 
first of these levels, the great of the great level  of manifest attachment. However, one needs to have  
suppressed  the great of the great level of manifest attachmen t merely to stop laxity and excitement. 
When one attains calm abiding, one attains a prepar ation of a concentration. After having attained 
calm abiding, one generates the direct antidotes to  the various levels of manifest attachment 
beginning from the great of the great.  
 In discussing the nine levels of manifest attachme nt, we can talk about nine preparations that 
serve as actual antidotes to them. At the time of t he direct antidote, the afflictions have not yet be en 
abandoned.  
 When one newly attains calm abiding, this is the a ttainment of calm abiding alone. As one 
carries on with the cultivation, one is able to att ain a union of calm abiding and special insight. 
Later, there will be an extensive discussion about the concentrations. In Gyeltsab Je’s text, there is  
not such a detailed explanation, but there are sepa rate texts that explain the concentrations and 
formless absorptions.   
 
Ornament of the Essence, page 84:  
2B2C-1A2A-1B. Cause {115}  
Shantideva’s Compendium of Trainings  ( Siksasamuccaya ) explains the four modes of 
generating the mind [of enlightenment]: (1) having seen the exalted body of a buddha, 
one wonders, “What if I were to attain such [a body ]?”; (2) seeing and hearing about the 
inconceivable strength of bodhisattvas  buddhas  and bodhisattvas, and so forth; (3) not 
being able to bear the decline of the Mahayana teac hings; and (4) not being able to bear 
sentient beings tormented by suffering [and generat ing great compassion].  The 
explanation that it is generated from the four caus es, four conditions, and four forces is 
a branch of eliminating doubt about the causes and conditions. Although the other three 
are mere generated minds that seek buddhahood, what  is explicitly indicated here is a 
fully qualified principal generated mind that acts as the support of deeds; hence it must 
definitely be motivated by a compassion that cannot  bear sentient beings’ suffering and 
wishes to free them from it. 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
6 The fourth mode of generating the mind of enlighten ment “not being able to bear sentient beings 
tormented by suffering” needs to be annotated to re ad “not being able to bear sentient beings 
tormented by suffering and generating great compassion .” Here when the text says “the other three 
are mere generated minds that seek buddhahood…,” it  is saying that the fourth mode is what is 
explicitly indicated here. Thus, the first three mo des are mere generated minds that seek 
buddhahood, but they are not what is explicitly ind icated here.  
 The phrase “The explanation that it is generated f rom the four causes, four conditions, and four 
forces is a branch of eliminating doubt about the c auses and conditions” means that in order to 
generate conventional bodhichitta the four causes, four conditions, and four forces must be 
complete. 
 
Q: What are the four causes, four conditions, and f our forces? 
A: The four causes are: (1) excellent lineage, (2) being held by a spiritual guide, (3) greater 
compassion, and (4) fear of the sufferings of cycli c existence.  
 The four conditions are: (1) seeing and hearing ab out the magical emanations of the tathagatas 
and bodhisattvas, (2) hearing the Mahayana scriptur al basket, (3) seeing that the Mahayana Dharma 
is close to decline, and (4) seeing afflicted senti ent beings in this context. 
 The four forces are: (1) one’s own force, (2) othe rs’ force, (3) causal force/force of the cause, 
and (4) force of application.  
 
Q: Does “others’ force” refer to being supported by  the buddhas and bodhisattvas? 
A: Yes,  you can take “others’ force” to be the actual force  of buddhas and bodhisattvas. It 
principally refers to the force of one’s spiritual guide who teaches one the mind of enlightenment. 
This person can be a buddha or a bodhisattva. 
 
Ornament of the Essence, page 85:  
2B2C-1A2A-1C. Entity 
2B2C-1A2A-1C1. Definition 
2B2C-1A2A-1C2. Divisions 
2B2C-1A2A-1C3. Differences between wishing and enga ging 
2B2C-1A2A-1C1. Definition 
The definition [of Mahayana generated mind ] is: a special mind that is concomitant with 
the aspiration seeking perfect complete enlightenme nt for others’ welfare.  
 
Know from the stages of the Ornament for Clear Realization,  composed by Jetsun 
Losang Dragpa Palzangpo [Lama Tsongkhapa], how you should train in the attitudes 
seeking others’ welfare and seeking enlightenment, and so forth, in order to generate 
this. 
 
The definition of Mahayana generated mind posited b y Gyeltsab Je is stated for the sake of 
understanding; it is not a branch of decisive analy sis. If one were to take that stated here as the 
definition, it is not entirely accurate. What needs  to be adjusted to make this definition accurate, w e 
can replace the word “mind” with “Mahayana main men tal knower.” Thus the definition of a 
Mahayana generated mind  reads: a special Mahayana main mental knower that is concomitant with 
the aspiration seeking perfect complete enlightenme nt for others’ welfare. 
 What is the significance of making this adjustment  to Gyeltsab Je’s definition? Prior to 
generating bodhichitta, one has a contrived aspirat ion seeking enlightenment, but such a contrived 
aspiration seeking enlightenment is not a Mahayana generated mind. It is  a special mind that is 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
7 concomitant with the aspiration seeking perfect com plete enlightenment for others’ welfare, but it is 
not a Mahayana generated mind.  
 In order for the definiendum to be complete and ac curate, it should say: “a Mahayana 
conventional  generated mind,” whereas in his outlines Gyeltsab Je just says “Mahayana generated 
mind.” 
 What is the meaning of “concomitant with”? A main mind is concomitant with its mental factors. 
Thus, a Mahayana conventional generated mind is con comitant with the aspiration seeking perfect 
complete enlightenment for others’ welfare, which i s a mental factor in its retinue. It is said that a  
main knower and the mental factors in its retinue a re concomitant by way of five similarities: (1) 
support, (2) object of observation, (3) aspect, (4)  substance, and (5) time.  
 
Q: What does “concomitant by way of five similariti es” mean? 
Translator: The significance is that the main mind and its mental factors are concomitant by way of 
support, i.e. they arise on the same support; they arise by observing the same object of observation; 
they have the same aspect; arise at the same time, and so forth.  
 
Q: Did Lama Tsongkhapa compose a text called Stages of  the Ornament for Clear Realization?  
A: I checked the index of Lama Tsongkhapa’s texts b ut found that Lama Tsongkhapa did not 
compose a text called Stages of  the Ornament for Clear Realization . He composed the Lam Rim 
Chen Mo , and the Golden Rosary  which is his commentary on the Ornament for Clear Realization . 
However, Gyeltsab Je did compose a text called Opening the Door to Explaining the Stages of the  
Ornament for Clear Realization . Perhaps Lama Tsongkhapa gave teachings on the sta ges of the 
Ornament for Clear Realization  and Gyeltsab Je took notes. As he was the person w ho wrote down 
the text, then perhaps the text was attributed to h im as the author.  
 
 
Tuesday afternoon, 13 May 2008 
 
Question: Regarding the four modes of generating th e mind of enlightenment (page 84) and the four 
conditions we discussed yesterday: the four modes a nd four conditions seem very similar.  
A: Yes, they are very similar.  
 
Before we go into a detailed discussion of the Maha yana conventional generated mind, I’d like to 
talk a bit about the lam rim, the stages of the pat h. Here, we are talking about how to generate 
bodhicitta and so forth. In terms of practice, we n eed to understand that there is a definite order in  
terms of the attitudes we need to generate. For a s tart, we need to examine our attitude regarding our  
life now. If we examine our mind, we may find we ha ve a lot of preoccupation with this life alone; 
the events of this life can take on a huge signific ance for us. For example, we may talk to others in 
an unpleasant way, and if others are rude with us, we get angry and irritated, and so on. We may 
find we become unhappy due to small conditions. If that is the case, we can forget about the 
happiness of future lives; we can’t even cope with the circumstances of this life. So for a start, we 
need to learn how to cope with the hardships of thi s life and how to work with them and, on that 
basis, we can consider the happiness of future live s and create the causes for that happiness.  
 If we are bad-tempered and get angry and unhappy e asily, there is no way we can do good 
practice, so the first thing we need to do is to wo rk with such states of mind. If we have the 
tendency to get unhappy and angry very readily, we need to examine the attitudes in our minds. 
There may be certain things that stimulate these un happy states, and indulging in these thoughts 
does not benefit us, it just makes us unhappy. If w e don’t try to counteract such attitudes, these 
states of mind will become very natural, and will m ake it difficult for us to practice. Although we 
have the potential to practice, the presence of suc h habitual tendencies prevent us from practicing 
properly. We need to counteract such unhealthy atti tudes. For instance, when we meditate, many 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
8 thoughts come up in the mind and we may feel like w e need to get up and do something, or go and 
talk to somebody, and so on. This also happens when  we are studying: we may look at the text and 
then different kinds of thoughts come up, and we ca n’t really engage in the meaning of the text. If 
we do something to eliminate these obstacles, we wi ll be able to meditate and study well, but 
without counteracting these habitual tendencies, th ere is no way to meditate or study well, let alone 
abide peacefully in this life.  
 We need to apply reasoning to reduce the unhealthy  tendencies in the mind, and we need to 
investigate to see what these non-beneficial attitu des, are and try to reduce them. Otherwise, they 
prevent us from studying and meditating well. By ap plying reasoning, we try to reduce these non-
beneficial attitudes, and in that way we can have a  very good quality mind when we study and 
meditate. The most difficult thing for us to do is to work with the scattered mind, which wants to 
think about this and that, and so on.  This is actu ally the foundation of our practice. If we fail to 
counteract this mind that wants to indulge in negat ive attitudes, then we don’t have the ability to 
understand well the small scope teachings, and to g enerate the realizations of the small scope. And 
if we are unable to do that, we can forget about th e realizations of the medium and great scopes. So 
without this initial work of trying to subdue the m ind, there is no way any real practice can occur. I f 
our mind is constantly filled with various thoughts , it is as though we do not have any break from 
these thoughts. Once in a while, a good thought com es up, but it is quickly pushed away by other, 
negative thoughts. So this initial work of working with negative thoughts is actually the foundation 
for the small, medium and great scopes.  
 Here, we are talking about the conventional genera ted mind. Is this attained when we generate 
the thought to attain enlightenment? When we attend  jenangs, empowerments, and so on, we 
generate bodhicitta as a part of them. Does that me an we have attained conventional bodhicitta? If 
that is the case, then we are all bodhisattvas. The  generated mind that is attained on such occasions 
is contrived bodhicitta, it is not the actual bodhicitta. In the  context of the sevenfold cause-and-
effect instructions for generating bodhicitta, we s tart by recognizing all sentient beings as having 
been our mothers, then we remember their kindness a nd so on. The seventh point, the effect, is 
uncontrived bodhicitta. This refers to a bodhicitta  that arises without exertion, naturally, without t he 
need for deliberate contemplation. When we initiall y generate bodhicitta, we have wishing 
bodhicitta. Having generated this, we take the bodh isattva vows. When we start training in the 
deeds of a bodhisattva, we generate the engaging bo dhicitta. This is the general procedure which 
you need to understand. When we go through the text  there are many details, as well as some tricky 
points we will be discussing.  
 
Translator: There is a question related to a questi on on the exam, which says: A direct realization of  
emptiness in the continuum of a Hinayana foe-destro yer is a knower of bases. The suggested answer 
is “false.” 
A: Right: the answer is false. This is not  a knower of bases.  
Translator: This is a clear realization that is not  any of the three exalted knowers. Don’t we say tha t 
the clear realizations of the four aryas are includ ed in the three exalted knowers?  
A: Yes. The clear realizations of the four aryas ar e included in the three exalted knowers. But if it is 
a clear realization of the four aryas, it is not ne cessarily one of the three exalted knowers. If you 
claim that a clear realization in the continuum of an arya has to be one of the three—a knower of 
bases, a knower of paths, or an exalted knower of a ll aspects—many absurd consequences will 
follow.  
 
Q: In order to generate bodhicitta, the four causes , four conditions, and four forces are necessary. I n 
order to generate bodhicitta, is it necessary that these occur all together? 
A: Yes. When our teacher Shakyamuni Buddha, was bor n in the hell realm in a previous life, were 
the four causes complete? One of these is being hel d by a spiritual guide—was he held by a spiritual 
guide?  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
9  
Q: One of the four conditions is that one needs to see that the Mahayana Dharma is close to decline, 
and if that is the case, then at the time of the bu ddha, it would not be possible to generate bodhicit ta, 
because it was not close to decline.  
A: Good point. Let us examine this expression: seei ng that the Mahayana Dharma is close to 
decline. What does “close to decline” mean? Some mo nths, some years…? In order to generate 
conventional bodhicitta, it is not necessary for th e Mahayana Dharma to be in decline.  
 I did say yesterday that the four causes, conditio ns, and forces need to be complete. But if we 
look at the individual items, they may not be prese nt. For example, was the person who was reborn 
in the hell realm who later became Shakyamuni Buddh a held by a spiritual guide? What does it 
mean to be “held by a spiritual guide”? This does n ot mean one has to be physically close to a 
spiritual guide. It actually refers to being mentally  close to a spiritual guide. It is not necessary to  be 
physically near. Someone who is held by a spiritual  guide is someone who pleases the spiritual 
guide and practices whatever is instructed by the s piritual guide.  
 
Q: Who was the Buddha’s spiritual guide?  
A: It is stated in the Sutra of the Fortunate Eon . 
Student: It was Dipamkara. 
GTT: Yes, that may be correct. In this sutra, it st ates how the various buddhas generated bodhicitta, 
and so on.  
 
Q: If the Buddha, when he was born in a hell realm,  received these instructions, he must have been 
remembering instructions from a previous life, or r eceiving them telepathically.  
A: It is said that all the buddhas are looking afte r each and every sentient being. When the 
conditions are right, a sentient being will receive  care from all the buddhas. Why is it that we do no t 
receive the care of buddhas? It is our own fault. I f we do not behave properly, we are unable to 
receive their care. It is said that even if a buddh a were to come in our presence and teach the 
Dharma, if the conditions are not complete, we woul d not be able to hear the teachings well; we 
would not even be able to see them properly, we wou ld see some strange appearances. If from our 
side the conditions are complete, we will immediate ly receive the care of the buddhas.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 85: 
2B2C-1A2A-1C2. Divisions 
[The divisions are] wishing and engaging minds.  
2B2C-1A2A-1C3. Differences between wishing and enga ging 
[Kamalashila’s] Stages of Meditation  ( Bhavanakrama ) says {116}: 
 
The seeking at the beginning, “May I become a buddh a in order to benefit those 
migrating beings” is the mind that wishes. From the n onwards, having upheld 
vows, that having engaged in the accumulations is t he mind that has engaged. 
 
[Shantideva’s] Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva  ( Bodhisattvacharyavatara , 1.16) 
gives analogies of the two: 
 
As is understood by the particularities 
Of desiring to go and going, 
So the wise should understand respectively 
The particularities of these two. 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
10 Having taken as the basis the thought, “I shall go to the city,” there are two 
[possibilities] of being and not being actually con joined with activities of the body, such 
as striding onwards. Likewise, while the general de finition of the generated mind does 
not have the attribute of engaging, the divisions i nto the two [possibilities] of being and 
not being actually conjoined with the activity of t he practice of deeds is the meaning of 
the former passage. The assertion that there is no wishing mind at the time of training in 
the deeds after taking the engaging vows is not the  meaning of those [passages]. 
Moreover, even after having upheld the engaging vow s in that manner, there are two 
modes of engagement of the mind with respect to tra ining in the deeds. The actual 
presence of a mindfulness and aspiration that seeks  omniscience (at a time when not 
only is one motivated merely by the generated mind,  but an enhanced intention to give 
also dawns) is the meaning of being actually conjoi ned with the activity of the practice 
of deeds. When such is absent, then it is not actua lly conjoined [with the activity of the 
practice of deeds]. Therefore, it is obvious that t here is no fault in asserting that a 
wishing mind exists from the path of accumulation—a nd even after having attained a 
ground—because even though one directly realizes th e meaning of emptiness after 
having attained a ground, there will occur plenty o f occasions where the generated mind 
is not actually conjoined with [the activity of the  practice of deeds].  
 
The meaning of these citations is that if one is ac tually conjoined with the activity of the practice of 
deeds, then that generated mind is engaging generat ed mind/engaging bodhicitta; if one is not 
actually conjoined with the activity of the practic e of deeds, then that generated mind is wishing 
bodhicitta. What is the measure of being actually c onjoined with the activity of the practice of 
deeds? The text says, “The actual presence of a min dfulness and aspiration that seeks omniscience 
(at a time when not only is one motivated merely by  the generated mind, but an enhanced intention 
to give also dawns) is the meaning of being actuall y conjoined with the activity of the practice of 
deeds. When such is absent, then it is not actually  conjoined [with the activity of the practice of 
deeds].”  
 What are the boundaries for these two types of bod hicitta? The boundaries for wishing bodhicitta 
is from the Mahayana path of accumulation through t he end of the continuum of a sentient being; 
the boundaries for engaging bodhicitta is from the Mahayana path of accumulation through t he 
buddha ground. You see that there is a difference b etween these boundaries. Both begin from the 
Mahayana path of accumulation, but the end points a re different: for the Mahayana wishing 
generated mind, it is through the end of the contin uum of a sentient being; for the engaging 
generated mind, it is through the buddha ground.  
 When one initially generates wishing bodhichitta, one does not have engaging bodhichitta.  After 
generating wishing bodhicitta, one takes the bodhis attva vows, and then engages in the deeds of a 
bodhisattva; at that point, one generates engaging bodhicitta. The order of generation of the 
sequence is:  
1.  one initially generates wishing bodhichitta,  
2.  one takes bodhisattva vows, 
3.  one engages in the deeds of a bodhisattva, 
4.  one generates engaging bodhichitta. 
 
This does not mean that when engaging bodhicitta is generated, th ere is no longer the wishing 
bodhicitta. When one engages in the practice of dee ds of a bodhisattva, one generates engaging 
bodhicitta; at that point, there is no wishing bodh icitta, but later on, wishing bodhicitta will arise , 
and then engaging generated mind will arise again, and so on.  
 For example, a bodhisattva on the path of accumula tion or on the path of preparation can be in 
meditative equipoise on emptiness; at such times, t he bodhicitta in his/her continuum is wishing 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
11 bodhicitta. During subsequent attainment, when the bodhisattva trains in the deeds of a bodhisattva, 
the bodhicitta in his/her continuum is engaging bod hicitta.  
 You should not think that wishing bodhicitta and e ngaging bodhicitta are two separate 
continuities. When someone initially generates bodh icitta, this is wishing bodhicitta. This person 
goes on to take the bodhisattva vows and actually e ngage in the deeds of a bodhisattva. At this time, 
the bodhisattva has engaging bodhicitta, and it is manifest. When this bodhisattva enters meditative 
equipoise on emptiness, the bodhicitta becomes non- manifest. So the bodhicitta in this person’s 
continuum is wishing bodhicitta, and when this bodh isattva enters subsequent attainment, at the 
time of training in the deeds of a bodhisattva, the  bodhicitta in his continuum is engaging bodhicitta . 
In conclusion, when the Mahayana conventional gener ated mind is actually conjoined with the 
activity of the practice of deeds, it is an engagin g bodhicitta; if it is not actually conjoined with the 
activity of the practice of deeds, it is wishing bo dhicitta.  
 The criterion for being actually conjoined with th e activity of the practice of deeds has already 
been explained. In such a situation, when we say th at bodhicitta is actually conjoined with the 
activity of the practice of deeds, both factors—tha t which conjoins (the activity of the practice of 
the deeds), and that which is conjoined (bodhicitta )—must be manifest. If either of the two is not 
manifest, we would say that there is one being conj oined with the other, but it is not a case of being  
actually conjoined. If either of the two is not manifest, th en we would not say that bodhicitta is 
actually conjoined with the activity of the practic e of deeds. 
 
Q: When a bodhisattva is in meditative equipoise, t he practice of the perfection of wisdom is 
manifest, but bodhicitta is not manifest. For that reason, we say engaging bodhicitta is not manifest.  
During that time, there is wishing bodhicitta. Is t hat correct?  
A: Yes, that’s correct.  
 
Q: During initiations, when we take the bodhisattva  vows, if we don’t have an actual concentration 
or a preparation for a concentration, are we actual ly receiving the vows?  
A: During an initiation, we have a pure motivation wishing to receive the initiation, so we generate 
contrived bodhicitta, and at the point of taking th e vows there must be a desire to take the vows. On 
top of that, after reciting the vows three times, i t’s necessary to generate the thought, “I have 
obtained the vows.” If those conditions are complet e, then we actually receive the bodhisattva 
vows, even if we have not generated uncontrived bod hicitta.  On such occasions, we leave very 
special latencies on our mind. However, if we are n ot careful, there is the danger of contradicting or  
transgressing these vows and creating negativities.  In terms of the various levels of vows, the 
shramana and bikkshu vows are less profound than the bodhisattva vows. I n comparison, the tantric 
vows are even more profound than bodhisattva vows.  
 
Q: In the criteria for being actually conjoined wit h the activity of the practice of deeds, it is said  that 
you need to have “ the actual presence of a mindfulness and aspiration  that seeks omniscience (at a 
time when not only is one motivated merely by the g enerated mind, but an enhanced intention to 
give also dawns.”  Does this imply that we need to physically hand ov er something? 
A: There are two possibilities: one can actually gi ve something, or one may not physically give 
something. In both cases, it is possible to have an  enhanced wish to give. 
 
Q: At the time of meditative equipoise of a bodhisa ttva, the practice of the perfection of wisdom is 
present. Is there at the same time, the practice of  the perfection of concentration? 
A: Yes.  
Q: Since this is an action, is it not also engaging  bodhicitta? 
A: There is wishing mind, but there is no engaging mind. [Translator to student: are you saying that 
because this is conjoined with the activity of deed s, there is engaging mind?] We would say that 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
12 bodhicitta in the continuum of a bodhisattva is con joined with the practice of deeds, but is not 
actually  conjoined, because the generated mind is not manif est.  
 
Q: It seems like the perfection of wisdom and the p erfection of concentration are not activities, 
because they are not conjoined with bodhicitta duri ng meditative equipoise.  
A: We would say that these activities are conjoined  with bodhicitta, but they are not actually 
conjoined with it.  
 
Q: Why does this criteria only mention “to give,” t he first of the six perfections? 
A: Indeed, only giving is mentioned in this criteri a, however bodhisattvas practice all six 
perfections inclusively within each of the practice s of the perfections. So it is not the case that 
ethics, patience, and so forth are not present. Whe n a bodhisattva is engaged in giving, it is said th at 
all the practices of the six perfections are includ ed. This means that when a bodhisattva is practicin g 
generosity, this is conjoined with the understandin g of the giver, gift and recipient being empty of 
true existence, so in this way the practice of the perfection of wisdom is present in the practice of 
the perfection of generosity.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 86: 
 
 Although the two—the engaging vows and the engagin g mind—are contradictory [in 
the sense of being mutually exclusive], know that t he generation of that [engaging mind 
comes about] through only the power of upholding th e vows. The engaging mind exists 
from the path of accumulation through buddha ground . {117} What has been explained 
here are the divisions of the conventional mind of enlightenment; they are not divisions 
of the ultimate mind of enlightenment. The differen ce between the two is as follows. An 
intention for the conventional exalted body (withou t intending for the mere ultimate 
mode of abidance of unsurpassable enlightenment) is  the former. An intention for only 
the ultimate mode of abidance of enlightenment, in a manner of water placed in water, 
is the latter; it exists having attained the path o f seeing and onwards; it does not exist in 
ordinary beings. 
 
This is saying there are two kinds of generated min d: conventional bodhicitta and ultimate 
bodhicitta. What has been explained above is conven tional bodhicitta, not ultimate bodhicitta. What 
is the difference between these? Conventional bodhi citta is the mind of seeking the conventional 
exalted body through observing the conventional exa lted body, whereas ultimate bodhicitta is an 
intention for only the ultimate mode of abidance of  enlightenment, in a manner of water placed in 
water. This ultimate bodhicitta only exists from th e first ground through the buddha ground; it does 
not exist in ordinary beings.  
 
Q: Are the results of wishing generated mind and en gaging generated mind the same? 
A: Yes. But this does not mean that one can attain enlightenment with just the wishing generated 
mind. The results of wishing bodhichitta and engagi ng bodhichitta are the same, enlightenment, but 
it does not mean that one can attainment enlightenm ent without engaging bodhichitta. Another 
example is that the uninterrupted path is a cause o f omniscience, and a liberated path is a cause of 
omniscience, but one cannot attain enlightenment wi th just an uninterrupted path.  
 
Q: On the buddha ground there is engaging bodhichit ta, but not wishing bodhichitta. So what are 
the deeds of a buddha conjoined with?  
A: On the buddha ground, meditative equipoise and s ubsequent attainment are not contradictory, so 
the deeds are always manifest.  
Q: What is a “conventional exalted body”? 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
13 A: The conventional exalted bodies are the emanation body, the complete enjoyment body , and the 
exalted wisdom truth body; in addition, there is al so the nature body that is purity in being free fro m 
adventitious stains. Therefore, the nature body tha t is purity in being free from natural stains is an  
ultimate exalted body .  
Q: Thus, it is the dharmadhatu of the buddha’s mind ? 
A: Yes, it refers to the dharmata of the buddha’s m ind.  
 
Q: What does it mean that “the two—the engaging vow s and the engaging mind—are 
contradictory” (page 86, top)? 
A: They are contradictory in the sense that there i s no common locus between them. Engaging vows 
are vows; engaging mind is bodhicitta. It is possib le for someone, before generating the engaging 
mind, to have engaging vows in his/her continuum.  
Q: When one has engaging mind, does one also have t he engaging vows? 
A: That’s correct.  
Q: So they are not mutually exclusive? 
A: Yes, they are. Engaging vows are the commitments  a bodhisattva makes, saying “I will engage 
in the bodhisattva deeds.”  
Q: What kind of phenomena are the vows? 
A: In the Vaibhashika and Sautrantika schools, vows  are forms. In this school, they are probably not 
form. Pratimoksha vows are explained by taking thos e two schools as the basis. They are not 
explained from the point of view of the Mahayana sc hools.  
 
Q: Once one attains the path of seeing, does the co nventional mind of enlightenment—the intention 
for the conventional exalted body—exist? 
A: On the path of seeing and above, we also find th e intention for the conventional exalted body. 
Therefore, both the conventional mind of enlightenm ent and the ultimate mind of enlightenment 
exist on the path of seeing and above. When one att ains the path of seeing, one is on an 
uninterrupted path. There is wishing bodhicitta (wh ich is not manifest), there is ultimate bodhicitta 
(which is manifest), but there is no engaging bodhi citta. One arises from the uninterrupted path and 
enters the liberated path; here also, there is wish ing bodhicitta (which is not manifest) and ultimate  
bodhicitta (which is manifest), but there is no eng aging bodhicitta. Then one enters subsequent 
attainment; when one trains in the deeds, there is manifest engaging bodhicitta, but no wishing 
bodhicitta, and there is ultimate bodhicitta, which  is not manifest.  
 We say the engaging mind exists from the path of s eeing through the buddha ground, but this 
does not mean it exists during the uninterrupted pa th and the liberated path; in fact it does not  exist 
during the uninterrupted path and the liberated pat h. The wishing mind exists from the path of 
seeing through the end of the continuum of a sentie nt being, but it does not exist in subsequent 
attainment.  
 During subsequent attainment, is engaging bodhichi tta pervaded by existing? During subsequent 
attainment, there is no wishing mind—is there perva sion? Engaging mind exists [during subsequent 
attainment]—is there pervasion? So what happens whe n a bodhisattva is sleeping during subsequent 
attainment?  
 
Student: the sleep is actually conjoined with the a ctivity of practice of the deeds. 
A: A bodhisattva does not sleep in the way we sleep . I would say that even during sleep there is 
engaging bodhichitta. The point here is that althou gh we say that engaging mind exists on the path 
of seeing through the buddha ground, it does not me an that it exists everywhere in this range; there 
are intervals in which there is no engaging mind. S imilarly, we say that the wishing mind exists on 
the path of seeing through the end of the continuum  of a sentient being. But this does not mean that 
it exists everywhere in this range, there are inter vals where there is no wishing mind. 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
14 Wednesday, 14 May 2008 (morning) 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 86:  
2B2C-1A2A-1D. Benefits 
There are the temporal benefits of (i) purifying ca uses of bad migrations accumulated 
previously and severing their future continuity, (i i) newly accumulating causes of good 
migrations and those accumulated previously not hav ing a limit to their exhaustion, and 
(iii) becoming worthy of being paid homage by the w orld, including gods. Eventually, 
one will attain unsurpassable enlightenment and so forth. 
 
The first of the temporal benefits  is “purifying causes of bad migrations accumulated  previously and 
severing their future continuity.” Why is it that b y generating bodhicitta, one purifies causes of bad  
migrations? Negativities are mainly accumulated in dependence on sentient beings. By generating a 
good mind, such as bodhicitta, one is able to count eract those negativities. In that way, one purifies  
negativities accumulated previously, specifically t he causes of bad migrations accumulated 
previously, and by generating bodhicitta, from then  onwards, one will not accumulate the causes of 
bad migrations; in that way one severs the future c ontinuity of causes of bad migrations.  
 
The second benefit  is “newly accumulating causes of good migrations a nd those accumulated 
previously not having a limit to their exhaustion.”  When one generates bodhicitta, one accumulates 
causes of good rebirths, in particular the causes o f a human rebirth. A human rebirth is a very 
special support for practicing Dharma. Furthermore,  the causes of good migrations previously 
accumulated do not have a limit to their exhaustion , because one dedicates one’s virtues and in this 
way, one’s virtues become very powerful and have no  limit to their exhaustion.  
 
Here it talks about accumulating causes of good mig rations but these are still migrations within 
samsara. In general, a rebirth in samsara is an obj ect of abandonment, so why do bodhisattvas want 
to accumulate causes of good migrations? Bodhisattv as actually intentionally create the cause to be 
reborn in a good migration, in particular that of a  human being, through the force of prayers.  
There are two benefits to this:  
(1) the human rebirth is a special support for prac ticing Dharma and  
(2) it is a special support for enacting the welfar e of others.  
For these two reasons, bodhisattvas intentionally m ake prayers to be reborn in the human realm 
within cyclic existence, and they take rebirth in c yclic existence with pleasure.  
 Bodhisattvas make prayers to attain a human rebirt h for very good reasons. We ourselves have 
attained such a rebirth, so it is important not to waste this opportunity, but to make full use of our  
human rebirth as much as possible. It’s very import ant that we realize how precious our human 
rebirth is, and how much potential it has, and not become discouraged when we encounter 
obstacles. It is important for us to develop a long -term view and make full use of our precious 
human rebirth without letting it go to waste.  
 
It is said that virtues have no limit to their exha ustion due to bodhicitta. When we accomplish virtue  
it is important that at the beginning, we have a go od motivation, that in the middle, we focus on the 
activity with a good mind, and that at the end, we dedicate the virtue created for all sentient beings  
to achieve the state of full enlightenment. In this  way, our virtues become very powerful. In 
addition, if we can conjoin our virtues with the re alization of emptiness— understanding how all 
phenomena lack true existence—then our virtue becom es even more powerful. When we conjoin 
our dedication with the realization of emptiness, i t becomes very stable and powerful. Even if we 
have not realized emptiness, we can still apply our  understanding of emptiness in our dedication. By 
contemplating emptiness with a part of our mind, we  can conjoin our dedication with this mere 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
15 understanding of emptiness. When we engage in an ac tivity, there is the preparation at the 
beginning, i.e. we need to have a good motivation, in the middle, the actual activity, and at the end,  
the conclusion of dedication to complete enlightenm ent. If we do a good dedication, it can perform 
the function of pacifying obstacles. Even if we hav e no realization of emptiness, we can remind 
ourselves that “this is empty of true existence.” D oing proper dedication is thus very helpful; by 
doing so, we can pacify obstacles that we encounter  in our studies and purify negativities in relation  
to others. As much as we are able to do a proper de dication, that much purification effect will be 
attained. We can dedicate to obtain a human body in  the future and to have the conditions to engage 
in studies; these will become the causes to attain enlightenment.  
 
In Buddhist texts, we find instructions on how to a ttain enlightenment in one life with one body. In 
case we are not able to actualize those instruction s, it is okay to make prayers to practice Dharma in  
a human body in future lives. We can contemplate in  this way, making dedication to have a series of 
better and better lives in the future so that our p ractice will also continuously become better. 
 
The third benefit  is: “becoming worthy of being paid homage by the w orld, including gods. 
Eventually, one will attain unsurpassable enlighten ment and so forth.” While it is important to 
accumulate virtue, it is important not to generate anger, because that is one great cause of 
destroying our roots of virtue. In particular, we s hould be careful not to get angry with bodhisattvas ; 
the damage from such anger is enormous. We also nee d to be careful about not getting angry with 
our teachers or our parents. Where are the bodhisat tvas? We don’t know! So we need to be careful 
not to get angry with anyone.  
 
Here in our community, we have ordained people and lay people. Within those who are ordained, 
there are senior and junior sangha. Those who are j unior should respect the senior sangha members, 
and the senior sangha members should be careful not  to be arrogant and not to bully the junior 
members. In this community, mutual respect is impor tant; lay people should respect those who are 
ordained and not get angry with them, and vice vers a. If we are not careful, then anger may arise 
and we may look down on others. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 86: 
2B2C-1A2A-2. Meaning of the branches 
2B2C-1A2A-2A. Explaining the common definition as we ll as the objects of observation 
2B2C-1A2A-2B. Explaining the divisions, a subsidiary  topic 
2B2C-1A2A-2A. Explaining the common definition as we ll as the objects of observation 
2B2C-1A2A-2A1. Definition 
2B2C-1A2A-2A2. The branches of ascertaining that [d efinition], the objects of observation 
2B2C-1A2A-2A1. Definition 
2B2C-1A2A-2A1A. Making a general connection 
2B2C-1A2A-2A1B. Root text 
2B2C-1A2A-2A1C. Commentary 
2B2C-1A2A-2A1A. Making a general connection 
COMMENTARY 
The entity of the generated mind itself, as well as  objects of observation: 
 
Q: What does “making a connection” refer to here? W hat is being connected to what? 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
16 A: Basically, it is making a connection between wha t is above and what is below; what is before 
and what comes after. In this context, for example,  we’ve been discussing the generated mind. Next, 
we are going to look at its objects of observation.   
 
Q: Why is it called “general connection”? 
A: We are talking about a general discussion of the  generated mind itself, not about the divisions of 
the generated mind.  
 
EXPLANATION 
The entity of the generated mind itself, as well as  its objects of observation: 
2B2C-1A2A-2A1B. Root text {118}  
ROOT TEXT 
1.19ab The generated mind is desire for 
Perfect complete enlightenment for others’ welfare.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The Mahayana generated mind  indicated here  is the definiendum. The definition is : a 
special mind concomitant with the desire for perfect complete enlightenment  for the 
sake of  liberating other  sentient beings from all suffering. 
 
Here, the word “mind” should be replaced by the exp ression “Mahayana main mental knower” in 
order to make the definition more accurate. The def inition would thus be “a special Mahayana main 
mental knower concomitant with the desire for perfe ct complete enlightenment for the sake of 
liberating other sentient beings from all suffering .”  
 
The text says “The generated mind is desire for / P erfect complete enlightenment for others’ 
welfare.” So generated mind is said to be desire. N ow, is the generated mind an aspiration seeking 
enlightenment? 
Student 1: It has to be conjoined with the wish for  others’ welfare. 
Student 2: If it is a main mind, it is not a mental  factor. So the answer would be No.  
GTT: You said no, but the root text says it is  a desire for perfect complete enlightenment. So all of 
you say that generated mind is not  the aspiration for complete enlightenment, but how  do you 
reconcile that with the root text? 
Student: It is important that it says “for others’ welfare.” The generated mind is the aspiration 
seeking others’ welfare.  
GTT: The aspiration seeking enlightenment and the a spiration seeking enlightenment for others’ 
welfare are the same in that they are the same in b eing aspiration. 
 
Student 3: The generated mind is a main mind that h as in its retinue the mental factor seeking 
complete enlightenment.  
GTT: That is correct.  
Student 4: If it is a generated mind, there is no p ervasion that it’s conjoined with the aspiration 
seeking complete enlightenment for others’ welfare.  Because in the 4 modes, we say that the 4 th  is 
fully qualified principal generated mind that acts as a support to deeds, the other 3 are not.    
GTT: If you say that if it is a generated mind, it is not pervaded by being conjoined with the 
aspiration seeking complete enlightenment for other s’ welfare, this would contradict the definition.  
 
Student 4: But Shantideva mentions (p. 84) “Althoug h the other three (meaning the first 3 modes) 
are mere generated minds that seek buddhahood, what  is explicitly indicated here is a fully qualified 
principal generated mind that acts as the support o f the deeds…”  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
17 GTT: In this passage, it indicates a fully qualifie d principal generated mind, etc. In the first mode—  
“having seen the exalted body of a buddha, one wond ers, ‘What if I were to attain such [a body]?’”  
-- this means that one generates bodhicitta, having  seen the exalted body of a buddha. The first three  
points are merely generated minds; the fourth is di fferent, in the sense that it is induced by great 
compassion and acts as the support for deeds. In th at way, it is different from the first three.  
 
Student: What is the object of observation of the g enerated mind? Is the generated mind conjoined 
with two  aspirations—that seeking enlightenment and that se eking others’ welfare? 
GTT: No one is giving the answer to the question [i .e. Is the generated mind an aspiration seeking 
enlightenment?]!  
 
Student: Bodhicitta is focused on the suffering of sentient beings, and there is the aspiration that 
seeks enlightenment. So bodhicitta is a combination  of these two: the main mind is focused on 
suffering sentient beings.  
GTT: I’m not totally satisfied with that answer. We  need to look at the root text. 1.19ab says: “The 
generated mind is desire for / Perfect complete enl ightenment for others’ welfare.” This says that 
for the sake of others’ welfare, there is the desir e for perfect complete enlightenment. From this, 
you should be able to understand that first there i s an aspiration for others’ welfare; based on that,  
there is an aspiration for perfect, complete enligh tenment, which is what accompanies/assists the 
generated mind.  
 
Student: In terms of practice, when one generates a  motivation or dedication, if one dedicates for 
one’s enlightenment, it seems to be for one’s own b enefit, but if one dedicates for others, it seems t o 
be for others’ benefit. Is there some way to bring these two together?  
GTT: When we talk about dedication for one’s own en lightenment, this of course has to do with 
one’s own welfare, but it is not motivated by self- cherishing; the reason for seeking enlightenment 
is for others’ welfare. One wants to attain enlight enment in order to benefit others. At the 
beginning, it may not be easy to generate a good qu ality motivation or dedication, but we do 
understand that enlightenment is something to be at tained for others’ welfare; an enlightenment that 
is not for others’ welfare does not exist. How do w e generate a good quality mind that seeks 
enlightenment? It is important to contemplate other s’ welfare well. If you do not contemplate this, 
there is no way a good quality mind that seeks enli ghtenment will arise. So, one needs to think 
about how sentient beings are tormented by sufferin g and so forth, and when we think about others’ 
welfare in this way, then naturally, a good quality  mind that seeks enlightenment will arise. As 
much as we are able to generate a good motivation, that much better will be our dedication. 
 
The definition says “a special Mahayana main mental  knower concomitant with the desire for 
perfect complete enlightenment for the sake of libe rating other sentient beings from all suffering.” 
In the sevenfold cause-and-effect instructions for generating bodhicitta, we start by thinking of all 
sentient beings as our mothers, and the fifth step,  compassion, has the aspect of wishing to free 
sentient beings from suffering; With the generation  of such compassion, one wonders “who has the 
ability to free sentient beings from suffering?” an d concludes that only a buddha has this ability, 
thus generating bodhicitta. The generated mind then  is a mind that seeks perfect, complete 
enlightenment for others’ welfare.  
 
In the root text, we see that generated mind is “de sire for perfect complete enlightenment for others’  
welfare.” It is thus imputed with the name “desire”  or “aspiration.” The reason for designating 
generated mind with the name “desire for perfect co mplete enlightenment” is to make it known that 
generated mind is accompanied  or assisted by the d esire for enlightenment.  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
18 Student: In the sevenfold instruction, the step bef ore generating bodhicitta is the exceptional resolv e 
wishing to attain enlightenment; that is the cause for generated mind. One desires complete 
enlightenment before generating this exceptional re solve. First one desires enlightenment, then one 
makes a resolution to attain it, so that resolution  is the cause of the mind of enlightenment, rather 
than the desire for complete enlightenment.  
GTT: The exceptional resolve which is the sixth poi nt of the sevenfold instruction, is basically a 
resolve saying “I will do it.” Before this, is ther e the desire for complete enlightenment? There 
could be a contrived desire for complete enlightenm ent before this resolve, but the uncontrived 
desire for complete enlightenment would arise only after the exceptional resolve. We may have a 
contrived wish for enlightenment now, but it is not  preceded by uncontrived compassion, love, and 
so forth. Is it possible that one generates the des ire “I want to attain complete enlightenment” 
without recognizing all sentient beings as our moth ers, without wanting to repay their kindness and 
so forth? 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 87: 
 
Having explicitly indicated the meaning here to be the Mahayana generated mind, 
indicating it with the expression “desire” is for t he sake of a special purpose. Merely 
this name implicitly indicates here the meaning of the two implied desires of others’ 
welfare and of enlightenment. Further, that is for the sake of making known that the 
desire for others’ welfare is necessary as a cause of the generated mind, and the desire 
for enlightenment is necessary as a companion. Thes e will be explained. Hence, desire. 
For what? Unsurpassable enlightenment. For the sake  of what? “For others’ welfare.” 
Hence, [from between] the two—enlightenment which i s the object of seeking and 
others’ welfare—enlightenment will occur first, but  know that the attitudes seeking 
those two must be generated in reverse sequence [i. e., the attitude seeking others’ 
welfare should be generated before the attitude see king enlightenment].  
 
The last part indicates that the aspiration seeking  others’ welfare is generated before the attitude 
seeking enlightenment. In terms of the observed obj ects, enlightenment comes first, and others’ 
welfare comes later. However, in terms of the attit udes seeking those two observed objects, the 
aspiration seeking others’ welfare comes first, and  the aspiration seeking enlightenment comes later. 
When we talk about the aspiration seeking others’ w elfare, this is an aspiration seeking to separate 
sentient beings from suffering, having observed tha t they are tormented by suffering, For the sake 
of freeing all sentient beings from all their suffe rings, then the mind seeking one’s own 
enlightenment arises. 
 
Let us examine the order of generation of the mind seeking others’ welfare, and the mind seeking 
one’s own enlightenment. Which of these should come  first? In terms of the order of generation of 
these minds, one first generates a mind seeking oth ers’ welfare, then one generates the mind 
seeking enlightenment. The observed object, i.e. en lightenment, is accomplished, and then the 
observed object, others’ welfare is accomplished.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 87: 
2B2C-1A2A-2A1C. Commentary 
2B2C-1A2A-2A1C-1. Meaning of the words 
2B2C-1A2A-2A1C-2. Dispelling objection 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
19 2B2C-1A2A-2A1C-1. Meaning of the words 
COMMENTARY  
So the root text is said. The characteristic of the  generated mind [thinking], “Having 
achieved buddhahood, for others’ welfare I shall ma ke effort in accordance with their 
fortunes” which desires perfect complete enlightenm ent for others’ welfare is of two 
types: wishing and the very entity of engaging. 
 
EXPLANATION {119}  
The subject— the generated mind thinking, “For  the sake of others’ welfare, having 
achieved buddhahood  myself at the beginning, I shall make effort in accordance 
with the fortunes  of the three lineage-bearers”—is of two, because the characteristic 
of desire  for perfect complete enlightenment for others’ welfare is of two types : 
generated mind wishing  to engage and the very entity of engaging . 
 
This passage is very clear. There is nothing to exp lain. 
 
What is the observed object of the generated mind? The object of observation of conventional 
bodhicitta is complete enlightenment. This will com e later.  
 
Q: Is this a summary of the previous section?  
A: If you look at the outlines (p. 85), we did disc uss the difference between the wishing and 
engaging minds. The discussion that we are in now f alls under the outline “meaning of the 
branches” and is based on the root text. The discus sion we had yesterday falls under the outline 
“general meaning” and is not directly related to th e root text; it is a general discussion. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p.87: 
2B2C-1A2A-2A1C-2. Dispelling objection 
2B2C-1A2A-2A1C-2A. Objection 
2B2C-1A2A-2A1C-2B. Reply 
2B2C-1A2A-2A1C-2A. Objection 
COMMENTARY  
OPINION: The very desire for perfect complete enlig htenment—the aspiration for 
virtuous qualities seeking that—is a mental factor 2, but is not the generated mind a 
mind 3 that arises bearing the appearance of superior obj ects? How will it be the 
generated mind? 
 
EXPLANATION 
OPINION: The subject—the aspiration which seeks (that is the  desire for perfect 
complete enlightenment )—how will it be the generated mind? It follows that it will 
not, because it is a mental factor. There is pervasion, because the desire for 
enlightenment— the aspiration for virtuous qualities seeking that— is a division of 
the individually-object-ascertaining [mental factor s] 4 included within the aggregate of 
                                                 
2 What is usually translated as “mental factor” lite rally means “arisen from mind.” 
3 “Mind” in this context refers to a main mind or a primary consciousness. 
4 According to Asanga's Compendium of Knowledge (Abhidharmasamuchchaya ), the 51 mental factors can be 
subsumed under the 6 groups: 
(1-5) omnipresent mental factors, feeling and so fo rth 
(6-10) object-ascertaining mental factors, aspirati on and so forth 
(11-21) virtuous mental factors, faith and so forth  
(22-27) root afflictions, attachment and so forth 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
20 compositional factors 5, but  is not the generated mind a mind that arises bearin g the 
appearance of superior  objects , the two welfares as objects ?  
 
Here, we have an objection that arises from the roo t text 1.19ab: “The generated mind is desire for 
perfect complete enlightenment for others’ welfare. ”  The objection is: “How could this aspiration 
that seeks perfect complete enlightenment be a gene rated mind?” This person says that this 
aspiration is not a generated mind because it is a mental factor. And there is pervasion because this 
desire for enlightenment is actually one of the fiv e object-ascertaining mental factors included 
within the aggregate of compositional factors. This  debate says that an aspiration cannot be 
bodhicitta, because it is a mental factor. In this section, you need to understand that a generated 
mind is a main mind/knower. In the retinue of this main mind, we have an aspiration seeking 
perfect, complete enlightenment; this aspiration ac companies/assists this main mind. The main 
mind actually arises from the aspiration seeking ot hers’ welfare. The main mind is of two types: 
wishing and engaging bodhicitta. One needs to know the boundaries of bodhicitta, the boundaries of 
wishing bodhicitta, and the boundaries of engaging bodhicitta.  
 
Q: Since a mental factor is always in the retinue o f a main mind, why is it emphasized here that the 
generated mind is a main mind? Why does Gyeltsab Je  emphasize this point?  
GTT: There is a purpose for emphasizing that genera ted mind is a main mind. Otherwise, how 
would we know that the generated mind is a main min d?  
Student: But who says it is a main mind? 
GTT: Everybody says that. There is a reason for des ignating the main mind with the name “desire;” 
not only is the generated mind a main mind/knower, it is a special main knower. If this is not 
specified, one might think that the aspiration for complete enlightenment is bodhicitta. It needs to 
be understood that generated mind is not just any m ind; it is a main knower, and furthermore, it is a 
special main knower.  
 
 
Wednesday afternoon, 14 May 2008 
 
In the paragraph expressing the opinion (page 88, f irst paragraph), the last phrase says: “but is not 
the generated mind a mind that arises bearing the a ppearance of superior objects, the two welfares, 
as objects ?” The “two welfares” refer to one’s own welfare and o thers’ welfare.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , page 88: 
 
 Regarding the meaning of this objection, those who  are mixed-up about just the words 
say, “We posit that the generated mind is a desire,  but we do not accept the consequence 
flung, that it follows that a desire is not the gen erated mind.” With respect to the thought 
of the objector, if he objects that a desire is pos ited as the definition of the generated 
mind, {120} then, since the thought, “That desire—t he basis for characterization in 
which the definition has engaged—must be asserted a s the generated mind,” would arise 
if [he] is an analytical person, how can there be a n opportunity for [him] not accepting 
[that]? It is not that the Acarya composed the trea tise after having stated the objection in 
which that was not accepted, but was deprived of a reply to that. Since the pervasion of 
that consequence was also accepted by the Acarya, t he damage to fact in that reply is 
just that. The saying that “That indicates that min ds and mental factors are different 
                                                                                                                                                                  
(28-47) secondary afflictions, belligerence and so forth 
(48-51) changeable mental factors, regret and so fo rth 
5 The aggregate of compositional factors is one of t he five aggregates which make up a person. It conta ins all the mental 
factors , with the exception of feeling and discrimination. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
21 substances” cannot be proven even by a pure pervasi on that those that are contradictory 
are necessarily different substances.  
 
Someone who is mixed up about the words says: “I po sit that the generated mind is a desire, but if 
you were to fling the consequence ‘it follows that a desire is not the generated mind,’ then I do not 
accept that.”  With respect to the thought of the objector, the th ought: “That desire—the basis for 
characterization in which the definition has engage d in—must be asserted as the generated mind,” 
would arise if he is an analytical person. If this person is analytical, then he would understand that   
both the definition and the basis for characterizat ion are desire. How can there be an opportunity for  
him not accepting that? The Acarya Haribhadra compo sed this treatise and stated the objection in 
such a way, but it is not that he does not have a r eply to this objection. 
  “The pervasion of that consequence” refers to the  pervasion of the consequence stated above in 
the opinion: “The subject—the aspiration which seek s (that is the desire for perfect complete 
enlightenment)—how will it be the generated mind? I t follows that it will not, because it is a mental 
factor .” In other words, the aspiration which seeks (that  is the desire for perfect complete 
enlightenment) would not be the generated mind beca use it is a mental factor. “Since the pervasion 
of that consequence was also accepted by the Acarya , the damage to fact in that reply is just that.”  
The pervasion of that consequence was also accepted  by the Acarya.  
 What does “the damage to fact in that reply is jus t that” refer to? In general, when we talk about 
“the reply to the objection stated,” there are has three attributes of such a reply: reason, purpose, and 
damage to fact. The damage to fact is stated in the  opinion itself, because the objector says: “The 
subject—the aspiration which seeks (that is the des ire for perfect complete enlightenment)—it 
follows that it will not be the generated mind beca use it is a mental factor.” This is precisely the 
damage to the fact, because an aspiration is a ment al factor and therefore how can it be the 
generated mind? In fact this aspiration is used to designate the generated mind. In other words, 
generated mind or conventional bodhichitta is imput ed with the name “aspiration,” but in fact 
aspiration cannot be the generated mind because gen erated mind is a main mind and aspiration is a 
mental factor. 
 What fact  are we talking about? We can state this in the for m of a consequence: “The aspiration 
seeking perfect complete enlightenment, it follows that it is not the generated mind, because it is a 
mental factor.” Whatever is a mental factor cannot be the generated mind. The reason, “the 
aspiration seeking perfect complete enlightenment i s a mental factor,” damages the fact that 
generated mind is a main mind. This reason establis hes that aspiration is not generated mind 
because generated mind is not a mental factor.  
 The last sentence in that passage says: “The sayin g that ‘That indicates that minds and mental 
factors are different substances’ cannot be proven even by a pure pervasion that those that are 
contradictory are necessarily different substances. ”  “Those that are contradictory” are those that do 
not have a common locus. The pervasion is therefore  that those that do not have a common locus 
are pervaded by being different substances. However , this pervasion cannot prove the statement: 
“that indicates that mind and mental factors are di fferent substances.”  
 This passage is related to an objection by someone ; it is not particularly essential, although it 
does contain some essential points. Sometimes in th e text there are passages that are not so 
essential. There is the danger that someone who is reading the text can spend a lot of time trying to 
figure out passages that are not essential, and neg lecting passages that are really essential. So do n ot 
do that. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , page 88: 
2B2C-1A2A-2A1C-2B. Reply 
2B2C-1A2A-2A1C-2B1. Designation by the name “desire  for others’ welfare” 
2B2C-1A2A-2A1C-2B2. Designation by the name “desire  for enlightenment” 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
22 2B2C-1A2A-2A1C-2B1. Designation by the name “desire  for others’ welfare” 
COMMENTARY 
It is true. However, in this [context] when there e xists the characteristic of aspiration for 
virtuous qualities—seeking—the mind of enlightenmen t is generated, whereby the 
result is indicated by the cause. In order to make known that “all the virtuous qualities 
of bodhisattvas who seek in that manner will increa se,” since it is based upon 
designation, there is no fault. 
 
EXPLANATION 
It is true  that whatever is a mental factor is not the genera ted mind . However, the 
subject— in this context  of indicating the definition of the generated mind —since the 
generated mind  is based upon designation  by the name “desire,”  there is no fault of 
asserting a common locus [between a mental factor a nd the generated mind], because it 
is a designation by way of the three attributes bei ng complete. 
 
Gyeltsab Je says that it is true that if it is a me ntal factor, it is not the generated mind. We do no t 
have the fault of asserting that there is a common locus between a mental factor and the generated 
mind. The reason given here is that the generated m ind is based upon designation; it is imputed by 
the name “desire,” because it is a designation by w ay of the three attributes being complete. “The 
three attributes” are (1) the reason for the design ation, (2) the purpose of the designation, and (3) 
the damage to fact. The reason for the designation is set out below. 
 
Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
 There is a reason for the designation , because the result  is indicated by designating it 
with the name of the cause.  {121} The aspiration seeking others’ welfare and t he 
Mahayana generated mind will become cause and resul t, because when there exists the 
seeking of others’ welfare with the characteristic of aspiration for the  virtuous 
qualities  of separating all sentient beings from suffering , there is pervasion that the 
mind of enlightenment is definitely generated  after that ; if that does not come first, 
the fully qualified generated mind indicated here w ould not be produced. 
 
“When there exists the seeking of others’ welfare w ith the characteristic of aspiration for the 
virtuous qualities of separating all sentient being s from suffering, there is pervasion that the mind of 
enlightenment is definitely generated after that.” In other words, when there is the aspiration 
seeking others’ welfare, the mind of enlightenment will definitely be generated afterwards. If this 
aspiration seeking others’ welfare does not come fi rst, the fully qualified generated mind indicated 
here will not be produced. For this reason, the res ult, the generated mind, is indicated by 
designating it with the name of its cause, the aspi ration seeking others’ welfare.  
 
Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
 There is a purpose for designating it by the name “seeking oth ers’ welfare,”  because it 
is for the sake of making known that “all the virtuous qualities included within the 
generated mind (that is the support for deeds) and the deeds in the continua of 
bodhisattvas who seek others’ welfare  in that manner will increase.”  The damage to 
fact  is just that explanation above. 
 
For the sake of making it known that all the virtuo us qualities included within the generated mind 
(that is the support for deeds) and the deeds in th e continua of bodhisattvas will increase, the 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
23 generated mind is designated by the name “seeking o thers’ welfare.” This is the purpose for 
designating the generated mind by the name “seeking  others’ welfare.” 
 The damage to the fact is expressed saying: it fol lows that the aspiration seeking others’ welfare 
is not the generated mind because it is a mental fa ctor. This is similar to the previous passage that 
sets out the objection, but the subject is differen t. Previously the subject was the aspiration seekin g 
enlightenment, and here the subject is the aspirati on seeking others’ welfare, but the way in which 
the fact is damaged is similar to the previous pass age. Hence, it follows that the aspiration seeking 
others’ welfare is not the generated mind because i t is a mental factor. There is pervasion because 
whatever is a mental factor is pervaded by not bein g generated mind. This was set out at the 
beginning of this section saying: “It is true that whatever is a mental factor is not the generated 
mind.” 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 89: 
 
 Explaining that the aspiration which seeks in this  context is the seeking of 
enlightenment is a case of (i) not understanding ev en slightly the presentation of the 
stages of the path of the Perfection [Vehicle], and , (ii) having determined the basis for 
designation and the designated phenomena here, not understanding what to do.  
 
If someone were to say that the aspiration which se eks in this context is the aspiration seeking 
enlightenment, this would be a misunderstanding. In  this context there are two aspirations which  
seek—the aspiration seeking enlightenment and the a spiration seeking others’ welfare. Therefore, to 
say that the aspiration which seeks in this context  refers to the aspiration seeking enlightenment in 
incorrect. This is a case of not understanding even  slightly the presentation of the stages of the pat h 
of the Perfection [Vehicle], meaning that this pers on has not understood the presentation of the 
stages of the path to enlightenment. In order to ha ve the aspiration seeking enlightenment, it is 
necessary to first have the aspiration seeking othe rs’ welfare. The aspiration seeking others’ welfare  
actually induces the aspiration seeking enlightenme nt.  
 The second point regards the basis for designation , which in this context is the generated mind, 
and the designated phenomena, which are the two asp irations—the aspiration seeking others’ 
welfare and the aspiration seeking enlightenment. I f someone says that aspiration which seeks in 
this context is the aspiration seeking enlightenmen t, he has not understood what to do with the basis 
of designation and the designated phenomena. 
 
 Therefore, to give a little description here, that  one must realize emptiness prior to 
generating the mind [aspiring] towards supreme enli ghtenment applies to those of sharp 
faculty, from among the two types of trainees; ther e is no such certainty for those of dull 
faculty, but even they must become bearers of the e ssence of compassion from the very 
time of having initially generated the mind. 
 
Bodhisattvas of sharp faculty realize emptiness pri or to generating the mind of enlightenment. 
However, it is not the case that all bodhisattvas d o this. For those of dull faculty there is not this  
certainty. However, even those of dull faculty must  become bearers of the essence of compassion 
from the very time of having initially generated th e mind of enlightenment. 
 
 Hence, for the sake of making known that the gener ated mind indicated here must 
definitely be preceded by great compassion, it is d esignated by the name “seeking 
others’ welfare.” If the generated mind induced by that fully qualified compassion is 
present, the desire to train in the deeds will aris e naturally, and if that is present, all the 
virtuous qualities that are the causes of omniscien ce will increase; it is so designated 
also for the sake of making that known. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
24  
The meaning here is clear; there is no need for com mentary.  
 
{122} QUALM: You would have in your palm all phenom ena if you were to have in 
your palm one phenomenon; what is the one [phenomen on]? 
RESPONSE: “Compassion.” Just as it has been taught,  “since it is important at the 
three—beginning, middle and end—for those who desir e to engage in the Mahayana 
path, you should cultivate compassion at the beginn ing, and, without letting it 
degenerate, if you increase it more and more to ful l qualification, the generated mind 
and the deeds will become fully complete.” Understa nd that, for the sake of making that 
known to those who are skilled in the sequence of t he Mahayana path, the generated 
mind here is designated by the name “aspiration tha t seeks others’ welfare.” There is 
much to be expressed in dependence on this, but I w ill not elaborate more. 
 
What is the one phenomenon that when one has it, on e will have all phenomena in one’s hand? It is 
compassion, more precisely it is great compassion. One should cultivate great compassion at the 
beginning and so forth. It is important at the begi nning, middle, and end. If it is present at the 
beginning one will generate bodhichitta strongly, i f it is present in the middle one will engage in th e 
deeds of a bodhisattva, and if is present at the en d, when one has attained buddhahood, one will 
enact the welfare of sentient beings. If one does n ot let great compassion degenerate but increases it  
more and more, the generated mind and the deeds wil l become complete. In order to make that 
known to those who are skilled in the sequence of t he Mahayana path, the generated mind here is 
designated by the name “aspiration that seeks other s’ welfare.” 
 
Ornament of the Essence , page 90: 
2B2C-1A2A-2A1C-2B2. Designation by the name “desire  for enlightenment” 
COMMENTARY 
As one type, prayer seeks; it is the very desire fo r perfect complete enlightenment. 
Indicating the generated mind that acts together wi th it as that term is in order to make 
known that “in that manner, the mind possessing pra yer is generated in bodhisattvas.” 
 
EXPLANATION 
In terms of the aspiration seeking enlightenment, as one type  of the two aspirations that 
seek, it is also designated by the name “aspiration ,” whereby the fault of asserting a 
common locus does not exist.  
 
There are two aspirations that seek—the aspiration seeking enlightenment and the aspiration 
seeking others’ welfare. In terms of the aspiration  seeking enlightenment, the generated mind is also 
designated by the name “aspiration,” whereby there is no fault of asserting a common locus 
between generated mind and the aspiration seeking e nlightenment.  
 
Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
The prayer (in which one has produced hope for the result)  seeks;  further, here  it is the 
very desire for perfect complete enlightenment.   
 
“The prayer” is one in which one produces hope for the result that is enlightenment, so one has the 
aspiration seeking perfect complete enlightenment.  
 
The following sentence expresses the three attribut es: 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
25 Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
The subject—the generated mind —there is a reason for designating it by the name 
“aspiration that seeks enlightenment,”  because it acts together with it  by means of the 
five concomitances 6.  
 
The reason for designating the generated mind by the na me “the aspiration that seeks 
enlightenment” is because this generated mind and the aspiration s eeking enlightenment are 
concomitant by way of the five similarities.  
 
Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
Indicating it as that term is purposeful , because it is in order to make known that 
“in that manner,  the mind possessing the prayer  explained  is generated in 
bodhisattvas.” It is for the sake of making known that the entranc e to the Mahayana is 
the Mahayana generated mind.  
 
The purpose for the designation  is to make it known that the aspiration for perfec t complete 
enlightenment is generated in bodhisattvas. Another  purpose for the designation is to make it known 
that the entrance to the Mahayana is the Mahayana g enerated mind. We have already discussed 
what is a door of entry to the Mahayana and what is  not a door of entry to the Mahayana. In order to 
be included in the ranks of the Mahayana one needs to have generated the conventional generated 
mind in one’s continuum; if one has not generated t he conventional generated mind in one’s 
continuum, one is not considered to be in the ranks  of the Mahayana. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , 
 
{123} Fearing wordiness, I will not elaborate more.   
 
The damage to fact  is just as above. 
 
The damage to fact is as above: if it is a mental f actor it is not a main mind, and if it is a main mi nd 
it is not a mental factor.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 90: 
2B2C-1A2A-2A2. The branches of ascertaining that [d efinition], the objects of observation 
2B2C-1A2A-2A2A. Questions 
2B2C-1A2A-2A2B. Reply  
2B2C-1A2A-2A2A. Questions 
COMMENTARY 
QUESTION: Also, what is that perfect complete enlig htenment, and what is others’ 
welfare—the nature that is desired, and for whose w elfare the mind is generated?  
 
                                                 
6 According to Asanga's Compendium of Knowledge (Abhidharmasamuchchaya ), a mental factor is concomitant with its 
main mind by means of the five similarities:  
(1)  similar substance 
(2)  similar object of observation and [subjective] aspe ct 
(3)  similar entity 
(4)  similar time 
(5)  similar realm and level 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
26 EXPLANATION 
QUESTION: In addition to the [above] question ensui ng from the definition, also, what 
is that perfect complete enlightenment—the nature t hat is the result desired? What 
is others’ welfare—for whose welfare the mind is ge nerated?  
 
The root text says “The generated mind is desire fo r perfect complete enlightenment for others’ 
welfare.” In this statement “perfect complete enlig htenment” and “others’ welfare” are mentioned. 
What do they mean? 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 90: 
 
2B2C-1A2A-2A2B. Reply 
2B2C-1A2A-2A2B-1. Root text 
2B2C-1A2A-2A2B-2. Commentary 
2B2C-1A2A-2A2B-1. Root text 
1.19cd That and that are, just as in the Sutra ,  
Expressed briefly and extensively. 
 
EXPLANATION 
The subject—the observed objects, that  enlightenment and that  others’ welfare—know 
that they  are expressed briefly and extensively  in all the three—extensive, medium 
and brief [ Mothers ], because, just as indicated in the middle Sutra , the complete 
meaning is also indicated in the other two. 
 
Here the Tibetan terms for “observed objects” ( dmigs yul ) and “objects of observation” ( dmigs pa ) 
are different; however, in general we can say that they refer to the same meaning. According to the 
statement here, the objects of observation are two types: enlightenment and others’ welfare. 
Enlightenment and others’ welfare are indicated in the medium Sutra, the Twenty Thousand Stanza 
Perfection of Wisdom Sutra . They are also indicated briefly and extensively i n the extensive and 
brief Perfection of Wisdom Sutras—the Hundred Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom Sutra  and 
the Eight Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom Sutra . So all three versions—the extensive, 
middling and brief Perfection of Wisdom Sutras—expr ess enlightenment and others’ welfare briefly 
and extensively.   
 
Ornament of the Essence , 
 
 The thought of the Acarya abides in accordance wit h only that, because in relation to 
this, the Great Commentary explained that: 
 
They are expressed just as in the Arya Twenty-Five Thousand Stanza [Perfection 
of Wisdom] Sutra . {124}  
 
And on the occasion of indicating the divisions, it  is only as explained previously:  
 
Why? This precious sutra set engages in closely con densing the meaning of the 
Twenty-Five Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom . 
 
Also, the Acarya Dignaga explained: 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
27 Thus, the meanings of the explanations said  
Are without incompleteness in this Eight Thousand .  
The text is asserted to be condensed in this. 
The meaning is just that taught. 
 
Thus, “just as in the Sutra ” [in 1.19c] must definitely be explained to be the  Twenty-five 
Thousand Stanza [Perfection of Wisdom] . [The thought of the Acarya abides in 
accordance with only that] also because the occurre nce of the statement “there is no 
contradiction with the Sutra ’s meaning” in the commentary is the word commentar y of 
this. If one wishes to explain the Acarya’s system,  one should not in any way explain 
that “there is no contradiction with Array of Tree Trunks  ( Gandavyuha ) and so forth.” 
 
The medium Sutra, the Twenty Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom Sutra , is the same sutra that 
is also called the Twenty-five Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom Su tra . Here the Twenty 
Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom Sutra  is cited explicitly as the source, and the other t wo 
sutras are indicated. The Array of Tree Trunks  is a sutra that is not cited as a source, however it does 
not mean that there is a contradiction with this su tra. “Source” here is a source in which the two 
observed objects—enlightenment and others’ welfare— are expressed. The Twenty Thousand Stanza 
Perfection of Wisdom Sutra  is explicitly cited as a source in which they are expressed briefly and 
extensively. It is also indicated that the extensiv e and brief Perfection of Wisdom Sutras are sources  
in which enlightenment and others’ welfare are expr essed. Although the Array of Tree Trunks Sutra  
is not cited as a source, there is no contradiction  with the sutra. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 91: 
 
2B2C-1A2A-2A2B-2. Commentary 
2B2C-1A2A-2A2B-2A. Explaining the two observed objec ts 
2B2C-1A2A-2A2B-2B. Indicating that itself as alread y proven 
2B2C-1A2A-2A2B-2C. Reason for not citing other sour ces 
2B2C-1A2A-2A2B-2A. Explaining the two observed objec ts 
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. Perfect complete enlighte nment and others’ welfare are also 
briefly and extensively indicated in the three type s of Mothers  of the Victors together, 
without contradicting the meaning of the Sutra , by way of statements that earnestly 
indicate fully: “the Perfection of Wisdom” and “reg arding all—generosity and so 
forth—the act of generosity, the giver, the recipie nt, and so forth are to be established as 
not observed,” bearing the meaning  that causes understanding; and “pass beyond sorrow 
exactly in accordance with the fortunes of all sent ient beings” and “those who desire to 
set the miserly and so forth in generosity and so f orth, should accomplish this very 
Perfection of Wisdom” and so forth. 
 
EXPLANATION 
Since the observed objects of the Mahayana generate d mind are also indicated in the 
extensive and the brief, just as in the middle Mother , the observed objects of the 
generated mind— perfect complete enlightenment and others’ welfare— are also 
briefly and extensively indicated in the three type s of Mothers  of the Victors 
together , because they are also indicated without incomplet eness in the two—the 
extensive and the brief— without contradicting , that is, agreeing with, the Twenty-Five 
Thousand Stanza [Perfection of Wisdom] Sutra , exactly in accordance with the 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
28 meaning of the Sutra . It is not that there is no statement indicating tha t exact 
accordance in the two—the extensive and the brief—b ecause it is indicated by:  
(i) the statement in the middle Mother  bearing the meaning that causes 
understanding  by having taken as the subject matter the meaning of enlightenment that 
is indicated in the brief indication and extensive explanation;  
(ii) the statement in the extensive Mother that earnestly indicates fully the meaning of 
the brief indication and extensive explanation on o thers’ welfare that was indicated in 
the middle Mother ; and  
(iii) the statement in the  Eight Thousand Stanza [Perfection of Wisdom Sutra]  that 
“Subhuti, a bodhisattva mahasattva is based upon th e Perfection of Wisdom; be 
confident!”  
 
Understand that it is wrong to say that “This would  become saying ‘It is indicated that 
there is no contradiction with the three Mothers  together also in the three types of 
Mothers  of the Victors  together.’” 
 
This passages sets out our own system’s position th at “just as enlightenment and others’ welfare are 
briefly and extensively indicated in the medium Mot her, they are also briefly and extensively 
indicated in the brief and extensive Mothers.” Howe ver, someone has a different interpretation, 
which is why Gyeltsab Je says at the end of this pa ragraph that it is wrong to say that “This would 
become saying ‘It is indicated that there is no con tradiction with the three Mothers  together also in 
the three types of Mothers  of the Victors  together.’”  
 According to our own system there are actual citat ions that come from the medium Mother  that 
do not appear in the exact same form in the extensi ve Mother  and brief Mother . However, according 
to the person who makes the wrong assertion, the wo rds cited from the medium Mother  also appear 
in the extensive Mother  and brief Mother . There is a citation from the Eight Thousand Stanza 
Perfection of Wisdom Sutra  which says “Subhuti, a bodhisattva mahasattva is b ased upon the 
Perfection of Wisdom; be confident!” If the asserti on of this person were correct, these words 
should also appear in the medium Mother, but they d o not.  
 
 
Thursday 15 May 2008 
 
We will review the passage we went through yesterda y. According to our system, the middle 
Mother indicates the observed objects of the Mahaya na generated mind. In other words, in the 
Middle Mother, perfect complete enlightenment and o thers’ welfare are indicated. Our system says 
that just as they are indicated in the middle Mothe r, they are also indicated in the extensive and 
brief Perfection of Wisdom sutras. Our system does not, however, say that the words appear in the 
extensive and brief Mothers in the way that they ap pear in the middle Mother. Someone claims that 
the words indicating perfect complete enlightenment  and others’ welfare appearing in the middle 
Mother also appear in the extensive and brief Mothe rs. According to our system, this is not correct. 
According to our system, the words in the middle Mo ther probably also appear in the extensive 
Mother, but do not appear as extensively in the bri ef Mother. This person says the words appear in 
the same way in all the three Mothers; our system s ays this is not correct.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 92: 
 
QUALM: How is the meaning of the middle Mother  earnestly indicated? {126}  
RESPONSE: The briefly indicated meaning of enlighte nment is indicated by 
“Shariputra, with respect to this, Bodhisattva Maha sattva, those who desire to attain 
manifest complete enlightenment in all ways in rega rd to all phenomena should strive in 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
29 the Perfection of Wisdom,”  and the extensively explained meaning of enlighten ment 
by “Shariputra, with respect to this… regarding all the six perfections —generosity 
and so forth—the act of generosity, the giver, the recipient, and so forth are to be 
established as not observed ” in the other two [ Mothers ]. Although this appears to be 
just appropriate as an explanation of the condensat ion of the varieties of words of the 
middle Mother , it suffices as a condensation of the varieties of  meaning. 
 
There are several sutra quotations here. At the beg inning, a citation explains the meaning of 
enlightenment in a brief way, followed by one that extensively explains the meaning of 
enlightenment. Not all the words are quoted here [a s indicated by the ellipsis]. These quotations 
appear in the brief and extensive Perfection of Wis dom sutras.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 92: 
 
 Manifest complete enlightenment in regard to all p henomena is the entity of 
enlightenment. The teaching that the method for [at taining] it is, in general, the training 
in the perfection of wisdom, is a brief indication by means of method; and teaching it to 
be training in all six perfections by means of bein g conjoined with the wisdom realizing 
emptiness is an extensive explanation by means of m ethod. 
 
Here we see an explanation of the meaning that appe ars in the sutras. There is a brief indication and 
an extensive explanation. The brief indication teac hes that “the method for [attaining] it is, in 
general, the training in the perfection of wisdom.”  Only the perfection of wisdom is stated here. The 
extensive explanation teaches that “training in all  six perfections by means of being conjoined with 
the wisdom realizing emptiness,” saying that the si x perfections must be conjoined with the wisdom 
realizing emptiness. This paragraph explains how en lightenment is briefly indicated and extensively 
explained. The next paragraph explains how others’ welfare is briefly indicated and extensively 
explained. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , pp. 92-93: 
 
 Further, others’ welfare is briefly indicated by m eans of method in the middle Sutra,  
by the passage: “Bodhisattva Mahasattva, all those sentient beings existing in the world 
systems numbering the grains of sand of the banks o f the Ganges River of the lands of 
the ten directions, who desire to thoroughly  pass beyond sorrow in the sphere of nirvana 
that is without remainder of the aggregates, should  train in the Perfection of Wisdom.” 
{127} Condensing its meaning, it is said, “Those wh o desire to pass beyond sorrow  
exactly in accordance with the fortunes of all sent ient beings  who are the three 
lineage-bearers, [should accomplish this very Perfe ction] of Wisdom.”  
 
This explains how others’ welfare is briefly indica ted. The extensive explanation is explained in the 
next paragraph: 
 
 And others’ welfare is extensively explained by me ans of method with “Bodhisattvas 
[who desire to set] miserly sentient beings in gene rosity,” and so forth. Condensing its 
meaning, it is said, “Those who desire  to set the miserly and so forth in generosity 
and so forth, should accomplish this very Perfectio n of Wisdom” and so forth.  
 
In the first citation, it says “‘Bodhisattvas [who desire to set] miserly sentient beings in generosit y,’ 
and so forth.” “And so forth” refers to an extensiv e explanation involving the other five perfections;  
it explains bodhisattvas who wish to set immoral se ntient beings in ethics, to set malicious sentient 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
30 beings in patience, to set lazy sentient beings in joyous effort, distracted sentient beings in 
meditative stabilization, and those with corrupted wisdom in wisdom. That is, it sets out how 
bodhisattvas seek to set sentient beings in all six  perfections. In the second citation, “Condensing i ts 
meaning, it is said, “Those who desire to set the m iserly and so forth in generosity and so forth, 
should accomplish this very Perfection of Wisdom,” it does not state the other five perfections.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 93: 
 
 Someone, having taken the statement of earnestness  to refer to the treatise, explains 
that “they are briefly and extensively indicated by  it.” These are words lacking relation, 
because it would become saying, “they are briefly a nd extensively indicated in the 
treatise, also in the three Mothers  together.” The explanation in the context of the 
classifications [of the generated mind] in the exte nsive explanation of others’ welfare 
and enlightenment is explained in that [treatise], but it is not the meaning of this 
context. That the brief is explained in the words o f the root text that indicate the 
definition, and the extensive in the words of the r oot text of the classification—is clearly 
a gibberish explanation. Others’ welfare is the nir vana of others’ continua; the method 
for [attaining] that is indicated extensively and b riefly.  
 
This paragraph explains some wrong positions. It sa ys, “Someone, having taken the statement of 
earnestness to refer to the treatise.” If we look a t the passage from Haribhadra’s commentary that 
this is commenting on (p. 91), it says “Perfect com plete enlightenment and others’ welfare are also 
briefly and extensively indicated in the three type s of Mothers  of the Victors together, without 
contradicting the meaning of the Sutra , by way of statements that earnestly indicate full y...” 
Someone took this statement as related to the treat ise, meaning a treatise that is not a sutra, such a s 
the Ornament and so forth. In fact, however, the statement refer s to the brief and extensive 
Perfection of Wisdom sutras, while this person thin ks it refers to a treatise. We say this is a mistak e, 
because “it would become saying, ‘they are briefly and extensively indicated in the treatise, also in 
the three Mothers  together.’” Our own system says that the treatise explains that all three Mothers 
briefly and extensively indicate others’ welfare an d enlightenment, but this person’s explanation 
says that in the three Mothers, we find the explana tion that the treatise briefly and extensively 
indicates enlightenment and others’ welfare. This m eans that according to this person’s assertion, in 
the three Mothers, we find this explanation that en lightenment and others’ purpose are briefly and 
extensively indicated in the treatise . “Classifications” here refers to the classificati ons of the 
generated mind.  
 
The words of the root text indicate the definition of the generated mind, and we will look at the root  
text that discusses the classifications of the gene rated mind. Someone says that the brief is 
explained in the words of the root text that indica te the definition of the generated mind, and the 
extensive is explained in the words of the root tex t of the classifications of the generated mind. 
According to our system, this is not correct.  Acco rding to our system, others’ welfare refers to “the  
nirvana of others’ continua.” This is actually a to pic of debate. As we have seen, those who are 
miserly are set in generosity, those who are immora l are set in morality, and so forth. If that is the  
case, can we say that others’ welfare is the nirvan a found in others’ continua? We can find proof 
that other’s welfare is the nirvana in their contin ua, if we look at the earlier citation: “Those who 
desire to pass beyond sorrow exactly in accordance with the fortunes of all sentient beings who are 
the three lineage-bearers…” To pass beyond sorrow m eans to attain nirvana. Our system says that 
others’ welfare is nirvana in others’ continua. Alt hough one sets sentient beings in generosity and so  
forth, one eventually leads them to nirvana. Althou gh there are these other activities, mainly 
bodhisattvas lead sentient beings to the state of l iberation. 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
31 Ornament of the Essence , p. 93: 
 
2B2C-1A2A-2A2B-2B. Indicating that itself as alread y proven 
COMMENTARY 
Thus, know that the generated mind is the nature of  desiring perfect complete 
enlightenment for others’ welfare. 
 
EXPLANATION 
Having established above the two observed objects, thus know that the generated 
mind is the nature of desiring perfect complete enl ightenment for others’ welfare . 
 
“Having established above the two observed objects”  refers to the fact that the two observed 
objects—enlightenment and others’ welfare—have been  established through being briefly indicated 
and extensively explained in the brief and extensiv e sutras.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 93: 
2B2C-1A2A-2A2B-2C. Reason for not citing other sour ces {128}  
COMMENTARY 
The earnest indication of the meaning of the contex t in the classic texts is indeed taught 
in all, but fearing wordiness, I have not written d own those very sources. 
 
EXPLANATION 
The earnest indication  of  the meaning of the context , the observed objects of the 
generated mind in the  scriptures that are classic texts, is indeed taught in all  the three 
Mothers , but I have not  explicitly written down those very sources  in this 
commentary, because I wish to give an explanation j ust briefly and, fearing wordiness , 
I have not written down. 
 
Here, Haribhadra is saying that he has only cited f rom the middle Mother, not from other sources, 
because he does not want the explanation to become too wordy. The meaning is taught in all three 
Mothers, so he says “I have only cited from the mid dle Mother.” In Haribhadra’s commentary 
before this, we see words from the sutra; this sutr a cited is the middle Mother. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p.93: 
 
2B2C-1A2A-2B. Explaining the divisions, a subsidiary  topic 
 
This outline comes from p. 86:  
2B2C-1A2A-2. Meaning of the branches 
2B2C-1A2A-2A. Explaining the common definition as we ll as the objects of observation 
2B2C-1A2A-2B. Explaining the divisions, a subsidiary  topic 
 
 
2B2C-1A2A-2B1. Making a connection 
2B2C-1A2A-2B2. Root text 
2B2C-1A2A-2B3. Commentary 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
32 2B2C-1A2A-2B1. Making a connection 
COMMENTARY 
Thus, having expressed the observed objects of the generated mind as well as its entity, 
now its classifications—twenty-two types, intercedi ng stanzas: 
 
EXPLANATION 
Thus,  having expressed the observed objects of the genera ted mind as well as its 
entity, now its classifications—twenty-two types,  by compiling what is not the 
common topic of the presentation of the corpus into  stanzas of a subsidiary topic , 
interceding stanzas: 
 
This talks about how a connection is made between w hat has been explained and what follows. We 
have gone through the observed objects and entity o f the generated mind. Now we will go through 
the classifications of the generated mind. This is done by compiling “what is not the common topic 
of the presentation of the corpus.” “The corpus” re fers to the root text that we have gone through 
(1.6a, on p. 63): “Generated mind, instructions…” A fter generated mind, we should go on to 
explain the instructions, but we will not immediate ly look at that topic. We will look at a subsidiary  
topic, the classifications of the generated mind. I t is not a “common topic;” by compiling this 
subject into stanzas, we will discuss it now.   
 
Ornament of the Essence , pp. 94-95:  
2B2C-1A2A-2B2. Root text 
1.20 Further, earth, gold, moon, fire,  
Treasure, jewel-mine, ocean, {129}  
Vajra, mountain, medicine, spiritual guide,  
Wish-granting gem, sun, song, 
 
 1.21 King, treasury, highway,  
Mount, geyser,  
Pleasant sound, river, and cloud: 
These are the twenty-two types. 
 
EXPLANATION 
The twenty-two generated minds are explained by “ Further…, ” because the twenty-
two are meanings that are objects to be characteriz ed by similes, and they are indicated 
through implication by means of the concordant prop erty between simile and meaning. 
2B2C-1A2A-2B3. Commentary 
2B2C-1A2A-2B3A. How the twenty-two meanings are cha racterized by the twenty-two similes  
2B2C-1A2A-2B3B. Boundaries 
2B2C-1A2A-2B3A. How the twenty-two meanings are cha racterized by the twenty-two similes  
2B2C-1A2A-2B3A-1. Extensive explanation  
2B2C-1A2A-2B3A-2. Summary 
2B2C-1A2A-2B3A-1. Extensive explanation  
COMMENTARY 
Those explained by [the root text] to be concomitan t with:  
(1) aspiration, (2) attitude, (3) exceptional resol ve, (4) application, (5) generosity, (6) 
ethics, (7) patience, (8) joyous effort, (9) concen tration, (10) wisdom, (11) skillful 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
33 means, (12) prayer, (13) power, (14) the perfection  of exalted wisdom, (15) 
clairvoyance, (16) merit and exalted wisdom, (17) d harmas in harmony with the class of 
enlightenment, (18) compassion and special insight,  {130} (19) retention  and 
confidence, (20) a festival of D harma, (21) the one path traveled, and (22) the tru th 
body, are respectively like:  
 
The next paragraph lists the similes . 
 
(1) the earth, (2) fine gold, (3) the new moon, (4)  fire, (5) a great treasure, (6) a jewel-
mine, (7) a great ocean, (8) a vajra, (9) the king of mountains, (10) medicine, (11) a 
virtuous spiritual guide, (12) a wish-granting gem,  (13) the sun, (14) a pleasant Dharma 
melody, (15) a great king, (16) a treasury, (17) a highway, (18) a mount, (19) a geyser, 
(20) a pleasant sound, (21) the flow of a river, an d (22) a cloud, respectively through:  
 
The next passage gives the meaning that is characterized by the similes . 
 
(1) being a property that is the basis of all whole some qualities, (2) unchanging until 
enlightenment, (3) fully increasing all virtuous qu alities, (4) burning the firewood of 
obscurations to the three exalted knowers of all, ( 5) satisfying all sentient beings, (6) 
being a property that is the support of precious ex cellent qualities, (7) being undisturbed 
by the descending of all undesirables, (8) through firm conviction, being inseparable, 
(9) being unmoved by distracting objects, (10) thor oughly pacifying the diseases of 
afflictive and knowledge obscurations, (11) not for saking the welfare of sentient beings 
on any occasion, (12) accomplishing the results of wishes accordingly, (13) fully 
ripening trainees, (14) teaching the Dharma that ma kes trainees aspire, (15) 
accomplishing others’ welfare through unobstructed might, (16) being like a treasury of 
many collections of merit and exalted wisdom, (17) being that which all aryas traveled 
and will travel, (18) through not falling into eith er samsara or nirvana, progressing 
easily, (19) through retaining heard and unheard dh armas, inexhaustible, (20) pleasantly 
proclaiming to trainees who desire liberation, {131 } (21) activities of others’ welfare 
being not different, and (22) being suitable to alw ays display abiding in the abode of 
Tushita and so forth. 
 
In the explanation, the various parts are put toget her and explained:  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p.95:  
 
EXPLANATION 
Those  twenty-two generated minds explained by [the root text] :  
 
(1) The subject—the generated mind concomitant with aspiration —is like the earth  
because, through inducing all paths, it is a property that is the basis of all wholesome 
qualities .  
 
Here, the simile is the earth. The earth is the bas is for crops to arise. Likewise, through “the 
generated mind concomitant with aspiration,” which is found on the small level of the path of 
accumulation, one attains all wholesome qualities.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 95: 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
34 (2) That concomitant with attitude is like fine gold , because it will not degenerate in 
attitude until enlightenment . The sutra passages for these [first two] are just  as in the 
brief indication and the extensive explanation on e nlightenment. 
 
Gold will not transform into something of another e ntity, such as iron, which can rust. The 
generated mind “concomitant with attitude  is like fine gold because it will not degenerate i n attitude 
until enlightenment,” meaning that this bodhicitta will not degenerate. The bodhicitta on the 
middling level of the path of accumulation will not  degenerate.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 95: 
 
(3) That concomitant with extraordinary resolve is like  the new moon  because it 
will  increase  all virtuous qualities,  such as the close placements of mindfulness, 
without degeneration. Sutra says, “Shariputra, a gr eat bodhisattva should abide in the 
Mother, fully completing the thirty-seven harmonies  of enlightenment.” 
 
This point uses the simile of the new moon. The new  moon waxes until it becomes full. This says 
that the bodhicitta concomitant with extraordinary resolve  will increase all virtuous qualities, such 
as the 37 harmonies with enlightenment. The reason that on the great path of accumulation such 
qualities are attained is because the bodhisattva o n this level attains a special meditative 
stabilization. With this meditative stabilization, the bodhisattva can directly perceive buddhas and 
hear the Dharma directly from them. A bodhisattva c ould be sitting here in the gompa in Pomaia, 
for instance, and hear teachings that are taking pl ace in Bodhgaya. This brings many opportunities 
for one’s qualities to increase.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 95: 
 
(4) That concomitant with application  that cultivates the similitudes of the three 
exalted knowers is like fire , because it burns  the  manifest firewood of the 
obscurations to the three exalted knowers of all.  {132} Sutra says “Due to desiring to 
pass through having viewed by knowing and seeing a knower of all.” 
 
This generated mind that is concomitant with applic ation  occurs on the path of preparation. On the 
path of preparation, the bodhisattva attains the un ion of calm abiding and special insight observing 
emptiness. Here, the bodhisattva with this generate d mind “burns the manifest firewood of the 
obscurations to the three exalted knowers of all.” At this level, the manifest knowledge obscurations 
are burnt, meaning they are abandoned.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 95: 
 
(5) That concomitant with generosity is like a great tr easure , because it satisfies all 
sentient beings with resources. Sutra says, “Those who desire to se t miserly sentient 
beings in generosity…” 
 
On the first ground, the generated mind concomitant  with generosity  is likened to a great treasure. 
On the first ground, the surpassing practice of the  perfection of generosity is attained. Bodhisattvas  
are able to give their resources to sentient beings , and thus this generated mind satisfies sentient 
beings. This fifth point is related to the first of  the ten perfections.  
 From here, we have ten generated minds that are co rrelated with the ten perfections on the ten 
grounds. The ten perfections are:  
1.  Generosity 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
35 2.  Ethics 
3.  Patience 
4.  Joyous Effort 
5.  Concentration  
6.  Wisdom 
7.  Skillful means 
8.  Prayer 
9.  Power 
10.  Exalted wisdom  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 96: 
 
(6) That concomitant with ethics is like a jewel-mine , because it acts as a property 
that supports precious excellent qualities . Sutra says, “… the immoral…” 
 
This generated mind concomitant with ethics  is on the second ground.  On the second ground, th e 
surpassing practice of the perfection of ethics is obtained, and a bodhisattva is able to place immora l 
sentient beings in morality, or ethics. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 96: 
 
(7) That concomitant with patience is like a great ocea n  because it is undisturbed 
by the descending of all undesirables  of harm and suffering. Sutra says, “… those 
bearing harmful intent…” 
 
The bodhicitta concomitant with patience  is like a great ocean because it is undisturbed by  the 
descending of all undesirables. This is on the thir d ground. If we consider the ocean, if we throw 
things into it, it does not become disturbed. Likew ise, this generated mind concomitant with 
patience is “undisturbed by the descending of all u ndesirables.” On the third ground, the bodhisattva 
attains the surpassing practice of the perfection o f patience, but it is not the case that there is no  
patience on the first and second grounds. Here, the  bodhisattva develops a confidence in the practice 
of patience, while on the first and second grounds,  it has not been attained. We should understand 
this similarly with respect to all ten grounds.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 96: 
 
(8) That concomitant with joyous effort is like a vajra  because, through firm 
conviction in the path, it is inseparable 7 from the Mahayana. Sutra says, “… the lazy…” 
{133} 
 
Sutra says that “The lazy are placed in joyous effo rt.” On the fourth ground, the surpassing practice 
of the perfection of joyous effort is obtained, as a result of which bodhisattvas do not become 
discouraged or depressed. This is like a vajra, bec ause through firm conviction in the path, it is 
inseparable from the Mahayana.  In addition to not becoming discouraged, they are able to place 
lazy sentient beings in effort.  
 
Questions and answers (these questions were asked by students in the prev ious class, and Geshe-
la said that students needed to provide their own a nswers, after which he would give answers)  
                                                 
7 Bskyod emended to read phyed in accordance the earlier commentary. Interestingly , the text reads skyed  on page 90 of 
the Drepung Loseling Library Society’s 1996 edition  of Ornament of the Essence . 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
36  
Student 1: Regarding the passage (p. 91), “… one should not in any way explain that “there is no  
contradiction with Array of Tree Trunks  ( Gandavyuha ) and so forth,” this seems to imply that there 
is a contradiction with the sutras, but Geshe-la said there is no contradiction with the sutras. 
Student 2: The statement “there is no contradiction  with the Sutra’s meaning” explains that there is 
no contradiction with the Twenty-Five Thousand Verse Perfection of Wisdom Sut ra.  It should not be 
explained that there is no contradiction with the Array of Tree Trunks and so forth.  It refers to a 
specific sutra, rather than other sutras. 
 
GTT: Correct.  Here, the sutra referred to is the Twenty-Five Thousand Verse Perfection of Wisdom 
Sutra , not the Array of Tree Trunks . 
 
Student 1: While in meditative equipoise on emptine ss, does a bodhisattva (a) have engaging 
generated mind, or (b) is this engaging generated m ind non-existent, or (c) is it existent in a non-
manifest manner?  
Other student’s answer: In the continuum of a senti ent being’s meditative equipoise, engaging 
bodhicitta does not exist. 
 
GTT: Correct. You should understand that engaging a nd wishing bodhicitta are not separate 
continuities. When one is in meditative equipoise, one is not conjoined with deeds, so one’s 
bodhicitta is wishing bodhicitta. When one passes t o subsequent attainment, that bodhicitta is 
engaging bodhicitta.  
 
Student 1: Is bodhicitta the desire to bring sentie nt beings to enlightenment, or to liberation? That is, 
if one has placed sentient beings in liberation, is  sentient beings’ welfare completed? 
Student 2: Others’ welfare refers to enlightenment,  or non-abiding nirvana.  
 
GTT: Final others’ welfare is non-abiding nirvana, or buddhahood. But the text  we went through 
today says others’ welfare is nirvana. It depends o n the dispositions of the trainees. There are three  
lineage-bearers, and they need to be led to their r espective nirvanas, but finally, to non-abiding 
nirvana.  
 
Q: Geshe-la said that that if generated mind is con joined with the activity of practice of deeds, it i s 
engaging bodhicitta, if it’s not conjoined, it is w ishing bodhicitta.  That seems to imply that at the  
time of meditative equipoise on emptiness, the bodh isattva does not have the activity of the practice 
of the deeds because he does not have engaging bodh icitta. 
Translator: On p. 85, it says: “The divisions into the two [possibilities] of being and not being 
actually conjoined with the activity of the practic e of the deeds is the meaning…” This means that if 
bodhicitta is actually conjoined with the activity of the practice of the deeds, it is engaging 
bodhicitta; if it is not  actually conjoined with the activity of the practice of the deeds, it is wishing 
bodhicitta.  
 
Q: So, during meditative equipoise, the bodhicitta in the continuum of a bodhisattva is conjoined 
with the activity of the practice of the deeds but not actually conjoined with the activity of the 
practice of the deeds? 
A: Yes. When one thing is conjoined with another, the two assist or accompany each othe r. In order 
for two things to be actually conjoined , both of those things must be manifest.  
 
 
Friday 16 May 2008 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
37 Ornament of the Essence , p. 96: 
 
(9) That concomitant with concentration is like the kin g of mountains  because, 
through firm meditative stabilization, it is unmove d by distracting objects. Sutra says, 
“… those whose minds are distracted…” 
 
The sutra quote in a more complete form says, “…tho se who desire to set sentient beings whose 
minds are distracted in meditative stabilization, a nd so forth…” The “king of mountains” is said to 
be very stable. On the fifth ground, the bodhisattv a attains the surpassing practice of the perfection  
of concentration. Here, the mind is very, very stab le. Does this mean that prior to the fifth ground, a 
bodhisattva has distractions and does not have stab le concentration? This is not the case: even 
before the fifth ground, the bodhisattva has concen tration and his mind is not distracted; however, 
here the bodhisattva attains confidence in his concentration.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 96: 
 
(10) That concomitant with  the perfection of wisdom is like medicine  because it 
thoroughly pacifies the diseases of afflictive and knowledge obstructions . Sutra 
says, “… those with corrupt wisdom…” 
 
On the sixth ground, the bodhisattva attains the su rpassing practice of the perfection of wisdom.  
The sutra quote in a more complete form says, “…tho se who desire to set sentient beings with 
corrupt wisdom in wisdom, and so forth…” Due to hav ing attained the surpassing practice of the 
perfection of wisdom on the sixth ground, a bodhisa ttva is able to enter into the absorption of 
cessation and arise from it in the shortest instant  in which an action is completed.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 96: 
 
(11) That concomitant with skillful means is like a virt uous spiritual guide  because, 
through the four immeasurables, the method for not discarding sentient beings, it does 
not forsake the welfare of sentient beings on any o ccasion . Sutra says, “… those who 
are skillful in the means of even just one virtuous  generated mind…” 
 
The sutra citation in a more complete form says, “t hose who desire to set sentient beings who are 
skillful in the means of even just one virtuous gen erated mind in skillful means and so forth…”  On 
the seventh ground, a bodhisattva attains the surpa ssing practice of the perfection of skillful means,  
and thus attains confidence in skillful means; due to this, the bodhisattva does not forsake the 
welfare of sentient beings on any occasion.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 96: 
 
(12) That concomitant with prayer is like a wish-grantin g gem  because, through the 
five clairvoyances, the method for having power ove r results, it accomplishes the 
result of wishes accordingly . Sutra says, “Accomplishing enlightenment, the exa lted 
body of a buddha…” {134} 
 
This particular generated mind is attained on the e ighth ground. The generated mind that is 
concomitant with prayer, through the five clairvoya nces, the method for having power over results, 
accomplishes the result of wishes accordingly. “The  method for having power over results” is 
related to the application of a pure land, one of t he applications of a bodhisattva (the tenth topic o f 
the fourth category, the application in complete as pects). Application of a pure land is “a yoga of 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
38 the pure grounds in which a root of virtue, such as  a prayer to accomplish the special land where he 
will attain enlightenment, has become a powerful po tency in his continuum.” Because of having 
attained this yoga, the bodhisattva has power over results.  
 This generated mind is on the eighth ground, one o f the three pure grounds. In the sutra system, 
it is said that a bodhisattva has to accumulate the  accumulations of three countless eons in order to 
attain enlightenment. The accumulation of the third  countless eon is gathered on the three pure 
grounds, while the accumulations of the first two e ons are gathered before that. The accumulations 
of the three countless eons is completed after the three pure grounds. In both the sutra and tantra 
systems, in order to gain enlightenment, one must c omplete the accumulations of three countless 
eons. However, according to sutra, one must abide f or three countless eons in order to complete the 
accumulations, while according to tantra one does n ot need to abide  for three countless eons to 
complete the accumulations. For this reason, many p eople are interested in tantra, which is of 
course wonderful. However, if such people are not c areful, they may take more than three countless 
eons to attain buddhahood!  
 Here it mentions the five clairvoyances, which wil l be discussed later. In general, we talk about 
six, rather than five.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 96: 
 
(13) That concomitant with power is like the sun  because, through the four means of 
gathering [disciples], it fully ripens trainees . Sutra says, “Through the food, drinks, 
clothing, and the like of a great bodhisattva, the wishes in the minds of sentient beings 
are fully completed…” 
 
On the ninth ground, a bodhisattva attains the surp assing practice of the perfection of power. 
Through the four means of gathering sentient beings , this generated mind fully ripens trainees. 
Here, it talks about the sun, which is used as a si mile for this generated mind. Kyabje Song 
Rinpoche gave a nice description of this simile, sa ying that when the sun is shining, there is 
illumination, and people can do their various activ ities, such as working, and so on. If there is a 
cave, the sunlight is not able to illuminate the in side of the cave, so it is dark inside the cave. Is  it 
the fault of the sun that the cave is dark? No, it is not the sun’s fault, it’s the cave’s fault. Like wise, 
bodhisattvas constantly enact the welfare of sentie nt beings, taking care of them, but if sentient 
beings turn away, they cannot benefit from the bodh isattvas’ activities, so whose fault is it? It is t he 
fault of sentient beings turning away that they are  not able to receive this benefit.  
 
[Geshe Tenphel told an anecdote about Song Rinpoche , other lamas, and their beards...]  
 
This point talks about the four means of gathering disciples : 
1.  performing generosity in giving necessities; giving  what is needed; 
2.  speaking pleasantly;  
3.  according with the purpose/ the welfare of the worl d;  
4.  acting out the welfare of the trainees; 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 96: 
 
(14) That concomitant with the perfection of exalted wis dom is like a pleasant 
Dharma melody  because, through the four individual correct knowl edges, the method 
for attaining complete liberation, it teaches the Dharma that makes trainees aspire . 
Sutra says, “Great bodhisattva, train in the twenty  emptinesses…” 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
39 On the tenth ground, a bodhisattva attains the surp assing practice of the perfection of exalted 
wisdom. Through the four individual correct knowled ges, this generated mind teaches Dharma that 
makes trainees aspire. We will talk about the indiv idual correct knowledges in the fourth chapter, in 
the context of the thirty-seven harmonies of enligh tenment.  
 
Until now, we have covered fourteen of the generate d minds, leaving eight more. After the ten 
grounds, there is only the buddha ground. From amon g the eight remaining generated minds, the 
fifteenth through the nineteenth are included in th e distinguished paths, or the three pure grounds.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 96: 
 
(15) That concomitant with clairvoyance is like a great king  because, through 
unobstructed might which does not allow realizations already attained to go to waste, 
it accomplishes others’ welfare . Sutra says, “Great bodhisattva, transcend all the  
worlds of the ten directions with a single generate d mind…” 
 
This generated mind occurs on the distinguished pat hs, the three pure grounds. Many qualities are 
attained on the ten grounds. In this generated mind , realizations already attained are not allowed to 
generate or go to waste, and through unobstructed m ight, a bodhisattva accomplishes the welfare of 
sentient beings in the worlds of the ten directions . 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 97: 
 
(16) That concomitant with the collections of merit and exalted wisdom is like a 
treasury  because it is like a treasury of many collections of merit and ex alted 
wisdom  teaching unsurpassable enlightenment. Sutra says, “Great bodhisattva, the 
tathagatas, along with the hearer and bodhisattva s angha of the ten directions…” {135}  
 
On the distinguished paths, a bodhisattva has a hug e collection of merit and exalted wisdom.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 97: 
 
(17) That concomitant with  the thirty-seven dharmas in harmony with the class of 
enlightenment  is like a highway  because all aryas  of the three times traveled and will 
travel  through that path. Sutra says, “Great bodhisattva,  the desire to attain the excellent 
qualities of all the buddhas of the three times and  so forth…” 
 
[The words “traveled and will travel” are from Hari bhadra’s commentary and need to be put in 
bold.] Here we are talking about the generated mind  that is concomitant with the thirty-seven 
harmonies with enlightenment. It is like a highway,  because all aryas of the past, present, and future  
travel through this path. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 97: 
 
(18) That concomitant with compassion and special insigh t is like a mount because, 
through not falling into either samsara or nirvana,  it progresses easily . Sutra says, 
“Great bodhisattva, the preliminaries of all hearer s and solitary realizers…” 
 
Due to special insight, one does not abide in samsa ra; due to compassion, one does not abide in 
nirvana, or solitary peace; in that one way does no t fall into either samsara or nirvana. Due to not 
abiding in either samsara or nirvana, one progresse s easily to the state of non-abiding nirvana.  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
40  
Ornament of the Essence , p. 97: 
 
(19) That concomitant with retention and confidence is l ike a geyser  that spouts 
water and is inexhaustible because, through retaining  previously heard and unheard 
dharmas,  it is inexhaustible . Sutra says, “That taught, is being taught and wil l be 
taught by all the buddhas of the ten directions…” R etention causes one to hold, and 
confidence causes one not to know exhaustion. {136}   
 
What is a geyser? It is not an ordinary spring. In an ordinary spring, the water flows downwards, 
while in a geyser, the water spouts upwards. “Reten tion causes one to hold, and confidence causes 
one not to know exhaustion.” This is related to the  two qualities mentioned in the phrase above: 
retention and confidence. 
 
The last three generated minds are included in the buddha ground by means of preparation, the 
actual, and the conclusion. What do we mean by prep aration, the actual, and the conclusion of the 
buddha ground?  
• Preparation refers to the end of the continuum of a sentient be ing; 
• the actual refers to when one attains buddhahood; and 
• the conclusion refers to the time of the supreme emanation body.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 97: 
 
(20) That concomitant with the festival of the four summations  of Dharma 8 is like a 
pleasant sound  because it pleasantly proclaims  [a sound] that causes liberation from 
cyclic existence to trainees  who desire liberation . Sutra says, “Having illuminated 
with light of the body darkness and what is dark am ong the worlds in the lands of each 
of the ten directions, sentient beings who are born  there are caused to hear the sounds of 
the Triple Gem.” 
 
This is posited to be at the end of the continuum o f a sentient being, so one would be in meditative 
equipoise. Can one proclaim the Dharma while in med itative equipoise? Sentient beings cannot 
teach Dharma while in meditative equipoise. The sut ra quote says, “Having illuminated with light 
of the body…,” which is something that can be done during the meditative equipoise of a sentient 
being. The end of the citation says, “sentient bein gs who are born there are caused to hear the 
sounds of the Triple Gem.” How is this done? While one is in meditative equipoise on emptiness, 
one can send an emanation to teach Dharma and do ot her activities. This is possible; otherwise, if 
one were in meditative equipoise, it would be diffi cult to teach Dharma. If we consider someone at 
the end of the continuum of a sentient being, such a person may have attained control over 
emanations, but this is not necessarily so. Thus, t here is someone who has attained control over 
emanations and someone who has not attained control  over emanations. If someone has not attained 
control over emanations, before entering meditative  equipoise, one must gather back one’s 
emanations and then enter into meditative equipoise . If one has attained control over emanations, 
there is no need to gather them back before enterin g meditative equipoise.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 97: 
 
                                                 
8 “The four summations  of Dharma” are also more commonly referred to as “t he four seals.” 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
41 (21) That concomitant with the one path traveled is like  the flow of a river  because, 
through having attained the ability that subdues 9 all trainees in common, the activities 
of others’ welfare are not different . Sutra says, “In the realms of the infinite worlds  in 
each of the ten directions, sentient beings who are  blind, deaf, insane, naked, thirsty, 
hungry, and so forth…” 
 
Here, a bodhisattva has attained the ability that s ubdues all trainees in common; the bodhisattva has 
no prejudice thinking, “I am Buddhist, these traine es are not Buddhist; I am close to this person and 
not to that person,” and so forth. In this way, thi s bodhisattva teaches everyone, everywhere, so the 
activities of others’ welfare are not different. Th is twenty-first generated mind occurs when one has 
just attained enlightenment. One is able to enact t he activities of others welfare continuously, 
without interruption until the end of cyclic existe nce. They are not enacted only occasionally.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 97: 
 
(22) The subject—the generated mind concomitant with the truth body  that enacts the 
welfare of sentient beings by emanating the twelve deeds—is like a cloud , because it is 
suitable to always display  the twelve deeds— abiding in the abode of Tushita,  
continuing from that to enter the womb of the mothe r, and so forth . {137} Sutra says, 
“Shariputra, furthermore, the great bodhisattva dis plays the behavior of the 
tathagatas…” 
 
We get rainfall from clouds, so the generated mind at this level is able to let down a rainfall of 
profound and extensive Dharma to the trainees who a re the three lineage-bearers. Through 
emanating the twelve deeds, one enacts the welfare of sentient beings. 
 
The twelve deeds are: 
1.  Abiding in the abode of Tushita  
2.  Transferring from Tushita 
3.  Entering the womb of the mother 
4.  Being born 
5.  The sports of a youth 
6.  The deeds of a prince, enjoying the company of a pr incess 
The first six are deeds of a layperson. 
7.  Renunciation 
8.  Undergoing austerities 
9.  Conquering the maras 
10.  Becoming enlightened 
11.  Turning the wheel of dharma  
12.  Entering parinirvana  
The last six are the deeds of a renunciate, or orda ined person. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 98: 
2B2C-1A2A-2B3A-2. Summary 
COMMENTARY  
In that way, through “Further, earth, gold, moon, f ire,” and so forth, the twenty-two 
generated minds are explained. 
                                                 
9 ‘dus  emended to read ‘dul  in accordance with page 91 of the Drepung Loseling  Library Society’s 1996 edition of 
Ornament of the Essence . 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
42  
EXPLANATION 
Through the similes of “Further, earth, gold, moon, fire,” [1.20a]  and so forth, the 
twenty-two generated minds are explained  because, as explained above, [the twenty-
two generated minds] are meanings that are objects to be characterized by similes and 
they are implied by means of concordant property in that way.  
2B2C-1A2A-2B3B. Boundaries 
2B2C-1A2A-2B3B-1. Explaining the individual boundari es  
2B2C-1A2A-2B3B-2. Showing that all paths are include d 
2B2C-1A2A-2B3B-1. Explaining the individual boundari es 
COMMENTARY 
Regarding those, (1-3) the first three are included  within the beginner's level, within the 
small, middling, and great themselves; (4) the one after those is included within the path 
that will enter into the first ground; (5-14) the t en after that are included within the ten 
grounds, Very Joyous and so forth, and bear the obj ects of utilization of the paths of 
seeing and meditation; (15-19) the five after those  are included within the distinguished 
paths; and (20-22) the three generated minds after those are included within buddha 
ground by means of preparation, actual, and conclus ion. 
 
EXPLANATION {138}  
Regarding those, (1-3)  the first three  generated minds are included within the 
beginner's level , because they are respectively included within  the small, middling, 
and great  path of accumulation themselves ; (4) the one  possessing preparation after 
those is included within the path that will enter i nto the first ground , because it is 
included within the Mahayana path of preparation; (5-14)  the subject— the ten after 
that—are  respectively included within the ten grounds, Very Joyous and so  forth , 
because they bear the objects of utilization of the paths of see ing and meditation  
that are the entities of the ten grounds; (15-19) the five —possessing the six 
clairvoyances and so forth— after those are included within the distinguished p aths,  
because they are included within the three pure gro unds; and (20-22) the  last three 
generated minds after those are included within bud dha ground,  because they are 
respectively included by means of the preparation, actual, and conclusion of buddha 
ground. 
 
These have already been explained, so there is no n eed to comment further. Jedzun Chogyi 
Gyeltsen’s General Meaning has some further information. It speaks of four typ es of generated 
mind (these can be seen in the footnote on p. 63 of  Ornament of the Essence ): 
1.  Generated mind of engagement through belief 
2.  Generated mind of pure extraordinary thought 
3.  Generated mind of ripening 
4.  Generated mind of abandonment of obscurations 
 
These occur respectively on: 
1.  The path of accumulation and path of preparation 
2.  The first seven grounds  
3.  Three pure grounds 
4.  Buddha ground  
 
From the point of view of how this mind is generate d, there are three divisions: 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
43 1.  The mode of a king : this is a bodhicitta in which one thinks “I will attain enlightenment first, 
then place sentient beings in the state of enlighte nment.” It is king-like, because a king gives 
orders to his subjects from his position.  
2.  The mode of a boatman : literally, this is “together” or “simultaneous” b odhicitta. This is 
bodhicitta in which one thinks “All sentient beings  and I will attain enlightenment together.” 
3.  The mode of a shepherd : literally, this refers to a herdsman, a herder of  cattle or sheep. This 
is bodhicitta in which one thinks, “I will place al l sentient beings in the state of 
enlightenment, then I will attain it myself.”  
 
In general, all bodhisattvas are sharp-facultied, b ut we can divide those into the sharpest, the 
middling, and the dull-facultied. The dull-facultie d will generate bodhicitta through the mode of 
king-like bodhicitta; the middling, through the mod e of the “together bodhicitta;” and those of 
sharpest faculty through the mode of herdsman-like bodhicitta. These faculties are posited from the 
point of view of mental strength, i.e. great, middl ing, or weak mental strength. If one thinks “I will  
place all sentient beings in enlightenment first, t hen attain enlightenment myself,” this is a case of  
great mental strength. In the case of the together- like bodhicitta, it is weaker than the herdsman-lik e 
bodhicitta, and the king-like bodhicitta has the le ast mental strength.  
 
In this section, you need to understand very well t he definition of conventional generated mind, and 
the characteristics of the two divisions: wishing a nd engaging bodhicitta. If you can understand 
these three essential points, then you have underst ood this topic well. For those of you who are 
sincerely interested in generating such a bodhicitta—not just  through the mode of taking 
initiations!—you should understand the three modes of generating it as explained here (king-like, 
etc.), and to do this on the basis of reflecting on  suffering. One must know the various types of 
suffering, and on the basis of this, one need to ap ply our attention to sentient beings, to understand  
how much they are suffering. To the extent that you  are able to do that, to that extent your mental 
strength will be great.   
 These various ways of generating bodhicitta come ab out through the various strengths of great 
compassion. Depending on the strength of great comp assion, one will generate various types of 
bodhicitta.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 98: 
2B2C-1A2A-2B3B-2. Showing that all paths are include d 
COMMENTARY 
Like that, the classifications of the generated min d are included within the range—from 
the beginner's level through the buddha ground. 
 
EXPLANATION 
The classifications of the generated mind are inclu ded within the range—from the 
beginner's level through the buddha ground , because the manner is like that 
explained above. 
 
Q: It seems that the only type of bodhicitta that m akes sense is the king-like bodhicitta, because 
otherwise, how can one guide sentient beings withou t knowing what the goal is oneself? 
A: It seems like that. We need to think about this in terms of one’s mental strength. We will discuss 
this on Monday.  
 
Q: Why is it that the bodhisattva who is in meditat ive equipoise on emptiness does not have 
engaging bodhicitta? It seems that this bodhisattva  is engaged in activity for the attainment of 
buddhahood.  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 13: 12-18 May, 2008 
 
44 A: There is no engaging bodhicitta during meditativ e equipoise. There is bodhicitta, but it is not 
manifest. If there is engaging bodhicitta, it must be actually manifest. One enters meditative 
equipoise motivated by bodhicitta. After entering m editative equipoise, bodhicitta is not manifest, 
because the mind of meditative equipoise is manifes t. Although the bodhicitta does not degenerate 
during meditative equipoise, it is not manifest at that time. Please think of a better answer than thi s 
for Monday! 
 
Student: Based on the explanation of a bodhisattva who has gained control over emanations, it 
seems that there are both wishing and engaging bodh icitta manifest, because he is able to emanate 
while being in meditative equipoise. It would seem that this bodhisattva would then realize both 
ultimate and conventional truths with a single mind , which is supposed to be unique to a buddha.  
A: That is a good question. This refers to a bodhis attva at the end of the continuum of a sentient 
being. In general,  we say that during meditative equipoise there is wi shing bodhichitta, and during 
subsequent attainment there is engaging bodhichitta .  In the case of the end of the continuum of a 
sentient being, it is hard to describe such a state . At the end of the continuum of a sentient being, if 
one gathers back one’s emanations, how can one teac h the Dharma? This is probably not done 
through speech, but through the light of one’s body . Just as the light of the body can eliminate 
darkness, so the light of the body can teach the Dh arma, such as the “four summations (or seals) of 
Dharma.” Through the force of this light, one can c ause movement of wind, through which sounds 
are produced. Think about this.  
 
Q: When does one obtain control over emanations?  
A: It is probably attained only on the three pure g rounds, not before. This is due to a bodhisattva 
having pacified coarse exertion on the three pure g rounds. On the first seven grounds, there is still 
coarse exertion, and on the three pure grounds, the re is only subtle exertion. So having pacified 
coarse exertion, one is able to attain control over  emanations. 
 
Q: If bodhisattvas have the ability to travel to bu ddha realms and so forth, why do they not practice 
tantra to enact the welfare of sentient beings more  quickly? 
A: Perhaps they are bodhisattvas who have generated  the herdsman-like bodhicitta, so they are not 
in a hurry!  
 
 
 
/wheel END /wheel 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 