Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/Transcript pdf/ORN_GTTnotes_06.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:51:41.517721
================================================================================

Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 6: 3-7 March, 2008 
 
 
 1  
Masters Program: Ornament for Clear Realization 
Notes on commentary by Geshe Tenzin Tenphel 1 
 
 
Monday, 3 March, 2008 
 
Various points (questions and answers) 
 
• In the Autonomist system, there is existence from o wn side and  imputation by the mind. With 
the example of a bad person, “badness” exists from its own side but must be posited by the 
mind. In order for imputation by the mind to take p lace, there must be something existing from 
the side of the person. From this point of view, yo u impute a man as a man because there is a 
man from its own side; it is not correct to impute it as a woman, because there is no woman 
there.  
 
• The selflessness mentioned on p. 16 (outline 2B1B-2 D: Identifying the three exalted knowers 
which are the objects of praise) in the phrase: “… it indicates that the principal wisdom is that 
very wisdom realizing selflessness…” is not necessa rily a selflessness of persons. When applied 
to knower of bases, it refers to selflessness of pe rsons; when applied to knower of paths and 
exalted knower of all aspects, it refers to selfles sness of phenomena. 
 
• In the last line of the first stanza: 
 
1.1d To the Mothers of the buddhas as well as [of] the host of hearers and bodhisattvas, I 
pay homage.  
 
“Mothers” does not simply refer to the three exalte d knowers, because the path of preparation and 
path of accumulation are also included.  
 
 
                                                 
1 Technical note :  
• In these notes, corrections and additions to the tr anslation of Maitreya’s, Haribhadra’s, and Gyeltsab ’s texts are 
indicated by explicitly indicating the changes and underlining the altered or added text. If underlini ng is not  
explicitly indicated as a correction, it is a part of the translation.  
• These notes include the outline headings and an ind ented quotation of the first part of the section of  text being 
explained, followed by ellipses (…). Students are e xpected to refer to Explanation: Ornament of the Essence  to see 
the text in its entirety. Correction s: on p. 18 (outline 2B1C -2A1B: How those of sharp faculty generate faith ):  
• in the paragraph beginning with “In the context of those of sharp faculty…,” “… and 
familiarized with their meanings…” should read “…by familiarizing  with their 
meanings…”) 
• “If, by way of the reason ‘being free of one or man y,’ one is able to prove the property of the 
subject and the pervasion, and one is able to estab lish that  the occurrence of clear appearance  
will occur  from familiarizing with the meaning of the thesis,  then [you] would have to  assert 
that one has understood well  the Ornament for Clear Realization.  
• “What valid cognition  establishes by means of valid cognition  that the three—bases, 
paths, and aspects—are not produced?” 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 6: 3-7 March, 2008 
 
 
 2  
2B1C-2A1B-2B. Proving the modes 
2B1C-2A1B-2B1. Proving the property of the subject 
2B1C-2A1B-2B2. Proving the pervasion 
2B1C-2A1B-2B1. Proving the property of the subject 
2B1C-2A1B-2B1A. Proving as free of being a truly exi stent one 
2B1C-2A1B-2B1B. Proving as free of being a truly exi stent many 
2B1C-2A1B-2B1A. Proving as free of being a truly exi stent one (continued) 
 
The root syllogism  
 
Here, we are looking at this syllogism: “The subjec t—bases, paths, and aspects—are not truly 
existent because they are neither established as a truly existent one or many, just as in the example 
of a reflection.”  
 
The three components of the syllogism are the subje ct ; the predicate of the probandum ; and the 
sign . The subject is “bases, paths, and aspects”; the p redicate of the probandum is “not truly 
existent”; the sign is “neither established as a tr uly existent one or many.” Thus the predicate of th e 
negandum  is “truly existent.”  
 
 
Ornament of the Essence,  p. 19: 
 
Although three valid cognizers are needed to prove its pervasion, refutation of a common 
locus between the sign and the predicate of the neg andum is difficult to realize…. 
 
What is the meaning of “its pervasion”? Pervasion m eans the sign  (“Neither established as a truly 
existent one or many”) being pervaded by the predicate of the probandum  (“not truly existent”). If 
it is established as neither truly existent one nor  many, it is pervaded by not being truly existent.  
 
The probandum  is “bases, paths, and aspects are not truly existe nt;” the predicate of the probandum 
is “not truly existent.” By combining the subject a nd the predicate of the probandum, we get the 
probandum. The probandum is that which is to be pro ven, or established. Here, “bases, paths, and 
aspects are not truly existent” is to be establishe d.  
 
Three valid cognizers 
  
“…[T]hree valid cognizers are needed to prove its p ervasion…”: the three valid cognizers  are seen 
further down, on p. 20, in the outline “proving the  pervasion”:  
(1)  a valid cognizer ascertaining a basis for character ization of the sign 
(2)  a valid cognizer ascertaining that the predicate of  the probandum and the predicate of the 
negandum are directly contradictory 
(3)  a valid cognizer refuting a common locus between th e sign and the predicate of the 
negandum 
 
These three valid cognizers are necessary to establ ish any kind of correct sign, not just this 
particular one.  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 6: 3-7 March, 2008 
 
 
 3 “…refutation of a common locus between the sign and t he predicate of the negandum is difficult to 
realize…”: We must have these three valid cognizers , but the third one is difficult to realize. These 
three valid cognizers in this context to prove its pervasion are not in terms of the root syllogism 
stated above, because we are now proving “freedom o f being truly existent one.” The syllogism that 
expresses this is “the subject—bases, paths, aspect s—are not established as truly existent one 
because of having parts.”  
 
The “root syllogism” is “The subject—bases, paths, and aspects—are not truly existent because 
they are neither established as a truly existent on e or many, just as in the example of a reflection,”  
and two syllogisms stem from this. The first is “th e subject—bases, paths, aspects—are not 
established as truly existent one because of having  parts.” 
 
Ornament of the Essence : 
 
Therefore, to express it, if a common locus—between  (i) that having parts and (ii) that 
which is also established as truly existent one—wer e established, then, although the two—
the parts and the whole—appear as different entitie s with respect to the mode of 
appearance, they would have to exist as a single en tity with respect to the mode of 
subsistence because, otherwise, having parts would be impossible. 
 Although they appear as different entities with re spect to the mode of appearance, they 
are established as a single entity with respect to the mode of subsistence; although the false 
mode of subsistence is not contradicted, the mode o f subsistence that is established as true 
is contradicted…. 
 
 
Our system’s refutation of an objection 
 
Up to this point, our own system is presented. Afte r this comes the refutation of an objection. If 
there is a common locus between that having parts a nd that established as being a truly existent one, 
this means that having parts would be established a s one without depending on others; the 
consequence is that it would have to be one without  depending on others.  
 
In order to think of “having parts,” we would have to think of parts and the whole. According to our 
system, the parts and the whole appear as different entities with respect to their mode of  
appearance, but with respect to their mode of subsi stence, they exist as a single entity; otherwise, 
having parts would be impossible. “Whole” means tha t bearing parts.  
 
The [hypothetical] objector says there is a common locus between that having parts and that 
established as truly existent one. This person says  that the whole and parts are mutually dependent; 
otherwise, that having parts would not be existent.  If having parts is possible, parts and the whole 
are mutually dependent; if that is the case, [we sa y that the consequence is that] there is no  common 
locus between that having parts and that establishe d as truly existent one.  
 
“…although the false mode of subsistence is not contr adicted, the mode of subsistence that is 
established as true is contradicted….” 
 
• “False mode of subsistence”  means the mode of appearance and mode of abidance 2 are 
discordant  
                                                 
2 “Mode of abidance” and “mode of subsistence” are u sed interchangeably here.  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 6: 3-7 March, 2008 
 
 
 4 • “Mode of subsistence that is established as true”  means the mode of appearance and mode of 
abidance agree, i.e. are concordant . The false mode of subsistence and mode of subsist ence 
established as true are very different.  
 
From “Also, the subject…” presents a refutation of the objection . In our own system, the whole and 
parts do exist differently. Here, our consequence ( to the objector) says: the subject, the whole and 
many parts, do not exist differently, because that would have to be seen by an arya’s meditative 
equipoise, but they are not seen as different by an  arya’s meditative equipoise.  
 
• The passage “Although they appear as different enti ties with respect to the mode of 
appearance…the mode of subsistence that is establis hed as true is contradicted” presents our 
own system’s position . From the word “Also, the subject…” is the refutat ion of the objection . 
This refutation lasts until the end of this section .  
 
On p. 19, it talks about the three valid cognizers.  It says “… if a common locus—between (i) that 
having parts and (ii) that which is also establishe d as truly existent one—were established, then...” 
This establishes a debate. Our system says there is  no common locus between that having parts and 
that established as a truly existent one. We say if  there is a common locus, then the successive 
consequences would follow.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 20: 
 
Also, the subject—the whole and the many parts—it f ollows that they do not exist 
differently, because, if they were to exist differe ntly, that would have to be seen by an 
arya’s meditative equipoise, but they are not seen to be different by an arya’s meditative 
equipoise. 
 
Why does this consequence follow? If they were to e xist differently, the mode of appearance and 
mode of abidance would have to agree, and that woul d have to be seen by an arya’s meditative 
equipoise.  
 
The expression “having parts” refers to possessing parts. Let us consider my body: it is that having 
parts. It is a composite of parts such as hands, le gs, head, etc. These parts are not a different enti ty 
from my body. If my body were to be that having par ts that is truly existent, the mode of 
appearance and mode of abidance of my body would be  the same, not different.  
 
The appearance of my body and the appearance of its  many parts are the same. Are my body and its 
many parts one or different? They are different , although they are not different entities . Does an 
arya’s meditative equipoise (on emptiness) see them  as different? It does not  see them as different. 
Although the body and its parts exist differently, that is not seen by an arya’s meditative equipoise.  
An arya’s meditative equipoise only sees emptiness.  Why does it say “… if they were to exist 
differently, that would have to be seen by an arya’ s meditative equipoise”?  
 
Back to the common locus: if there is a common locu s between that having parts and that 
established as truly existent one, then it would be  “that having parts that is a truly existent one.” If 
that having parts is a truly existent one, then par ts and the whole would be truly existent one. 
Therefore, they are not different, because if they were to exist differently, that would have to be 
seen by an arya’s meditative equipoise.  
 
Emptiness is true , but it is not truly existent . If that having parts is truly existent, it would be seen 
by an arya’s meditative equipoise, because the mode  of abidance and the mode of appearance are 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 6: 3-7 March, 2008 
 
 
 5 concordant. Because they are concordant, the more y ou analyze it, the clearer it becomes. The mind 
to which that becomes clearer and clearer can only be an arya’s meditative equipoise.  
 
Let’s take a vase as an example. A vase does not ex ist the way it appears. If it did exist as it 
appeared, then the more we analyzed it, the more we  would see that the mode of abidance and mode 
of appearance agree.  
 
An arya’s meditative equipoise  is a final mind that realizes that the mode of abi dance and mode of 
appearance do not agree. If something is establishe d truly, it would have to be seen by an arya’s 
meditative equipoise. But an arya’s meditative equi poise does not  see true existence; it sees the lack  
of true existence, therefore it is established that  there is no true existence.  
 
• Here, Geshe-la gave encouraging advice on maintaini ng joyous effort in our studies.  
 
 
 
Tuesday 4 March 2008 
 
2B1C-2A1B-2B1A. Proving as free of being a truly exi stent one (continued) 
 
Ornament of the Essence , pp. 19-20: 
 
Therefore, to express it, if a common locus—between  (i) that having parts and (ii) that 
which is also established as truly existent one—wer e established although the two—the 
parts and the whole—appear as different entities wi th respect to mode of appearance, they 
would have to exist as a single entity with respect  to the mode of subsistence, because 
otherwise, having parts would be impossible.  
 Although they appear as different entities with re spect to the mode of appearance, they 
are established as a single entity with respect to the mode of subsistence; although the false 
mode of subsistence is not contradicted, the mode o f subsistence that is established as true 
is contradicted…. 
 
These passages are the same in being a refutation o f an objection by our system . There is someone 
positing an objection with the passage: “Therefore,  to express it, if a common locus…were 
established…” The passage “also, the subject…” is a  refutation of this objection. According to our 
own system, there is no common locus ; we are refuting the position that there is a comm on locus.  
 
The sign 3 (that we are trying to prove) is “having parts.” T his sign establishes that bases, paths, and 
aspects are not established as truly existent one. To prove its pervasion, it is necessary to have thr ee 
valid cognizers. Among these three, the third one i s difficult to understand: “…a valid cognizer 
refuting a common locus between the sign and the pr edicate of the negandum…” The sign is 
“having parts;” the predicate of the negandum  is “established as truly existent one.”  
 
Our system says there is no common locus (between t hat having parts and that which is established 
as truly existent one); if there were a common locu s, certain faults would ensue.  
 
 
                                                 
3 The syllogism we are discussing here is “the subje ct—bases, paths, and aspects—are not established as  truly existent 
one because of having parts.” 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 6: 3-7 March, 2008 
 
 
 6 Our system’s refutation of there being a common loc us 
 
The passage on p. 19: “although the two—the parts a nd the whole—appear as different entities with 
respect to mode of appearance, they would have to e xist as a single entity with respect to the mode 
of subsistence, because, otherwise, having parts wo uld be impossible” is our system’s refutation of 
the position that there is a common locus .  
 
For example, my body is a whole. Its parts are the limbs, etc. To the mode of appearance,  the whole 
and parts are different, but in reality, with respect to the mode of subsistence, they are one entity . 
Why? This is because if we were to remove the parts  one by one, we would not have a body. There 
are no parts that are a different entity from the b ody, and no body that is a different entity from th e 
aggregates, or parts. They appear differently, but in terms of the mode of abidance, they are one 
entity. If we took the parts away one by one, there  would be nothing we could demonstrate as the 
body. Otherwise, having parts would be impossible.  
 
Although they appear as different entities with res pect to the mode of appearance, they are 
established as a single entity with respect to the mode of subsistence; although the false 
mode of subsistence is not contradicted, the mode o f subsistence that is established as true 
is contradicted…. 
 
With respect to the mode of subsistence that is est ablished as true, the mode of subsistence and the 
mode of appearance are the same .  
 
Next, our system flings a consequence to the positi on to be refuted: “Also, the subject—the whole 
and the many parts—it follows that they do not exis t differently…” Our system gives a reason as to 
why there is this consequence, that whole and many parts do not exist differently: “… because, if 
they were to exist differently, that would have to be seen by an arya’s meditative equipoise, but they  
are not seen to be different by an arya’s meditativ e equipoise.”  
 
According to our system : the parts and the whole appear as different entit ies with respect to the 
mode of appearance, and they exist as a single enti ty with respect to the mode of subsistence.  
 
Here, we are trying to prove that the subject has p arts. This is difficult to understand unless you ar e 
really familiar with the procedure of debate.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 20: 
 
Also, the subject—the whole and the many parts—it f ollows that they do not exist 
differently… 
 
According to our system, the whole and parts exist differently. We fling the consequence to the 
“objector”: it follows they do not  exist differently, because if they were to exist d ifferently, this 
would have to be seen by an arya’s meditative equip oise, but they are not seen to be different by 
such a meditative equipoise. Our system says if the y were to exist differently, that difference would 
not have to be seen by an arya’s meditative equipoi se. According to the assertion that there is a 
common locus between those two, then if the whole a nd parts existed differently, that would have to 
be seen by an arya’s meditative equipoise. Why? Bec ause the whole and parts exist truly. If they 
exist truly, the mode of appearance and mode of abi dance are concordant. A final mind realizing 
that the mode of appearance and abidance are concor dant is an arya’s meditative equipoise directly 
realizing emptiness.  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 6: 3-7 March, 2008 
 
 
 7 The text continues ( Ornament of the Essence , p. 20): 
 
If you accept that, then: the subject—the whole—it follows that it is many, because it is 
established and it is not different from the many p arts…. 
 
The objector has to accept this consequence, i.e. t hat they would exist differently. You (objector) 
accept that the whole and parts do not exist differ ently, i.e. that they are one. Then the whole would  
follow as many. This is why we have this consequenc e. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 20: 
 
If you accept that, it is damaged by the valid cogn izer that comprehends it as one…. 
 
Accepting “that” means accepting that it is many. “ [C]omprehends it as one” means comprehending 
the whole as one. The whole is one; if it is many, it is damaged by the valid cognizer that 
apprehends it as one. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 20: 
The subject—the many parts—it follows that it is on e, because it is established and not 
different from the whole. The assertion is damaged by the valid cognizer of 
conventionalities that comprehends it as many…. 
 
“Whole” is not many, and many parts are not one. Th erefore the whole and many parts are not the 
same, they are different.  
 
In dependence on these, it is refuted that many par ts and the whole are not different. 
 
“These” refers to the above two reasonings presente d by our system. In dependence on these, the 
parts and whole are established as different.  
 
By refuting that, the sign of the consequence is re futed. 
 
The sign of the consequence : “because, if they were to exist differently, that  would have to be seen 
by an arya’s meditative equipoise, but they are not  seen to be different by an arya’s meditative 
equipoise.” 
 
Also, by refuting a component, the composite is ref uted, whereby it is incorrect to refute a 
later side of the sign; we must assert that the sig n is refuted by refuting the earlier. 
 
“Earlier” refers to “… if they were to exist differently, that would have to be seen by an arya’s 
meditative equipoise.” By refuting this, the entire  sign is refuted.  
 
If the parts and the whole were to exist differentl y, it would be  refuted in the perspective 
seen by an arya’s meditative equipoise, whereby a c ommon locus between ‘having parts’ 
and ‘established as truly existent one’ is refuted.  
 
In this outline, we’ve proved the freedom of being truly existent one; next, we will prove the lack of  
being truly existent many.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 20: 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 6: 3-7 March, 2008 
 
 
 8 2B1C-2A1B-2B1B. Proving as free of being a truly exi stent many {29}  
The subject—the three, bases, paths, and aspects—ar e not established as a truly existent 
many, because a truly existent one does not exist. 
 
QUALM: Since it has been proven above that a truly existent one is not established, why is 
the lack of a truly existent one stated as a sign h ere? 
 
Objection : Previously, we established that bases, paths, and  aspects are not established as truly 
existent one. “Not truly existent one” was establis hed, so why is the lack of truly existent one given  
as a sign?  
 
RESPONSE: It is a requisite in order to prove the p ervasion of this sign. 
 
Response : If truly existent one doesn’t exist, then truly e xistent many is pervaded by not existing. 
To establish truly existent many, truly existent on e must exist. In general, without the qualification  
of true existence, if one is not established, many cannot be established. This is the pervasion being 
discussed.  
 
Its sign is established in dependence on the two: ( 1) refuting partlessness and (2) it being  
necessarily established as a partless one if it wer e established as a truly existent one. 
 
We establish that bases, paths, and aspects are not  established as truly existent many because 
truly existent one doesn’t exist. How does one esta blish that truly existent one does not exist? 
Because of having parts. This boils down to the two  things that are mentioned: “(1) refuting 
partlessness and (2) it being necessarily establish ed as a partless one if it were established as a 
truly existent one.”  
 
The meaning of “sign is established” is that the si gn is correct. It usually means the sign is 
established by a valid cognizer. It does not have t o be the three modes in order to be established.  
 
• Bases : refers to phenomena such as aggregates and consti tuents 
• Paths : refers to the three paths (hearer, solitary reali zer, bodhisattva) 
• Aspects : refers to all phenomena. These are the objects of  observation of the three exalted 
knowers.  
 
2B1C-2A1B-2B2. Proving the pervasion 
 
This refers to the “root syllogism:” The subject, b ases, paths, and aspects are not truly existent 
because they are not truly existent one or many. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 20:  
 
Although three—(1) a valid cognizer ascertaining a basis for characterization of the sign, 
(2) a valid cognizer ascertaining that the predicat e of the probandum and the predicate of 
the negandum are directly contradictory, and (3) a valid cognizer refuting a common locus Correction: “…(2) it being  necessarily established as a partless one if it we re established as a 
truly existent one.”  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 6: 3-7 March, 2008 
 
 
 9 between the sign and the predicate of the negandum— are needed, since the first two are 
easy to realize, the last is as follows…. 
 
To realize that a reflection is not established as truly existent one or many is not difficult. It is easier 
for us to realize this about a reflection than to u nderstand this about bases, paths, and aspects. 
Ordinary beings can realize that a reflection is no t established as true, i.e. as it appears. In 
dependence on realizing that a reflection is not es tablished as truly existent one or many, slowly we 
will realize that bases, paths, and aspects are not  established as truly existent one or many. In 
dependence on that, we will realize that they are n ot truly existent.  
 
Ornament of the Essence,  p. 20:  
 
When the valid cognizer (ascertaining one and many to be mutually exclusive direct 
contradictions in terms of a basis, a reflection) r ealizes the infeasibility of three 
possibilities  between one and many, there is an ascertainment by way of realizing the 
infeasibility of three possibilities  between truly existent one and many in terms of the  basis, 
a reflection. 
 
“Mutually exclusive direct contradictions :” mutually exclusive means that if a basis is one,  it is 
negated from being many; if it is many, it is negat ed from being one. So one and many are mutually 
exclusive.  
 
Wednesday, March 5, 2008 (morning) 
 
 
2B1C-2A1B-2B2. Proving the pervasion (continued) 
 
A valid cognizer ascertains one and many to be mutu ally exclusive direct contradictions. They are 
mutually exclusive because if it is one, it is not many; if it is many, it is not one. They are direct  
contradictions. This valid cognizer realizes the in feasibility of three possibilities between one and 
many. A third possibility between one and many is s omething that is “neither one nor many”—no 
such thing exists.  
 Corrections:  
Ornament of the Essence, p. 20, 2B1C-2A1B- 2B1A: Proving as free of being a truly existent 
one : “ If the parts and the whole were to exist differentl y, it would be refuted in the perspective 
seen by an arya’s meditative equipoise, whereby a common lo cus between ‘having parts’ and 
‘established as truly existent one’ is refuted.”  
Should read: “It has been refuted that  if the parts and the whole were to exist different ly, 
that would be refuted in the pe rspective seen by an arya’s meditative equipoise, whereby a 
common locus between ‘having parts’ and ‘establishe d as truly existent one’ is refuted.” 
 
P. 20, 2B1C-2A1B-2B2: Proving the pervasion : “ When the valid cognizer (ascertaining one 
and many to be mut ually exclusive direct contradictions in terms of a  basis, a reflection) realizes 
the infeasibility of three possibilities...” 
Should read: “When  [In dependence on]  the valid cognizer (ascertaining one and many to be  
mutually exclusive direct contradictions in terms o f a basis, a reflection) realizing  the 
infeasibility of three possibilities  between one and many…”  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 6: 3-7 March, 2008 
 
 
 10  In dependence on the valid cognizer ascertaining on e and many as mutually exclusive direct 
contradictions, there is ascertainment by way of re alizing the infeasibility of three possibilities 
between truly existent  one and truly existent many in terms of the basis, a reflection. There is no 
third possibility that is neither truly existent on e nor truly existent many. When one ascertains this , 
one will realize that there is no true existence in  terms of the basis, a reflection. On that basis, o ne 
will come to realize there is no true existence in terms of bases, paths, and aspects. 
 
As a syllogism : the subject, a reflection, is not truly existent because it is not established as truly 
existent one or truly existent many. By realizing t he sign of the syllogism—it is not established as 
truly existent one or many—one will quickly realize  that the subject, a reflection, is not truly 
existent. By repeated contemplation on the sign in terms of this example, one gradually realizes that 
bases, paths, and aspects are not truly existent. 
 
Why is it easier to realize the lack of true existe nce in terms of a reflection than the lack of true 
existence of bases, paths, and aspects? A reflectio n is a “falsity in the renown of the world;” it is 
easy to realize it doesn’t exist truly. There is no  need to realize emptiness to realize this. Bases, 
paths, and aspects are not falsities renowned in th e world; it is more difficult to realize them as no t 
truly existent. By realizing lack of true existence  in terms of a reflection, one will eventually real ize 
lack of true existence in terms of bases, paths, an d aspects by way of analysis.  
 
In addition to analysis, one also needs to accumula te merit, because we have committed many 
negativities through the force of afflictions, and we need to reduce their force. By collecting virtue , 
we can reduce their power, especially that of ignor ance, and we will be closer to realizing the nature  
of phenomena. Ignorance obscures seeing the nature of things, so the stronger the afflictions, the 
more difficult it is to contact the nature of thing s. The main type of merit to realize emptiness is t o 
have a good motivation. This comes through proper c ontemplation before an activity, i.e. making 
offerings, etc.; otherwise our motivation becomes m ixed. This comes through practice. The 
motivation needs to remain strong throughout an act ivity.  
 
“Direct contradictions”  
 
Two things can be contradictions without being direct contradictions; for instance, the flower and 
watch on the table in front of me are contradiction s, because they are different and have no common 
locus, but are not direct contradictions. They are not direct contradictions because if they were 
direct contradictions, it would mean that if it is not a flower, it is a watch; if it is not a watch, it is a 
flower. Examples of direct contradictions are “one and different,” “one and many,” and “the 
permanent and the impermanent.” Direct contradictio ns are applied to all objects of knowledge. A 
direct contradiction with the watch is “that which is not this watch.”  
 
Ornament of the Essence , pp. 20-21:  
 
OPINION of someone who has not trained in the prese ntation of reasoning: The 
ascertainment that an existent is either one or man y eliminates the superimposition holding 
that something truly existent is not pervaded by be ing either truly existent one or many. 
 
RESPONSE: In that case, the valid cognizer ascertai ning that product is pervaded by being 
impermanent must eliminate the superimposition hold ing that the product sound is not 
pervaded by being impermanent sound, whereby the in ferential cognizer supported on that 
sign would not newly eliminate the superimposition… . 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 6: 3-7 March, 2008 
 
 
 11  An objector  says the “… ascertainment that an existent is either one or man y eliminates the 
superimposition holding that something truly existe nt is not pervaded by being either truly existent 
one or many.”  
 
Our system  says that an ascertainment that an existent is eit her one or many does not eliminate the 
superimposition holding that something truly existe nt is not pervaded by being either truly existent 
one or many. We say the ascertainment that an exist ent is either one or many simply eliminates the 
superimposition holding that an existent is not either one or many.  
 
Why does this person think in this way? It is relat ed to the previous paragraph, in which it is said 
that the realization of the infeasibility of three possibilities between one and many in terms of the 
basis, a reflection, ascertains by way of realizing  the infeasibility of three possibilities between truly 
existent one and many in terms of the basis, a reflection. O ur own system says that in dependence 
on this valid cognizer that realizes the infeasibil ity of three possibilities between one and many in 
terms of a reflection, then without needing to pass  through other valid cognizers, one ascertains by 
way of realizing the infeasibility of three possibi lities between truly existent one and many in terms  
of the basis, a reflection. However, this cannot be  said in terms of bases, paths, and aspects.  
 
Even if one has a valid cognizer realizing the infe asibility of three possibilities between one and 
many in terms of bases, paths, and aspects, one nee ds to generate other valid cognizers before one 
can have this realization of infeasibility of three  possibilities between truly existent one and many in 
terms of bases, paths, and aspects.  
 
In terms of a reflection, the object to be negated is not very subtle. Ordinary people can realize thi s 
clearly. If a third possibility between one and man y is not feasible, then a third possibility between  
truly existent one and many is not feasible. But fo r most of us, in terms of a general basis, by 
realizing that a third possibility that is neither one or many is not feasible, we are not able to rea lize 
the infeasibility of the third possibility, i.e. ne ither truly existent one or many.   
 
Our response ( Ornament of the Essence , p. 21) :  
 
In that case, the valid cognizer ascertaining that product is pervaded by being impermanent 
must eliminate the superimposition holding that the  product sound is not pervaded by 
being impermanent sound, whereby the inferential co gnizer supported on that sign would 
not newly eliminate the superimposition. 
 
What sign? This is the sign of the syllogism: “The subject, sound, is impermanent because of being 
a product.”  
 
Our system says that a valid cognizer ascertaining that product is pervaded by being impermanent 
does not eliminate the superimposition holding that  the product, sound, is not pervaded by being 
impermanent sound. This syllogism is stated to some one who understands that sound is a product, 
and that a product is pervaded by being impermanent , but has doubt about sound being 
impermanent. A valid cognizer ascertaining that pro duct is pervaded by being impermanent does 
not eliminate the superimposition that the product sound is not pervaded by being impermanent 
sound. It has not realized that sound is impermanen t and has not eliminated the superimposition that 
the product sound is not pervaded by being imperman ent sound. By contemplating, such a person 
will realize that sound is impermanent, and will el iminate the superimposition that the product 
sound is not pervaded by being impermanent sound. P rior to eliminating this superimposition, he 
has already realized that whatever is a product is pervaded by being impermanent.  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 6: 3-7 March, 2008 
 
 
 12  A superimposition is a mind, or a doubt. Here, the “third possibility” refers to something that is, 
e.g., neither one nor many.  
 
At the end of our response, we say: “There is plent y to be said, but I will leave it for the time 
being.” When we state this syllogism to a person: “ the subject, bases, paths, and aspects, are not 
truly existent because they are not established as truly existent one or many,” such a person then 
realizes that an existent is either one or many, in  terms of bases, paths, and aspects, but has not 
eliminated the superimposition that something truly  existent is not pervaded by being truly existent 
one or many in terms of bases, paths, and aspects. This is because this person has doubts re. whether 
or not bases, paths, and aspects are not truly exis tent.  
 
Conclusion : If one has realized that a product is impermanent , one doesn’t necessarily realize that 
sound is impermanent; likewise, if one has realized  that something is one or many, one doesn’t 
necessarily realize that something truly existent i s either truly existent one or many.  
 
“One” can depend on others, but a “truly existent o ne” cannot depend on others. For instance, we 
can only say that a finger is “longer” or “shorter”  in relation to other fingers. We can also say that  
one depends on its parts, and therefore is not trul y existent.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 21: 
 
2B1C-2A2. From that, generating the aspiration whic h seeks 
Also through lucidity in those, also both persons w ho strongly desire their excellent 
qualities develop great respect in that and the scr iptures based upon that for the purpose of 
holding and so forth in all ways…. 
 
In Maitreya’s expression of worship, the three exal ted knowers are explicitly praised; in dependence 
on that, Ornament  trainees generate faith in the three mothers, and with this they have the aspiration 
seeking hearing, contemplation, and meditation. By engaging in these, they can attain the state of 
omniscience. The principal objects towards which fa ith is generated is the three Mothers. That to 
which one generates this mind of seeking is the Ornament for Clear Realization . In dependence on 
hearing, contemplation, and meditation, one will ev entually attain enlightenment.  
 
With regard to the faith generate in the Mothers: d ull-faculty disciples generate great faith, sharp-
facultied develop irreversible faith.   
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 21: 
 
…holding the words and so forth in all ways  regarding that which is together with the 
complete subject matter : 
 
“[T]hat which is together with the complete subject  matter” refers to Ornament for Clear 
Realization . The complete subject matter can also be eight cat egories and seventy topics. “In all 
ways” is to eliminate only studying sometimes, and other times going on picnics, etc.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 21: 
2B1C-2A3. From that, how to attain the result after  having entered 
From that, through the stages of generating the kno wers which arise from hearing and so 
forth, supreme goodness will be attained. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 6: 3-7 March, 2008 
 
 
 13   
EXPLANATION  
Generating great seeking is together with a special  purpose, because from generating that,  
supreme goodness —unsurpassable enlightenment —will be attained  in dependence on 
that…. 
 
“…[T]he three knowers which arise from hearing and so forth” refers to the wisdoms arisen from 
hearing, contemplation, and meditation. Faith in th e Mothers will give rise to aspiration seeking the 
treatise.  
 
 
“…[I]mplicitly the reverse is implied:” If one does  not generate lucid faith in the treatise, one will  
not generate aspiration in the treatise and will no t engage in hearing, contemplation, meditation, and  
will not attain enlightenment.  
 
By generating lucid faith in Mothers (i.e. the thre e exalted knowers), one will generate the mind 
seeking the treatise Ornament for Clear Realization,  which takes the three exalted knowers as its 
subject. Faith should be understood in relation to the expression of worship. Many have faith in the 
Three Jewels, but few have faith in the treatises t hat take the Three Jewels as their subject matter. 
 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 21: 
2B1C-2B. Summary 
COMMENTARY 
Therefore, lucidity in the Bhagavati is the princip al cause of attaining all goodness. 
 
EXPLANATION {31}  
The subject—faith of lucidity in the Bhagavati—is the principal cause of  attaining all 
goodness, because it has already been shown to be so by means  of a valid cognizer that 
ascertains cause and effect.  
 
“Therefore…”: means based on reasons said above, i. e.: faith in the Mothers gives rise to aspiration 
for the treatise, which gives rise to hearing, whic h gives rise to contemplation, which gives rise to 
meditation, which gives rise to omniscience.  
 
This outline comes from the outline 2B1C Commentary … (p. 16). This summary is a division of 
2B1C-2: Meaning of the purpose .  
 
 
Wednesday, March 5, 2008 (afternoon) 
 
 Correction (p. 21): 
“Through these explicitly indicating that which acco mpanies the stages of the path that were 
born in the mental continuum of Venerable [Maitreya ], implicitly the reverse is implied”  
should read “Through these explicitly indicating the process of  giving rise to that which 
accompanies the stages of the path that were born in the mental continuum of Venerable 
[Maitreya], implicitly the reverse is implied.”  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 6: 3-7 March, 2008 
 
 
 14  It is in dependence on this valid cognizer ascertai ning one and many to be mutually exclusive direct 
contradictions in terms of a basis, a reflection th at there is an ascertainment by way of realizing th e 
infeasibility of three possibilities  between truly existent one and many in terms of the  basis, a 
reflection. 
 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 22:  
 
2B1C-3. Dispelling arguments 
OPINION: Is the praise to the perfection of wisdom at the beginning of composing the 
treatise meant [as a praise] of all, or of only one  portion?.... 
 
This section follows from the outline on p. 16. ( 2B1C: Commentary ).   
 
RESPONSE: We do not assert the latter position; we accept the former…. 
 
The latter position is that the praise is “of only one portion…;” the former position is that it is 
“meant [as a praise] of all.” 
 
Opinion : “In the first case, the number [from among the ei ght categories that is actually praised] 
would have been too few…” In case the praise is a p raise of all, this number would have been too 
few, because the four applications and truth body a re not praised. In the second case (the praise to 
the perfection of wisdom being praise of only one p ortion), is this to any of the exalted knowers, or 
just to the exalted knower of all aspects? In the s econd case, it is sufficient to praise “any of the 
three, or the principal exalted knower of all aspec ts alone. So what is the purpose of mentioning the 
three together as objects of praise?” 
 
Our system : There is no fault that the definite number of thr ee exalted knowers is too few. There is 
a reason and purpose for explicitly praising them. This is expressed in the coming commentary: 
 
Regarding that, the three exalted knowers of all th emselves include the eight [clear 
realizations] ; those also are the perfection of wisdom, and also  by them, all aims are 
fulfilled in a manner that will be explained…. 
 
Explanation of this passage:  
 Corrections  (p. 22):  
Wherever “eight categories” appears in this section , it should read “eight [clear realizations].”  
• “Regarding that, the three exalted knowers of all t hemselves include the eight [clear 
realizations] …”  
• “…because Venerable [Maitreya] wished to praise all  eight [clear realizations] …” 
• “…having kept the  inclusion (where the three exalted knowers of all themselves 
include the eight [clear realizations] ) in mind …”  
• “…because (i) those  eight [clear realizations]  which are included within the three exalted 
knowers…” 
• “…it is impossible not to see all the eight [clear re alizations]  in that way; having wished 
to praise…”  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 6: 3-7 March, 2008 
 
 
 15  EXPLANATION 
Regarding that, there is a reason for the praise by means of the th ree exalted knowers, 
because (i) Venerable [Maitreya] wished to praise a ll eight [clear realizations] , and (ii) 
having kept the  inclusion (where the three exalted knowers of all themselves include  
the eight [clear realizations] ) in mind, he  praised the perfection of wisdom by means of 
the excellent qualities of  the three exalted knowers of all themselves …. 
 
 
This expresses the reason . The reason has two parts:  
(i)  Venerable Maitreya wished to praise all eight categ ories 
(ii)  Having kept the inclusion in mind (i.e. the eight c lear realizations are included by the 
three exalted knowers), he praised the perfection o f wisdom by means of the excellent 
qualities of the three exalted knowers of all thems elves. 
 
This is inclusion where three exalted knowers inclu de eight clear realizations by way of practice .  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 22: 
 
There is a purpose for praising the Mothers by mean s of the three exalted knowers, because 
(i) those  eight categories which are included within the thr ee exalted knowers also  are the 
complete  perfection of wisdom,  and  (ii) it will be known that “ also by the three exalted 
knowers,  all desired aims of the aryas are fulfilled in a manner that will be 
explained. ”…. 
 
This expresses the purpose . The purpose for praising the Mothers by way of th e three exalted 
knowers is for the sake of making known that three exalted knowers are able to accomplish the 
excellent desired aims of aryas who are their child ren.  
 
The paragraph expressing the purpose says that the three exalted knowers include the eight clear 
realizations. This means that all aspects of the ei ght clear realizations are included in the aspects 
that are objects of cultivation of the three exalte d knowers. By way of practice, the three exalted 
knowers include the eight clear realizations, so th is serves as a praise to the perfection of wisdom.  
 
By praising the three exalted knowers, all eight cl ear realizations are praised, and thus the entire 
perfection of wisdom. Not only is praise expressed to three exalted knowers and eight clear 
realizations, all paths are praised, whereby the en tire perfection of wisdom is praised.  
 
 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p.22: 
 
 The way in which three includes eight is as follow s…. 
 
 
Difference between “eight categories” and “eight cl ear realizations:” 
• Eight clear realizations : three exalted knowers, four applications, exalted  wisdom truth body.  Correction: Ornament of the Essence , p. 22: “ Since also eight are subsumed in the earlier three,  
those eight are asserted to be objects of praise…” Should be: “[With respect to]  the earlier 
“also,” since  the eight are subsumed in the three, those eight are asserted to be objects of praise.”  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 6: 3-7 March, 2008 
 
 
 16  • Eight categories : three exalted knowers, four applications, and res ultant truth body (the 
eighth category is not  a clear realization). 
 
There is a reason  for praising the three exalted knowers as well as for the eight clear realizations; 
there is also a purpose for praising both.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , 
 
The purpose of indicating overtly just the three ex alted knowers is so that it is made known 
that what are asserted to achieve the goals of the three lineage-bearers are individual 
unmixed paths of the three. 
 In summary, if it is one of the eight clear realiz ations, it is pervaded by being an aspect 
that is an object of cultivation of one of the exal ted knowers and, through practicing in that 
manner, three includes eight.  
 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 23: 
 
2B1C-4. Meaning of the words  
2B1C-4A. Praise by means of individual qualities 
2B1C-4B. Having summarized, paying homage 
2B1C-4A. Praise by means of individual qualities 
The first of the three is as follows. 
2B1C-4A1. The way in which the knower of bases lead s to peace  
COMMENTARY {33}  
Fully knowing that all bases are not produced is th at which makes those desiring nirvana—
the hearers, and also the solitary realizers, place d in that class, whose life activities are 
superior by merely a little, indicated by a sequenc e—attain the two types of nirvana with 
the characteristic of being together with the aggre gates and without the aggregates. 
 
EXPLANATION  
“Is that which makes… attain.” By who?.... 
 
 
Etymology of “hearer”  
 
“Hearer” has two parts in Tibetan: “ nyan” (nyän) and  “thos ” (thö). the first syllable means “hear,” 
the second syllable means “listen.” A hearer listens to teachings by the teacher, the Buddha, and 
practices based on having listened to those teachin gs, and then causes others to hear these 
teachings.  
 
Solitary realizers 
 
Solitary realizers are of various types. One type i s the “rhinoceros-like solitary realizers.” They 
have uncommon characteristics, because on the learn ers’ path, they make three kinds of prayers , 
two of which are mentioned in this passage (nos. 2 and 3 below):  
(1)  “May I be reborn in a land where there is no buddha ” (this mainly refers to the supreme 
emanation body).  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 6: 3-7 March, 2008 
 
 
 17  (2)  “May I be able to teach Dharma without sound, by wa y of expressions of my body.” 
(3)  “May I attain nirvana in my last existence without relying on the instructions of a master.” 
This refers to the last rebirth in samsara; without  relying on instructions, they meditate on 
their own and attain liberation. 
 
Two types of nirvana:  
 
(1)  With remainder—nirvana together with the suffering aggregates  
(2)  Without remainder—nirvana that is separated from su ffering aggregates  
 
Nirvana with remainder : A human being who goes on to attain the foe-destr oyer state still has 
human aggregates. The nirvana in the continuum of s uch a foe-destroyer is nirvana with remainder. 
The support of foe-destroyers can be any of the thr ee realms—desire realm, form realm, formless 
realm. Nirvana in this foe-destroyer’s continuum wo uld be nirvana with remainder, because it is 
nirvana together with the remainder that are the su ffering aggregates.  
 
Nirvana without remainder : When such a foe-destroyer of the three realms pas ses away, he is born 
in a lotus in Sukhavati pure land; the nirvana in h is continuum at that time is nirvana without 
remainder, because it is without suffering aggregat es. This body is a mental body, a body that is the 
nature of mind.  
 
“Remainder” refers to contaminated aggregates, not aggregates in general. Even after a  foe-
destroyer is born in Sukhavati, he still has aggreg ates, but they are not contaminated. Contaminated 
aggregates arise, or are appropriated, through the force of afflictions; a foe-destroyer’s body in 
Sukhavati does not come about through afflictions.  
 
“Is that which makes… attain.” This refers to Harib hadra’s commentary. “How are the solitary 
realizers indicated—by what words?” Solitary realiz ers are not explicitly mentioned; “They are 
implicitly indicated by being placed in that class of hearers.” Although hearer and solitary realizers  
are in the same class, there is some difference: “b ecause their life-activities are superior by merely  a 
little, such as revealing Dharma to others without sound, having abandoned the conception of 
apprehendeds, and not relying upon the quintessenti al instructions of a master in the last existence.”   
 
Two results :  
(1)  Nirvana with remainder: “nirvana that is together w ith the aggregates of suffering, the result 
of past karma and afflictions, even though afflicti ons have been exhaustively abandoned”  
(2)  Nirvana without remainder: “nirvana with the charac teristic of being without the 
aggregates.”  
 
The meaning of “with remainder”  
 
In a hearer’s or solitary realizer’s last life, the y go on to attain the foe-destroyer state. The bodi ly 
support of that foe-destroyer is known as “remainde r.” This person has taken many rebirths through 
the force of karma and afflictions; in the very las t life, the aggregates are the remainder, because 
there will not be any more suffering aggregates aft er that. “With remainder” means “together with 
remainder,” “without remainder” means “having separ ated from the remainder.” Remainder is the 
suffering aggregates, not just aggregates.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 23: 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 6: 3-7 March, 2008 
 
 
 18  It is incorrect to assert that here nirvana without  remainder is a nirvana where the 
continuity of matter and cognition has been severed , (1) because that is only an imputation 
by those of the hearer schools, and (2) because the  time has arrived for the Acarya himself 
to make a presentation of the lower nirvana drawing  from the paths of reasoning. 
 
“Here” means that in our system it is incorrect to assert this.  
 
The meaning of “…They are further indicated by a se quence of words that describe the excellent 
qualities of the knower of bases.” This refers to r oot text 1.1a: “That which through the knower of 
all…” The excellent qualities of the knower of base s are expressed by “leads hearers seeking 
pacification to peace…” The knower of bases leads t o pacification; it leads the hearers to peace.  
 
 
Various points 
 
• The term “bodily support” refers to the person who is the support, not to the body itself. 
“Remainder” can refer to the five aggregates, but n ot just to the body, because then there would 
be problems if we discussed the formless realm, bec ause there is no coarse form in the formless 
realm.  
• Among the three lineage-bearers, solitary realizers  are superior to hearers; they are “middling” 
level. However, if we were to meet a learner hearer , we might even think that such a being were 
a buddha or a bodhisattva!   
• Contaminated aggregates  include any of the five aggregates that have arisen through afflictions.  
 
 
Thursday, 6 March, 2008 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 23: 
2B1C-4A2. The way in which the knower of paths achi eves the aims of the world {34}  
COMMENTARY  
The very entity realizing that all paths are not pr oduced is that which causes 
bodhisattvas—those enacting the welfare of migratin g beings as long as samsara exists—to 
achieve the aims of all migrating beings. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The method, the very entity realizing that all paths are not  truly produced, is that which 
causes the persons who are the support, bodhisattva s—those enacting the welfare of 
migrating beings as long as samsara exists—to achie ve  the result , the aims of all migrating 
beings  of the three lineage-bearers. 
 
 
Enacting sentient beings’ welfare  
 
Bodhisattvas who enact welfare of migrating beings do not do so just for one or two days, etc. They 
do so “as long as samsara exists.” This mainly refe rs to bodhisattvas revealing the paths that are 
methods to the three lineage-bearers in order for t hem to achieve their aims. There are also sentient 
beings who are not included in these three, so bodh isattvas use various methods to enact their 
welfares. There are countless beings not included i n these three lineage-bearers; bodhisattvas also 
benefit them, but they do not explicitly teach them  methods, such as the paths, because they are not 
ready. Bodhisattvas directly reveal paths to be pra cticed to the three lineage-bearers.  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 6: 3-7 March, 2008 
 
 
 19   
Accumulation of merit in the perfection vehicle and  tantra  
 
According to the perfection vehicle (sutra system),  a bodhisattva needs to collect the accumulations 
for three countless eons before he can attain buddh ahood. These three countless eons start from the 
time of generating bodhicitta. Sometimes, people be come discouraged when they hear about this 
great length of time. In tantra, in contrast, it is  said we can attain enlightenment in this body, in this 
life, and there is a maximum of sixteen lifetimes t o attain enlightenment, so many people become 
interested in tantra! But if we count those who hav e attained enlightenment through the tantra 
system in recent times, there are not many, so we s houldn’t think in this way. Saying it takes a 
maximum of sixteen lifetimes is in terms of people who have renunciation, bodhicitta, and the 
correct view, i.e. the “three principal aspects.” S aying we can attain enlightenment in this life is a  
possibility; otherwise, we can attain it in the bar do, or after that, but this only applies to those w ho 
have these three principal aspects. In fact, there are more people who attend initiations, do retreats , 
etc., than those who attend lam rim teachings, but there are few who have attained enlightenment in 
this way. On the basis of bodhicitta, one can quick ly complete the accumulations and attain 
enlightenment.  
 
Three countless great eons seems like a very long t ime, but we have wasted more time than this and 
if we’re not careful, we will waste even more time.  Bodhisattvas who enact the welfare of sentient 
beings think nothing of these three countless great  eons. We should not be too concerned about the 
time it takes when we do practice or study; if we a re overly concerned with this, we can feel rushed 
and can actually end up doing things more slowly. W e should simply focus on our practice without 
thinking too much about the time it takes, and this  will actually speed up the process.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 24: 
2B1C-4A3. The way in which the exalted knower of al l aspects turns the wheels of Dharma 
COMMENTARY  
Possessing that which comprehends that all aspects are not produced, the buddhas—
bearers of exalted bodies which are perfectly restr ained, principal of the lords who bear 
yoga—as antidotes to deeds, turn all the wheels of Dharma without exception in all 
aspects. 
 
EXPLANATION  
Turn.  By who?.... 
 
As we explained before, there is the support, the m ethod, and the result.  
 
• Support : mainly supreme emanation body  
• Method : exalted knower of all aspects 
• Result : turning the wheels of Dharma for the three lineag e-bearers 
 
The support , the supreme emanation body, turns the wheels of D harma in dependence on the 
method, the exalted knower of all aspects. Turning the whee ls of Dharma is the result of the exalted 
knower of all aspects, i.e. the method is the cause .  
 
 
Supreme emanation body and turning the wheels of Dh arma  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 6: 3-7 March, 2008 
 
 
 20  There is no time when the supreme emanation body is  not teaching Dharma, but how do we explain 
this? We say the exalted knower of all aspects is t he cause of the result, which is the turning of the  
wheel of Dharma; the cause precedes the result, so then there will be a time when the supreme 
emanation body is not  teaching the Dharma. The cause is established firs t and followed by a result; 
we cannot have cause and result simultaneously.  
 
In fact, there is no time when the supreme emanatio n body is not teaching the Dharma, and the 
supreme emanation body is itself a result that aris es from the enjoyment body, which acts as an 
empowering condition . Before descending to our continent, Shakyamuni Bu ddha was in Tushita 
pure land. That buddha was a birth emanation body . Afterwards, he came to our continent in the 
form of a supreme emanation body, but he had previo usly attained enlightenment. It is thus correct 
to say that in dependence on the method, the exalte d knower of all aspects, the wheels of Dharma 
are turned.  
 
 
The Buddha’s twelve deeds 
 
Some texts say the Buddha is simultaneously display ing the twelve exalted deeds, but not 
simultaneously enacting them in our continent . The twelve deeds  are:  
 
1.  Being born in Tushita pure land 
2.  Transferring from Tushita 
3.  Being conceived in the womb  
4.  Being born from the womb 
5.  Being a youth and engaging in play 
6.  Showing himself as a prince 
7.  Definitely emerging, i.e. leaving the palace  
8.  Undertaking austerities 
9.  Conquering the maras 
10.  Becoming a buddha 
11.  Turning the wheels of Dharma 
12.  Passing into parinirvana 
 
Six of these are deeds of laypersons, and six are d eeds of an ordained person. They are said to be 
sequential in our continent , but to be simultaneous, because they occur simult aneously in different 
world systems. These deeds are difficult to underst and in a detailed way.  
 
The result is turning the wheels of Dharma, but who se result is that? Since it is said that in 
dependence on the method, the exalted knower of all  aspects, the wheels of Dharma are turned, we 
say that the exalted knower of all aspects is the c ause. The cause has to come first, followed by the 
result, so there is a time when the exalted knower of all aspects has been established but the turning  
of the wheels of Dharma has not been established. T he point is that before the supreme emanation 
body turns the wheel of Dharma, the exalted knower of all aspects has already been established.  
 
This exalted knower of all aspects is present all t he time in the supreme emanation body, in the 
emanation body, etc. We would say that the four bod ies—emanation body, enjoyment body, nature 
body, and the exalted wisdom truth body—are establi shed at the same time. However, in terms of a 
specific land, there is a difference. In this conti nent, there was a time when the supreme emanation 
body was displayed but prior to that time, the eman ation body was already established.  
 
Vaibhashika presentation of the Buddha 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 6: 3-7 March, 2008 
 
 
 21   
One sutra ( The Sutra of the Fortunate Eon ) describes the prophecies about the various buddha s, e.g. 
when they will become enlightened, and so on. Howev er, the Vaibhashika description is a bit 
awkward if you analyze it. In their description, a bodhisattva has to gather the accumulations of 
three countless great eons by the time of the path of preparation. After gathering these 
accumulations, he enters meditation on the path of preparation and attains buddhahood in a single 
session. They also explain that after attaining enl ightenment, the Buddha passed away at the age of 
eighty-one and attained nirvana without remainder, and the continuity of matter and cognition 
became severed. So after gathering the accumulation s for three countless great eons, he only taught 
for forty-five years. This explanation seems a bit strange. 
 
It is said that the Buddha is able to live 100 year s, but he passed away around the age of eighty. 
This is because he made a dedication for his follow ers, the monks and nuns, so that even when a 
famine occurred, they would not have difficulty fin ding food, and his lifespan was thus reduced by 
twenty years. He made this dedication because when the Buddha was alive, the monks would go on 
their alms rounds. Once, a group of 100 monks split  into two, and one group found food while the 
other didn’t. The group that didn’t find food split  into two, one of which found food and the other 
didn’t, and so on, until there were two people, one  who managed to find food, and the other not. 
The one who didn’t find food became very thin, and the Buddha offered him food, but his alms 
bowl overturned and the ground opened up and swallo wed his food. Shariputra found the food and 
gave it to the monk, who was finally able to eat a little. Due to seeing this, Buddha made this 
dedication for his followers. He also made dedicati ons for his lay followers. It is said that the 
duration of the teachings depends on the presence o f the ordained followers; if the number of 
ordained followers becomes fewer, the teachings wil l degenerate.  
 
Difference between ordained and laypersons 
 
The term “rab tu chung wa” ( rab tu ‘byung ba ; “to become ordained”) literally means “emerging 
(from the household).” Householders need to be conc erned about many things: food, family, etc. 
Someone who is ordained, or emerged from the househ old, can study and practice and explain 
Dharma to others.  
 
Returning to our earlier discussion, we were lookin g at the statement that Buddha Shakyamuni, in 
dependence on the method, the exalted knower of all  aspects, turned the wheels of Dharma, the 
result, in this continent .  
 
In general, the knower of bases is not the mother o f hearer aryas, the knower of paths is not the 
mother of bodhisattva aryas, and the exalted knower  of all aspects is not the mother of buddha 
aryas. We need to add the qualification “who are it s children,” e.g. the knower of bases is the 
mother of the hearer aryas who are its children , etc.  
 
The method is the exalted knower of all aspects; th e turning of the wheels of Dharma is the result of 
the exalted knower of all aspects; when we talk abo ut the exalted knower of all aspects, whose 
exalted knower of all aspects are we talking about?  Would you posit buddha aryas or supreme 
emanation bodies? If you were to say “this is a bud dha arya’s exalted knower of all aspects,” this is 
not correct. If we were to say this is a supreme em anation body’s exalted knower of all aspects, this 
is also not correct. The exalted knower of all aspe cts in the continuum of the supreme emanation 
body is established, so there is a time during whic h the wheels of Dharma are not turned. Otherwise, 
the exalted knower of all aspects and the turning o f the wheels of Dharma would be simultaneous, 
and cause and effect would be simultaneous, in whic h case the meaning of cause and effect would 
be lost.  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 6: 3-7 March, 2008 
 
 
 22   
Various points  
 
In this particular continent , we can say that the Buddha’s twelve deeds, being in Tushita, coming to 
this continent, etc., are sequential. [Regarding th e difference in time between Tushita pure land and 
our continent,] one day in Tushita is equivalent to  fifty human years. This is due to the difference i n 
merit. We in this continent have less merit, so the re is a shorter period of time in which we can 
enjoy happiness. Similarly, in hell realms, because  of negativities, the hell beings have a very long 
lifespan [i.e. they experience suffering for a very  long time]. The first level of the hell realms is the 
“Reviving Hell.” Fifty years in Tushita is equivale nt to one day in the Reviving Hell, and the 
shortest life span of a being there is 500 years.  
 
Q: Are there not cases in which cause and effect ar e simultaneous, e.g. when a monk holds vows, 
being a monk is the “cause,” and holding the vows i s the “result”? 
 
A: One obtains vows because another person, who pos sesses the vows, confers them to a second 
person. When we speak, it seems that cause and effe ct can be simultaneous, for example, a father 
and son. The father is the cause, the son is the re sult, and they exist simultaneously. In your 
example, we have to say that when one receives the vows, one becomes a monk; without receiving 
the vows, one does not become a monk.  
 
In dependence on the exalted knower of all aspects,  there is the turning of the wheels of Dharma in 
this continent, so it seems that at the time of the  cause, the exalted knower of all aspects, there is  no 
turning of the wheel of Dharma because the result s hould come later. So although there is no 
turning of the wheel of Dharma in this continent, a t that instant there is turning of the wheel of 
Dharma somewhere else, so at any time there is turn ing of the wheel of Dharma.  
 
In the past, there were various bodhisattvas who ma de vows about when they would become 
enlightened, who would they would benefit, etc., su ch as “I will become a buddha when the lifespan 
of beings is long, when they have time to practice,  etc.” The person who later became Shakyamuni 
Buddha made the vow to become a buddha when people’ s lifespans were 100 years and the merit 
was degenerated, etc. Due to his great kindness, we  are able to receive the teachings that the 
Buddha gave on our continent 2,500 years ago. At th at time, Ananda made requests to Buddha not 
to pass away. One day, there was an emanation of a mara who requested the Buddha to pass away, 
and Buddha promised to pass away after three days. Then the disciples requested the Buddha not 
pass away, and due to this request, he blessed the time of three days so that it appeared as three 
years.  
 
 
Friday, 7 March, 2008 
 
 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 24: 
 Correction: Ornament of the Essence , p. 21 (p. 30, Tib.): “… who (i) strongly desire their 
excellent qualities , to achieve the goals of the four aryas and so for th  develop…” should read 
“…who strongly desire their excellent qualities , to achieve the goals of the four aryas and so 
forth  (i)  develop…” 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 6: 3-7 March, 2008 
 
 
 23  2B1C-4A3. The way in which the exalted knower of al l aspects turns the wheels of Dharma (continued) 
 
Possessing that which comprehends that all aspects are not produced, the buddhas—
bearers of exalted bodies which are perfectly restr ained, principal of the lords who bear 
yoga—as antidotes to deeds, turn all the wheels of Dharma without exception in all 
aspects…. 
 
Who are those “Possessing that which comprehends th at all aspects are not produced”? The 
buddhas. They are the “bearers of exalted bodies wh ich are perfectly restrained…from discordant 
classes of the three doors , lords who bear the yoga of the union of calm abiding and special 
insight,” and “ principal since they have gained mastery in being perfect lor ds of Dharma compared 
to the hearers and solitary realizers…” They are su perior to the hearers and solitary realizers. As 
antidotes to the 84,000 affliction deeds of trainee s, they “ turn all the wheels of Dharma that are in 
the nature of the 84,000 aggregates of Dharma without exception,” so the wheels of Dharma are 
antidotes to the afflictions.  
 
84,000 afflicted deeds : the principal afflictions are the three poisons ( anger, attachment, ignorance); 
a fourth category is the combination of all three. Each of these four is divided into 21,000, giving 
84,000 afflictions. As an antidote to these, the Bu ddha taught 84,000 aggregates of Dharma.  
 
Re. “aggregates of Dharma”: that which acts as anti dote to one of the 84,000 classes of afflictions. 
An aggregate of Dharma is “a scripture that teaches  a complete antidote to one affliction.”  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 24: 
 
QUALM: With respect to that, all of however much Dh arma there is—(i) scriptures that 
have been taught by the Bhagavan for the sake of se vering the discordant classes in the 
continuum of the trainees, and (ii) clear realizati ons—is the wheel of Dharma, but why is it 
called “wheel?” 
 
RESPONSE: The precious wheel of a wheel-turning kin g transfers progressively to this 
and that other place and becomes victorious over th e discordant classes through the force 
of that…. 
 
Two divisions of a wheel of Dharma :  
1.  wheel of Dharma of scripture  
2.  wheel of Dharma of realization 
 
The wheel of Dharma of scripture must be included i n the words of the buddhas. Not any scripture 
is a wheel of Dharma of scripture. Ornament for Clear Realization,  being words of Buddha 
Maitreya, is considered a wheel of Dharma of script ure. “Words of buddha” does not necessarily 
refer to words of Buddha Shakyamuni.  
 
Three types of words of buddha: 
 
1.  Speech said to others : words explicitly said by the Buddha to others. 
2.  Speech that comes about through blessings of the Bu ddha : in the Heart Sutra , we see an 
example. Here, there is a conversation arisen throu gh the power of the Buddha; also, the 
“drum of the gods:” even without being hit by anyon e, it proclaims the four seals of Dharma, 
e.g. all compounded phenomena are impermanent, etc.   
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 6: 3-7 March, 2008 
 
 
 24  3.  Speech that comes about through permission of the B uddha : when Buddha was alive, he gave 
permission to his disciples: “In the future, when y ou compile teachings, you can state the 
‘background’ of a teaching, i.e. where it was given , the retinue, etc. In the Heart Sutra,  it said 
“Thus have I heard…”—this was not explicitly said b y Buddha to others, but was said with 
his permission, so it is also categorized as words of buddha.  
 
It has been said that Haribhadra perceived his deit y and was given permission to compose the 
Commentary Clear Meaning,  but he did not receive specific instructions on ho w to write it, etc., so 
Commentary Clear Meaning  is not actually the words that come about through permission. This 
third category refers to cases where in the future,  when someone compiles the Buddha’s teachings, 
they are allowed to describe the time, place, etc. In this category, the buddha actually specifies wha t 
should be said by the disciples.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 24: 
 
To summarize the meanings of those fragments of tea chings on the wheel of Dharma 
together for ease of understanding: 
 
2B1C-4A3A. Explicit teaching by way of the conventio ns of names of the three levels of the wheels of 
Dharma occurring in the Sutra Unraveling the Thought (Samdhinirmocanasutra ) 
2B1C-4A3B. Indication by means of the three levels of leading trainees occurring in the Questions of King 
Dharanishvara (Dharanishvararajapariprchchha-sutra ) although the conventions of names have not 
been taught explicitly 
2B1C-4A3A. Explicit teaching by way of the conventio ns of names of the three levels of the wheels of Dh arma 
occurring in the Sutra Unraveling the Thought (Samdhinirmocanasutra ) 
In the Sutra, [Paramarthasamudgata says to the Budd ha]:….  
 
 
The Sutra Unraveling the Thought  and the three wheels of Dharma 
 
There are many teachings on the wheels of Dharma, b ut the main scripture teaching explicitly about 
the first wheel of Dharma, etc., is the Sutra Unraveling the Thought.  It is said that the Buddha did 
not teach the Dharma explicitly for forty-nine days  after attaining enlightenment. In the Mahayana, 
we would not say that he did not teach the Dharma a t all, but in a common way we say he did not 
teach the Dharma explicitly. After that, he turned the wheel of Dharma to his five good disciples. 
After that, he taught the middle wheel of Dharma to  the sharp-facultied Mahayana trainees. The 
third wheel arose because there were people who did  not understand the meanings taught in the first 
two wheels, since they seemed to contradict each ot her.  
 
The three natures 
 
In order to dispel doubts, the bodhisattva Paramart hasamudgata asked for clarification, saying, “In 
the first wheel, you taught that phenomena from for ms, etc., through the thirty-seven harmonies of 
enlightenment are established by way of their own c haracter; in the second wheel, you taught that 
all phenomena, from form through the exalted knower  of all aspects, are not established by way of 
their own character; these overtly contradict each other, so what is the purpose for the buddha 
teaching in this way? In the third wheel, among the  three natures, imputational natures (kun rtags ) 
are not established by way of their own character, while other-powered natures ( gzhan dbang ) and 
thoroughly established natures ( yongs grub ) are established by way of their own character.” B uddha 
replied that he was thinking of other-powered and t horoughly established natures in teaching the 
first wheel of Dharma; in the second wheel, he was thinking of imputational natures.  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 6: 3-7 March, 2008 
 
 
 25   
The explicit terminology “three wheels of Dharma” a ppears only in Sutra Unraveling the Thought.  
In the Questions of King Dharanishvara  sutra, it is explained that the meaning of three l evels of 
wheels of Dharma is to guide disciples progressivel y: trainees’ minds became ripened by the first 
wheel, then the second wheel, etc. Sutra Unraveling the Thought  says that this is not the case . This 
will come in more detail. 
 
First wheel of Dharma 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 25: 
 
Initially, in the area of Varanasi in the Deer Park  called “Sage’s Propounding,” 
the Supramundane Victor thoroughly turned a wheel o f doctrine for those engaged 
in the Hearer Vehicle, fantastic and marvelous whic h none—god or human—had 
previously turned in a similar fashion in the world , through teaching the aspects of 
the four noble truths…. 
 
This passage from Sutra Unraveling the Thought  is based on the Mind-Only school. The first 
paragraph describes the first wheel of Dharma. This  wheel is described as “surpassable,” i.e. there is  
something higher than it. It also “affords an occas ion,” i.e. for refutation and dispute. This means a n 
occasion for debate in terms of those who have unde rstood the meaning of the sutra and who are 
honest, i.e. are not attached to their own position . It “requires interpretation” because it cannot be  
taken literally; its meaning has to be interpreted.  It “serves as a basis for controversy” because it 
cannot be taken literally, it is a basis for debate .  
 
 
Second wheel of Dharma  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 25: 
 
 Based on just the naturelessness of all phenomena and based on just the 
absence of production, the absence of cessation, qu iescence from the start, and 
naturally passed beyond sorrow, the Supramundane Vi ctor turned a second wheel 
of doctrine for those engaged in the Great Vehicle,  very fantastic and marvelous, 
through the aspect of speaking on emptiness…. 
 
Naturelessness of all phenomena : all three natures—imputational natures, thoroughl y established 
natures, and other-powered natures—are “non-natures .” They are not established by way of their 
own character, so they are “non-natures.”  
 
Imputational natures are characterless because of n ot being established by way of their own 
character. Other-powered natures are non-natures be cause of being “production non-natures.” They 
are produced, but are production non-natures, becau se of being produced through the force of 
others, not by themselves. Thoroughly established natures are n atureless because they are ultimate 
non-natures. In Mind-Only, thoroughly established n atures are ultimate, but are ultimate non-
natures. They are ultimate non-natures because they  are ultimates, but are the selflessness of 
phenomena, so they are known as “ultimate non-natur es.”  
 
Thus, imputational natures are character non-natures , other-powered natures are production non-
natures , and thoroughly established natures are ultimate non-natures .  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 6: 3-7 March, 2008 
 
 
 26  Because of “absence of production,” there is “absen ce of cessation;” because of this, there is 
“quiescence from the start;” because of this, there  is “naturally passed beyond sorrow.” 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 25:  
 
Furthermore, that wheel of doctrine turned by the S upramundane Victor is 
surpassable, affords an occasion [for refutation], requires interpretation, and 
serves as a basis for controversy.  
 
“…[S]urpassable, affords an occasion [for refutatio n], requires interpretation, and serves as a basis 
for controversy” mean the same thing as the words i n the first paragraph. The first two wheels both 
require interpretation, but the way of interpreting  them is different.  
 
The third wheel of Dharma  
 
Ornament of the Essence :  
 
 However, based on just the naturelessness of pheno mena and based on just 
the absence of production, the absence of cessation , quiescence from the start, and 
naturally passed beyond sorrow, the Supramundane Vi ctor turned a third wheel of 
doctrine for those engaged in all vehicles, possess ed of good differentiation, 
fantastic and marvelous…. 
 
“Unsurpassable” means there is none higher. Accordi ng to the Chittamatra school, the first two 
wheels require interpretation, while the third does  not and is of definitive meaning .  
 
Ornament of the Essence : 
 
Many differing assertions of the great charioteers have arisen regarding the meaning of this 
sutra set…. 
 
Asanga, for the sake of “taking care of the many Ma hayana lineage-bearers, opened the chariot 
tracks of Cognition-Only.” He explained the Mind-On ly system in relation to the Chittamatras 
Following Scriptures (of the two types of Mind-Only : those Following Scripture and those 
Following Reasoning). Mind-Only proponents followin g scripture principally follow scriptures; it is 
not that they do not follow reasoning, while those following reasoning mainly use reasoning, it is 
not that they do not follow the scriptures.  
 
Ornament of the Essence : 
 
Further, he explained the three—extensive, medium, and brief Perfection of Wisdom 
Sutras—the basis for characterization of the second  wheel, as being of interpretable 
meaning in the following manner…. 
 
In this passage, other-powered natures are also “ul timate non-natures” in addition to being 
production non-natures. “Character non-natures” app ly to imputational natures; and “ultimate non-
nature” applies to both other-powered and thoroughl y established natures.  
 
Why are other-powered natures also “ultimate non-na tures”? Extensive commentary on this can be 
found in Lama Tsongkhapa’s Essence of Eloquence: Interpretable and Definitive Meanings.  
“Ultimate” here refers to a pure path. Other-powere d natures are not the final object of observation 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 6: 3-7 March, 2008 
 
 
 27  of a pure path, therefore they are ultimate non-nat ures. They are not object of observation of pure 
paths because by cultivating or meditating on other -powered natures, one does not remove the 
obscurations. In order to remove the obscurations, one needs to cultivate a final object of cultivatio n 
of a pure path. In order to be an object of observa tion of a pure path, it has to be able to purify 
obscurations by cultivating it. Because other-power ed natures do not purify obscurations, they are 
not final objects of cultivation of a pure path, an d are thus ultimate non-natures.  
 
• Debate : Someone says that the reason for saying other-pow ered natures are ultimate non-
natures also applies to imputational natures, so wh y aren’t imputational natures known as 
ultimate non-natures? Imputational natures are also  not the final object of observation of a 
pure path; we can thus also posit imputational natu res as ultimate non-natures.  
 
These three natures—imputational nature, other-powe red natures, and thoroughly established 
natures—are related. Other-powered natures being em pty of imputational natures is a thoroughly 
established nature.  
 
Two types of imputational natures :   
1.  existent imputational natures  
2.  non-existent imputational natures  
 
Examples of imputational natures : form is the basis adhered to by the conception ap prehending it. 
Form itself is an other-powered nature; its being a  basis adhered to by the conception apprehending 
it is an imputational nature. Form is the basis adh ered to by the conception apprehending it, but the 
basis adhered to by the conception apprehending it is not form. Form is an other-powered nature, 
and the basis adhered to by the conception apprehen ding it is an existent imputational nature. The 
basis adhered to by the conception apprehending it that is established by way of its own character is 
a non-existent imputational nature. The non-existen ce of this is a thoroughly established nature. The 
emptiness of an imputational nature of an other-pow ered nature is a thoroughly established nature.  
 
Why imputational natures are not ultimate non-natur es 
 
Imputational natures are not posited as ultimate no n-natures, but other-powered natures are posited 
as ultimate non-natures, although imputational natu res have the complete characteristics of an 
ultimate non-nature. This is because there is great er doubt with regard to other-powered natures, 
and less doubt with regard to imputational natures.  Greater doubt/lesser doubt means there is greater 
doubt of whether other-powered natures are final ob jects of observation of a pure path, and less 
doubt if imputational natures are final objects of observation of a pure path. Both other-powered 
and thoroughly established natures are established by way of their own character, while 
imputational natures are not established by way of their own character, so there is less doubt with 
regard to them. This is why imputational natures ar e not posited as ultimate non-natures, while 
other-powered natures are posited as ultimate non-n atures.    
 
 
Four topics are usually elaborated on in the course  of studying the Ornament:  
1.  Twenty sangha 
2.  Interpretable and definitive meanings 
3.  Dependent-arising 
4.  Concentrations and absorptions 
 
In Mind-Only, final objects of observation of a pur e path  are two:  
1.  subtle selflessness of persons: lack of self-suffic ient, substantially existent self  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 6: 3-7 March, 2008 
 
 
 28  2.  subtle selflessness of phenomena: emptiness of dual ity  
 
Objects purified by realization of selflessness of persons and of selflessness of phenomena : 
1.  conception of self of persons  
2.  conception of self of phenomena.  
 
 
END 