Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/ORN_CommGChonyi_ABC08.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:52.604695
================================================================================

 
 
 
FPMT  BASIC PROGRAM  
 
Ornament of Clear Realisations 
Chapter Four 
 
 
 
Oral Commentary 
 
by 
 
Geshe Thubten Chonyi 
 
 
 
 for the Basic Program at Amitabha Buddhist Centre 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Oral Commentary translated from Tibetan in to English by Venerable Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Alison Wong  
Transcripts edited by Cecilia Tsong and chec ked by Yap Siew Kee and Geshe Chonyi  
 
© Geshe Chonyi and Amitabha Buddhist Centre, 2008 
 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program - Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 1 
Page 1 of 3 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root Verses  of Ornament for Clear Realisations  translated by Venerable 
Joan Nicell; an FPMT Masters Program Project, edition June 2007, ©Joan 
Nicell and FPMT, Inc.  Basic Program Study Manual for Maitreya’s Ornament for Clear Realizations, Chapter 4, compiled by Emily Hsu and Kok Wai Cheong; an FPMT Masters 
Program Project, edition September 2005, © FPMT, Inc. 
             Root Verses are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added.  
 
Lesson No: 1                               Date: 8th July 2008  
 
We would not be studying every topic contained in this rather thick text,  
Ornament for Clear Realisations. Instead, we will focus on the topic, the 37 
aspects of an exalted knower of all aspects harmonious with hearers (pg. 45, 
Chart.1.1). Before that, I will give you a brief introduction to the eight categories that make up this text.  
 
A celestial being once asked the Buddha, “How can we learn the Dharma? How 
can we turn away from negativities? How can we abandon meaningless 
activities? How can we achieve the sorrowless state?”  
 
The Buddha replied, “Through hearing, one knows the Dharma. Through 
hearing, one will be able to turn away from negativities. Through hearing, one 
will abandon meaningless activities and finally, through hearing, one will achieve liberation.” 
 
The first two statements refer to the higher training in ethics (or morality). Through hearing, one understands correctly what is to be abandoned and cultivated. On the basis of that correct understanding, one turns away from non-virtue and engages in virtue with one’s body, speech and mind.   
 
The statement “Through hearing, one will abandon meaningless activities” refers to the higher training of concentration. With the higher training of ethics as the foundation, one would then reflect on the meaning of whatever teachings one has heard. Through this process, one would abandon all 
meaningless activities.  
 
Generating a stable mind that is not distracted by meaningless activities 
comes primarily from living in ethics and restraining ourselves from 
committing non-virtuous or negative actions with our bodies and speech. Our 
minds are usually distracted by meaningless activities. Why is this so? It is because we have not developed a strong foundation in the practice of ethics, restraining ourselves from physical and verbal non-virtue. Without this  
fundamental practice of ethics, it will be difficult for us to abandon distractions 
and to have a stable and concentrated mind that can help us to engage single-pointedly in the practice of virtue. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program - Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 1 
Page 2 of 3 The last statement, “Through hearing, one will achieve liberation” refers to the 
higher training of wisdom. When one has a stable and concentrated mind,  one  
 
can develop the wisdom that realises emptiness which understands how 
phenomena and events exist in reality. This wisdom helps us to cut the root of 
samsara, which is our self grasping. By cutting off samsara, we will be able to achieve the sorrowless state of liberation.  
 
In order for us to achieve the permanent, everlasting happiness of liberation, 
we need to have wisdom. In order for us to develop such wisdom, we must first 
develop concentration. Before we can develop concentration, we need to have a strong foundation of practising pure ethics. In order for us to have pure ethics, we must hear and study the teachings.  
 
Hearing and studying the teachings will help us turn away from non-virtue and stop us from creating negative actions. There are many kinds of non-virtue, some light and some heavy. It is said that the negative karma of 
abandoning the Dharma is very heavy negative karma. It is, in fact, one of the 
root downfalls.  
 
In order to stop this negative action of abandoning the holy Dharma both now 
and in the future, it is extremely impo rtant to learn the teachings first and 
then reflect on them. This is the best way to protect ourselves from creating 
this heavy negativity.  
 
There are different reasons why we engage in unskilful and non-beneficial 
negative actions, one of which is our ignorance, not knowing what is bad and 
what is good. Therefore, the best way to stop this lack of knowledge is to learn what is correct and incorrect. There is no better method than this. 
 
The Lam Rim, the teachings on the stages of the path to enlightenment, are said to have four greatnesses:- 
1. The greatness of enabling one to know that all of the teachings are free of contradiction.  
2. The greatness of enabling one to understand that all of the scriptures are instructions for practice. 
3. The greatness of enabling one easily to find the Buddha’s intent.  
4. The greatness of enabling one to refrain automatically from committing 
the great misdeed which, in this context, refers to abandoning the holy 
Dharma.  
 
To avoid abandoning the Dharma, we must first actualise the preceding  greatnesses without which we would not be able to naturally stop creating the 
misdeed of giving up the Dharma. In order for us to actualise the earlier 
greatnesses in our minds, we must first learn, study and contemplate the 
teachings.  
 
Sometimes, we may have the thought, “I do study but there is no need to study 
in such great detail and to study so much.” We had seen earlier how studying 
the teachings will enable us to give up negative actions, especially the heavy 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program - Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 1 
Page 3 of 3 negative karma of giving up the Dharma. The teachings always emphasise the 
need to study as extensively as we can.  
 
For example, we listen to teachings on the negative effects of killing – how it is 
a non-virtue and how we would have to experience the consequences of such a 
negative action ourselves in the future. We can reflect on whether this is so. Through such contemplation, finally when we are convinced that killing is bad and how it will harm us, we will naturally avoid killing. In order for us to have the intention of avoiding killing, we must first understand the negative 
consequences of killing by listening to the teachings. 
 
Before we came into contact with Buddhism, we might have enjoyed killing or 
we might have no fear of killing. But after listening to the teachings and 
learning the negative consequences of killing, we will slowly be convinced to 
give up the act of killing. From here we can see the difference between studying and not studying the Buddhadharma. It is so amazing that after learning the Buddhadharma we will restrain ourselves from creating non-virtuous actions, 
such as killing, that we had been so enthusiastic about before. This is the 
result of having created some positive karma in the past.  
 
Why is having the intention to stop killing so extraordinary? This is because 
when we tell most people that killing is not a good thing, this cannot fit their 
minds. They find it difficult to understand why killing is bad. They are ignorant 
of and confused about what is virtue and beneficial and what is non-virtue and not beneficial.  
 
Here we have the opportunity and interest to study the Great Treatises and the profound teachings of the Buddha. We also have faith in the teachings. This is  amazing and wonderful. We should keep this in our minds and remember the reasons for the need to study and the benefit of doing so.  
 
With regards to learning and studying, we should never be satisfied with whatever we already know. We should never be satisfied with our level of studying and learning. We should continuously put in more effort to study and 
learn. We should always pray that we will be able to do so.  
 
In my own case, whenever I can spend a full day reading and reflecting on 
what I had read, whether I understood something or everything, at the end of 
that day, I feel the great benefit of doing so. I think the benefit of such reading 
and reflection would not be less than my simply reciting mantras. In fact, the benefit could even be greater. We have to remind ourselves constantly not to neglect learning and contemplation and how essential they are.  
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Alison Wong   
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong 
 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 2 
Page 1 of 5 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root Verses  of Ornament for Clear Realisations  translated by Venerable 
Joan Nicell; an FPMT Masters Program Project, edition June 2007, ©Joan 
Nicell and FPMT, Inc.  Basic Program Study Manual for Maitreya’s Ornament for Clear Realizations, Chapter 4, compiled by Emily Hsu and Kok Wai Cheong; an FPMT Masters 
Program Project, edition September 2005, © FPMT, Inc. 
             Root Verses are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added.  
 
Lesson No: 2                            Date: 10th July 2008  
 
I  go for refuge until I am enlightened 
To the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Supreme Assembly,, 
By my practice of giving and other perfections,  
May I become a buddha to benefit all sentient beings 
 
It is important to reflect on the meaning of the refuge prayer that we recite all the time in class. We have already learnt what the Three Jewels are and what  their qualities are. Our reflection gives us an opportunity to recall whatever understanding we have of the Three Jewels and to remember what they mean. On the basis of that, we then develop the aspiration to actualise and become 
the Three Jewels ourselves and from that aspiration, we generate faith. With 
that faith, the pure attitude of refuge will arise in our minds. It is important 
that we  generate this feeling and thought, “Oh, the Three Jewels are really marvellous,” as it will make our minds more lucid and clear. That is the 
meaning of the first two lines of the prayer which indicates the causal refuge: 
“I go for refuge until I am enlightened to the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Supreme Assembly.” 
 
“By my practice of generosity and other perfections, may I become a buddha to benefit all sentient beings”:  Focussing on the Three Jewels, one develops the 
thought, “How wonderful it will be if I can achieve this state for the welfare of other sentient beings.” This is the resultant refuge.   
 
“May I become a buddha to benefit all sentient beings”:  If possible, one should 
try to reflect on the nature of this ‘I’ or self that is going to achieve buddhahood  
and the nature of that object of attainment, that they do not exist inherently.  
 
“By my practice of generosity and other perfections”:  The “other perfections ” 
refers to the remaining five perfections of ethics, patience, joyous perseverance, 
concentration and  wisdom. When one reflects on them in an extensive way, 
whatever virtue one does should be conjoined with the practice of the six 
perfections. For example, with regards to the perfection of generosity, we can reflect on what we can give and should not give, the persons whom we should give to and the person who is giving. There are many things to reflect on. In 
addition, we can reflect on how these three – the giver, the recipient and the  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 2 
Page 2 of 5  
object – also do not exist inherently. Such reflection can be applied to each of 
the six perfections. 
 
The author of this text, Ornament for Clear Realisations,  that we are studying 
in this module is Maitreya so I would like to say something about him. Maitreya is the future Buddha and is also known by different names or titles such as Jetsun Jampa, Venerable Maitreya or Maitreya Buddha. They all  refer to the same person but their meanings are different.  
 
We are now in the time period known as the fortunate eon when 1,000 buddhas will descend into this world. Shakyamuni Buddha is the fourth of these 1000 buddhas.  
 
The next Buddha will be Maitreya who is currently residing in Tushita pure land. The manner in which he abides there is that of being seated on a chair with his feet on the ground. This is an auspicious dependent arising for him to get up quickly and descend into this world. Maitreya is in the aspect of the 
complete enjoyment body and is adorned with the garments and ornaments of 
a celestial being. This Maitreya is given the name Jetsun Jampa which means Venerable Gentle Protector in English and is not referred to as Maitreya Buddha.  That title will only be conferred in the future when he descends into 
this world in the aspect of the supreme emanation body. Only then will he be 
called Maitreya Buddha.  
 
When the Tibetan term (Gyalwa Jampa) is translated as Conqueror Maitreya, this refers to Maitreya in the aspect of the complete enjoyment body.  Maitreya 
Buddha refers to Maitreya in the aspect of the supreme emanation body.  
 
Each buddha from the first Buddha (Krakucchanda Buddha) to the 1000th 
Buddha (Radiant Buddha) selected their own worlds into which they will descend in order to benefit sentient beings of various lifespans. None of them 
chose to benefit sentient beings in the worlds when they will only have a lifespan of 100 years and a lifespan of 80,000 years. It was Shakyamuni Buddha who chose to benefit sentient beings with the karmic lifespan of 100 
years and it was Maitreya Buddha who vowed to benefit sentient beings who 
will have a karmic lifespan of  80,000 years. 
 
The time when the average lifespan of sentient beings is a hundred years is 
considered to be very short. This period is known as the degenerate age where 
there is a lot of problems, suffering, poverty, sicknesses, a lot of conditions for death to occur, people engaging in wrong activities and holding wrong views, etc. Nevertheless, Shakyamuni Buddha made the vow to benefit and liberate sentient beings during this period.  
 
It is said that at the time when the lifespan of sentient beings will be 80,000 years, it will be an excellent time when the world will be like a god realm with many perfect enjoyments. Everyone will naturally abide in virtue. Except for 
Maitreya, the 1,000 buddhas did not choose to work for sentient beings of this 
world.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 2 
Page 3 of 5  
It was prophesised that the teaching of Shakyamuni Buddha will last for 5,000 
years in this world. During the last 500 years, only the sign of Dharma remains. Things will slowly degenerate as time goes by and sentient beings will  
engage in more and more negativities. Those negativities will become heavier 
and heavier, causing  the lifespan of human beings to decrease from 100 years to 20 years to only 10 years. During that time, there will be great famines, many sicknesses and lots of fighting and conflict. It will be like a hell on earth. 
 
At that time, an emanation of Maitreya will appear in the aspect of wearing the robes of a fully ordained monk. People who see that emanation will be astounded at his perfect and beautiful body and they will ask Maitreya, “What did you do to get such a beautiful body?” Maitreya will tell them that he 
achieved his beautiful body through the practice of patience. Upon hearing this 
reply, those people will cultivate patience and gradually the conflicts and fighting will stop. As a result, the lifespan of human beings will gradually start to increase from 10 to 20 years, 30 years and so forth. 
 
There is a prophecy that Maitreya will descend and be born into this world at the place where Shakyamuni Buddha passed away into parinirvana,  Kushinagar. For the first 20,000 years, he will take on the aspect of living the 
life of a layperson.  After that, he will ordain as a monk and on that day of his 
ordination, he will display the deed of achieving full enlightenment. From then on up to 60,000 years, Maitreya will turn the Wheel of Dharma for the benefit of his disciples. 
 
It is mentioned that during the time of Shakyamuni Buddha’s teaching, if one takes ordination, keeps the four root vows purely and strive to engage in the activities of hearing, contemplation and meditation of the Buddhadharma, then even if one does not achieve the result of any of the three vehicles, as a 
result of those virtues, one will become the disciple of Maitreya and will 
directly receive teaching from him when he descends into this world.  
 
The Perfection of Wisdom  sutras taught by the Buddha is the root source of the 
Lam Rim (the stages of the path to enlightenment). The actual meaning or 
intent of the Perfection of Wisdom  sutras is unravelled by Maitreya in this text, 
Ornament for Clear Realisations which describes the 70 topics of the Perfection 
of Wisdom  sutras. Maitreya also composed the text, Ornament of the Mahayana 
Sutras  which further elaborates on the practices that will lead to 
enlightenment,  referring to many sutras that were taught by the Buddha. In 
order to further explain the practice of calm abiding and special insight, he composed another two texts: Discrimination between the Center and the 
Extremes  and Discrimination between Phenomena and Reality. He then 
composed the Sublime Continuum of the Great Vehicle (Uttaratantra)  which 
shows that there is only one final vehicle, explaining the tathagata essence and 
the view in accordance with Nagarjuna. These five texts are known as the Five 
Treatises of Maitreya.  
 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 2 
Page 4 of 5  
Manjushri clarified the profound view whereas Maitreya clarified the stages of 
clear realisation which are the hidden meaning of the Perfection of Wisdom  
sutras.  
 
Etymologically, the perfection of wisdom can be divided into four:  
1. The natural perfection of wisdom is illustrated by the emptiness of the mind with stains (the tathagata essence).  
2. The scriptural perfection of wisdom refers to the extensive, middling and 
short Perfection of Wisdom  sutras.  
3. The path perfection of wisdom refers to the wisdom realising emptiness in 
the continuum of a bodhisattva. 
4. The resultant perfection of wisdom is the final result and only exists at the buddha ground. 
 
These four are the etymological divisions of the perfection of wisdom. The actual  perfection of wisdom primarily refers to the resultant truth body (or 
dharmakaya). 
 
The subject matter of the Ornament for Clear Realisations  is the eight 
categories which are explained in eight chapters. The eight categories consist of:- 
3 knowers 
• Exalted knower of all aspects 
• Knower of paths 
• Knower of bases 
4 applications 
• Application in complete aspects 
• Peak application 
• Serial application 
• Momentary application 
1 result 
• Resultant truth body 
 
1. Exalted knower of all aspects 
The first of the eight categories is the exalted knower of all aspects which is the final wisdom directly perceiving all phenomena. It can be divided into:  
1. the exalted knower of all aspects realising the modes of phenomena 
2. the exalted knower of all aspects realising the varieties of phenomena 
 
Boundary:  It exists only on the buddha ground as only the Buddha has this 
wisdom. The wisdom of the Buddha is known as the exalted knower of all 
aspects. 
 
2. Knower of paths  
The knower of paths is the knower in the mental continuum of a Mahayana superior.  
 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 2 
Page 5 of 5  
The knower of paths can be defined as a Mahayana superior’s clear realisation 
that is conjoined with a wisdom directly realising emptiness  in the continuum 
of the person who possesses it. It can be divided into three:- 
1. The knower of paths that knows hearers’ paths 
2. The knower of paths that knows solitary realisers’ paths 
3. The knower of paths that knows Mahayana paths 
 
The Autonomy Middle Way School is divided into two: 
1. the Sautrantika-Svatantrika-Madhyamaka (Sutra Autonomy Middle Way School) 
2. the Yogacara-Svatantrika-Madhyamaka (Yogic Autonomy Middle Way) 
The proponents of the Yogic Autonomy Middle Way are so-called because most 
of their tenets are similar to the Mind Only School. The Ornament for Clear 
Realisations is presented mainly from the perspective of the Yogic Autonomy 
Middle Way School. 
 
According to this school, the persons of the three vehicles are primarily 
differentiated on the basis of their having different objects of abandonment and 
objects of meditation:  
1. For hearers, their object of abandonment is the conception of the self 
sufficient substantially existent person  
2. For solitary realisers, their object of abandonment is the conception of 
grasping form and the consciousness apprehending that form to be 
separate entities. 
3. For bodhisattvas, the object of abandonment is the conception of 
phenomena as being truly existent. 
 
The illustrations for these three divisions of the knower of paths are as follows: 
1. The knower of paths that knows hearers’ paths is the wisdom directly realising the selflessness of person in the continuum of the Mahayana superior. 
2. The knower of path that knows solitary realisers’ paths is the wisdom directly realising the emptiness of form and the consciousness apprehending it to be  different substantial entities in the continuum of the Mahayana superior. 
3. The knower of paths that knows the Mahayana path is the wisdom directly realising emptiness in the continuum of the Mahayana superior. 
 
Boundary : This knower of paths exists from the Mahayana path of seeing 
through the buddha ground, i.e. the knower of paths does not exist prior to the path of seeing.
1
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme   
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Alison Wong   
Edited by Cecilia Tsong 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee 
Vetted by Geshe Chonyi 
                                                           
1 Please refer to pgs. 11, 33 – 34 from Basic Program Study Manual. . 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 3 
Page 1 of 5                                                           Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root Verses  of Ornament for Clear Realisations  translated by Venerable 
Joan Nicell; an FPMT Masters Program Project, edition June 2007, ©Joan 
Nicell and FPMT, Inc.  Basic Program Study Manual for Maitreya’s Ornament for Clear Realizations, Chapter 4, compiled by Emily Hsu and Kok Wai Cheong; an FPMT Masters 
Program Project, edition September 2005, © FPMT, Inc. 
             Root Verses are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added 
 
Lesson No: 3                           Date: 15th July 2008  
 
I had briefly explained the meaning of the refuge and bodhicitta prayer which 
we recite every time before class. You should bring that meaning to mind and 
reflect on it in silence for a few minutes.  
 
Whenever we listen to teachings, we should abandon the three faults of the 
vessel and cultivate the six attitudes (or six recognitions).1 Before we begin the 
lesson proper, we usually spend five to ten minutes meditating. During this 
time, it is useful to check whether we are able to abandon those three faults and cultivate the six recognitions. This doesn’t simply mean being able to 
mentally list them out, but, rather, we should actively do something to 
abandon those faults and  cultivate those attitudes. When we apply the art of listening in this way, it will make the session fruitful and worthwhile.  
 
Buddha said, “Listen well, listen thoroughly and retain it in mind.” So 
whenever we listen to the teachings, we first need to pay attention and focus 
on what is being said with our minds and with a pure motivation. We should not forget  whatever understanding we may have gained in the session. So the point is not simply to be able to list out the three faults and the six attitudes. It 
is important to check whether those three faults and six attitudes are in our 
minds or not.  
************ 
 
When the Buddha taught the Perfection of Wisdom  sutras, the explicit subject 
matter was emptiness. The implicit hidden meaning of those sutras was the levels of clear realisations which are clarified in Maitreya’s Ornament for Clear Realisations and summarised in the eight clear realisations. We will not be 
going through the eight realisations in detail.  In order to know what the eight realisations are, we need to know their names so that we can  understand their meaning. Therefore we have to pay attention to the words to try to understand 
what they do mean.  
 
1 A vessel might have the following three faults: (1) being upside down; or (2) though held right side up, being dirty; 
or (3) though clean, having a leaky bottom. The six attitudes are: (1) Think of yourself as a sick person (2) Think of 
the instructor as a doctor (3) Think of the instructor’s explications as medici ne. (4) Think of earnest practice as the 
way to cure your disease. (5) Think of the Tathagatas as excellent beings. (6) Wish that the teaching will endure for 
a long time. (Pgs. 58-62, The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment  by Tsong-kah-pa, Volume 
One).   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 3 
Page 2 of 5  
From my side, I will try to make it accessible for you but at times it is not easy 
to do that. Once we have a rough understanding of these eight realisations, it will help us when we read a commentary on the Ornament for Clear 
Realisations  in the future, our interest will be aroused, giving us the 
motivation to carry on reading the commentary. Otherwise, when we pick up a 
commentary on this text,  we won’t understand anything at all and without 
any prior understanding, it is unlikely that we will continue reading it.  
 
This text, Ornament for Clear Realisations  is challenging and is a profound 
treatise. Nevertheless, we can place some positive imprints in our minds and   
we can definitely understand some parts of it. 
 
We had started to look at the eight categories that make up the Ornament for 
Clear Realisations, covering the exalted knower of all aspects and the knower 
of paths: 
●  The exalted knower of all aspects refers to the path (or consciousness) in the 
continuum of the Buddha Superior.  
● The knower of paths is basically the path (or knower) in the continuum of 
the Mahayana superior. (The path in the mental continuum of the 
Mahayana superior is the knower of paths. The knower in the mental 
continuum of the Mahayana superior is the kn ower of path. They both mean        
the  same thing.) 
 
The knower of paths can be divided into three:- 
1. The knower of paths that knows hearers’ paths 
2. The knower of paths that knows solitary realisers’ paths 
3. The knower of paths that knows Mahayana paths 
 
An illustration of the knower of paths that knows hearers’ paths is the wisdom directly perceiving the selflessness of  persons in the continuum of a Mahayana superior. 
 
Generally speaking:  
1. An exalted knower (or wisdom) that directly perceives the selflessness of  
person is a hearers’ path. 
2. An exalted knower that r ealises the emptiness of subject and object being 
different substantial entities  is a solitary realisers’ path. 
3. An exalted knower that directly realises emptiness  is a Mahayana path. 
 
If it is a hearers’ path, it is not necessarily included only in the continua of the 
hearers and if it is a solitary realisers’ path, it is not necessarily included only 
in the continua of the solitary realisers. But when it is a Mahayana path, it can only be found in the continuum of a Mahayanist. 
 
The wisdom directly perceiving the selflessness of person  in the continuum of a 
Mahayana superior is a hearers’ path and also a Mahayana path. These two 
are not contradictory. The wisdom that realises the emptiness of subject and 
object being different substantial entities  in the continuum of a Mahayana 
superior is a solitary realiser’s path and is also a Mahayana path.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 3 
Page 3 of 5  
Boundary for the knower of paths : It exists from the Mahayana path of seeing 
through to the buddha ground. This means the knower of paths does not exist  
prior to the path of seeing. 
 
Question from student:  
Does the “Mahayana path” here refer to the motivation or the view? 
Answer: 
A path is necessarily a consciousness and not a view. There are five Mahayana 
paths – the path of accumulation, the path of preparation, the path of seeing, 
the path of meditation and the path of no-more-learning. 
 
Keep in mind that the Ornament for Clear Realisations  is presented mainly 
from the perspective of the Yogic Autonomy Middle Way School. In the 
Autonomy Middle Way School, the selflessness of persons and selflessness of 
phenomena are differentiated according to their objects of negation and not according to their bases of emptiness.  
 
According to the Consequence Middle Way School, however, the selflessness of persons and selflessness of phenomena are not differentiated according to their objects of negation but according to their different bases. 
 
3. Knower of bases 
Definition: The knower of bases is defined as an exalted wisdom conjoined with a wisdom directly realising selflessness in the continuum of the person who possesses it in his continuum that abides in a Hinayana class of realisations. 
  
An illustration of a knower of bases is the wisdom directly perceiving the 
selflessness of person  in the continuum of a Mahayana superior. This wisdom 
is a knower of paths and is also a knower of bases.  
 
A Hinayana path is either a path that exists in the mental continuum of a 
Hinayanist or it is something that abides in the Hinayana class of realisations. 
For example, the wisdom directly realising the selflessness of person  in the 
continuum of a Mahayana superior is a Hinayana path not because it is included in the mental continuum of a Hinayanist but because that wisdom abides in the Hinayana class of realisations.  
 
What is the meaning of “abide in a Hinayana class of realisations”? It means that that wisdom directly perceiving the selflessness of person  in the 
continuum of a Mahayana superior has a similar observed object and aspect  of it as the main object of cultivation of a Hinayana learner.  
 
In the last lesson, I had reviewed the objects of abandonment and the objects of practice according to the Yogic Autonomy Middle Way School, the perspective from which this text is presented. According to that tenet system, they posit three vehicles primarily because of their assertions regarding the 
objects of abandonment and practice, focussing on the self of phenomena and 
the self of person.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 3 
Page 4 of 5  
Is the wisdom that directly perceives the selflessness of a person in the 
continuum of a Mahayana superior a hearers’ path? Yes.  
 
Is the wisdom that realises the emptiness of subject and object being different substantial entities in the continuum of a Mahayana superior a solitary realisers’ path?  Yes.  
 
Is the wisdom that realises the emptiness of subject and object being different 
substantial entities in the continuum of a Buddha superior a solitary realisers’ 
path? Yes.  
 
Buddha mentioned in many sutras that bodhisattva superiors need to know the hearers’ paths and on the basis of that knowledge, generate them. With 
that  scriptural authority, it is asserted that in the mental continua of bodhisattva superiors, there exist hearers’ paths. They do meditate on hearers’ path and generate them. Why do the bodhisattva superiors have to do this?  
 
This is because bodhisattva superiors have to take care of disciples who are predisposed towards that lineage. In order to do that, they have to know the paths and generate them, experiencing the realisations themselves before they 
can teach them to such disciples. Similarly, in order for the bodhisattva 
superiors to take care of those inclined towards the solitary realisers’ paths, they have to able to show the path. That is why the bodhisattva superiors need to meditate on and generate both the hearers’ and solitary realisers’ paths. 
  
The knower of bases is mutually inclusive  or synonymous with an exalted 
knower in a superior’s continuum abiding in a Hinayana class of realizations. (It is insufficient to simply say that the knower of bases is mutually inclusive with an exalted knower in a superior’s continuum).  
 
The knower of bases has four divisions:- 
1. the knower of bases that is close to the resultant mother 
2. the knower of bases that is distant from the resultant mother 
3. the knower of bases of the discordant class 
4. the knower of bases of the antidotal class 
(The knower of bases that is distant from the resultant mother and knower of bases of the discordant class mean the same thing).  
 
Boundary for the knower of bases : It exists in the continua of all superiors. 
This means that the hearer superior, solitary realiser superior, bodhisattva superior and Buddha superior have the knower of bases. 
 
The knower of bases that is distant from the resultant mother  is separated 
from great compassion and is bound by grasping at true existence. An illustration would be the wisdom directly realising selflessness of person in the continuum of a hearer superior who has not yet realised emptiness (and is 
therefore bound by grasping at true existence). As long as one is bound by 
grasping at true existence, this means that one has not realised emptiness and is therefore further away from attaining enlightenment.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 3 
Page 5 of 5                                                            
The knower of bases that is close to the resultant mother  is an exalted 
knower in the continuum of a Mahayana superior abiding in the Hinayana 
class of realisations that is conjoined with great compassion and the wisdom 
realising emptiness.  
 
The wisdom directly realising the emptiness of subject and object as separate  
entities in the continuum of a Buddha Superior - is that a knower of bases?  Yes, because that realisation abides in the Hinayana class of realisations.  
 
Is that an exalted knower of all aspects? 
 
Is that a knower of paths?  It is a knower of paths because it is an exalted 
knower in the continuum of a Mahayana superior.1
 
 
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Alison Wong   
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong 
 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
Vetted by Geshe Chonyi 
 
1 Please refer to pgs. 12, 14, 16 and 23 in the BP Study Manual .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 4 
Page 1 of 7 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root Verses  of Ornament for Clear Realisations  translated by Venerable 
Joan Nicell; an FPMT Masters Program Project, edition June 2007, ©Joan 
Nicell and FPMT, Inc.  Basic Program Study Manual for Maitreya’s Ornament for Clear Realizations, Chapter 4, compiled by Emily Hsu and Kok Wai Cheong; an FPMT Masters 
Program Project, edition September 2005, © FPMT, Inc. 
             Root Verses  are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added.  
 
Lesson No: 4                           Date: 17th July 2008  
 
The study of the philosophical treatises which we are undertaking here is not 
easy. It is difficult and challenging.  
 
Traditionally, it is said that learning these profound philosophical subjects is 
like doing the preliminary practices. We believe we accumulate a lot of merit 
through preliminary practices such as 100,000 prostrations and 100,000 
mandala offerings.  But it is said that the merit one accumulates through examining and studying these profound treatises can be more than performing those preliminary practices.  
 
According to traditional belief, when one has completed the five main philosophical subjects (i.e., Perfection of Wisdom, logic and reasoning, the view of emptiness, the Abhidharma and vinaya) but has not done the common preliminary practices such as prostrations and mandala offerings, one is still 
allowed to enter the three-year Great Retreat. The studies one had completed 
qualify as the preliminary requirement for entering this long retreat. 
 
You should never ever think that it is a waste of time and that it is not 
beneficial to study these great philosophical texts. We believe that we 
accumulate a lot of merit by doing prostrations but if we were to question the 
benefit of doing prostrations, it would be difficult to point to any tangible or practical benefit. But we still believe that prostrations are beneficial.  
 
We cannot say that there is no benefit to studying this profound text. It has its benefits. We should make sure that we do not succumb to this way of thinking, “What is the point of studying all these profound subjects? They are of no benefit or use to me. I don’t need them.” When we think like this, we will not pay any attention to this subject so it is important we do not end up like 
that. The great masters of the past had said the merit of studying these 
subjects is equivalent to the merit of doing the preliminary practices such as making 100,000 prostrations. The merit we accumulate from studying this text is definitely equal, if not greater than the merit we accumulate from making 
prostrations.  
 
When we say studying this subject is the best preliminary practice, what is 
this preliminary practice for?  It is the preparation for entering into retreat.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 4 
Page 2 of 7  
Doing a retreat is more of a mental rather than physical activity as it focuses 
on how we can retreat and subdue the mind. But before we can undertake a real retreat to subdue our minds, we have to know how to subdue our minds.  
 
We usually consider the common preliminary practices to be very important and we put in a lot of effort into doing them. For example, it takes a lot of effort to perform 100,000 prostrations. Of course, we will accumulate an inconceivable amount of merit through making prostrations and mandala 
offerings but we accumulate even more merit through studying these great 
profound subjects. We need to understand the reason for our asserting this.  Once we see the reason, we gain ascertainment and this will translate into our putting in more effort to learn more about this subject. It is important to keep this in mind at all times as this subject is challenging and profound and we 
may meet with the difficulty of not understanding the subject and not knowing 
its application. When this happens, there is a danger of losing enthusiasm and becoming discouraged. So it is important to remember the benefit and the purpose of studying this subject.  
 
******************************* 
The Madhyamaka (Middle Way) School has two divisions:-  
1. the Autonomy Middle Way School and  
2. the Consequence Middle Way School.   
 
The Autonomy Middle Way School can be subdivided into two: 
1. the Sutra Autonomy Middle Way School (Sautrantika-Svatantrika) 
2. the Yogic Autonomy Middle Way School  (Yogachara-Svatantrika) 
 
The proponents of both the Sutra and Yogic Autonomy Middle Way Schools assert that:- 
- all phenomena exist inherently (i.e., exist by way of its own character or 
exist from its own side).  
- all phenomena do not exist truly.  
 
Proponents of the Autonomy Middle Way School assert that phenomena exist inherently because the imputed object when searched for is findable. However, 
they assert that phenomena do not exist truly. Therefore, “existing inherently” and “existing truly” do not mean the same thing.  
 
The Autonomy Middle Way School asserts that phenomena do not exist truly because phenomena do not exist by way of their own uncommon objective mode 
of subsistence . Rather, phenomena can only be posited through the force of 
appearing to a non-defective awareness .  Because this is so, therefore, 
phenomena is not truly existent. What does a non-defective awareness mean?  
This School asserts that all phenomena exist inherently which is how they appear to the awareness and because they appear the way they exist, 
therefore, that awareness is said to be non-defective. 
   
The Sutra Autonomy Middle Way School is so-called because it shares similar 
assertions with the Sutra School which asserts external objects. An external  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 4 
Page 3 of 7  
object is the object that is formed through the coalescing of many particles or 
atoms resulting in a gross form which acts as the observed object condition for the generation of an eye consciousness perceiving it.  
 
The Yogic Autonomy Middle Way School is so-called because it shares similar assertions with the Mind Only School which do not assert external objects. They do not assert that form exists prior to the consciousness apprehending it. Like the Mind Only School, the Yogic Autonomy Middle Way School asserts 
that both form and the consciousness apprehending it exist simultaneously,  
they arise from a single predisposition contained within the mind and that everything is in the nature of the mind.  
 
There are two types of selflessnesses: 
1. the selflessness of person and 
2. the selflessness of phenomena 
and they can be further divided into coarse selflessnesses and subtle 
selflessnesses. 
 
Selflessness of person :  
• The coarse selflessness of person is the emptiness of a permanent, unitary, 
and independent person.   
• The subtle selflessness of person is the emptiness of a self-sufficient  
substantially existent person.  
• Both the Sutra and Yogic Autonomy Middle Way School assert that the 
subtle selflessness of person is the emptiness of a self-sufficient substantially 
existent person . To them, that is the subtlest selflessness of person and there 
is nothing subtler than that. 
 
Selflessness of phenomena :  
• The coarse selflessness of phenomena is the emptiness of subject and object 
as different substantial entities .  
• The subtle selflessness of phenomena is the emptiness of true existence . 
• Only the Yogic Autonomy Middle Way School asserts both the coarse 
selflessness of phenomena and the subtle selflessness of phenomena.  
 ● The Sutra Autonomy Middle Way School only asserts the subtle selflessness   
of phenomena i.e., the emptiness of true existence. They do not  assert the 
coarse selflessness of phenomena i.e., the emptiness of subject and object as 
different substantial entities because, to  them, subject and object are different 
entities. 
 
The Autonomy Middle Way School does not assert true existence. If an object 
can exist by way of its own uncommon objective mode of subsistence without 
being posited by the force of appearing to a non-defective awareness, then that 
object would be truly existent.  
 
Both the Consequence Middle Way School and Autonomy Middle Way School 
assert that phenomena do not exist truly. But the meaning of true existence 
for the two schools is different.  There is a difference in the level of subtlety as  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 4 
Page 4 of 7 the object of negation presented by the Consequence Middle Way School is 
subtler than that presented by the Autonomy Middle Way School.   
 
Because the Yogic Autonomy Middle Way School asserts coarse and subtle   
selflessnesses of person and of phenomena, therefore there is the presentation 
on the main object of meditation of the persons of the three vehicles.  
 
According to the Autonomy Middle Way School, the main object of cultivation (or object of meditation):- 
• For the hearer lineage is the selflessness of person i.e., the emptiness of a 
self-sufficient substantially existent person; 
• For the solitary realiser lineage is the emptiness of subject and object as 
different substantial entities 
• For the bodhisattva lineage is the emptiness of true existence. 
 
According to the Autonomy Middle Way School, one only needs to realise the selflessness of person in order to achieve liberation from samsara. This is because that realisation is the antidote to the root of samsara, which is grasping at the self of person. One does not have to realise the emptiness of 
true existence in order to achieve liberation. 
 
Both Consequence Middle Way School and Autonomy Middle Way School 
assert that the root of samsara is the grasping at the self of person. However, the self of person as defined by the two schools are different. To the 
proponents of the Consequence Middle Way School, the emptiness of the self-
sufficient substantially existent person is not the subtle selflessness of person. 
To them, this is only the coarse selflessness of person.  Therefore, simply realising the emptiness of the self-sufficient substantially existent person will not help one to achieve liberation as this is not the root of samsara. To them, 
there is something subtler than that, which is the emptiness of a person. 
Therefore, to cut the root of samsara and achieve liberation, one needs to realise emptiness.  
 
Because all of you are predisposed towards the Consequence Middle Way School, due to the strength of those imprints, when we present something that is opposite to its assertions, it is difficult for you all to accept them! 
 
(In response to a student’s question): 
A magician through his use of a special substance causes the appearance of an elephant or horse to arise. But to the person perceiving that illusion, there is an eye consciousness there which is non-defective. Both factors are necessary without which we cannot have the appearance of the elephant or 
horse. If the person’s eye consciousness is not affected by the magic spell, 
would he see the horse or elephant? So you need the presence of the two factors: 50% from the side of the object, 50% from the side of the perceiver. In the absence of these two, nothing can be perceived.  
 
To summarise, the Autonomy Middle Way School asserts that one only needs to realise the selflessness of person in order to achieve liberation from samsara. One does not have to realise the emptiness of true existence to be  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 4 
Page 5 of 7  
liberated. However, it is possible that there are hearers who realise emptiness 
even when they do not need to do so for the purpose of achieving liberation.  
 
In our last lesson, we had discussed the four divisions of the knower of bases, one of which is the knower of bases that is distant from the resultant mother, which is defined as a knower of bases who is separated from great compassion 
and bound by grasping at true existence. An example would be a hearer who 
has not realised  emptiness.   
 
The knower of bases that is in the co ntinuum of a Mahayana superior is a 
knower of bases that is close to the resultant mother (defined as an exalted 
knower in the continuum of a Mahayana su perior abiding in the Hinayana class 
of realisations that is conjoined with great compassion and the wisdom realising 
emptiness) because it is a knower conjoined with the special method of 
bodhicitta and wisdom realising emptiness. This is opposed to the knower of 
bases in the continuum of the hearer superior which is a  knower of bases that 
is distant from the resultant mother  because this knower is not conjoined with 
this special method.  
 
So, at this point, you should know what the three knowers refer to and on that 
basis, be able to give illustrations of them.  
 
• The wisdom directly perceiving emptiness in the continuum of the 
Mahayana superior - is that a knower of paths or not? Is that a knower of bases or not?  
• The wisdom directly perceiving emptiness in the continuum of the hearer 
superior - is that a knower of paths? Is that a knower of bases? 
By positing such illustrations, you ask yourself, “Is this a knower of paths? Is this a knower of bases?” It helps to clarify your understanding of those three knowers.  
Prepare your answers for the next class, giving reasons for your answer. 
 
Geshe-la: 
Many of you may have seen the movi e, “Kung Fu Panda,” how the panda was 
training to become the dragon warrior. So, same thing here in class, we are 
training to become dragon warriors! Where ever you go, you want to get something quick, where ever you go, you would find nothing there. If you look for a quick method to understand, a quick method to become a kung fu master, that 
doesn’t exist.  
 
What you have to do is to put heart into it, work hard yourself, practise 
continually yourself. So then you become the kung fu master – even the panda 
can become the kung fu master! There is some kind of advice for us there. 
Sometimes we think, “How come he knows so much? How come I don’t know? 
How can I be like that?” Then we run from master to master, looking for something quick, a quick practice, a qu ick method to achieve enlightenment, 
running after different masters. But, I think, at the end of the day, it is the same. 
You won’t get enlightened quickly in that way.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 4 
Page 6 of 7  
So the message here is that you have to practise continually yourself, learning 
the philosophy and so forth. You have to memorise (the definitions of) the three knowers. It’s not like whatever I say woul d simply go inside (your minds). So 
after knowing this (the three knowers), you have to remember, you have to discuss, you have to ask questions, you have to read the book. Slowly, you will get some kind of understanding within your mind. Again, this text is not easy so 
it takes time and from your side, you need to put in the effort. 
 
Some people wanted to know how to st udy, how to improve, how to know.  So 
the message is that. Every one has differ ent intelligence, different amount of 
time, the main thing is you have to work hard to understand the topic. Once you know a little bit, you would have some kind of interest and then you can push 
slowly. 
 
In the beginning, it is like that, it is very difficult to ge t into the subject.   So, in 
the beginning, don’t get dis couraged. The first day, you don’t get it, and the next 
time, you still don’t get it and then you just stop. I don’t think that is the way to 
go. If you really want to study, then over the years, three years, ten years, it may take longer than that, if you put in the effort, you will learn something.  
 
We have covered the three knowers. Next are the four applications which are: 
1. Application in complete aspects 
2. Peak application 
3. Serial application 
4. Momentary application 
 
4. Application in the complete aspects  
The application in the complete aspects refers to the consciousness of a bodhisattva who meditates on all the aspects in their entirety. As long it is a 
knower in the continuum of the bodhisattva, it is definitely an application in 
the complete aspects.  
 
Definition : The application in the complete aspects is a bodhisattva’s yoga 
conjoined with a wisdom cultivating the aspects of the three exalted knowers through gathering them together.  
 
When the aspects of the three knowers are enumerated, there are a total of 
173 aspects which are divided into:  
1. 27 aspects of the knower of bases 
2. 36 aspects of the knower of paths and  
3. 110 aspects of the exalted knower of all aspects  
 
The bodhisattva’s yoga refers to a yogi who is training in bodhicitta over and 
over again.  It does not necessarily refer to the yoga that is performed whilst 
one is in meditative equipoise. Anyone entering the path is called a yogi so bodhisattvas are yogis.  
  
Boundary : The application in the complete aspects exists from the Mahayana 
path of accumulation through to the end of the continuum of a sentient being. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 4 
Page 7 of 7                                                            
“A wisdom cultivating the aspects of  the three exalted knowers through 
gathering them together ”: It is unclear in the text but some scholars explained 
that ‘gathering them together’  means a bodhisattva meditates on all the 173 
aspects in a single session. The analogy is that of standing on top of a building 
and looking at the entire city below. One has a panoramic view of the city instead of focussing on each and every single building in it. 
   
There are bodhisattvas who meditate on all the 173 aspects of the three exalted knowers through gathering them together on the Mahayana path of accumulation but there are also bodhisattvas who meditate on the 173 aspects 
serially in stages, starting with the 27 aspects of the knower of bases, then 
going on to the 36 aspects of the knower of paths and the 110 aspects of the exalted knower of all aspects. This will be covered in the presentation on serial application.  
 
Therefore, the bodhisattva necessarily has to possess in his mental continuum: (1) the yoga of cultivating the aspects of the three exalted knowers through gathering them together and (2) the wisdom that cultivates the aspects of the three exalted knowers serially.
1
 
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Alison Wong   
Edited by Cecilia Tsong 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
Vetted by Geshe Chonyi 
 
 
1 Please refer to pgs. 35 – 37, 39 – 40 in the BP Study Manual .  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 5 
Page 1 of 5 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root Verses  of Ornament for Clear Realisations  translated by Venerable 
Joan Nicell; an FPMT Masters Program Project, edition June 2007, ©Joan 
Nicell and FPMT, Inc.  Basic Program Study Manual for Maitreya’s Ornament for Clear Realizations, Chapter 4, compiled by Emily Hsu and Kok Wai Cheong; an FPMT Masters 
Program Project, edition September 2005, © FPMT, Inc. 
             Root Verses  are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added.  
 
Lesson No: 5                           Date: 22nd July 2008  
 
Although this text, Ornament for Clear Realisations  is part of the Basic 
Program curriculum, we will not be studying it in great detail. So when you 
listen to these teachings, please pay full attention. For those who have the real 
interest to study this topic, it is important to give yourself the time to read and reflect on the text.  
 
In the olden days, it was customary not to build stupas or prayer wheels at 
places where the serious study of Buddhist philosophy was undertaken such 
as the three great monasteries of the Gelugpa tradition in Tibet. This is not saying that there is no benefit in turning prayer wheels or circumambulating  stupas. Rather, it indicates that studying the Buddhadharma is of greater 
importance and that one’s time should be devoted to learning and reflecting on 
the Buddhadharma. The absence of stupas and prayer wheels is an expression of the lack of time to do things such as circumambulation and turning the prayer wheels as one is focussed on one’s studies.  
 
What I am pointing out is that you have to be very clear with regards to your goal and objective. If your main goal is to study the Buddhadharma, then your goal should be clear and stable and you should direct your efforts towards that goal by putting aside time for your studies. In the great places of learning, the 
monasteries have restriction on activities such as learning poetry, astrology,  
art and so forth. There are even restrictions on doing pujas for sponsors as these activities are seen to interrupt one’s serious studies.  
 
You may have different lifestyles here and you may be busy with your work but, nevertheless, you need to be clear about what your goal is. If your goal is to study the Buddhadharma, on the day you decided to attend this Program, you should decide to put aside time to study and reflect on the teachings. If 
you have some wish to learn the Buddhadharma but you are not serious about 
your studies, what will happen? You may come to class but you do not pay full attention to the teachings and you are not bothered about your inattention.  You do not make time to study or reflect on the text after class. Your efforts 
will be wasted.  
 
ABC may be offering the Master’s Program in the future although this is not 
yet confirmed. If that does happens, the Basic Program will be the foundation  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 5 
Page 2 of 5  
for that course. If you do not study the Basic Program well, you can forget 
about  participating in the Master’s Program. You need to do the preparatory work through your studies now if you want to join the Master’s Program in the 
future. You need to generate the strong aspiration from the beginning and 
have the determination to do your very best to understand the topic being taught in class. Without such determination and if you simply passively listen to the teachings with a distracted mind, you may not get anything at the end of the session. When you carry on like this, from session to session, you will have 
nothing to show at the end of the three months, even though you may have 
attended the entire module. 
 
***************************** 
Although I have introduced the three knowers over the last few lessons, it seems like the majority of you still don’t know what they are! Some blame it on the terminology saying it is not English but it is not the fault of the words at all.  When you study such topics and when they are translated into English, 
the words are like this. If you go on to the Master’s Program, what you get now 
is what you will get in the future. Simplifying or watering down the language will not help you in the future.   You just have to learn it. 
 
Geshe-la:  
One American explained to me how he st udied Buddhist philoso phy. In order to 
understand, for example “knower of bases,” he had to understand the definition and then memorise it so that he can expl ain what a “knower of bases” is. As the 
definition is long, it is difficult to memorise. So this American recited each 
definition for one mala and he managed to  memorise it in that way. He said 
other than memorising the definitions, there is no other way to study.  
 
In the monastery, we have to memorise all the texts once we have studied the 
topic because during debate, it is not possible to bring along the texts. Whenever 
someone asks you the definition, you have to be able to quote it from memory. 
Your opponent will find fault with it when the definition is not quoted correctly.  
 
So you need to memorise the definitions or else it would be difficult to study this topic as there are many definitions in this topic. If you cannot remember the definitions, you must at least try to understand the meaning of the definitions so that you can explain them. 
  
1. Exalted knower of all aspects 
The first of the eight categories, this is the final wisdom directly perceiving all phenomena. The wisdom (consciousness) of the Buddha is known as the exalted knower of all aspects. 
 
2. Knower of paths  
Definition:  A Mahayana arya’s clear realisation conjoined with a wisdom 
directly realising emptiness in the continuum of the person who possesses it in 
his continuum .  
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 5 
Page 3 of 5  
The knower of paths is the knower in the mental continuum of a Mahayana 
superior and the knower in the continuum of a Mahayana superior is the knower of paths. The path (or consciousness) in the continuum of the 
Mahayana superior is the knower of paths. 
 
3. Knower of bases 
Definition:  An exalted wisdom conjoined with a wisdom directly realising 
selflessness in the continuum of the person who possesses it in his continuum that abides in a Hinayana class of realizations. 
 
The knower of bases exists in the continua of all the superiors – hearer 
superiors, solitary realiser superiors and the Mahayana superiors (bodhisattva 
superiors and Buddha superiors). Therefore, ordinary beings will not have 
knower of bases. 
 
If it is a knower of bases, it is necessarily a path in the continuum of the 
superiors. A knower of bases is an exalted knower in the continuum of a 
superior that abides in the Hinayana class of realisations. If it is knower of bases, it is necessarily an exalted knower in the continuum of the superiors.  
 
The wisdom directly perceiving the selflessness of person in the continuum of a superior is a knower of bases. Since it is a knower of bases, that wisdom abides in a Hinayana class of realisations. Why, in this illustration, is this path said to abide in a Hinayana class of realisations? 
 
This is because that realisation is taken as the main object of cultivation by the Hinayana learner having a similar observed object and an aspect of it. (There are two Hinayana qualities – the object of cultivation and the object of abandonment). 
 
The mind that directly perceives the selflessness  of a person, what is its object 
of observation?  The observed object condition is selflessness of a person. What appears to that mind is the selflessness of a person. This was covered in the 
module on Mind and Cognition (Lorig). For example, the eye consciousness 
apprehending blue. The observed object is blue and the eye consciousness apprehending blue is generated in the aspect of blue.  
 
The wisdom directly perceiving selflessness of a person in the continuum of a bodhisattva superior: The observed object is selflessness of a person and it has the aspect of selflessness of a person. The observed object and the aspect of this mind of the Mahayana superior is similar to that of a Hinayana superior. 
 
The wisdom directly realizing selflessness of a person in the continuum of a Buddha superior - is that a knower of bases or not? 
  
 
The wisdom directly realising emptiness in the continuum of a hearer superior – is that wisdom a knower of bases or not? 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 5 
Page 4 of 5 The definition of knower of bases is an exalted wisdom conjoined with a 
wisdom directly realizing selflessness in the continuum of the person who possesses it in his continuum that abides in a Hinayana class of realizations. There are two elements in this definition and both elements must be satisfied.  
 
Whatever is a path in the mental continuum of hearer superior is not necessarily a knower of bases. The wisdom directly realising the subtle selflessness of phenomena in the continuum of a hearer superior is not a 
knower of bases because although it fulfils the first part of the definition, it 
does not fulfil the second element of the definition.  
 
Whatever is a path in the continuum of a hearer superior,  is it necessarily one 
of the three knowers? The answer is no.  
 
Is there anything which is a knower of path and knower of bases?  
 
Is there anything that is a knower of bases, a knower of paths and an exalted knower of all aspects? 
 
1. The wisdom directly perceiving selflessness of the person is the main object of cultivation (path) of a hearer.  
2. The wisdom realising the emptiness of subject and object as different 
substantial entities is the object of cultivation (path) of a solitary realiser.  
3. The wisdom directly perceiving emptiness of true existence is the object of 
cultivation (path) of a Mahayana superior.  
 
The first two are knower of bases but no. 3 is a knower of paths. Whatever is a 
path in the continuum of a superior is not necessarily one of these three 
knowers. For example, the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness of true existence in the continuum of a hearer superior, that is not an exalted knower of all aspects, it is not a knower of paths and it is also not a knower of bases. 
This is because it does not fulfil the definition required to be a knower of 
bases.  
 
Question from student:  
Is there a clear boundary with regards to the Hinayana class of realisations? 
Answer:  
One can think about the wisdom directly perceiving the sixteen aspects of the Four Noble Truths. An example would be the wisdom directly realising  the 
Four Noble Truths in the continuum of the hearer superior and the wisdom 
directly realising impermanence in the continuum of the Hearer superior. These are both knower of bases.  
 
The Four Noble Truths are the main object of cultivation of the hearer 
superior. Having said that, is the wisdom directly realising impermanence also  
the main object of cultivation of the hearer superior (impermanence being one 
of the 16 aspects of the Four Noble Truths)? 
 
If you say that the hearer superior has many things to meditate on but his main focus is on the selflessness of person, then that suggests that the  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 5 
Page 5 of 5                                                            
bodhisattva mainly meditates only on emptiness of true existence but not on 
compassion and bodhicitta. We have to say that the bodhisattva also takes great compassion as a main object of cultivation. Similarly, the hearer superior 
also takes impermanence as a main object of cultivation. 
 
Is the mind that is intent on achieving liberation in the continuum of the 
hearer superior the main object of cultivation of the hearer superior? The answer is yes. That object is not selflessness of the person but it is a knower of 
bases. The point here is that a knower of bases is not necessarily only  the 
wisdom directly realising selflessness of person.   
 
That is the reason why in the definition of the knower of bases, it has the 
words “conjoined with .” That is why it is important to look at the definitions to 
see the boundaries and what it is driving at. Because if a knower of bases is 
necessarily  a wisdom directly realising the selflessness of person, then the 
definition would not have to use the words, “conjoined with.” Instead, it would 
say a knower of bases is an exalted wisdom that is  a wisdom directly realising 
selflessness in the continuum of the person who possesses it in his continuum that abides in a Hinayana class of realizations 
 
The mind of great compassion that realises the selflessness of person, is that a knower of bases? 
 
The wisdom realising the emptiness of subject and object as different 
substantial entities in the continuum of a Buddha superior – is that a knower 
of bases or not? 
 
Is the wisdom realising the emptiness of subject and object as different 
substantial entities the main object of cultivation of a Hinayanist? You have to 
answer “Yes” or “No.” If you say, “Yes,” then, in debate, if I say that it follows that the wisdom realising the emptiness of subject and object as different substantial entities is not the main object of cultivation because the main 
object of cultivation is the selflessness of person, then what would you say? In 
debate, you must answer the question directly. Is the main object of cultivation of the Hinayanist one of these or both (i.e, the wisdom realising the emptiness of subject and object as different substantial entities and the selflessness of person)?
1
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Alison Wong   
Edited by Cecilia Tsong 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
Vetted by Geshe Chonyi 
 
1 Please refer to pg. 39 in the BP Study Manual .  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 6 
Page 1 of 7 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root Verses  of Ornament for Clear Realisations  translated by Venerable 
Joan Nicell; an FPMT Masters Program Project, edition June 2007, ©Joan 
Nicell and FPMT, Inc.  Basic Program Study Manual for Maitreya’s Ornament for Clear Realizations, Chapter 4, compiled by Emily Hsu and Kok Wai Cheong; an FPMT Masters 
Program Project, edition September 2005, © FPMT, Inc. 
             Root Verses  are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added.  
 
Lesson No: 6                           Date: 24th July 2008  
 
There are some people, especially those who have attended many teachings in the past, who have the bad habit of not really concentrating in class. At the 
beginning of the class, even though they are here, they do not have the 
thought, “Since I am here now, I will pay full attention, as much as I can.” Rather they have an attitude of “Whatever happens will happen.” Although they are physically present, the words go into their ears but they do not retain 
anything in their minds from what they have heard. It is like an awareness to 
which an object appears but is not ascertained! 
 
The point is to make sure that doesn’t happen here. Coming to class is not an 
easy thing as you have put in the effort and set aside time for doing so. Since 
you are already here, you may as well make the best use of that time. Therefore, you should have the intention from the beginning to pay as much attention as you can and try to learn as much as possible from the lesson, 
even if it may be only one or two words. It is important at the beginning of 
every session to generate the thought, "I will listen attentively to what is being said and I will try to learn as much as possible.”  
 
The mind has to be mentally alert. In the course of studying or attending 
teachings like these, there are bound to be things that one cannot understand 
immediately and there will be things that one can understand. But from one’s own side, one has to generate the intention and will to pay full attention to the best of one’s ability. When this is done, you will definitely learn something. 
Whatever you have learnt will inspire you to learn more and will increase your 
aspiration to educate yourself.  
 
On the other hand, if right from the beginning, you don’t have that intention 
but have a rather flippant attitude of "Whatever happens, happens," then you 
won’t get anything out of the session. It  is then difficult to develop any keen 
interest to further your knowledge. One’s studies would not go anywhere. So please try your best to keep this in mind. Since you are here, try your best to pay full attention. Of course, one must understand that studying has its 
challenges and its difficulties. 
 
Geshe-la : When I was studying in Sera, once during a break, I was preparing for 
a one week White Manjushri retreat. Th ere was this older Geshe, who didn’t 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 6 
Page 2 of 7 study much, who knew that I was going for a retreat. He told me: "Why don’t 
you study rather than go for retreat? Wi th studying, you can gain more wisdom, 
but what can you gain from a retreat?" I still did my retreat but his advice touched me. I thought it was very logical. Du ring retreat, we do a lot of chanting 
and accumulate a lot of merit. But when we think of this logically - when we study we know a word a day and in on e week, we will know seven words and 
our wisdom will increase. When we chant, how much wisdom can we develop? I remembered his advice for a long time. This Geshe has already passed away 
but his advice was good. 
*********************** 
When we consider the three knowers in a very simplistic way:-  
1. Knower of bases: The “bases” refer to the Four Noble Truths so a knower of bases has the knowledge of knowing what the Four Noble Truths are.  
2. Knower of paths: The “paths” refers to method and wisdom. 
3. Exalted knower of all aspects: The “aspects” refer to all phenomena.  
This is how we can look at the three knowers in a very simplistic way but the 
real meaning is in the definitions. 
 
The exalted knower of all aspects refers to the final fruit or the highest goal that one can attain. In order to achieve the exalted knower of all aspects, we need to generate the Mahayana path within our mental continuum. Therefore 
we need to cultivate the knower of paths. In order to generate the Mahayana 
path within our continuum, we must first train in the preliminary of in the path of person of middling capacity. For that reason, the knower of bases is 
explained. 
 
Questions may arise. Why do I have to study these three exalted knowers? What do they have to do with me and how do they help me in my Dharma practice? The point is to cultivate these three knowers, as one is the preliminary to the other. When we know what the three exalted knowers are, 
we then generate the aspiration to achieve them. When we have the aspiration 
to cultivate these three exalted knowers, then the intention to study and reflect on the texts or teachings that show us how to cultivate these three exalted knowers will arise. Understanding the three exalted knowers will help us in 
our understanding of the Three Jewels which are our objects of refuge. It also 
helps us to have an extensive understanding of the true paths. In other words, there are many benefits to studying the three exalted knowers.  
 
4. Application in Complete Aspects  
When we look at the application in complete aspects in a very simplistic way, it refers to any exalted knower (or path) in the continuum of a bodhisattva. If it is a path in the continuum of a bodhisattva, it is an application in complete aspects. If it is an application in complete aspects, it is a path in the 
continuum of a bodhisattva. 
 
The “aspects” here refers to the aspects of the three exalted knowers. When the 
aspects of the three exalted knowers are enumerated, there are a total of 173 
aspects:  
1. 27 aspects of knower of bases 
2. 36 aspects of knower of paths and  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 6 
Page 3 of 7 3. 110 aspects of the exalted knower of all aspects  
 
Definition : A bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined with a wisdom cultivating the 
aspects of the three exalted knowers through gathering them together.  
 
The application in complete aspects means to meditate on all these aspects in 
their entirety and this meditation is done through gathering them together.  
 
What is the meaning of “gathering them together?”  It means to meditate on all 
the 173 aspects together in their entirety rather than focusing on a single 
specific aspect. The analogy is that of standing on a very high mountain looking down at a city. One sees the whole city in its entirety rather than looking at a particular building. The word “yoga”’ has many meanings. In this 
context, it refers to the bodhisattva training in the mind of enlightenment. 
 
We should understand that if it is an application in complete aspects, it is not 
necessarily  a meditation that cultivates all the 173 aspects through gathering 
them together. In the definition, it is not a bodhisattva’s yoga that cultivates all 
aspects of the three exalted knowers through gathering them together but 
rather it is a bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined with a wisdom cultivating the 
aspects of the three exalted knowers through gathering them together.  
 
In this context, the application in complete aspects refers to the preparation for achieving one’s final goal, to achieve the exalted knower of all aspects in order to attain enlightenment.  
 
• A bodhisattva necessarily  has the wisdom that cultivates the aspects of the 
three exalted knowers through gathering them together.  
• It is also possible for the bodhisattva to have the wisdom that progressively 
cultivates the aspects of the three exalted knowers. One can also say that a bodhisattva necessarily  has the wisdom that progressively cultivates the 
aspects of the three knowers. 
• Basically, there are some bodhisattvas who meditate on the aspects of the 
three knowers by gathering them together while other bodhisattvas meditate 
on the aspects of the three knowers progressively.  
• What is the purpose of such meditations? It is to achieve the exalted knower 
of all aspects in order to achieve full enlightenment.  
• Whatever is an application in complete aspects is not necessarily  a wisdom 
that cultivates the aspects of the three exalted knowers through gathering them together. For example, there are applications in complete aspects that 
progressively or serially cultivate the aspects of the three exalted knowers.  
 
Boundary : This application exists from the Mahayana path of accumulation 
through to the end of the continuum of a sentient being.  This would refer to all bodhisattvas. 
 
5. Peak Application  
Definition : A bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined with a wisdom highly transformed 
from the Mahayana path of accumulation that cultivates the three exalted knowers through gathering them together. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 6 
Page 4 of 7  
How does one posit the difference between the application in complete aspects 
and the peak application?  
 
The difference is whether one has gained mastery over the cultivation of the aspects of the three exalted knowers. The application in complete aspects refers to when one has not gained mastery over such cultivation whereas peak application refers to when one has gained mastery over the cultivation of the aspects of the three exalted knowers through gathering them together. 
 
When the bodhisattva is on the Mahayana path of accumulation, the bodhisattva meditates on the aspects of the three exalted knowers through gathering them together but he has not gained mastery with respect to that 
meditation.  
 
When the bodhisattva progresses to the next path - the heat level of the path of 
preparation, he also cultivates the aspects of the three exalted knowers 
through gathering them together but now he has gained mastery over that 
cultivation. This explains “A bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined with a wisdom highly 
transformed  from the Mahayana path of accumulation …” 
 
What is the measure of having gained mastery with respect to the cultivation of the aspects of the three exalted knowers through gathering them together? The 
texts are unclear on this point. It is mentioned in some texts that the intended 
disciples of the Ornament for Clear Realisations  are those of definite Mahayana 
lineage. When the bodhisattva attains the Mahayana path of preparation, the bodhisattva has achieved the union of calm abiding and special insight focussing on emptiness. Some scholars say that because of this achievement, 
therefore they have gained mastery over the cultivation of the aspects of the 
three exalted knowers through gathering them together.  
 
In general, one achieves the union of calm abiding and special insight at the 
path of accumulation but it is not the union of calm abiding and special insight 
focussing on emptiness . For those of definite Mahayana lineage, the 
bodhisattva will only achieve the union of calm abiding and special insight that 
focusses on emptiness on the Mahayana path of preparation.  
 
The bodhisattva on the Mahayana path of accumulation cultivates the aspects 
of the three exalted knowers through gathering them together. In one sitting, 
the bodhisattva meditates on all the 173 aspects through gathering them together but at this stage, he is still in training. But when the bodhisattva attains the path of preparation, he has gained mastery over and confidence with respect to this cultivation.  
 
Peak application has four divisions:- 
1. peak application of the path of preparation 
2. peak application of the path of seeing,  
3. peak application of the path of meditation,  
4. uninterrupted peak application 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 6 
Page 5 of 7  
Question: 
In the definition of peak application, the words “the aspects” (with reference to 
the three exalted knowers) is missing (compared to the definition of the 
application in complete aspects)? Is this significant in any way? 
Answer:  
They mean the same thing even though the word “aspects” is not mentioned in 
the definition of peak application. 
 
Boundary:   It exists from the heat level of the Mahayana path of preparation 
through the end of the continuum of a sentient being. 
 
Having examined these two applications, we can see that: 
• If something is a peak application, it is necessarily  an application in 
complete aspects. The pervasion works this way but not the other way round.  
• Whatever is an application in complete aspects is not necessarily  a peak 
application. 
 
The extent of pervasion for the application in complete aspects is greater than 
that for the peak application. The criteria for positing these two applications is 
not whether one has gained mastery over the cultivation of the aspects of the 
three knowers through gathering them together.  Whether the application has 
already gained mastery over the cultivation of the aspects of the three exalted knowers through gathering them together is simply to show the difference  
between the application in complete aspects and peak application but that should not be taken to be the reason for positing the difference between these 
two applications. 
 
• When does one achieve peak application?  
When one has gained mastery over the cultivation of the aspects of the three 
exalted knowers through gathering them together.  
• What does it mean to achieve mastery and when does it happen?  
One achieves mastery when one achieves the union of calm abiding and special insight focussing on emptiness, i.e., when one achieves the Mahayana 
path of preparation.  
• Before one can achieve the union of calm abiding and special insight 
focussing on emptiness, one must first achieve the calm abiding that focusses 
on emptiness while on the Mahayana great path of accumulation. 
 
6. Serial Application  
Definition : A bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined with a wisdom that progressively 
cultivates the aspects of the three exalted knowers for the sake of attaining stability in the aspects of the 3 exalted knowers. 
 
Boundary : This application exists from the Mahayana path of accumulation 
through  just prior  to the end of the continuum of a sentient being. 
 
7. Instantaneous Application (or momentary application) 
Definition : A bodhisattva’s final yoga that has attained stability in the aspects 
of the three exalted knowers.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 6 
Page 6 of 7  
Boundary : This application exists only at the end of continuum of a sentient 
being. 
 
As seen earlier, the difference between the application in complete aspects and 
peak application is whether one has gained mastery over the cultivation of the aspects of the three exalted knowers through gathering them together.  
 
The difference between serial application and instantaneous application is 
whether one has stability in the progressive cultivation of the aspects of the 
three exalted knowers. At the time of the serial application, one progressively or serially cultivates the aspects of the three exalted knowers for the purpose of gaining stability in the cultivation of the aspects of the three knowers.  The 
boundary for serial application is from the Mahayana path of accumulation 
through just prior  to the end of the continuum of a sentient being. The 
definition for serial application does not say, through the end  of continuum of a 
sentient being. 
 
Answer to student’s question : 
Whether it is just prior or through the end of a continuum of a sentient being, 
it means it does not exist on the buddha ground. 
 
Question: 
What does “yoga” in the bodhisattva’s “yoga” means? 
Answer: 
Yoga is the practice of the yogi. In this context, it is the bodhisattvas’ training 
in the mind of enlightenment.  
 
********************* 
Questions for Sunday discussion group session:  
 
1. Is the path in the mental continuum of a hearer superior necessarily a 
knower of bases? 
  
2. Is there a common locus between a knower of paths that knows the hearers' 
path and a knower of paths that knows the solitary realisers' paths? 
  
3. The knower that realises the emptiness of subject and object being different substantial entities in the mental continuum of a Buddha superior - is that a knower of bases or not? 
  
4. Is there something that is all three knowers? 
  
5. What is the meaning of "through gathering them together" (refer application in the complete aspects)? 
  
6. A knower of paths and a knower of bases who realise the selflessness of person - are they the same?
  
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 6 
Page 7 of 7                                                            
We can use the tool of three possibilities or four possibilities to compare the 
two exalted knowers. Things will then become clearer. For example, when we compare the knower of paths and the knower of bases:- 
1. Is there something that is both a knower of paths and a knower of bases? 
2. Is there something that is a knower of paths but not a knower of bases? 
3. Is there something that is a knower of bases but not a knower of paths? 
4. Is there something that is neither a knower of paths nor a knower of bases? 
 
Before we can posit an illustration that there is something that is a knower of paths but not a knower of bases, we first need to know why this is so. Through that understanding, we can then give illustrations. In order to be able to do 
that, we need to understand the definitions of the three exalted knowers and 
their boundaries. When we know the knowers and their definitions well, we can compare the two phenomena using possibilities. This really helps us to clarify our understanding. If we do not know what the definitions and the 
boundaries are, there is no way we can do any comparison.
1
 
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Alison Wong   
Edited by Cecilia Tsong 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
Vetted by Geshe Chonyi 
 
1 Please refer to pg. 17 of the BP Study Manual .  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 7 
Page 1 of 5  Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root Verses  of Ornament for Clear Realisations  translated by Venerable Joan 
Nicell; an FPMT Masters Program Project, edition June 2007, ©Joan Nicell and 
FPMT, Inc.  Basic Program Study Manual for Maitreya’s Ornament for Clear Realizations, Chapter 4, compiled by Emily Hsu and Kok Wai Cheong; an FPMT Masters 
Program Project, edition September 2005, © FPMT, Inc. 
             Root Verses  are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added.  
 
Lesson No: 7                           Date: 27th July 2008  
 
The knower of bases is mainly found in the continua of hearer and solitary realiser superiors. Hearer and solitary realiser superiors meditate on the knower of bases 
in order to achieve the sorrowless state (or liberation) that is characterised by the 
abandonment of all sufferings.  
 
The knower of paths is mainly found in the continua of Mahayana superiors who  
meditate on them in order to be able to work for the benefit of all sentient beings. 
 
The exalted knower of all aspects is found in the continuum of the Buddha 
superior. When this exalted knower of all aspects is attained and one becomes a 
buddha, one turns the Wheel of Dharma for all sentient beings, showing them 
what are to be cultivated and what are to be abandoned in accordance with their predispositions, interests and abilities. Through revealing the Dharma, sentient beings will be able to free themselves from samsara.  
 
In order to be able to reveal the teachings, one must have achieved the exalted knower of all aspects. Before that can be achieved, one must first achieve the knower of bases and the knower of paths, without which one will not be able to attain the exalted knower of all aspects. 
 
The knower of paths is posited primarily in relation to the wisdom realising emptiness, which refers here to subtle emptiness. Before one can realise this subtle emptiness, one must first have the preliminary realisation of selflessness of 
person, which is the coarser level of em ptiness. In order for one to generate the 
knower of bases, one must have realised the selflessness of person. One needs to 
cultivate the knower of bases by meditating on the 16 aspects of the Four Noble Truths. This is primarily a Hinayana path. The knower of paths is a Mahayana 
path. One needs to meditate on both of them to bring one’s training to its full culmination before one actualises the exalted knower of all aspects. 
 
(Many questions were posed to Geshe-la during the remainder of the lesson. Some    of the students’ questions were inaudible). ,  
 
Question by student : 
Is there a knower of bases that is a realisation of emptiness?  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 7 
Page 2 of 5   
Answer:  
No, a knower of bases is a realisation of the selflessness of person.  
 
****** 
Answer to student’s question : 
This text here is presented in accordance with the Yogic Autonomy Middle Way 
School. When the word, “emptiness” is used here, it refers to subtle emptiness which according to this tenet system is the emptiness of true existence. The term 
“selflessness” refers to subtle selflessness of  person which is the emptiness of the 
self sufficient substantially existent person. Selflessness of person is different from 
the emptiness of true existence. 
 
****** 
Question: 
Does the solitary realiser realise the selflessness of person? 
Answer : 
Yes. 
 
******* 
All the tenet systems refer to a selfl essness of person and a selflessness of 
phenomena. That terminology does not change.    
 
So if you are discussing this from the viewpoint of the Yogic Autonomy Middle Way School, you should immediately understand that the “selflessness of person” refers to the subtle  selflessness of person, which is the emptiness of the self sufficient 
substantially existent person. Then when you discuss “emptiness,” it should be immediately understood to refer to subtle  selfless of phenomena, which is 
emptiness of true existence.  
 
In short, when we are discussing the two selflessnesses, it should be understood we are referring to the subtle  selflessness of person and the subtle  selflessness of 
phenomena.  
 
When the selflessness of person is divided, of course, there are subtle and coarse levels of selflessness: 
• The coarse selflessness of person is the emptiness of a permanent, unitary and 
independent person.  
• The subtle selflessness of person is the emptiness of the self sufficient 
substantially existent person.  
In the same way, there are coarse and subtle levels of selflessness of phenomena:   
• the coarse being the emptiness of the subject and object being different 
substantial entities and  
• the subtle being the emptiness of true existence.  
 
******* 
Question:  
The “emptiness” referred to in the direct realisation of “the emptiness of the subject and object being different substantial entities,” does that “emptiness” refer to “emptiness of true existence”? 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 7 
Page 3 of 5   
Answer:  
It has been explained earlier that the Yogic Autonomy Middle Way School shares 
many of the assertions of the Mind Only School. With regards to this emptiness of 
subject and object being different substantial entities, it means that the perceiving 
subject and the perceived object are not of different substantial entities. That is the emptiness that is realised by the solitary realiser superiors according to this School. Because there are three main objects of cultivation, three vehicles have been posited.  
 
******** 
Question from student : 
What is an “exalted” knower? 
Answer:  
An exalted knower is a path. An exalted knower is necessarily a path and a path is necessarily an exalted knower but a knower is not necessarily an exalted knower. 
 
******* 
Question by student : 
Is it correct to say that the wisdom realising the emptiness of the subject and object as different substantial entities is a knower of bases not because it abides in a Hinayana class of realisations but because this wisdom is an exalted wisdom that is conjoined with a wisdom directly realising selflessness in the continuum of 
the person who possesses it in his continuum? 
Answer:  
That is incorrect. This wisdom would then  not be a knower of bases because it 
does not fulfil the second part of the definition, i.e., a wisdom that abides in a Hinayana class of realisations. 
  
There are two parts in the definition of a knower of bases:- 
1. It is conjoined with a wisdom directly realising selflessness in the continuum of 
the person who possesses it in his continuum 
2. It abides in a Hinayana class of realisations 
 
If it is a knower of bases, it must fulfil these two requirements. If you say that the wisdom realising the emptiness of the subject and object as different substantial 
entities in the continuum of a solitary realiser superior does not abide in a 
Hinayana class of realisations, then that wisdom is not a knower of bases.  
 
But the wisdom realising the emptiness of the subject and object as different 
substantial entities in the continuum of a solitary realiser superior is a knower of 
bases so it must abide in a Hinayana class of realisations. 
 
******* 
Question from student : 
Can we say that to be a superior (be it hearer superior, solitary realiser superior, bodhisattva superior or Buddha superior), one has necessarily directly realised the 
selflessness of person? 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 7 
Page 4 of 5   
Answer: 
Yes. A superior necessarily has directly realised the selflessness of person and 
directly realised the 16 aspects of the Four Noble Truths.  
 
******* 
 
The following are questions posed to the class by Geshe-la : 
 
●Is an exalted knower that abides in a Hinayana class of realisations necessarily  
a knower of bases or not? Give me an exam ple of such an exalted knower that is 
not a knower of bases. 
Student : A hearer’s path of accumulation because it is not a superior’s path. 
 
• Is the wisdom realising selflessness in the continuum of a hearer abiding on the 
path of preparation a wisdom abiding in a Hinayana class of realisations or not?  
 
• Is an exalted knower that abides in a Hinayana class of realisations in the 
continuum of a Hinayana superior necessarily a knower of bases? 
 
• The path in the continuum of a Hinayana superior, is that necessarily a knower 
of bases? 
Student:  The wisdom realising emptiness in the mental continuum of a Hinayana 
superior is not a knower of bases.  
   
Geshe-la : Doesn’t that realisation abide in the Hinayana class of realisations? OK. 
It doesn’t. But isn’t it a path in the mental continuum of a Hinayana superior? Isn’t it a Hinayana path? It is a Hinayana superior’s path, isn’t it? Is it cultivated by Hinayana superiors or not?  
 
If something is the main object of cultivation of a Hinayana superior, is it necessarily  cultivated by all Hinayana superiors?  Is the wisdom directly realising 
the emptiness of true existence in the continuum of a Hinayana superior the main object of cultivation of a Hinayana  superior or not?  
 
It is a main object of cultivation of a Hinayana superior because there are 
Hinayana superiors who take that as a main object of cultivation. Therefore it can be a main object of cultivation of a Hinayana superior. 
 
• If it is a main object of cultivation of a specific Hinayana superior, does that 
mean it is necessarily  the main object of cultivation of all Hinayana superiors? 
 
Geshe-la : If you say no, that it needs not be the main object of cultivation for all 
Hinayana superiors, then it cannot  be the main object of cultivation for this 
specific Hinayana superior. It works both ways. This is a particular instance vs. a generality. 
 
• A knower of bases that directly realises emptiness, is it any one of the three 
exalted knowers?  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 7 
Page 5 of 5   
Student : A knower of bases that directly realises emptiness. Such a thing does not 
exist.  
Geshe-la : Are you sure? 
 
• Does a knower of bases that directly realises emptiness, does that exist or not?  
Geshe-la:  If you say such a thing exists, then the knower of bases no longer needs 
to abide in the Hinayana class of realisations.  
 
It’s not a matter of getting the right answer. What is the fault in this assertion of a 
knower of bases that directly realises emptiness? You need to understand the reasoning.  
 
If you say “No,” you mean there isn’t anything that is a knower of bases that realises the emptiness of true existence? If it is a knower of bases, does that mean it necessarily  does not realise emptiness of true existence? If you say not 
necessarily so, then again that means it is possible for a knower of bases to realise emptiness! 
 
 
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Alison Wong   
Edited by Cecilia Tsong 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
Vetted by Geshe Chonyi 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 8 
Page 1 of 7 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root Verses  of Ornament for Clear Realisations  translated by Venerable Joan 
Nicell; an FPMT Masters Program Project, edition June 2007, ©Joan Nicell and 
FPMT, Inc.  Basic Program Study Manual for Maitreya’s Ornament for Clear Realizations, Chapter 4, compiled by Emily Hsu and Kok Wai Cheong; an FPMT Masters 
Program Project, edition September 2005, © FPMT, Inc. 
             Root Verses  are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added.  
 
Lesson No: 8                           Date: 29th July 2008  
 
We should abandon the three faults of the vessel when we listen to teachings. If the vessel is stained, we should clean it. If it is leaky, we should seal the leaks. If it 
is upside down, we should put it upri ght. These are analogies but you should 
know the meanings behind them.  
 
Just as there are differences in the quality of the vessels, so are there differences in the capacities and quality of the minds of the listeners. If we were to ask, “Why 
is it that some people are more intelligent than others? Why are there some people who understand the reasoning that is being used in these lessons so easily and there are some people who find it so difficult to understand?” 
 
What are the possible reasons? It is not the faults of our parents and neither is it  
up to the teachers. The answer is karma. It depends on the kind of imprints we 
had placed in our mental continua in our previous lives which affects the state of 
our minds in this life. When we do not have virtuous imprints on our mental 
continua from previous lives, then most likely we will find it more challenging and difficult to understand things immediately in this life as opposed to those people who have virtuous imprints from their past lives.  
 
This also relates to my personal experience. In the past, I compared myself to people who were more intelligent and able to understand things faster. I completely empathise with some of you, as I have experienced the discouragement that comes from comparing myself with people of higher intelligence and with 
quicker minds. But this is life. Different people have different levels of intelligence. 
It is  the result of karma. If we were discouraged by not being able to understand things immediately, what is the benefit of remaining discouraged and feeling worthless? There are no benefits whatsoever.  
 
The only way to improve the situation is to work hard and put in as much effort as possible according to our own capacity and ability. You know the story of the race between the rabbit and tortoise. The rabbit which moves faster than the tortoise rests every now and then. But the tortoise which is not able to walk so quickly 
nevertheless carries on walking without resting. The analogy is that when one 
continuously puts in the effort and works hard, never giving up like the tortoise, it will definitely be possible for one to eventually compete on an equal footing with the rabbit. My point here is not to get discouraged or feel one is not getting 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 8 
Page 2 of 7 anywhere but rather, since you have put in the effort to come here, you should try 
to pay attention and listen as attentively as you can.  
 
As I have said many times before, the main reason for not understanding is due to 
inattention in class. You are here but you don’t bother to listen to the teachings. It 
is not that you do not have the ability to do so. There are people who don’t bother to listen to you when you talk to them. Their minds seem to be somewhere else.  Generally this seems to be a feature of Asian people. Westerners seem to listen more attentively when you talk to them.  
 
Geshe-la : I am just explaining what I see. I coul d be wrong. This is only my view.  
Different people can have different views. When we go for pilgrimage, when we  try 
to explain the details of the holy places or  statues, how much do the Asians listen? 
Normally, they don’t really listen to the tour guide. But when you explain the details 
of the picture or temple to the Westerners, th eir level of attention is totally different. 
This is what I have observed.  
 
This may be due to cultural differences. I am  not really sure but it seems to be like 
that. Westerners seem more attentive to what the guide is talking about. Maybe the 
Asians are not interested. Normally, two or three people will listen to the explanation but the rest will just walk around and do their own thing.  
 
In Nepal, when I see a tour guide explaining to a group of Western tourists, all of them gather round and listen to him. Singaporeans seem to be only interested in  lunch, dinner and shopping! That is what people say. What Singaporeans need is 
good food, a good room and shopping places. The view is not so important. There is 
nothing wrong with this. Everyone has his own different way .  
 
The point is that when you listen to an explanation, you have to listen to it with as much attention as you can. I guess one of the reasons why people do not understand despite being present at the teachings is because they do not really listen. Please try. Of course when one attends lessons like this, there will be things 
that we can understand and things we may not understand immediately. But if  
we try, definitely we will get something. If we put in the effort, we will definitely achieve some result. So please try to listen with an alert mind.  
 
************** 
4. Application in Complete Aspects 
When we look at the applications in complete aspects in the simplest way, it refers to any exalted knower (or the path) in the continuum of a bodhisattva.  
 
Definition : The application in complete aspects is a bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined 
with a wisdom cultivating the aspects of the three exalted knowers through gathering them together.  
 
Boundary:  It exists from the Mahayana path of accumulation through the end of 
the continuum of a sentient being. 
 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 8 
Page 3 of 7 5. Peak Application  
The peak application has four divisions:- 
1. the peak application of the path of preparation 
2. the peak application of the path of seeing,  
3. the peak application of the path of meditation,  
4. the uninterrupted peak application 
 
Definition : A bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined with a wisdom highly transformed from 
the Mahayana path of accumulation that cultivates the three exalted knowers 
through gathering them together. 
 
Boundary:   It exists from the heat level of the Mahayana path of preparation 
through the end of the continuum of a sentient being. 
 
Peak application can be said to be superior to the application in complete aspects. 
It occurs on the Mahayana path of preparation when one has gained mastery with respect to the cultivation of the aspects of the three exalted knowers through 
gathering them together. At the Mahayana path of accumulation, the bodhisattva 
also cultivates these aspects through gathering them together but he has not yet gained mastery over that cultivation.  
 
When we posit the difference between the application in complete aspects and peak application, the difference between these two are not posited on the basis of whether one has gained mastery over the cultivation of the aspects of the 3 exalted knowers.  
 
• Whatever is a peak application is necessarily  an application in complete aspects.  
• Whatever is an application in complete aspects is not necessarily  a peak 
application. 
 
A good way to compare any two phenomena is by using the tool of the three or four possibilities. When we think through the possibilities, things will become 
clearer. When we can understand the concept of comparing these two objects, we 
can apply that to any phenomena. 
 
For example, if we compare human beings and sentient beings, how many 
possibilities are there? 
1. Is there something that is both a human being and sentient being? 
2. Is there something that is a human being but not a sentient being? 
3. Is there something that is a sentient being but not a human being? 
4. Is there something that is neither a human being nor a sentient being? 
 
When we compare A and B, then the number of possibilities are:- 
1. Is there something that is both A and B? 
2. Is there something that is A but not B? 
3. Is there something that is B but not A? 
4. Is there something neither A nor B? 
 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 8 
Page 4 of 7  
How many possibilities are there between a knower of paths and a knower of bases? 
1. Is there something that is both a knower of paths and a knower of bases? 
2. Is there something that is a knower of paths but not a knower of bases? 
3. Is there something that is a knower of bases but not a knower of paths? 
4. Is there something that is neither a knower of paths nor a knower of bases? 
 
6. Serial Application  
Definition : A bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined with a wisdom that progressively 
cultivates the aspects of the three exalted knowers for the sake of attaining 
stability in the aspects of the three exalted knowers. 
Boundary : It exists from the Mahayana path of accumulation through just prior to  
the end of the continuum of a sentient being. 
 
A serial application is basically a meditation cultivating the aspects of the three exalted knowers for the sake of attaining stability in those aspects. Once stability has been attained, one achieves the instantaneous (or momentary) application. 
 
As shown in the definition of serial application, this application cultivates the aspects of the three exalted knowers serially or progressively as compared to the application in complete aspects which cultivates the aspects of the three exalted 
knowers through gathering them together. 
 
The boundary for serial application exists from the Mahayana path of 
accumulation through just prior  to the end of the continuum of a sentient being 
and not through the end  of continuum of a sentient being. This means serial 
application does not exist at the end of the continuum of a sentient being. 
 
Serial application has 13 divisions:- 
1-6:  Serial application of the six perfections: generosity, ethics, patience, effort, concentration, and wisdom. 
7-12: Serial application of the six recollections. These are recollection of the 
Buddha Jewel, Dharma Jewel, Sangha Jewel, ethics, generosity, and gods. 
13:  Serial application of non-entitiness. This is the wisdom realising emptiness of 
true existence. 
 
We are not going into the details of these 13 divisions. We just need to know with respect to serial application what it is and where it exists.  
 
Question from student: 
Does the bodhisattva cultivate serial application before the application in complete aspects? 
Answer: 
I believe I have mentioned before that all bodhisattvas cultivate the aspects of the 
three exalted knowers through gathering them together and serially. The bodhisattva on the Mahayana path of accumulation cultivates the aspects of the 
three exalted knowers through gathering them together as well as meditates on 
those aspects progressively.  
  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 8 
Page 5 of 7  
What is the reason for me to say this? How can we tell from looking at the 
definitions? Is what I am saying clear from looking at the definitions? That is why it is important to know and memorise the definitions.   
 
The definition says “conjoined” with a wisdom. In order for something to be conjoined, two things must be present: (1) the thing that is conjoining and (2) the thing that is conjoined.  
 
For example, someone who possesses a knower of paths in his continuum, does he necessarily possess the wisdom realising emptiness? Yes, the knower of paths is necessarily the Mahayana superior’s clear realisation that is conjoined with the 
wisdom directly realising emptiness in the continuum of the person who possesses it in his continuum. If it is a Mahayana path, it is also necessarily  conjoined  with 
great compassion. The point I am trying to make is that if it is conjoined with the 
wisdom directly realising emptiness, this means there is a wisdom directly 
realising emptiness. 
 
With respect to the application in complete aspects, if it is a yoga that is conjoined 
with a wisdom cultivating the aspects of the three exalted knowers through 
gathering them together, then that wisdom must exist. Similarly if it is a yoga that 
is conjoined with a wisdom that progressively cultivates the aspects of the three  exalted knowers, then that wisdom must also exist. But this does not mean that these wisdoms that are present in the continuum of the person manifest all the 
time.  
 
For example, in the presentation of paths and grounds which we have covered 
before, during an uninterrupted path (when the bodhisattva is in meditative 
equipoise), great compassion does not manifest but does great compassion exist in 
the continuum of that person on the uninterrupted path? Yes, great compassion does exist in his continuum but it does not manifest. If that person is a bodhisattva, he possesses great compassion and bodhicitta.  
 
When “studying Buddhist philosophy” is translated into Tibetan, it means literally that we are studying definitions. When we are studying the definitions, we should be less concerned with whether the answer is “Yes” or “No” but rather we have to understand the reasoning and what the definition is trying to convey. That process 
is important as we may not understand what we are memorising. So don’t simply 
accept what I say. Check the reasoning behind what I am saying.  
 
Both the application in complete aspects and serial application exist in the 
continua of bodhisattvas. 
 
If it is an application in complete aspects, it is a bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined with a wisdom cultivating the aspects of the three exalted knowers through gathering them together. When it is conjoined with such a wisdom, the bodhisattva definitely 
has that wisdom. Similarly the bodhisattva also cultivates serial application. The 
definition for serial application is a bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined with a wisdom that progressively cultivates the aspects of the three exalted knowers for the sake of attaining stability in the aspects of the three exalted knowers. When it is 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 8 
Page 6 of 7 conjoined with a wisdom that progressively cultivates the aspects of the three 
exalted knowers, then the bodhisattva definitely possesses that wisdom too. Therefore, the bodhisattva possesses both these wisdoms.   
 
From the above explanation, is there any fault in saying that if it is a bodhisattva, the bodhisattva necessarily cultivates the aspects of the three exalted knowers through gathering them together and he also cultivates the aspects of the three exalted knowers progressively?  
 
Student : No. All bodhisattvas do this.  
 
Geshe-la : If you say all bodhisattvas do this, then what about the uninterrupted 
path at the end of the continuum of a sentient being? On the uninterrupted path at the end of the continuum of a sentient being, is there a wisdom that progressively cultivates the aspects of the three exalted knowers?  
 
Again, it is not just a matter of answering “Yes” or “No.” Your answers should be supported by reasons.  
 
The definition of serial application states that it exists from the Mahayana path of accumulation through just prior to the end of the continuum of a sentient being. 
This means that serial application does not exist at the end of the continuum of a 
sentient being.  
 
If it is a peak application, is it necessarily a serial application? The answer is no.  
If we can find an instance of peak application that is not a serial application, this 
shows the answer is no. The illustration would be the uninterrupted path at the end of the continuum of a sentient being. Do you understand why it is a peak application and not a serial application? 
 
Geshe-la : If it is a serial application, is it necessarily a peak application?  
Student : No. The illustration is the Mahayana path of accumulation. 
  
Geshe-la : If it is a Mahayana path of accumulation, is it necessarily a serial 
application?  
Student : Not necessarily. 
 
Geshe-la : If you say that, then you are saying that there is a Mahayana path of 
accumulation is not a serial application. Can you give an example? 
Student : An application of complete aspects on the Mahayana path of 
accumulation. 
 
Geshe-la : Are you saying then that the application of complete aspects and serial 
application are contradictory? 
Student : No, they are not contradictory. 
 
Geshe-la : If you say they are not contradictory, this means that there must be 
something that is both an application of complete aspects and serial application. Give me an illustration.  
  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 8 
Page 7 of 7                                                           Answer to student’s question: 
In this context, “application” refers to the bodhisattva path. The bodhisattva 
cultivates the path perfection of wisdom in order to achieve the resultant perfection of wisdom.
1 “Application” brings one to enlightenment.   
 
The bodhisattva path, the bodhisattva’s application and the path perfection of wisdom are synonymous.  
 
Geshe-la : If it is a Mahayana path of accumulation, is it necessarily a serial 
application?  
Student : Yes 
 
Geshe-la : If it is a serial application, does it necessarily cultivates the aspects of 
the three  exalted knowers serially? 
Student : Yes. 
 
Geshe-la : The application of complete aspects on the Mahayana path of 
accumulation is not a serial application. This is because the application of complete aspects on the Mahayana path of accumulation does not progressively cultivate the aspects of the three exalted knowers but it cultivates the aspects of the three exalted knowers through gathering them together. 
Student : We can have two applications at the Mahayana path of accumulation. 
 
Geshe-la : Of course, you can have both but there isn’t one mind that can do both. 
This means you need two minds. The mind that meditates on the aspects of the three exalted knowers through gathering them together does not meditate on the aspects of the three exalted knowers serially, isn’t it?  
Student : No. 
 
Geshe-la:  If you say no, then the Mahayana path of accumulation is not 
necessarily a serial application. 
 
Geshe-la : Does the application of complete aspects on the Mahayana path of 
accumulation meditate on the aspects of the three exalted knowers serially?  
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Alison Wong   
Edited by Cecilia Tsong 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
Vetted by Geshe Chonyi 
 
 
1 Please refer to the transcript for Lesson 2 on 10th July 2008.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 9 
Page 1 of 6 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root Verses  of Ornament for Clear Realisations  translated by Venerable 
Joan Nicell; an FPMT Masters Program Project, edition June 2007, ©Joan 
Nicell and FPMT, Inc.  Basic Program Study Manual for Maitreya’s Ornament for Clear Realizations, Chapter 4, compiled by Emily Hsu and Kok Wai Cheong; an FPMT Masters 
Program Project, edition September 2005, © FPMT, Inc. 
             Root Verses  are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added.  
 
Lesson No: 9                           Date: 31st July 2008  
 
The eight categories are very extensive. What we have been doing so far is looking at them in an abbreviated way. The subject matter of the eight 
categories is the hidden meaning of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, covering all 
the clear realisations. This is Maitreya’s holy speech. Having this opportunity 
to simply look at this text, to listen to the explanations given and to study and reflect on it brings tremendous benefit.  
 
We have to understand how extremely fortunate we are to obtain this human life of leisure and opportunity. On top of  that, we have met the teachings of the 
Buddha and now we have this opportunity to study this great treatise. This shows how extremely fortunate we are. Just by knowing the names of the eight 
categories and roughly knowing their meanings make this human life of ours 
very meaningful. At this time when we have some intelligence and all the favourable  conditions for us to study, we should capitalise on this opportunity to place as many imprints as we can in our minds. From our side, we should 
work hard and put in the effort to study. We should try to put aside time to 
come to class and to pay attention in class. The point is that we have to do something to ensure we do learn something.  
 
It can be said from one point of view that the topic we are studying is exactly 
what the monks are studying in the great monasteries, those great seats of 
learning. It doesn’t mean that the monks who study in the monasteries necessarily understand the topic either. Also, it does not mean that someone who is in the process of studying for their Geshe degree or who has obtained 
the title, “Geshe,”  necessarily is more knowledgeable than you. This means 
that it is possible that some of you here may have a better understanding of the eight categories than some monks.  
 
There are many people who may be better educated than us with their degrees and certificates or more proficient in the English language. But compared to them, with our knowledge of the topic we are now studying, we know more than them.  When such people look at our text, they may say, “It is in English 
but this is not English!” This is because the terms and the phraseology are 
peculiar to the study of Buddhist philosophy. If we were to show our text to someone who has never studied Buddhist philosophy, it will not make any sense to them despite their superior command of the English language. From 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 9 
Page 2 of 6 this perspective, it can be said we are, as it says in the confession prayer of the 
Thirty-five Buddhas, “higher than the high, superior to the superior.”  
 
As we gain more knowledge through our studies, it is important to remember 
that we should not allow our acquiring knowledge and understanding to 
become a condition or cause for us to become proud or arrogant. For example, when one doesn’t have any possessions or wealth, there is nothing to be attached to or be miserable about. But once one has more money and possessions, it becomes the condition for one to become more attached and 
more miserly. In the same way, in the beginning of one’s studies, when one has 
neither knowledge nor understanding, there is no basis for pride to arise. But it is possible that as one’s knowledge and understanding increase, they may become conditions for one to feel arrogant and proud. It is important that this 
does not happen. What is the fault of such arrogance? One will look down on 
and despise others. When this happens, we harm both other people and ourselves.  
 
We have to keep in mind that studying is important. We also have to remember  that the purpose of studying is to be able to subdue our minds. Our studies have to act as causes for us to subdue our mind. So although we may be “higher than the high and superior to the superior,” we should not allow that 
fact to become the condition for us to feel arrogant.  
 
Within the class, there will be people who know more and others who know 
less. If someone were to ask a question of a more knowledgeable fellow student and the  latter’s response is, “Why are you so dumb? Why don’t you get it?” 
this is wrong. It is possible this happens when the latter party is not mindful 
or attentive to the question, thinking, “There is no point explaining it to him as he won’t get it.”  
 
So when you are asked a question and you know the answer, to help the other person, you should take the time to answer. If you don’t know the answer, then just say, “Sorry, I don’t know.” There may be times when you may not feel like answering or want to answer. But we should avoid such situations when 
we can.  
 
As I always mention to you all the time, since you are already here attending 
the session, try your best to listen well. When you try your best to listen, you 
definitely will learn something. 
 
**************** 
7. Instantaneous Application (or momentary application) 
Definition : A bodhisattva’s final yoga that has attained stability in the aspects 
of the three exalted knowers.  
Boundary : This application exists only at the end of the continuum of a 
sentient being. 
 
When one is engaged in serial application, one cultivates the aspects of the 
three exalted knowers for the sake of attaining stability in those aspects by progressively or serially cultivating them. One has not attained stability yet. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 9 
Page 3 of 6 When one has attained stability in that cultivation, then one attains 
instantaneous application. From this, we can see that serial application is the cause and instantaneous application is the effect (i.e., there is a cause and effect relationship between them). These two are mutually exclusive.  
 
What is the meaning of stability? It refers to the bodhisattva’s ability to cultivate all the 173 aspects of the three exalted knowers as objects of utilisation in the shortest moment of time. There are many ways of positing the shortest moment of time. In this context, the shortest moment of time refers to 
the “shortest moment of a complete action,” which refers to the duration of a 
finger snap or the blink of an eye. (When the duration of a finger snap is divided into 65 parts, 1/65 of a finger snap is the shortest moment of time). 
 
The stability achieved by the bodhisattva in the cultivation of the aspects of the three exalted knowers means being able to cultivate those aspects in the shortest moment of a complete action (e.g. the duration of a finger snap). It does not refer to the 1/65 of a finger snap which is the shortest moment of 
time.  
 
Instantaneous application refers to the time in which the bodhisattva is able to cultivate the 173 aspects of the three exalted knowers in the shortest moment of a complete action.  
 
Instantaneous application exists only at the end of the continuum of a sentient being.  
 
Instantaneous application has four divisions but other than being divided in 
the following way, their meanings are the same:  
1. non-ripened instantaneous application 
2. ripened instantaneous application 
3. characterless instantaneous application 
4. non-dual instantaneous application 
 
8. Resultant Truth Body 
Definition : A final result attained by the strength of cultivating the aspects of 
the three exalted knowers, which is the method for attaining it. 
Boundary : This exists only on the buddha ground.  
 
Now I will talk again about the four applications to help you gain some idea of what they are, rather than positing their differences and so forth.  
 
The final object of attainment of bodhisattvas is the resultant truth body. In 
order to achieve this final object of attainment, they meditate on the three exalted knowers. The purpose of discussing the three exalted knowers is to 
help us  identify these objects of cultivation of the bodhisattvas. In order to 
help us understand the kinds of minds or knowers within the bodhisattvas who are meditating on the three exalted knowers, we look at the four applications.  
 
How do the bodhisattvas cultivate the aspects of the three exalted knowers?  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 9 
Page 4 of 6 • At the time of the application of complete aspects, they cultivate those 
aspects of the three exalted knowers through gathering them together.  
• Peak application refers to the time when the bodhisattvas have gained 
mastery over this cultivation through gathering them together.  
● At the time of serial application, the bodhisattvas cultivate the aspects of 
the three exalted knowers serially or progressively.  
 
• When the bodhisattvas have attained stability in the progressive cultivation 
of the aspects of the three exalted knowers, that is the time the bodhisattvas 
achieve instantaneous application which exist only at the end of continuum of a sentient being. At this time the bodhisattvas achieve the ability to bring 
to mind all the 173 aspects of the three exalted knowers within the duration 
of a single finger snap. (Whether the bodhisattvas actually bring all the 173 aspects to  mind despite having the ability to do so is another question). 
 
Instantaneous application refers to the uninterrupted path at the end of the continuum of a sentient being. At that time, the bodhisattva is abiding in meditative equipoise focusing on emptiness. The bodhisattva directly perceives emptiness but he cannot perceive conventionalities. There are many aspects of 
the three exalted knowers that are conventionalities. When the bodhisattva 
achieves the path of thorough release, i.e., when the bodhisattva achieves the resultant truth body, he will be able to perceive conventionalities whilst remaining in  meditative equipoise focusing on emptiness. We cannot see anything when we close our eyes but the Buddha can see everything even with 
his eyes closed.  
 
In summary, when we look at these eight categories, we have the resultant 
truth body as the final object of attainment and the three exalted knowers as 
the objects of cultivation in order to achieve the resultant truth body. The 
mind that cultivates those three exalted knowers is the four applications. 
 
How does the bodhisattva meditate on the aspects of the three exalted knowers 
in order to achieve the resultant truth body? The bodhisattvas cultivate the 
aspects of the three exalted knowers through gathering them together. The bodhisattva also does so by progressively cultivating them. The definition of the resultant truth body states that it is, “ A final result attained by the strength 
of cultivating the aspects of the three exalted knowers, which is the method for 
attaining it” . The culmination then of the cultivation of the aspects of the three 
exalted knowers is  the attainment of  the resultant truth body which is the 
final result attained through the strength of such cultivation, “ which is the 
method for attaining it ”. 
 
The resultant truth body has four divisions:- 
1. nature body 
2. enjoyment body 
3. emanation body 
4. exalted wisdom truth body 
These are the four bodies we usually refer to. The resultant truth body is the 
same as the Buddha and it encompasses many things. The wisdom truth body, 
on the other hand, is not as extensive as the resultant truth body.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 9 
Page 5 of 6  
Definition of a nature body :  It is the final sphere of reality possessing the two 
purities. The two purities refer to the purity of natural stains and the purity of 
adventitious stains. There are two types of nature body:- 
1. The nature body that is free from natural stains.  
2. The nature body that is free from adventitious stains. 
 
According to the Autonomy Middle Way School, the nature body is posited as two. The nature body that is free from natural stains is emptiness and is an 
ultimate truth while the nature body that is free from adventitious stains is a 
conventional truth. Natural stains here refer to true existence while adventitious stains here refer to the conception of true existence (i.e., the mind that is grasping at true existence). 
 
Definition of an enjoyment body : It is a final form body possessing the five 
certainties: 
1. Certainty of abode: it abides only in Akanista  
2. Certainty of body: it is adorned with complete manifest signs and exemplifications (or the major marks and minor signs) 
3. Certainty of retinue: it is surrounded only by bodhisattva superiors 
4. Certainty of doctrine: it teaches only the Mahayana Dharma 
5. Certainty of time: it remains as long as samsara is not empty1 
 
Question from student:  
Is the resultant truth body posited by the Yogic Autonomy Middle Way School and the Consequence Middle Way School the same? 
Answer : Yes.  
 
Question from student: 
Is instanteous application the same as the vajra-like meditative stabilisation we learnt in the last module? 
Answer: Yes. 
 
Question: 
Is the duration of an uninterrupted path a single finger snap? 
Answer: 
I didn’t say that. Instantaneous application refers to achieving the ability to manifest all 173 aspects of the three exalted knowers in the shortest moment of a complete action. That does not mean instantanteous application only 
exists for that duration.  
 
Question from student :  
The presentation of the Ornament for Clear Realisations  is in accordance with 
the view of the Yogic Autonomy Middle Way School. Which tenet system is the basis for the presentation of The Tathagata Essence?  
Answer: That is presented in accordance with the view of the Consequence Middle Way School. 
 
Question from student :  
What is the measure of a Mahayana path? 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 9 
Page 6 of 6  
Answer:  
The measure of the Mahayana path is the path included in the continuum of a 
Mahayanist.  
A Hinayana path is not restricted to just the path in the continuum of a Hinayanist as it can also exist in the continuum of a Mahayanist. Positing that a Hinayana path is included only within the continuum of a Hinayanist is insufficient.  
 
Answer to student’s question:  
In the continuum of a Hinayanist, it is possible for them to have the realisation of emptiness. But that realisation is not a Mahayana path.   
 
Questions for review for own self-study
What are the eight categories? What are they individually? Think about them. But that’s not the question yet! 
To help us to understand the eight categories more clearly, consider the 
followings: 
1. Is there a phenomenon that is just 1 out of the 8 categories?  
2. Is there a phenomenon that is just 2 out of the 8 categories? 
3. Is there a phenomenon that is just 3 out of the 8 categories? 
4. Is there a phenomenon that is just 4 out of the 8 categories? 
5. Is there a phenomenon that is just 5 out of the 8 categories? 
6. Is there a phenomenon that is just 6 out of the 8 categories? 
7. Is there a phenomenon that is just 7 out of the 8 categories? 
8. Is there a phenomenon that is all the 8 categories?  
For each question, please give an illustration.  For example, for the first 
question, you should give an illustration of that phenomenon and the reason for your answer. You should also give illustrations why it is not the other seven categories. You should do the same for all the questions.  
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme;  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Alison Wong   
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong 
 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee 
 
Vetted with Geshe Chonyi  
 
                                                           
1 Please refer to page 19 of the BP Study Manual .  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 10 
Page 1 of 7 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root Verses  of Ornament for Clear Realisations  translated by Venerable 
Joan Nicell; an FPMT Masters Program Project, edition June 2007, ©Joan 
Nicell and FPMT, Inc.  Basic Program Study Manual for Maitreya’s Ornament for Clear Realizations, Chapter 4, compiled by Emily Hsu and Kok Wai Cheong; an FPMT Masters 
Program Project, edition September 2005, © FPMT, Inc. 
             Root Verses  are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added.  
 
Lesson No: 10                         Date: 7th August  2008  
 
We usually meditate for about five minutes at the beginning of each class. Instead of simply sitting there in silence and letting our minds space out, we 
should try to make these five minutes worthwhile by thinking of something 
that will transform the mind into virtue. Whether you use the five minutes to set your motivation, visualise the Buddha or to reflect on what we have studied in class, please try to use that time to transform the mind into virtue.  
 
For us, it is our non-virtuous states of mind that are manifesting most of the time so it is important that we generate some positive thoughts during these five minutes to transform our minds into virtue. It is extremely important to 
always adjust our motivation and to ensure that we have a proper and correct 
motivation at all times in everything we do particularly when it comes to studying the Dharma.  
 
As mentioned in the teachings, everything depends on our motivation. Whether what we study or learn here can actually benefit us in the future depends entirely on our motivation. Whether we would be able to do something for the teachings of the Buddha in the future with what we have learnt also depends on our motivation. I am not going to explain how to set the motivation as it is 
covered in the Lam Rim  which most of you already know. Since you know the 
Lam Rim , you have to apply and practise it. We must never forget the need to  
have a good motivation in whatever we do. The importance of motivation is 
always mentioned in the teachings especially at the beginning of any activity or  practice.  
 
It is also important to pay attention when you are taking part in a session like this. Since you are already here, you should try as much as possible to listen attentively. When you listen well, you will definitely be able to learn something and to plant imprints in your mind. Even if nothing spectacular happens in 
this life, there will definitely be hope in future lives depending on the imprints 
you are able to plant now.  
 
You already know all these things that I am mentioning here. It is possible that 
sometimes you may think, “I already know all this. He is saying the same thing 
again so it does not apply to me.” Because of having such an attitude, you do not pay much or any attention to what is said and the result is that nothing  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 10 
Page 2 of 7  
changes. This is a mistake. Whenever we listen to teachings or advice, we 
think it is general advice directed at everyone else but not oneself. This is also a mistake. We should think that whatever is being said is advice directed at 
oneself personally. We do not have to worry about others. We should think, 
“This is advice for me. Is this something I already know? If it is, am I following it? Am I changing for the better?” We should have such an attitude.  
 
********* 
 
Question from student :  
The truth body has two divisions but it seems that here the resultant truth 
body has four divisions? 
 
Answer:  
The resultant truth body has two divisions: (1) the truth body and (2) the form body. The truth body has two divisions: (i) nature body (or nature truth body) and (ii)  wisdom truth body and the form body has two divisions: (i) emanation body and (ii) enjoyment body.   
 
● The wisdom truth body is an exalted knower (consciousness) that knows all 
phenomena directly.  
● The resultant truth body is not  the same as the truth body. We cannot say 
that the truth body has four divisions.  
● It is the resultant truth body (which is mutually inclusive with Buddha) that 
has four divisions.  
 
Question from student :  
Does “resultant truth body” and “resultant body” mean the same thing? 
Answer:  
Yes, we can say so. 
 
Question from student : 
Are there any conditions where the resultant truth body is synonymous with 
the nature truth body? 
Answer: 
No, the resultant truth body is mutually inclusive and synonymous with 
Buddha. 
 
Question from student : 
Is the exalted knower of all aspects mutually inclusive with the wisdom truth body? 
Answer: 
Yes, they are mutually inclusive. 
 
Definition of an enjoyment body : A final form body possessing the five 
certainties. 
1. Certainty of abode: it abides only in Akanista.  
2. Certainty of body: it is adorned with the complete manifest signs and exemplifications (major marks and minor signs). 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 10 
Page 3 of 7 3. Certainty of retinue: it is surrounded only by bodhisattva superiors. 
4. Certainty of doctrine: it teaches only the Mahayana Dharma. 
5. Certainty of time: it remains as long as cyclic existence is not empty. 
 
Definition of an emanation body : A final form body that is distinguished by not 
possessing the five certainties.  
 
The emanation body has three divisions:- 
1. the artisan emanation body (Shakyamuni Buddha once emanated as a 
skilled musician playing the guitar in order to subdue the king of the smell 
eaters or gandharvas).  
2. incarnate emanation body (which refers to the Buddha emanating in various forms such as animals, to benefit sentient beings) 
3. supreme emanation body (which refers to the body in which the Buddha  
descends into a world system performing the 12 deeds there) and in 
accordance with the Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras , there is a fourth 
division: 
4. great enlightenment emanation body (illustrated by the Conqueror Amitabha and Miktrupa). 
 
The resultant truth body has four divisions and from the perspective of the support and supported of these four divisions, the nature truth body is the support and the enjoyment body, emanation body and exalted wisdom truth 
body are the supported.  
• The nature truth body supports the wisdom truth body. 
• The wisdom truth body is the empowering condition for the enjoyment body. 
• The enjoyment body acts as the empowering condition for the emanation 
body.  
An illustration: The emptiness of our minds is the support while our minds are that which is supported. The mind’s emptiness is the support of the mind.  As 
taught in The Tathagata Essence , the emptiness of the person is the basis of 
designation of a person. 
 
From the perspective of the supreme versus the lower of the four divisions; 
• the wisdom truth body is the supreme because it is the object of utilisation 
of the buddhas only. Only the buddhas can directly realise this wisdom truth body.  
• the complete enjoyment body is the object of utilisation of the bodhisattvas 
superiors only. Other beings cannot directly perceive the complete enjoyment 
body.  
• the supreme emanation body is the object of utilisation of ordinary beings 
with pure karma.  
These three bodies are discussed from the perspective of the kind of persons 
who can directly perceive them. 
 
Definition of wisdom truth body : An exalted knower that is the final insight 
regarding modes and varieties.  
Note: An exalted knower in the continuum of a buddha superior, an exalted 
knower of all aspects and wisdom truth body are synonymous. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 10 
Page 4 of 7 This completes the explanation of the eight categories.  
 
Question from student: 
Amitabha Buddha is an illustration of the great enlightenment emanation body 
which is defined as a final form body distinguished by not  possessing the five 
certainties. Doesn’t Amitabha Buddha possess the marks and signs and isn’t 
he surrounded by bodhisattva superiors?  
Answer: 
 There is no pervasion because Amitabha Buddha is also surrounded by many 
ordinary beings and not necessarily by bodhisattva superiors alone. 
 
Question from student : 
How about the certainty of prevailing till samsara ends?  
Answer: 
If that body in question does not possess any one of the five certainties, that 
means that body does not possess all the five certainties. If it is not a complete 
enjoyment body but it is a form body, then it can only be an emanation body.  
 
Question from student : 
Isn’t Akanista the highest of form realms? It is not even in the formless realms. 
Why would the Buddha abide there? 
Answer : 
The Akanista (which means “Nothing below”) mentioned here is not the Akanista of the form realms. It is a different one which is outside of samsara. 
 
Definition of the enlightened activity of the wisdom truth body : An extremely 
positive quality arising from the empowering condition that is the wisdom truth body which is its respective cause. The enlightened activity of the wisdom truth body has two divisions:- 
1. the enlightened activities existing in the object of the action (which refer to the virtue in the continua of the disciples) and  
2. the enlightened activities existing in the agent (which refer to the virtue in the continua of the buddhas).  
 
The boundaries  exist prior to entering the path all the way to the buddha 
ground. 
 
• If it is a virtue in the continua of the disciples, can it necessarily be posited 
as the buddhas’ enlightened activity?  
• If it is a virtue in the continuum of a sentient being, is that necessarily an 
enlightened activity of the wisdom truth body?  
• The higher rebirths of a god or human being - is that an enlightened activity 
of the buddhas?  
 
It is difficult to come to a conclusion regarding these points. Please think about them based on the definitions, illustrations and divisions. It seems that one 
has to say that every single virtue, from the smallest virtue existing in the 
continuum of a sentient being, is an enlightened activity of the buddhas. If it is a virtue in the continuum of a sentient being, is it an enlightened activity of 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 10 
Page 5 of 7 the buddhas? If it is the enlightened activity of the buddhas, what is the fault 
of saying that?  
 
The buddhas’ enlightened activities are spontaneous and uninterrupted. It 
does not arise from a motivation, “I want to do this” nor does it require any 
exertion or effort.  An analogy is given in the Ornament for the Mahayana 
Sutras : the sound of the drum that comes naturally without anyone beating it 
in the Heavens of the Thirty-Three which comes in the form of teachings like the Four Noble Truths and so forth. It is said the Buddha’s enlightened activities are similar to this drum that does not require to be beaten.  
 
If we say that the buddhas’ enlightened activities are spontaneous but are not uninterrupted, then it is possible that there are times that the buddhas’ enlightened activities are not emanating. But that is not the case, the buddhas’ enlightened activities are there all the time.  
 
There is another analogy from the Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras:  space 
contains everything and within this space, worlds are formed and disintegrate. When one world is formed and disintegrates, another world will be formed within this space. Similarly, the Buddha, who is always in meditative equipoise 
focussing on emptiness, never arising from that state, is nevertheless able to 
work for the benefit for all sentient beings.  
 
The buddhas’ enlightened activities are always engaging sentient beings 
uninterruptedly.  We must understand these two points: from the buddhas’ 
side, their enlightened activities are always (1) spontaneous and (2) uninterrupted. The buddhas emanate in countless forms - as sentient beings and non-sentient beings such as rivers, bridges, water, fire etc. - to benefit 
sentient beings. The buddhas manifest in forms that suit the dispositions of 
sentient beings. That is the buddhas’ power and qualities. There are many scriptures and teachings illustrating this.  
 
********** 
(Discussion regarding the following questions given in the last class:  
Is there a phenomenon that is just 1 out of the 8 categories?  
Is there a phenomenon that is just 2 out of the 8 categories? 
Is there a phenomenon that is just 3 out of the 8 categories? 
Is there a phenomenon that is just 4 out of the 8 categories? 
Is there a phenomenon that is just 5 out of the 8 categories? 
Is there a phenomenon that is just 6 out of the 8 categories? 
Is there a phenomenon that is just 7 out of the 8 categories? 
Is there a phenomenon that is all the 8 categories?) 
 
(Geshe-la checked with the class the number of possibilities they found).  
 
Answer from student A: 
The wisdom directly perceiving impermanence in the continuum of a hearer superior is only a knower of bases and is not any of the other seven categories.  
 
Answer from student B: The Mahayana path of accumulation is only the serial 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 10 
Page 6 of 7 application and application of complete aspects i.e. 2 out of 8.  
 
Geshe-la: Do you accept this illustration? If not, is the Mahayana path of 
accumulation something else other than these two? 
 
Refutation by student C:  No, because the wisdom directly realising selflessness 
in the mental continuum of a bodhisattva on the Mahayana path of 
accumulation can also be an application in all aspects, serial application and a knower of bases. 
 
Geshe-la : Isn’t the person on the path of accumulation an ordinary being? 
 
Student C : But this is not the direct realisation of emptiness, just a direct 
realisation of selflessness. The Mahayana superior has to have the direct realisation of emptiness……. 
 
Geshe-la:  Does the hearer on the hearer’s path of accumulation directly realise 
selflessness?  
 
Student C:  No, because he has not reached the path of seeing. My 
understanding is that to be a superior, you would necessarily have to achieve the path of seeing (to directly realise selflessness).  
 
Geshe-la:  So, if you have not achieved the path of seeing, you haven’t realised 
selflessness directly, isn’t it? 
 
Student C : For the Hinayana superior, to di rectly realise selflessness you have 
to achieve the path of seeing but it is different for the Mahayana path. On the 
Mahayana path, you can realise selflessness before the path of seeing…. 
 
Geshe-la : In order to achieve the path of seeing, one has to directly realise 
selflessness. Having said that, does the person on the Mahayana path of 
accumulation directly realise selflessness? Is that person on the Mahayana 
path of accumulation a superior being? 
 
Student C : According to this school, to be a Mahayana superior, you need to 
enter the Mahayana path of seeing so before that you are not (a superior being).  
Then, for the Hinayanists, when you realise selfless directly, you are a superior being on the  Hinayana path, not the Mahayana path.  
 
Geshe-la:  Everyone should think about this. This is not just a discussion 
between me and (Student C).  
 
The wisdom directly realising selflessness in the continuum of a person on the 
Mahayana path of accumulation is a knower of bases – does this illustration exist?   
 
(Student C changes the illustration to the wisdom directly realising the Four 
Noble Truths in the continuum of a person on the Mahayana path of 
accumulation is a knower of bases) 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 10 
Page 7 of 7  
The wisdom directly realising the Four Noble Truths in the continuum of a 
person on the Mahayana path of accumulation is a knower of bases. Does this illustration exist? Is this person a superior being or not? 
 
If he is not a superior being, then he is not a knower of bases, isn’t it? Therefore, we can say that Mahayana path of accumulation is only the serial application and application of complete aspects. 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Alison Wong   
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong 
 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee 
 
Vetted with Geshe Chonyi 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 11 
Page 1 of 7 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root Verses  of Ornament for Clear Realisations  translated by Venerable 
Joan Nicell; an FPMT Masters Program Project, edition June 2007, ©Joan 
Nicell and FPMT, Inc.  Basic Program Study Manual for Maitreya’s Ornament for Clear Realizations, Chapter 4, compiled by Emily Hsu and Kok Wai Cheong; an FPMT Masters 
Program Project, edition September 2005, © FPMT, Inc. 
             Root Verses  are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added.  
 
Lesson No: 11                         Date: 12th August 2008  
 
Do you have any questions regarding the eight categories? 
 
Question:   
What is the difference between peak application of the path of preparation, peak application of the path of seeing and peak application of the path of meditation? 
Answer :  
• If it is a peak application of the path of preparation, then it has to be the 
path of preparation. 
• If it is a peak application of the path of seeing, then it has to be the path of 
seeing. 
• If it is a peak application of the path of meditation, then it has to be the path 
of meditation. 
Your question can then be reduced to what is the difference between these three paths.  
 
Question :  
Is there any difference between uninterrupted peak application and 
instantaneous application? 
Answer: 
We can say that uninterrupted peak application and instantaneous application 
are mutually inclusive but we need to check whether there is any fault in stating that.  
 
Question: 
Does this mean the uninterrupted peak application exists from the heat level of the path of preparation? 
Answer : 
The boundary of the uninterrupted peak application is the end of the 
continuum of a sentient being.  The uninterrupted peak application is mutually inclusive with an exalted wisdom at the end of the continuum of a sentient being.  
 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 11 
Page 2 of 7  
Question: 
The boundaries then for uninterrupted peak application and instantaneous 
application are the same but are they the same thing? 
Answer: 
Yes, if they are mutually inclusive.  
 
Question: 
What is the duration of an instantaneous application?  
Answer:  
There is no specific time span for the instantaneous application. Instantaneous application is the uninterrupted path which is the final antidote to the knowledge obstructions.  
 
Question :  
Does that mean the end of the continuum of a sentient being can last a long time? 
Answer: 
The end of the continuum of a sentient being is not necessarily an 
uninterrupted path. Therefore, it follows then that it is quite difficult to posit the actual time span of an instantaneous application.  
 
When we look at the uninterrupted peak application, is that necessarily an 
uninterrupted path? Not necessarily.  
 
The end of the continuum of a sentient being is not necessarily an 
uninterrupted path because during the end of the continuum of this sentient 
being, there can exist the conventional mind generation (bodhicitta) and so 
forth.     
 
However, the end of the continuum of a sentient being is necessarily an uninterrupted peak application.  
 
Geshe-la: Do you understand what I am saying? I can say that two or three of you may know what I am talking about but the majority of you look like you don’t understand. If you are confused or  don’t understand, ask. Did you read? 
Did you do your homework? Did you think about the topic? I don’t know. I can see interest from some of you but the majority…..I am not sure. 
 
Question: 
Is this “end” of the continuum of a sentient being the shortest moment of time or the shortest moment of an action because “end” suggests to me one moment of mind? 
Answer:  
If we posit that time span to be “a moment of a complete action,” that is fine because that has various durations.  
 
When we say “the uninterrupted path at the end of the continuum of a sentient being lasts for a moment of a complete action,” that action refers to 
the removal of the obstructions to omniscience (or knowledge obstructions). 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 11 
Page 3 of 7 The moment of the complete action refers to the time taken for this  
uninterrupted path to overcome the obstructions to omniscience. That time span would vary.  
 
We are not  saying that “the uninterrupted path at the end of the continuum of 
a sentient being” lasts for the shortest  moment of a complete action. Rather, we 
are saying it lasts for “moment of a complete action.” 
 
The uninterrupted path at the end of the continuum of a sentient being is essentially a meditative equipoise focussing on emptiness. One becomes a 
buddha within that meditative equipoise.  
 
For a sentient being at the uninterrupted path at the end of the continuum of 
a sentient being, only emptiness appears in the continuum of that sentient being and conventional phenomena do not appear. Only a buddha can perceive 
both emptiness and conventional phenomena simultaneously.  
 
On that uninterrupted path at the end of the continuum of a sentient being, 
there comes a moment of time within that meditative equipoise focussing on 
emptiness when the sentient being can directly perceive conventional 
phenomena. That is when that sentient being becomes a buddha and achieves the path of thorough release (path of no more learning). 
 
Question :  
Is there an exalted knower of all aspects that is not necessarily a knower of paths? 
Answer:  
Why not? The eye consciousness of a buddha superior is an exalted knower of 
all aspects but not necessarily a knower of paths.  
 
Geshe-la: I say that but you have to thin k whether there is any problem with my 
illustration .  
 
Do you accept that? The exalted knower of all aspects is the omniscient mind. 
Based on the definitions of an exalted knower of all aspects and the knower of paths, is the illustration I have given a knower of paths or not? Is the buddha superior an exalted knower of all aspects? Is the buddha superior a Mahayana arya exalted knower? 
 
(Responses from students are inaudible ).  
 
You should try to attempt answering these questions. On the basis of knowing the eight categories and their definitions, you have to analyse them. From my 
side I can give you the answer straightaway but if you do not think about it, 
even though I give you the answer, it will never stay in your mind. You will not understand it.  
 
When you analyse the question yourself, your understanding will become very firm and you will not forget it. When it comes to studying this text, critical analysis is important. The conclusion that you achieve through your own 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 11 
Page 4 of 7 analysis will remain in your mind. When you do not analyse it yourself, then it 
will be difficult. I can give you the answer but when someone asks you a question, you may not be able to answer or explain it. This is the problem.  
 
For example, when someone asks, “If it is an exalted knower of all aspects, is it necessarily a knower of paths?” The answer should be “Yes.” But it is not sufficient just to say that. When I push you further, you become unsure of yourself.  
 
Geshe-la: Then that is not “Yes.”  
 
Question: 
The wisdom truth body and exalted knower of all aspects are mutually 
inclusive. What about the exalted knower of all aspects and the nature body? 
 
Answer:  
The exalted knower of all aspects and nature (truth) body are mutually exclusive.  
 
Geshe-la : What is the relationship between the wisdom truth body and the 
nature (truth) body? Are they mutually exclusive?  
 
Student : Yes, they are mutually exclusive.  
 
Geshe-la:  Since that is so, then there isn’t any common locus between this two, 
isn’t it?  
 
I did explain earlier about the four bodies, didn’t I? I talked about the two divisions of the nature body, which is defined as a final sphere possessing the 
two purities:  
1. The nature body that is a factor of purity in being free from natural stains. 
2. The nature body that is a factor of purity in being free from adventitious 
stains. 
I also talked about the wisdom truth body which is mutually inclusive with the 
exalted knower of all aspects. Having said that, is there something that is both  
a nature truth body and a wisdom truth body? 
 
Student’s response : Yes, a truth body is both the nature truth body and the 
wisdom truth body. 
 
Geshe-la : The nature truth body is divided into two. Is the truth body both of 
these divisions or not?   
 
Student : (Inaudible)  
 
Geshe-la:  That means there are four bodies? 
 
The nature truth body that is a factor of purity in being free from natural stains and the wisdom truth body are mutually exclusive.  The nature body is 
a permanent phenomenon while the wisdom truth body is a functioning thing. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 11 
Page 5 of 7  
Why is the nature body a permanent phenomenon? What is the definition of 
permanence? Is the nature body that is a factor of purity in being free from natural stain necessarily permanent? If it is emptiness, is it necessarily 
permanent? Is the mind’s emptiness of true existence emptiness?  
 
It is a permanent phenomenon. But the mind undergoes change in each and 
every single moment. If that is the case, then the emptiness of the mind will change in each and every single moment. When the person of this life dies, the 
emptiness of this person of this life ceases to exist, doesn’t it? Does this mean 
emptiness can cease to exist? 
 
Student : Selflessness can be divided into permanent and impermanent 
phenomena. 
 
Geshe-la : If it is selfless, is it necessarily either one of these?   
 
Geshe-la : Is there something that is all the four bodies (i.e. divisions of the 
resultant truth body)? 
 
Student : Yes. The illustration is the Buddha residing in Akanista sitting on the 
throne that is the emanation of himself. 
 
Geshe-la:  Are you saying that the throne is an emanation body? Is the 
Buddha’s throne a buddha? Is the Buddha’s hair a buddha? 
 
Are these four bodies separate? This follows that there is something that is matter, consciousness and non-associated compositional factor. According to your illustration, the four bodies become only three because form and consciousness are mutually inclusive. 
 
Question :  
According to this school, is the mind’s emptiness and the emptiness of the mind the same? 
 
Answer: We are not looking at the difference between the emptiness of the mind and the mind that is empty. We are saying that the mind’s emptiness and emptiness of the mind are the same. Both objects in question are emptiness, not the mind. If you are comparing emptiness and the mind, then there is a difference. 
 
Geshe-la : Is there a difference between the mind’s emptiness and the mind that 
is empty of true existence? 
 
Do you have any further clarifications about the 8 categories or not? Has 
anyone found a phenomenon which is five out of the eight categories? 
 
Student’s response: (inaudible) 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 11 
Page 6 of 7  
Geshe-la : Is the uninterrupted path, which is at the end of the continuum of a 
sentient being, is that a knower of bases or not? 
 
Student :  An illustration of a phenomenon that is five out of the eight out of the 
eight categories: The wisdom directly perceiving selflessness in the continuum 
of a sentient being at the end of the continuum of a sentient being. 
 
Geshe-la : Anything that is just four out of the eight categories? 
 
Student’s response: (inaudible) 
 
Geshe-la : If it is a Buddha’s exalted knower, is it necessarily a knower of bases? 
 
Student : To illustrate there is a phenomenon that is just three out of the eight 
categories: The bodhisattva’s cultivation of the aspects of the three exalted 
knowers on the path of preparation. 
 
(Geshe-la points out wrong terminology of this illustration).  
 
Geshe-la : If you say it is the Mahayana path of preparation, then, yes, that can 
be the application in complete aspects, peak application and serial application.  
 
Student : The wisdom directly perceiving selflessness of person in the 
continuum of a superior on the Mahayana path of preparation, is that a knower of bases? 
 
Geshe-la:  Yes. The wisdom directly perceiving selflessness in the continuum of 
someone on the Mahayana path of preparation, is that a knower of bases?  
 
Geshe-la: What would you say if someone asks you that, what are you going to say? 
 
Student:  Yes. 
 
Geshe-la: If I say, “No,”  what is yo ur logic? How are you going to prove it?  
  
Student’s response : (inaudible) 
 
Geshe-la : It is not a knower of bases because it is not an exalted wisdom 
conjoined with the wisdom directly realising selflessness. In the first place, the illustration doesn’t exist.  
 
(An exchange of “Yes” and “No” ensues between Geshe-la and a student). 
 
Geshe-la: You can’t simply say “Yes.” You have to debate and give your reason. 
 
Student: Yes, (the illustration exists). It follows that there are no arhat hearers 
after generating bodhicitta on the Mahayana path of accumulation.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 11 
Page 7 of 7 Geshe-la: Yes, I agree with that. In this system, there are three final goals. This 
arhat is not going to get enlightened. The arhat will not enter the bodhisattva path.  
 
Student: But in the Autonomy Middle Way School system, there are three final vehicles but one final goal.   
 
Geshe-la: Yes, but he is not going on that path, only this much…. 
 
Student: When he arises from his meditative equipoise upon attaining arhatship (foe destroyer)…. 
 
Geshe-la: That’s it. He is not entering the Mahayana path.   
 
Student: Can, ah? 
 
Geshe-la: He is not going. 
 
Geshe-la addresses the class: Don’t believe he is right or that what I am saying 
is the correct thing. I am just debating  according to the level but don’t believe 
what I am saying is right.  
 
Student: That would mean there are three final vehicles and not one final vehicle.  
 
Geshe-la: There is one final vehicle, you can say that. 
 
Student: If there is one final vehicle, that means the hearer arhat and the solitary realiser arhat upon arising from meditative equipoise will necessarily enter the Mahayana path.  
 
Geshe-la: No. Not necessarily. There is one final vehicle but it doesn’t necessarily mean everyone will go there. E.g. there is also someone who is stuck in the hell realms.  
 
Geshe-la: Don’t believe this. I am just  making up this logic for the debate.  
 
Ven. Gyurme: In debate, when Geshe-la throws wrong reasoning at you and 
you think that it is right, that means your understanding is incomplete. That 
is the point of what Geshe-la is trying to do here .  
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Alison Wong   
Edited by Cecilia Tsong 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee 
Vetted by Geshe Chonyi  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 12 
Page 1 of 8 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root Verses  of Ornament for Clear Realisations  translated by Venerable 
Joan Nicell; an FPMT Masters Program Project, edition June 2007, ©Joan 
Nicell and FPMT, Inc.  Basic Program Study Manual for Maitreya’s Ornament for Clear Realizations, Chapter 4, compiled by Emily Hsu and Kok Wai Cheong; an FPMT Masters 
Program Project, edition September 2005, © FPMT, Inc. 
             Root Verses  are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added.  
 
Lesson No: 12                        Date: 14th August  2008  
 
It is not easy to study Buddhist philosophy. It is challenging. During our studies, whether we understand everything or not, the point is not to be 
discouraged but rather we should have the determination to carry on.  
 
It is very important to use reasoning and analysis when we study this text. In 
many of the past sessions, we have been analysing this topic from many 
different angles. In the beginning, this process is challenging and is not easy. 
But once we understand and get the “feel” of the process of reasoning and analysis, as it becomes more manageable, we will not find the process so difficult. We will be able to approach the topic from different angles and not 
exhaust the various means of looking at the topic.  
 
We will benefit from being used to this process. Our minds become more active 
and alert and our memory becomes clearer. If we continue analysing the 
subject from various angles, we would be able to use our minds in the same 
way to analyse and to think about various issues. It will also help us in our old 
age because when the mind is able to think in this way, the memory will be very stable even as we age.   
 
Another point is that the more we analyse the chosen topic in this way, the clearer will be our understanding of the topic. Our familiarity with the topic will help us in our meditation.   
 
We have been trying to look at the topic from different angles through debating and asking questions. That is important. But we should understand that it is difficult and challenging to get used to this process in the beginning. But until we get it, we should not be discouraged. 
 
Geshe-la : When we learn to play chess for the first time, we have to learn how to 
move the various pieces – where the king goes, where the queen goes, where the horse goes and so forth. In the beginning when we play chess, it is quite boring because we will always lose. It was the same for me. I didn’t know the rules 
very well and when I played, my oppone nt was so clever in using  different 
ways to attack me. I couldn’t move my king,  etc. It was quite difficult to develop 
the interest in wanting to play continually. I always lost and didn’t know how to attack the other person.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 12 
Page 2 of 8  
But once you play many times and improve, you will gain the interest of wanting 
to play again and again. All games are like that.  
 
It is the same with studying Buddhist phil osophy - how to get the logic, how to 
think, how to debate. Once you have the inte rest, you will enjoy it. It is extremely 
difficult at the beginning because you cannot see the points and understand the 
meaning and it becomes boring.  
 
It was also like that when I first studied  philosophy in the monastery (at Kopan). 
It was not easy in the beginning as I didn’t know what I was doing for almost six  years. I memorised the definitions by  heart but I didn’t know their meanings. 
When I attended the debate, it was difficult because I didn’t know what the 
other party was talking about. It was extremely boring.  
 
After I moved to Sera, I had a difficult time for almost a year as I didn’t know 
how to debate and my opponent was alwa ys better than me. The good debaters 
don’t want to debate with you and the only debate partner you can get is the lousy one. It was extremely difficult to improve yourself. When you are debating, you have to stand and many people can ask you questions at the same time. If 
your question is not good, the others will push you out. 
 
It is not easy. It takes time. I am not sure  how one gets the logic but it does take 
time. But once you are into it , it becomes easier and peop le don’t need to tell you 
what to think and what to do. You automatically know what to do.   
 
Here I can see that not many people can get it. Maybe 3, 4 or 5 of you are using 
your brains a little bit. I am trying to show you part of the process in the past 
few lessons but I am not sure whether you have any interest or not. I do not know how beneficial it is.  
 
When I was in the monastery, the class started with 40 people. After five to ten years we were left with about 30 people. When we graduated, there were only  15 of us. Out of the 15, only five passed  the exams. We studied full time, we had 
the best teachers and all the conditions were there but somehow not everyone can complete their studies. There were obstacles as some fell sick, some had 
money problems and had to miss classes. He re it also like that and it is not so 
easy.  
 
We have to make strong prayers and to try ou r best. Definitely, it is very difficult. 
We have the good karma to come to class to listen to the teachings. So try your best as much as possible.  
 
In studying Buddhist philosophy, we shouldn’t only be interested in finding  the answers but rather we should understand the reasoning behind them. If our understanding is based on knowing the reasons, then our understanding will be firm and stable and this will help our minds to be more active and more  
analytical. Generally, people are just looking for the answers and are happy 
with the “yes” and “no” answers without really understanding the reasoning behind those answers. That won’t help one’s memory and over time, the power  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 12 
Page 3 of 8  
of our minds will deteriorate. We should also understand that whatever we are 
doing here, we have to think of our future lives. Needless to say, whatever we do now will definitely have some impact on our mental continua as we are 
placing imprints in our minds. 
 
We usually consider activities like reciting mantras or doing retreat to be 
virtuous and beneficial actions. I have mentioned before that when we have the opportunity to study and reflect on this text, I believe the benefits and the 
merit generated by studying and reflection will be at least comparable if not 
greater.  
 
We have to keep this in mind all the time and we should never entertain such 
thoughts as, “What is the point of studying and learning this text? There is no benefit at all. It is useless.” Rather we should understand that the benefit from studying and reflecting on this text is at least  comparable to the merit we get 
from doing retreat or some other practices. When we understand this, then it will help us in our studies and we will be able to generate enthusiasm for and 
interest in wanting to continue with our studies.  
 
Everyone accepts and believes that reciting mantras is beneficial and virtuous. 
If that is the case for mantra recitations, when we analyse this logically, how 
can we say there is no benefit from studying and reflecting on this text? If we 
say that studying and reflecting on this text has no or lesser benefit than  reciting mantras, it would apply to ma ntra recitations as well. How can  
reciting mantras be more beneficial than studying and reflecting on this text?  
 
You might say, “When I study this text, I do not understand,” but you also do not understand the mantra you are reciting. Since you do not understand the mantra, you cannot say there is any benefit in reciting it. I believe that reciting mantras, doing retreats or studying and reflecting on texts are of equal benefit. 
Because of this belief, I feel happy when I get the chance to study.  
 
We cannot say there is no benefit just because we don’t understand the text. 
Our not understanding the text does not mean that there is no benefit. These 
are all teachings of the Buddha and are beneficial for us. People who recite the 
Sanghata Sutra  and Golden Light Sutra  believe in the benefit of such recitation.  
By studying this text, Ornament for Clear Realisations,  which is the speech of 
Maitreya Buddha, we can say then that there is even more benefit.  
 
The essence of what I am trying to say is that you should never be 
discouraged.  
 
It is possible that there are some people who come to class thinking, “Today, I 
learnt nothing. It was a complete waste of time. It was meaningless as I 
achieved nothing. Even coming to class is a waste of time.” We should 
remember all those benefits that I have mentioned so far when we entertain such thoughts. Just because you do not understand the text does not mean that there is no benefit.   
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 12 
Page 4 of 8 You should think about this from different angles. We are planting imprints in 
our minds. It is important to keep this in mind whenever we attend a teaching session. When we are listening to teachings, we should do so with a happy mind, a mind of delight and enthusiasm. From our side, we have to make sure 
that we feel happy and enthusiastic about participating in the session and 
listen with a pure motivation. There is not going to be much benefit if you  think you are wasting your time or you feel unhappy and angry.  
 
We have to constantly remind ourselves that the purpose of studying is to put 
the Dharma into practice as taught in the beginning of the Lam Rim literature. 
The purpose of learning the Dharma is to subdue our minds and to overcome the three mental poisons. Of course it is not easy to subdue our minds but nevertheless we must try.  
 
It is also important not to be proud or arrogant especially when we start to understand the teachings. This is also something we have to keep in mind. Whether we are studying, learning or discussing the teachings with others, it is 
important to feel, from the depths of our hearts, that the main purpose of all 
these activities is to subdue and discipline our minds. 
 
*********  
  
The 110 aspects of the  exalted knower of all aspects can be divided into:- 
• 37 aspects of an exalted knower of all aspects harmonious with hearers 
(or the 37 harmonies with enlightenment) 
• 34 aspects of an exalted knower of all aspects harmonious with bodhisattvas 
• 39 uncommon aspects of an exalted knower of all aspects 
 
The 37 aspects of an exalted knower of all aspects harmonious with hearers are divided into 7 groups which are located at various levels of the Mahayana 
path:- 
1. Four close placements of mindfulness 
2. Four thorough abandonings 
3. Four legs of magical manifestation 
4. Five powers  
5. Five forces 
6. Seven branches of enlightenment 
7. Eight branches of a superior’s path 
 
The Mahayana path of accumulation  has 3 divisions:- 
1. Small level of the path of accumulation  
2. Middling level of the path of accumulation  
3. Great level of the path of accumulation 
• The four close placements of mindfulness are found at the small level of 
the path of accumulation. 
• The four thorough abandonings are found at the middling level of the 
path of accumulation. 
• The four legs of magical manifestation are found in great level of the path 
of accumulation. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 12 
Page 5 of 8 The Mahayana path of preparation  has 4 divisions:- 
1. Heat level of the path of preparation 
2. Peak level of the path of preparation  
3. Tolerance (or forbearance) level of the path of preparation  
4. Supreme mundane level of the path of preparation 
• The five powers are found at the heat and peak levels of the path of 
preparation. 
• The five forces are found at the tolerance and supreme mundane qualities 
levels of the path of preparation. 
 
The Mahayana path of seeing  
The seven branches of enlightenment are found on the path of seeing. 
 
The Mahayana path of meditation  
The eight branches of a superior’s path are found on the path of meditation. 
 
Maitreya’s Discrimination of the Center and Extremes  and Ornament of the 
Mahayana Sutras posit  that the seven branches of enlightenment are found 
on the path of seeing and that the eight branches of a superior’s path are 
found on the path of meditation.  
 
But in Vasubandhu’s Abdhidharmakosa,  he reversed the placement of these 
two:- 
1. The seven branches of enlightenment are found on the path of meditation. 
2. The eight branches of a superior’s path are found on the in path of seeing. 
The reason he placed the seven branches of enlightenment on the path of 
meditation is because that path is nearer to the state of enlightenment.  
The reason he placed the eight branches of a superior’s path on the path of 
seeing is because the duration of the path of seeing is much shorter than the 
path of meditation.  
 
Here we will follow Maitreya’s text. When we look at the various stages of the 
clear realisations starting from the Mahayana path of accumulation to the 
buddha ground, it can be condensed into these 37 harmonies with  enlightenment.  
 
The resultant truth body which is the final enlightenment refers to the wisdom 
truth body or exalted knower of all aspects. These 37 harmonies with  
enlightenment refer to the 37 factors that lead to the generation or production of the final attainment, i.e., the wisdom truth body or exalted knower of all aspects.  
 
The first of the seven groups of 37 harmonies with enlightenment is the four 
close placements of mindfulness:   
1. close placement of bodies 
2. close placement of feelings 
3. close placement of minds, and 
4. close placement of phenomena 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 12 
Page 6 of 8 The object of observation of the first close placements of mindfulness is the 
body, which has three divisions:- 
1. inner body 
2. outer body and  
3. both outer and inner body 
• The inner body  refers to the five sense powers which are the uncommon 
empowering conditions for the production of the five sense consciousnesses. 
• The outer body  refers to the objects which are not conjoined with the 
consciousness, i.e. they are the objects of the five consciousnesses such as 
form, sound, smell, taste and touch.  
• That which is both the outer and inner body  refers to forms that serve as 
the bases of the sense powers, for example, the eye sense power is located 
within the eye ball.  
 
Why there are these divisions called the outer body, inner body and both outer 
and inner body? I guess the body is called inner body because it is included 
within the continuum of a sentient being whereas an outer body is not included within the continuum of a person and in relation to a clear form, an outer body will be considered external.  
 
The illustration for both outer and inner body is the form that serves as the bases of the sense powers, for example, an eye sense power abides within the eye ball. The eye ball is not the eye sense power. Why is it considered both an outer and inner body? It is quite difficult to explain this. 
 
In general, in the close placements of mindfulness on the body, the object of observation is primarily our appropriated contaminated physical and mental aggregates. But it is not necessarily so because the object of observation also 
includes the outer body which refers to external forms -  visual form, sound, 
smell, taste and touch. In short, all forms can be the objects of observation of this mindfulness. Based on these divisions, we can see that “body” refers to a form that is made up of different parts and elements.  
 
If that is the case, we have to analyse: if it is a form, is it necessarily an object of observation of close placement of mindfulness on the body? We may be uncomfortable with positing that form and the body are the same thing. It is 
related to terminology. In this context, the body does not necessarily only 
mean our bodies as it can also refer to an external form which is the outer body. 
 
For example, when the Tibetan word “ gang zag” is translated into English, it 
means “person,” which we usually associate with only a human being. However when the word “ gang zag”  is used in the teachings, it can also refer to 
an animal. 
1
 
Question: 
The main purpose of close placement of mindfulness on the body is to develop 
an understanding of true sufferings so that we can generate renunciation. How 
does meditating on an external form help us to realise true sufferings, for example, when we look at a beautiful person? 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 12 
Page 7 of 8 Answer:  
The main purpose of close placement of mindfulness on the body is to be able 
to understand true sufferings and overcome it such as stopping desire. We do generate desire for external objects such as pleasant form, sound, smell, taste 
and touch and these are classified as “outer body.”  We have to meditate on 
how the outer body is by nature filthy and in the nature of suffering.  
 
True sufferings refer to the appropriated contaminated physical and mental aggregates. Can we also say that form, sound, smell, taste and touch including 
the external world are true sufferings? We have to meditate on them when we 
say that they are also true sufferings. True sufferings do not only refer to our bodies as also refer to the external world.  It is not an easy thing to say that visual form, sound, smell, taste and touch are true sufferings.  
 
Response from Student A :  
But these forms from their own side are neutral. It is our response to them that gives rise to suffering whereas the suffering of our bodies is not a matter of choice.  
 
Geshe-la: Your argument sugg ests that these two become almost similar, isn’t it? 
Because the body itself, without the mind, doesn’t have any kind of feeling, like 
sound, isn’t it? The dead body is true suff erings or not? According to your logic, 
only during one’s lifetime, there is tr ue sufferings. We sometimes say, “When 
you are dead, you are enlightened!”  
 
Response from Student B : The first aspect of true sufferings is its 
impermanence. That impermanence makes it true sufferings.  
 
Response from Student C: In this Yogic Autonomy Middle Way School, since both subject and object are not of different substantial entities, in the case of sound and the consciousness perceiving it, both arise from the same imprint. 
 
Question :  
Is the close placement of mindfulness taught here the same as that presented in Chapters 8 and 9 of the Bodhisattvacharyavatara ?  
Answer :  
In essence the four close placements of mindfulness mentioned here and the Bodhisattvacharyavatara  are the same. However there is a difference in the 
way which they are meditated on. In Chapter 9, it focuses on the body’s lack of inherent existence. In Chapter 8, although it is not specifically mentioned as 
the close placements of mindfulness on the body but the meaning is that as it 
talks about the meditation on the impurity of the body and so forth.  
 
Geshe-la : We would have to think about whether the outer body is true 
sufferings or not. When we accept that it is true suffering, then you would also 
have to say that visual form, sound, smell, taste and touch are necessarily the 
products of karma and afflictions, that this world of ours is necessarily the product of karma and afflictions. The elem ents of earth, water, fire and wind of 
this planet Earth are also necessarily the products of karma and afflictions. It 
follows then that our condo, bungalow, flat or car are necessarily products of 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 12 
Page 8 of 8                                                           karma and afflictions. When we follow this line of reasoning, it seems that 
everything  we see in the external world is necessarily the product of karma and afflictions.  
 
When we say that they are not true sufferings and are not products of karma and afflictions, that would mean true sufferings are only restricted to our bodies. When our bodies disintegrate and cease to exist, then would true sufferings also cease to exist? From this discussion, we can see that we have not fully grasped the meaning of true sufferings in the context of the Four 
Noble Truths.  
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Alison Wong   
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee 
 
 
 
 
 
1 Please refer to pg. 59 & 171 of the Basic Program Study Manual . 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 13 
Page 1 of 9 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root Verses  of Ornament for Clear Realisations  translated by Venerable 
Joan Nicell; an FPMT Masters Program Project, edition June 2007, ©Joan 
Nicell and FPMT, Inc.  Basic Program Study Manual for Maitreya’s Ornament for Clear Realizations, Chapter 4, compiled by Emily Hsu and Kok Wai Cheong; an FPMT Masters 
Program Project, edition September 2005, © FPMT, Inc. 
             Root Verses  are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added.  
 
Lesson No: 13                        Date: 28th August 2008  
 
It is important to have the correct motivation whenever we engage in the activities of coming to class and listening to the teachings.  The purpose of 
listening to and studying the teachings is to subdue or discipline our minds, in 
particular, to pacify the three mental poisons. It is extremely important that we remember this all the time so that whatever we do here will become the cause for achieving that goal. 
********** 
The four close placements of mindfulness are:- 
1. the close placement of mindfulness of bodies 
2. the close placement of mindfulness of feelings 
3. the close placement of mindfulness of minds, and 
4. the close placement of mindfulness of phenomena. 
 
1. Objects of Observation1
With regards to the objects of observation of the close placements of mindfulness, they are:- 
1. bodies  
2. feelings 
3. minds and  
4. phenomena 
 
The first object of observation of the close placements of mindfulness is the body, which has three divisions:- 
1. the outer body 
2. the inner body and  
3. the body that is both outer and inner.   
 
In some texts, these three divisions are also applied to feelings, minds and phenomena. This is something we have to think about.  
 
When we apply these divisions to feelings, then we have:- 
1. outer feelings 
2. inner feelings and  
3. feelings that are both outer and inner.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 13 
Page 2 of 9  
How would we apply these divisions to feelings?  
● When we talk about the outer body, this refers to an external form. The 
feeling that is generated in dependence on that external form would be 
classified as an outer feeling.   
●  The feeling that is related to any of the five sense powers would be classified 
as an inner feeling. 
● The feeling that arises in dependence on the bases of the sense powers can 
be classified as both an outer and inner feeling. 
 
These three divisions of feelings are made from the perspective of the objects of 
observation. The same divisions can be applied to the mind. These divisions are found in Guntang Rinpoche’s commentary.  
 
However, based on the textbook from Sera Je monastery (the text we are using), the body is divided into three divisions (i.e., the outer body, inner body and both outer and inner body). However when it comes to feelings, it is 
divided into pleasant, unpleasant and neutral and there aren’t any explicit 
kind of divisions with respect to minds and phenomena. 
 
According to our text, when we look at the body, which is an object of 
observation of the close placements of mindfulness, it has three divisions. But, 
in essence, the meaning is that all forms are suitable to be an object of 
observation of the close placements of mindfulness. So when we refer to the object of observation of close placement of mindfulness which is the body here, it is not restricted to only our contaminated bodies but, in fact, it covers all forms.   
 
According to our text, the objects of observation of the close placements of mindfulness on feelings can be divided into three divisions: 
1. pleasant feelings 
2. unpleasant feelings and 
3. neutral feelings 
However in Guntang Rinpoche’s commentary, feelings are divided into:- 
1. outer feelings 
2. inner feelings and  
3. both outer and inner feelings 
 
The objects of observation of the close placements of mindfulness on minds 
refer here to the primary consciousness (or the main mental knower) that 
excludes mental factors.  
 
The objects of observation of the close placements of mindfulness on  phenomena refer here to all mental factors that are not feelings and all non-
associated compositional factors and unproduced (or permanent) phenomena. 
 
If we were to summarise these various obj ects of observation, we can say that 
the objects of observation of the close placements of mindfulness are all 
phenomena as it covers everything in existence. Therefore if it is an existent, if it is a phenomenon, then it is necessarily the object of observation of the close 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 13 
Page 3 of 9 placements of mindfulness. We can check up and see whether there is any 
phenomenon that is not an object of observation of the close placements of 
mindfulness. 
 
We have four objects of observation of the close placements of mindfulness: 
bodies, feelings, minds and phenomena. Why are these four being posited to be 
the objects of observation of the close placements of mindfulness? 
 
 Compendium of Knowledge  states: 
 
What are the objects of observation of t he close placements of mindfulness: bodies, 
feelings, minds, and phenomena? 
 
The reason why these four are posited as the objects  of observation is so the immature will abandon 
grasping at the bodies as the dwelling place of the self; the feelings as the so urce of enjoyments of the 
self, the minds as the thing which is the self, and p henomena such as attachment as afflicting and faith 
as purifying the self. 
 
Compendium of Knowledge states: 
 
The thing that is the dwelling place of the self, the bases of resources for the self, the 
thing that is the self, and things that afflict and purify the self. 
 
2. Manners of Meditation2
There are two manners in which we can meditate on the close placements of 
mindfulness: (1) common and (2) uncommon.  
 
The first manner, common, is done by investigating both the general and specific characteristics of 
bodies, feelings, minds, and phenomena. 
 
 Treasury of Knowledge  states: 
 
One should meditate the close placements of  mindfulness by thoroughly investigating 
the two characteristics of bodies, feelings, minds, and phenomena. 
 
The common (or shared) manner of meditation is shared with the hearers and 
solitary realisers. The uncommon (or unshared) manner of meditation is only done by the bodhisattvas.   
 
When we meditate on the close placements of mindfulness, for example, on  bodies, we meditate on both their general and specific characteristics. The same thing is done with regards to feelings, minds and phenomena.  
 
Moreover, impermanence, suffering, empty, and self less are the general characteristics. They are 
explained as general characteristics since they are pervasive qualities app lied to particular bases. That is 
to say: all products are impermanent; all that is contaminated is suffering; and all phenomena are empty 
and selfless.   
 
This is what is mentioned in the Four Seals:  
1. all compounded phenomena are impermanent, 
2. all contaminated phenomena are suffering 
3. all phenomena are empty and selfless, and 
4. nirvana is peace. 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 13 
Page 4 of 9 When we meditate on the general charac teristics of bodies, we would meditate, 
on how they are impermanent, suffering, empty and selfless. The specific 
characteristics with regards to bodies would be their elements and evolutes (which arise from the elements). For example, bodies are made up of the four 
elements: earth, water, fire and wind. These are the specific characteristics 
with regards to bodies. 
 
When we meditate on the general characteristics of feelings, we would  meditate on how feelings are impermanent, suffering, empty and selfless.  
When we meditate on their specific characteristics, this refers to the entity of 
experience. 
 
When we meditate on the general characteristics of minds, we would  meditate 
on how minds are impermanent, suffering, empty and selfless.  When we 
meditate on their specific characteristics, this refers to the entity of observer. 
 
When we meditate on the general characteristics of phenomena, we would  
meditate on how phenomena are impermanent, suffering, empty and selfless.  
When we meditate on their specific characteristics, this would depend on the phenomenon in question since phenomena cover many things such as mental factors (with the exception of feelings) each of which has its own respective 
functions and entity.  
 
The second manner of meditation, uncommon, has three parts: objects of observation, mental 
engagement, and attainment. 
The first, objects of observation: hearers and solitar y realizers observe only their own bodies and so 
forth, while bodhisattvas observe the bo dies of both themselves and others. 
The second, mental engagement: Hearers and Solit ary Realizers mentally engage impermanence, 
and so forth, while bodhisattvas meditate  on the non-observable sign of phenomena. 
The third, attainment: hearers and solitary realizer s meditate solely to be free from the contaminated 
body and so forth, whereas bodhisattvas do not meditate  for the sake of freedom or non-freedom from 
that, but in order to achieve a non-abiding nirvana. 
 
 
Uncommon Manner of 
Meditation Hearers and Solitary 
Realisers Bodhisattvas 
Objects of observation Observe only their own 
bodies and so forth Observe the bodies of both 
themselves and others. 
Mental engagement Mentally engage 
impermanence, suffering, 
empty and selfless  On top of those, they also meditate on the non-observable signs of phenomena 
i.e. subtle selflessness of 
phenomena (the emptiness of true existence)  
Attainment Meditate solely to free 
themselves from the contaminated body and so forth They do not meditate on that alone but they also meditate to achieve a non- abiding nirvana. 
In short, the Mahayana manner of meditation on close placements of 
mindfulness is different from that of hearers and solitary realisers in terms of the objects of observation, mental engagement and attainment. 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 13 
Page 5 of 9 3. Reasons for Meditating3
 
The reasons for meditating in such a way is to engage into what is to adopted and rejected with regard to 
the four truths. 
Through meditating close placements of mindful ness of bodies you will understand that the 
appropriated pernicious state of  the contaminated body is the entity of suffering. 
Because pleasant and unpleasant feelings are the causes of cravings which desire non-separation 
and separation and since, considered from the point of vi ew of results, cravings are the principal origin of 
suffering, through meditating close placements of mindfulness of feelings, you will act to abandon them. 
 Through meditating close placements of mindfulness of minds the basis of self-grasping, the mind, is 
analyzed as impermanent and so forth, thereby st opping the conception of that. Then, due to the 
absence of fear of the annihilation of the self, you will actualize cessation. 
Through meditating repulsiveness and close plac ements of mindfulness of phenomena you will 
understand that all thoroughly afflicted phenomena are incompatible and all pure phenomena are antidotes for that. 
Through understanding that these very [meditations] are the means for turning away from harm and 
knowing how to develop them, you w ill enter into the Four Truths. 
 
These reasons for meditating on the close placements of mindfulness of the 
four objects are stated in Maitreya’s Discrimination of the Middle Way and the 
Extremes : 
Because being the pernicious state, 
Because being the cause of craving, 
Because being the basis, 
And because being non-obscuration, 
Are the entry into the four truths, 
Meditate the close placements of mindfulness. 
 
Objects of 
observation of 
the close 
placements of 
mindfulness  
Reasons for Meditating  
Four Truths 
Bodies To understand that the appropriated 
pernicious state of the contaminated body is 
the entity of suffering. To realise true sufferings 
Feelings Because pleasant and unpleasant feelings 
are the causes of cravings which desire non-separation and separation and since, considered from the poin t of view of results, 
cravings are the principal origin of suffering, through meditating close placements of mindfulness of feelings, you will act to abandon them. To abandon true origins 
Minds The basis of self grasping, the mind, is 
analyzed as impermanent and so forth, thereby stopping the conception of that. Then, due to the absence of fear of the 
annihilation of the self, you will actualize 
cessation. To actualise true cessations 
 
Phenomena Understand that all thoroughly afflicted 
phenomena are incompatible and all pure phenomena are antidotes for that. To engage in true 
paths 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 13 
Page 6 of 9 Question from Geshe-la: How does close placements of mindfulness of minds 
help you realise true cessations ? 
 
When we meditate on the close plac ements of mindfulness of bodies, the 
purpose is to realise true sufferings. In this meditation, we focus on how our 
contaminated aggregates are the products of karma and afflictions. Since we 
know they are under the control of karma and afflictions, they are in the 
nature of suffering. We see how our bodies are by nature impermanent and also how our unpleasant bodies are by nature filthy and dirty. The point is to realise the meaning of true sufferings. When we focus on these various aspects 
of our bodies, it will help us to overcome our grasping and our attachment to 
and desire for them.   
 
The ignorance and afflictions in our minds cloud our perception of ourselves and phenomena. We are completely confused about the real nature of things 
and based on that, we develop strong attachment for the body which appears 
as something very pleasant and attractive to our confused minds. Due to this attachment, we engage in all sorts of actions and accumulate negative karma which only results in suffering. Although we want happiness and do not want 
suffering, we run after the causes of suffering.   
 
Our strong attachment for the body only brings problems and suffering. If we 
do not want suffering, we have to weaken this attachment and the best way to 
do that is to reflect on the real nature of the body, i.e. how the body is, by 
nature, impermanent, suffering, empty and selfless. 
 
Chapter 8 of Shantideva’s Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life  gives an 
extensive explanation of how to meditate on the uncleanliness of the body. It is 
said that the substantial cause of the body is the egg and sperm of the  
parents. When we examine the nature of that egg and sperm, they are by nature unclean and filthy. Our blood, skin and flesh are the products of our mother’s egg and our bones, sinews, joints are the products of our father’s 
sperm. 
 
The discharges that come out from the nine orifices of our bodies are also filthy 
and unclean. For example, when we sweat, our perspiration is unclean. That is reality. We can understand this when we think about it but this is not the way 
we usually see things. Our surroundings may be clean and the food we eat 
may look good but once we eat the food and if some of it should fall out of our mouths and land on the floor, we dirty the place. What does this show? It shows that our bodies are by nature dirty and unclean. 
 
We have to overcome our strong attachment to our bodies by approaching this topic from many different angles of reasoning in order to weaken our attachment.  We are unfamiliar with the real nature of the body and without 
extensive examination of this issue through analytical meditation, it will be 
very difficult to subdue our attachment.  
 
Perceiving the body to be by nature pure and clean, we seek to make it even   cleaner and purer and to make it smell nicer. We have to do many things to 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 13 
Page 7 of 9 achieve this. Another example is that when we age, as the body by nature is 
unclean, no matter how much we wash it, the body will not change much. This indicates the real nature of the body. 
 
When we think about it, it becomes obvious that this is the real nature of the body. No one can successfully argue that the body by nature is clean and perfect but we instinctively grasp at the body as being so. This is pure hallucination. We are instinctively drawn to the attractiveness of our bodies.  We are not even talking about all phenomena here. We are just talking about 
one object – our bodies - and we can see how confused we are with regards to 
that. From this example, we can see the depth of our ignorance! 
 
By reflecting on how the body is the product of karma and afflictions and its  
unclean and suffering nature, we can overcome our attachment to it. Since the 
body is the product of karma and afflictions, it is impossible for us to experience real happiness with it. Not only there is no real happiness, it only brings us problems and difficulties for, with this body, we have to experience 
the suffering of birth, the suffering of aging, the suffering of sickness and 
finally, the suffering of death. These four sufferings occur because our bodies are the bases for these sufferings to arise. The body is like a container for these problems. We have to continually experience suffering even though we do 
not like suffering. When we understand how our bodies are the source of all 
our problems, then immediately we will generate less attachment for the body by seeing it as a trouble-maker. 
 
Because of the impermanent nature of the body, it is changing and 
disintegrating in each and every single moment. We are getting older and older 
and moving closer and closer to death. In the end, we have to die and leave this body behind and move on. This is the nature of the body. When we reflect on this, our sense of attachment for this body will also be reduced.   
 
We should conclude is that our desire and attachment for the body brings only suffering and problems. The only way to stop this suffering is to focus on the object of our attachment, the body and realise that its nature is unclean, 
impermanent and that it is true suffering.  
 
Question:   
When we focus on one object, for example a table, how is it possible for three different kinds of feelings (outer, inner and outer and inner feelings) to arise 
with respect to it? 
Answer:  
When we focus on an object, feelings will arise in relation to that object. Different feelings (happy, unhappy, neutral) will arise but they do not do so  
simultaneously at the same time. It is possible that the feelings will change.  
 
These feelings – outer, inner, both outer and inner - are posited from the 
perspective of the objects of observation. There is an outer feeling because this 
feeling is generated by depending on an external object e.g. a form.  It is called 
outer feeling because it focuses on the external object, the table. The inner 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 13 
Page 8 of 9 feeling and both external and inner feelings cannot arise by depending on that 
object (table).  
If the feeling arises in dependence on an inner form, this feeling is known as inner feeling.  
 
If the feeling is generated by depending on both inner and outer form, for example our sense organs such as the eye balls, then that would be both an outer and inner feeling. These divisions of feelings are made from the perspective of the objects of observation. 
 
Question:  
There seems to be a difference in the meditations on the close placements of mindfulness in this text and the Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life  by 
Shantideva. 
Answer :  
I thought I had already answered this question before. In this text, the close placements of mindfulness is done in the more common way i.e. by reflecting on impermanence, suffering, empty and selfless but in Chapter 9 of Shantideva’s Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life , the meditation on the four 
close placements of mindfulness is done from the ultimate point of view, by 
relating them to the emptiness of inherent existence.  
 
In Chapter 9, one reflects from various angles on how the body is empty of 
inherent existence. The same thing is done with feelings, the minds and 
phenomena.   
 
Question: 
How would one meditate on the inner body and the outer and inner body? 
Answer: 
For the close placements of mindfulness on the body, in term of the objects of 
observation – outer body, inner body, both outer and inner body -  the difference lies in the object but with regards to the manner of meditation, it is 
the same. Only the object is switched. But, first, we have to correctly identify 
the object in question before we can meditate on it.  
 
What is both an outer and inner body? It is the form that serves as the basis of the sense power i.e. the sense organ. The sense organs and the sense powers 
are different. The sense organ is the base upon which the sense power is 
located. For example, the eye sense power is the inner body and the eye sense organ is the eye ball which is both inner and outer body. All these are true sufferings. We meditate on how they are by nature impermanent, suffering, etc. 
  
In terms of the objects of observation, the outer body and both the inner and outer body are quite easy to meditate on. It is most challenging to meditate on the inner body as it is a clear and very subtle form. This refers to the 
uncommon empowering conditions for the production of the various sense 
consciousnesses e.g. the eye sense power. They cannot be seen with our naked eye. We cannot identify them clearly in our experience so it would be difficult to meditate on their nature being impermanent and so forth.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 13 
Page 9 of 9                                                            
 
Question:  
Are the sense powers atomically established? Are they matter? 
Answer:  
If you assert that form and matter are mutually inclusive, then you can say 
they are atomically established; they are form. However there are some people who say that form and matter are not mutually inclusive. If that is the case, then it is not form. I guess it is alright to say it is atomically established and 
that it is form. 
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Alison Wong   
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee 
 
 
1 Please refer to pg. 171 of the Basic Program Study Manual. 
2 Please refer to pg. 172 of the Basic Program Study Manual.  
3 Please refer to pg. 173 of the Basic Program Study Manual. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 14 
Page 1 of 8 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root Verses  of Ornament for Clear Realisations  translated by Venerable 
Joan Nicell; an FPMT Masters Program Project, edition June 2007, ©Joan 
Nicell and FPMT, Inc.  Basic Program Study Manual for Maitreya’s Ornament for Clear Realizations, Chapter 4, compiled by Emily Hsu and Kok Wai Cheong; an FPMT Masters 
Program Project, edition September 2005, © FPMT, Inc. 
             Root Verses  are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added.  
 
Lesson No: 14                   Date: 2nd September  2008  
 
It is important to mix whatever we have learnt with our minds. Of course there is some benefit to just hearing the teachings but that will not enable us to 
transform and improve our minds. In order to do that, we have to put whatever 
we have learnt into practice by mixing them with our minds.  
 
We have heard many teachings and it is very important to use these teachings 
at times of difficulties or when the afflictions such as attachment, anger or 
ignorance are manifesting strongly in our minds. At those times, it is important to immediately remind ourselves of the faults and disadvantages of the afflictions and to  remember the workings of karma. The point is to use 
whatever we have learnt to make these manifest afflictions go away.   
 
In our daily lives, when we meet with difficulties and problems and our 
afflictions are manifesting, we should use whatever methods we know to 
subdue them. If we are able to reduce those afflictions even slightly, whatever 
we have learnt becomes meaningful and useful. If we are unable to do anything to those manifest afflictions despite all we  have learnt and studied and instead,  
the afflictions become even stronger, then this gives meaning to the phrase, “The Dharma becomes poison”. 
   
When we talk about practising the Dharma to transform our minds, we shouldn’t  have the idea that it has to be some high practice to do with developing miraculous concentrations and powers of meditation. Rather, 
Dharma practice starts with and has to be done in our daily lives. The point of 
Dharma practice is to reduce our afflictions when they arise in our minds. We need to remember their faults and disadvantages and weaken them or stop them from manifesting. This is what we mean by Dharma practice.  
 
For example, the purpose of engaging in relationships between couples or friends is to achieve happiness. There are bound to be difficulties and problems. When difficulties arise, we have to use whatever we have learnt from the Dharma to keep the relationship harmonious. We know the Dharma. We 
want to be happy. But we do not use the Dharma and instead we quarrel and 
fight with each other. Then, we will not achieve the goal of happiness.  
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 14 
Page 2 of 8  
When difficulties arise in relationships, we should think of the Dharma and 
use what we have learnt to reduce the problems which come from our negative emotions such as attachment or anger. When our afflictions are reduced, there 
will be more harmony and our relationships will be happier.  
 
As soon as we are able to reduce the afflictions even by just a little bit, 
definitely there will be more happiness. When we have tasted the results of the practice and experience more happiness, naturally the enthusiasm to practise 
more will arise as will our interest in our studies. Just knowing the Dharma by 
coming to class, listening to the teachings and gaining intellectual knowledge alone do not help. We have to reflect on the teachings and put them into practice until we taste the results and experience the happiness that that 
practice can bring.  
 
We believe the benefits of the practices we do are all related to benefiting our 
future lives but it would be really difficult to have strong conviction in this 
when we have not even tasted the Dharma in this life.  
 
For example, when we reflect deeply on death and impermanence, immediately 
there is peace in our hearts and our desire, attachment and negative emotions 
are lessened. With a less negative mind, we will experience more happiness. 
Having experienced this, we would probably generate stronger faith in the teachings of the Buddha, thinking “There is really something in these teachings”  because the happiness we have just experienced came from practising the teachings.  
 
Having tasted the benefit of practising the teachings in this life, it makes sense for us to believe that the teachings will benefit us in our future lives. If we have not experienced that in this life and at the same time we declare that the 
teachings will benefit us in our future lives, it would be difficult to really 
believe this in our hearts. Experiencing the benefit of practising the teachings  starts in this life.  
 
Sometimes we make the mistake of doing our practices with the thought and hope that they will benefit us in our future lives. But those practices do not bring us any peace or happiness in this present life. This is a mistake because instead of allowing those practices to benefit us in this life, we still allow 
ourselves to fall under the control of our afflictions. The practices will benefit 
us in our future lives but, at the practical level, they can benefit us right now but somehow that doesn’t happen for us. We do not taste the beneficial results in this life.  
 
As a Dharma practitioner, we should at least be a better person than someone who is not practising the Dharma. It would be very sad if after practising the Dharma for a long time, we are worst off than someone who is not practising the Dharma. I am not saying that we will be able to do every single thing. It is 
difficult because we are under the control of our negative emotions which are 
very strong. Of course it is not easy but we should at least remind ourselves  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 14 
Page 3 of 8  
that we should aim to become a better person with more qualities than 
someone who does not practise the Dharma.  
 
When we say, “We plant the seed of happiness,” we should start with the people with whom we usually associate with such as our family members, relatives and friends. We should receive happiness from them but this is not what we do. We neglect the people around us, looking instead outside our circle of friends and relatives. We do not practise respect or love them. Instead, 
there is fighting and unhappiness. Actually, we should practise with the people 
around us and then extend that practice to others. Our source of happiness and aid comes from those around us to whom we  have access. We do not seek help from strangers or someone far away from us. We should acknowledge this 
and keep this fact in mind. 
 
The point is that when we meet with difficulties, unhappiness and our 
afflictions are manifesting strongly, we should apply what we have learnt since 
we have learnt so much already. When we do that, it would have fulfilled the 
purpose of studying the Dharma and being a Buddhist.  
 
As I mentioned in the last class, some people said that there is no change in 
their minds despite their knowing some of the teachings such as true 
sufferings, impermanence, emptiness and selflessness. Their minds remain the same without improvement. Change is not easy and will not happen overnight. In order to transform the mind, we need to have constant familiarisation with  whatever we have learnt. When we say to “meditate,” that  means to familiarise 
and to mix with our minds what we had studied. We need to do this over and 
over again. Then change can come.  
 
********* 
In the last session, we saw that the purpose of meditating on the four close placements of mindfulness was to enable us to engage with the Four Noble Truths. Through meditating on the close placement of mindfulness of 
bodies , we seek to understand true sufferings. When we meditate on true 
sufferings, we reflect on the characteristics of the body i.e., that it is impermanent, suffering, empty and selfless as well as its filthy contaminated nature. The purpose of reflecting on the suffering nature of the body and that the body by nature is unclean is to help us stop our attachment and desire for 
the body.  
 
There is a meditation focussing on the skeleton of one’s body by imagining all 
the flesh has been removed. For example, we start by focussing on the bone of the big toe or the skull. We then move on to other body parts till we see the 
whole body as a skeleton. After we have achieved some proficiency with this 
meditation, we can then meditate on how our surroundings are filled with such skeletons. We then extend this to the entire world, seeing it as filled with skeletons.  
 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 14 
Page 4 of 8  
We then withdraw these visualised skeletons back to the skeletons around us  
and absorb these into our bodies. We then focus again on our bodies as skeletons.  
  
We can further expand our visualisation in another way. Once again, we start from our toes, gradually progressing upwards to the skull and so forth. Our surroundings and the whole world are also filled with skeletons and we then proceed to absorb them into ourselves. In the earlier visualisation given, when 
all the skeletons were absorbed into us, we focussed on our whole body as a 
skeleton. In this second visualisation, when all the skeletons are absorbed into us, we focus on the skull alone. 
 
A third visualisation entails the same preliminaries but when all the skeletons are absorbed into us, we focus our attention on the bone between our eyebrows which is about the size of our thumb. 
 
These visualisations are taught in the Treasury of Knowledge 
(Abdhidharmakosha). Visualising the body as a skeleton is one of the methods to overcome attachment like the meditation on the uncleanliness of our bodies. 
 
Our attachment to our bodies can take the form of attachment to their  colour, 
shape or touch: 
• With respect to attachment to the colour of the body, we can overcome this 
by visualising the body as green and black in colour like the corpse of 
someone who has been dead for a few days.  
• In order to overcome the attachment towards the shape of the body, we 
visualise it as being out of shape.   
• If we are attached to the pleasant touch of the body, we can overcome this 
attachment by visualising the body rotting and being eaten by maggots like a corpse.  
• If we are attached to taking good care of our bodies and putting in a lot of 
effort to make it look beautiful, the way to overcome such attachment is to visualise our bodies as unmoving corpses.  
 
All these visualisations of the body being unpleasant in colour and shape, unmoving, rotting and being eaten by maggots are not simply some kind of psychological trick. Rather, we are meditating on what the body of the present will become in the future. 
 
It is taught that if we have strong attachment to the body, one of the ways to overcome that is to visit the cemetery or places where we can find corpses so that we can meditate on them as it is only a matter of time that our bodies  will be in those states. When we see such corpses, we may feel that there is a big 
difference between ourselves and the corpses. At a subtle mental level,   we 
think that we will not become like that, not recognising that we are seeing what our bodies will become in the future. Whatever reasons or logic we may use, the conclusion should be that we will end up like that in the future.  
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 14 
Page 5 of 8  
The boundary between the body being pleasant or unpleasant is basically 
dependent on whether there is a consciousness in the body. When we are still alive and our consciousness is conjoined with the body, it is possible to see the 
body as pleasant. Once the consciousness leaves the body, it will not be 
attractive anymore.  When someone has just passed away and the consciousness has just left the body, even though the body still looks fresh and the person looks as if he is sleeping, we still  feel fear with regards to that  body.  
 
Geshe-la:  I am wondering why we feel scared when we see a dead body when 
the consciousness is no longe r there. But when we see a butterfly, whether it is 
dead or alive, it still looks nice to us. I am wondering why there is this 
difference. People even put them (the de ad butterflies) in the museum and at  
home.  
 
But our bodies which we think of as so good and nice now, after we die, nobody 
would want to keep them for even one day! People worry about keeping the corpse in the house for even one day. However, people do decorate their homes with dead animals (like tigers) and dead butterflies. I saw this in  Malaysia. Whether dead or not, they look very good and we are not scared of them.  
 
I do not know the reason for this. What is the reason? Why are we scared of the 
corpse? (Students’ responses are inaudible) Is it because we have heard of those 
(ghost) stories?  
 
I told one geshe that I feel scared when I see a corpse. His reply was that he is 
more scared of touching a living body! Th is is true because when you touch a 
corpse, it will not do anything to you. However if you touch a living person, that can be dangerous. Sometimes it is true th at we are scared of touching the dead 
body.  
 
Some time ago, a man had passed away  but his eyes were still open. His 
parents requested me to close his eyes and it was difficult for me to decline their 
request. But I was feeling quite scared to touch his eyes. When I tried to close his 
eyes, his eyes opened again. I tried a fe w times. Finally his mother managed to 
close his eyes . I believed the person died of fear or something like that. I heard 
he had some relationship problems. 
 
I felt scared of touching the corpse even though nothing can happen when I touch 
it. Still, some kind of fear arises. 
 
The purpose of meditating on the close placement of mindfulness of bodies is to help us to realise true sufferings.  
 
The purpose of meditating on the close placement of mindfulness of  
feelings is to help us realise true origins. Craving arises from feeling. There are two forms of craving:- 
• Craving that desires to be separated from suffering or pain.  
• Craving that desires not to be separated from pleasant feelings.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 14 
Page 6 of 8  
Motivated by craving, we engage in various actions that accumulate karma and 
the result is our circling in cyclic existence. Craving causes us to circle over and over again in samsara. From here, we can see that feelings are in the 
nature of suffering because by depending on feelings, we develop craving. As 
the result of craving, we continue to circle in samsara. So the purpose of meditating on the close placement of mindfulness of feelings is to understand how they are the origins of suffering.  
 
In the previous lesson, we saw how the manner of meditation on the close placements of mindfulness on bodies, feelings, mind and phenomena is done by investigating both the general and specific characteristics. Likewise, meditating on the close placements of mindfulness of feelings, we reflect on 
their general characteristics of impermanence, suffering, empty and selfless in 
order to overcome craving which is the principal origin of suffering.  
 
The purpose of meditating on the close placement of mindfulness of minds  
is to help us to actualise true cessations. In the earlier meditation on the close placements of mindfulness of bodies, we focussed on their unclean nature. In the meditation on the close placements of mindfulness of feelings, we focussed on the suffering nature of feelings. Here, in the meditation on the close 
placements of mindfulness of minds, we focus on their impermanent nature. 
 
We have to understand how the mind has the entity of disintegration and is a 
phenomenon that undergoes change in each and every single moment. By understanding the impermanent nature of the mind, we slowly come to 
understand that there is a basis for actualising true cessations.  
 
When we reflect on the selflessness of the person (the emptiness of the self- 
sufficient substantially existent person), we have the concept that there is an 
“I” who is the controller of the aggregates but does not depend on them.  When 
such a self is being negated, it is possible for fear to arise, “Does that mean there is no “I”? Isn’t there an “I” engaging in virtue or non-virtue? Who is the “I” that achieves liberation then?”  
 
On the basis of understanding the impermanent nature of the mind which  undergoes change in each and every single moment, we will not generate this  fear of losing the “I” even when we realise that the self-sufficient substantially 
existent person does not exist. This is because we understand that there is a 
basis for accomplishing true cessations (nirvana). 
 
Remember I had asked you this question in the last session: How does the close placement of mindfulness of minds help you to realise true cessations? I 
think my earlier discussion explains this paragraph in the text:   
 
Through meditating close placements of mindfulness of minds the basis of self grasping, the mind, is 
analyzed as impermanent and so forth, thereby st opping the conception of that. Then, due to the 
absence of fear of the annihilation of the self, you will actualize cessation.1  
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 14 
Page 7 of 8 The purpose of meditating on the close placement of mindfulness of  
phenomena  is to help us to engage in true paths:  
 
Through meditating repulsiveness and close plac ements of mindfulness of phenomena you will 
understand that all thoroughly afflicted phenomena are incompatible and all pure phenomena are 
antidotes for that. 
 
In this close placement of mindfulness of phenomena, we focus on 
selflessness.  
 
Objects of 
observation of 
the close 
placements of 
mindfulness  
Reasons for Meditating  
The Four  
Noble Truths 
 
Bodies  
Understand that the appropriated pernicious state of 
the contaminated body is the entity of suffering.  
To realise true sufferings 
 
Feelings  
Because pleasant and unpleasant feelings are the 
causes of cravings which desire non-separation and 
separation and since, considered from the point of 
view of results, cravings are the principal origin of suffering, through meditating close placements of 
mindfulness of feelings, you will act to abandon them.  
To abandon true 
origins 
 
Minds  
The basis of self grasping, the mind, is analyzed as impermanent and so forth, thereby stopping the 
conception of that. Then, due to the absence of fear 
of the annihilation of the self, you will actualize 
cessation.  
To actualise true 
cessations 
 
 
Phenomena  
Understand that all thoroughly afflicted phenomena are incompatible and all pure phenomena are 
antidotes for that.  
To engage in true 
paths 
 
Question: 
What is the purpose of doing the three visualisations described with relation to 
seeing the body as a skeleton?     
Answer:   
In general, the meditation of generating and then withdrawing the skeletons is 
a meditation on the unpleasant nature of the body. These different steps help 
us to develop concentration. As the object of concentration becomes smaller, likewise the mind that focuses on the object becomes subtler.  
 
Question: 
With regards to the common and uncommon manners of meditation, can we understand the former to be related to the meditation on the selflessness of persons and the latter to be related to the meditation on the selflessness of 
phenomena? 
Answer: 
The answer to this will come later when we examine how the close placements 
of mindfulness of the Mahayana are superior to the close placements of mindfulness of the Hinayana. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 14 
Page 8 of 8                                                            
Student : Can Geshe-la please review with us the close placement of 
mindfulness of minds from Chapter 9 of Shantideva’s Guide to the 
Bodhisattva’s Way of Life?  
Response from Geshe-la:  Yes, we can do that. The close placement of 
mindfulness of minds in Chapter 9 of the Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of 
Life is done in relation to the sense consciousnesses and mental consciousness. 
Many methods are mentioned in the text to reflect on how the sense 
consciousnesses and the mental consciousness are not inherently existent.  
  
Question:  
In the 12 links of dependent origination, ignorance is said to be the root of suffering. It seems here that craving is the said to be the root of suffering. How 
do we reconcile these two positions? 
Answer :  
In the 12 links of dependent origination, there are three propelling causes, 
three actualising causes, four propelled effects and two actualised effects.   
 
There is a difference between the propelling cause and the actualising cause. The propelling cause is the first link, the ignorance that leads to compositional action and consciousness. The actualising cause is that which actualises the next life. The propelling cause is that which propels one into rebirth in cyclic 
existence while the actualising causes of the next life are (1) craving that leads 
to (2) grasping which leads to (3) potential existence.  
 
Ignorance is the root cause of samsara because it propels one into another 
rebirth in samsara but what actualises one’s next life in samsara is basically 
craving. Ignorance is likened to a seed that will grow into a plant which will eventually bear fruit. Craving can be likened to the causes that give rise to the fruit. Yes, there is a seed but what causes that fruit to appear? There must be a cause, isn’t it?  
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Alison Wong   
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee 
 
Vetted with Geshe Chonyi  
 
1 Please refer to pg. 173 of the Basic Program Study Manual.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 15 
Page 1 of 9 520Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root Verses  of Ornament for Clear Realisations  translated by Venerable 
Joan Nicell; an FPMT Masters Program Project, edition June 2007, ©Joan 
Nicell and FPMT, Inc.  Basic Program Study Manual for Maitreya’s Ornament for Clear Realizations, Chapter 4, compiled by Emily Hsu and Kok Wai Cheong; an FPMT Masters 
Program Project, edition September 2005, © FPMT, Inc. 
             Root Verses  are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added.  
 
Lesson No: 15                     Date: 4th September 2008  
 
I mentioned in the last class the importance of putting whatever we have learnt into practice particularly when we meet with difficulties and challenges. If we 
do not put the teachings into practice, then there is no benefit. Our minds are  
always in a negative state. We may be jealous of someone, feeling unhappy or angry or be attached to something. Our minds are always moving from one negative state to the next. 
 
When the negative emotions manifest, we have to be careful and practise what we have learnt, thinking from various angles and try to overcome them.  Of course it is not possible yet to overcome those afflictions completely but we 
should at least try our best to reduce their strength. When we try to do this, we 
will definitely see some benefit, gain some positive experience and taste the Dharma.  
 
Without achieving the slightest positive experience and at the same time  hoping that Dharma practice will bring benefit in the long run - I think that is   quite difficult. We always consider ourselves superior to others, always looking at their faults and negative aspects. This comes naturally to all of us all the time but we have to understand that this way of looking at things and viewing 
ourselves is the start  of all our problems, all the unhappiness and suffering.  
 
It is important to look at the faults we have, the mistakes we have made and 
then try to correct them instead of focussing on the faults and mistakes of 
others. As mentioned in the teachings, this is not the time to look at the faults 
of others but it is the time to examine our own faults, be truthful about them and correct them. As long as we have faults in our own minds, whatever we see will be tainted by them. Because of our own faults, we will see the other 
party as having faults even when they may be correct and perfect.  
 
The emphasis is to change ourselves and remove our own faults while we still 
have faults in our mind. When we have freed ourselves from every single fault, we will then become a buddha. Only then will it be fine to look at the faults of 
others. Until then, we should correct our own faults. We should be a good 
example for others since we have attended many teachings and have practised  for a long time. We should at least make sure that we have something to show 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 15 
Page 2 of 9 for it in terms of how our perspective has improved and our negative emotions 
have been weakened.  
 
When we have such experiences and have improved ourselves over time, this   
becomes the cause and condition for the flourishing of the buddhadharma and 
for leading others to the path to buddhahood.  
 
It is important to rely on the teachings and the antidotes at all times to transform and discipline our minds to deal with our negative emotions such as 
jealousy, pride, anger and so forth, whichever is the more difficult one. We 
have to put in more effort to applying the antidotes to weaken this negativity  over time.  
 
We have already spent five to six years studying the buddhadharma and, at 
the very least, we should set a good example. Of course, transforming the mind is not easy but you should at least try to do so. This is what I am asking of you.  
 
There are people who have studied and practised for a long time but the strength of their afflictions is only increasing over time. They are more jealous, angrier and so forth. Their behaviour and attitudes are not very different from 
someone who does not practise the Dharma. Because of this,  they think there 
is no point to studying the Dharma as it doesn’t seem to make any difference and they may as well be a normal person.  
 
We really have to think about the faults and disadvantages of our afflictions, 
the mental poisons and what happen to our minds when we are under their 
control. All this is clearly laid out in the Lam Rim. We should read, analyse and reflect on all those points.  
 
There is no way for us to be happy wh en our minds are under the control of 
negative emotions. The afflictions stop us from having real happiness in our future lives. If future lives do not exist, then it is completely a different matter but there are future lives and the afflictions will prevent us from experiencing 
any happiness then. 
 
We really have to be careful and keep this in mind. After having studied so 
much, we should change our minds for the better. Sometimes, it seems that 
the more one studies, the worst one becomes. We must not end up like that. 
The only way to transform and discipline our minds is to put the teachings into practice and to familiarise ourselves with the antidotes and apply them again and again till we see some change.  
 
We should really use the Dharma especially when we meet with difficult situations and challenges. Our perspective of things can affect the state of our minds. For example, when we have a disagreement with someone and by just focussing on the other person’s faults and mistakes, thinking how 
irresponsible he is and so forth, this  will only serve to increase our anger. The 
stronger our anger, the unhappier we become. But if we were to adopt another 
perspective thinking, “Maybe I should not have done this. I may have done 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 15 
Page 3 of 9 something inappropriate. Maybe it was my fault and I had contributed to this 
situation,” just thinking like that makes a big difference and the anger will not  grow and even be reduced.  
 
We can be happier or have more suffering simply by having a different perspective of a situation. Blaming the other party alone will only serve to increase our anger. But by simply thinking, “Maybe I did something wrong” will help to reduce our anger which will result in less suffering and less unhappiness.  
 
This is an example to highlight how our mental perspective can make a big difference as to whether we experience happiness or suffering. We may intellectually know this but somehow we do not put it into practice. It is like 
very childish behaviour. What we want is happiness and what we do not want 
is suffering but we do not adopt those mental perspectives that will make us happier. Instead we always think we are the best of the best, better than everyone else, higher than everyone else, more supreme than others, we are 
perfect without faults and it is always someone else who is at fault. Because of 
thinking like this, unhappiness and problems arise.  
 
The essence of what I am saying is that the fruit or the result of studying and 
practising the Dharma should be such that when we meet with difficult 
situations or challenges, we should be able to experience some kind of calmness and reduction in our negative emotions at those times.  
 
The Dharma has the power to pacify our negative emotions just like medicine 
has the power to heal our sicknesses and diseases. We must take the medicine 
in order to heal ourselves; likewise the Dharma has the power to make us happier and to reduce our suffering. We must taste the Dharma and experience it for ourselves. We must practise it. If we don’t experience it for 
ourselves, then the results will never come.  
 
When we talked about mental well-being and mental happiness, it is quite 
amazing when we compare it to our physical health and physical well-being. 
No matter how difficult the situation or how much mental unhappiness and 
dissatisfaction we may be experiencing, just by adopting a different way of looking at things, that mental unhappiness can be removed almost immediately. Just like that, the problem becomes smaller and easier to handle, 
we become happier and suffer less. This is the amazing thing with the mind as 
the effect can come very quickly.  
 
Compare this to physical disease or illness. We cannot get rid of them  overnight. When we compare mental suffering versus physical suffering, 
mental suffering is more acute and serious yet at the same time, mental 
suffering and mental unhappiness can be removed fairly easily just by adopting a different way of looking at things. Just like that we can see immediate results and experience more peace and happiness. This is not 
possible for physical illnesses and diseases as they cannot be cured overnight. 
That is why it is said, “Real Dharma practice is done with the mind and not with the body.”  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 15 
Page 4 of 9  
When we say we are practising the Dharma, we are learning the methods that 
show us the attitudes or thoughts that we should adopt and how we can deal with mental unhappiness. This is the essence of the teachings of the Buddha. 
By understanding this, what it means to practise the Dharma, we should strive 
to do so. 
******** 
4. Entity 
The definition of the close placements of mindfulne ss is: an exalted knower having entered a path which 
is included in either a meditative mindfulness or wisdom upon having examined both the general and 
specific characteristics of bodies, feelings, minds, and phenomena.  
 
 Compendium of Knowledge  states: “What is the entity? It is wisdom and mindfulness.” And Treasury 
of Knowledge  states: “The close placements of mindfulness are wisdom.” 
5. Divisions 
When close placements of mindfulness are divided, t here are four: the close placements of mindfulness 
on bodies and so forth. 
6. Boundaries 
The close placements of mindfulness exist from the path of accumulation through the buddha ground. 
7. Etymology 
Through mindfulness an object of observation of wisd om is placed near, that is, it is not forgotten, 
therefore [this practice] is termed the close placements of mindfulness. 
8. Demonstrating That the Close Placements of  Mindfulness of the Mahayana Are Superior 
The close placements of mindfulness of the M ahayana are superior to the close placements of 
mindfulness of the Hinayana because meditation on them is superior in fourteen ways: 
1) Its aim is the Mahayana. 
2) It relies upon wisdom. 
3) It acts as an antidote to the sixteen mistaken views. 
4) It engages you in meditating upon the four truths. 
5) It observes bodies and so fo rth of yourself and others. 
6) It mentally engages bodies and so forth as empty. 
7) Having separated yourself from the cont aminated body, an uncontaminated body is 
attained. 
8) It accords with the practices of the six perfections. 
9) It accords with leading hearers, solitary realizers, and so forth. 
10) It understands bodies to be like illusions, feelings  to be like dreams, minds to be like space, 
and phenomena to be like clouds. 
11) In accordance with your intentions, you will be reborn in cyclic ex istence as a wheel-
turning monarch and so forth. 
12) If you meditate the close placements of mindf ulness, you will naturally  have sharp faculties. 
13) Its meditation is not mixed with t he aspiration and so forth of the Hinayana. 
14) You will come to achieve a nirvana without remainder. 
 
 It is stated in Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras : 
 
Since the wise are dissimilar 
In fourteen ways 
In meditating the close placements of mindfulness, 
They are superior to others. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 15 
Page 5 of 9 And it is stated: 
 
Reliance and antidote, 
Similarly, engagement, 
Aim, mental engagement,  
Attainment, superiority of meditation, 
Accords with followers, 
Thorough understandi ng, rebirth, 
Greatness, superiority, 
Meditation, and perfect achievement.1
 
These 14 points make the Mahayana close placements of mindfulness superior 
to the Hinayana. I will read now from Guntang Rinpoche’s commentary which 
is easier to understand. However, there may be some differences between Guntang Rinpoche’s text and our text. 
The Close Placements of Mindfulness of the Mahayana Are Superior 
 Ornament for 
the Mahayana 
Sutras  Guntang Rinpoche’s 
commentary Sera Je text 
 
(1)  
Reliance  
Reliance on the wisdom arisen 
from hearing, reflection and meditation that focusses on the Mahayana Dharma.  
 
(In some other commentaries, it is said that reliance on these wisdoms arising from hearing, reflection and meditation are based on 
bodhicitta, the Mahayana 
enlightenment).  
(2) It relies upon wisdom  
 
I am not sure how the first  point - (1) Its aim is the 
Mahayana  relates to the 
quotation from the Ornament 
for the Mahayana Sutras. 
 
 
(2)  
Antidote  
This point is supposed to 
illustrate the superiority of the 
close placements of mindfulness of the Mahayana but the close placements of mindfulness of the Hinayana 
also act as antidotes to the 16 
mistaken views.  
 
Guntang Rinpoche explains 
that this antidote is an 
antidote to the grasping at true existence rather than an antidote to the 16 mistaken views. Therefore it is superior 
to the Hinayana.  
(3) It acts as an antidote to the sixteen mistaken 
views .  
 
These 16 mistaken views are opposite to the 16 attributes 
of the Four Noble Truths.  
 
(3)  
Engagement  
Beside engaging oneself in 
meditating upon the Four 
Noble Truths, it also engages 
others in them. Because of  
(4) It engages you in meditating upon the four 
truths. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 15 
Page 6 of 9  Ornament for 
the Mahayana 
Sutras  Guntang Rinpoche’s 
commentary Sera Je text 
this, the close placements of 
mindfulness of the Mahayana 
are superior to the Hinayana.  
 
(4)  
Aim  
 
“Aim” may give the connotation of a goal but it should be 
translated as 
the object of observation or the focal point. 
  
It observes bodies of all 
sentient beings  
(5) It observes bodies and so forth of yourself and 
others. 
 
 
 
(5)  
Mental engagement   
(6) It mentally engages bodies and so forth as 
empty. 
 
 
(6)  
Attainment, 
superiority of meditation  
The attainment that one achieves from meditating on the close placements of mindfulness of the Mahayana is not just for the separation 
from the contaminated bodies 
but rather the main object of attainment is the dharmakaya. 
  
(7) Having separated yourself from the contaminated body, an uncontaminated body is attained. 
 
We can take this to mean the same as what is mentioned in Guntang Rinpoche’s commentary. The 
close placements of 
mindfulness of the Mahayana are therefore superior to the Hinayana in terms of the attainment. 
 
(7)  
Accords 
  
It accords with the practices of the six perfections which are 
the opposite of their 
discordant classes e.g. miserliness etc.  
(8) It accords with the practices of the six 
perfections. 
 
 
(8)  
Followers  
The Mahayana through 
showing the Dharma that is in accordance with the thoughts of the hearers and solitary realisers, the hearers and 
solitary realisers then follow 
the Dharma that is taught. 
  
(9) It accords with leading hearers, solitary realisers, and so forth. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 15 
Page 7 of 9  Ornament for 
the Mahayana 
Sutras  Guntang Rinpoche’s 
commentary Sera Je text 
 
(9)  
Thorough 
understanding  
Guntang Rinpoche makes some additions to this  explanation of thorough understanding:  
Thorough understanding 
means it understands bodies 
to be like moving illusions; feelings to be like dreams in that things that appear in the dream are mistaken 
appearances; the minds to be 
like space, like clear light and phenomena to be like clouds which are phenomena that arise adventitiously.  
(10) It understands bodies to be like illusions, feelings to be like dreams, minds to be like space, and phenomena to be like 
clouds . 
 
 
(10)  
Rebirth  
One takes rebirth in cyclic 
existence in accordance with 
one’s intention.  
(11) In accordance with 
your intentions, you will 
be reborn in cyclic 
existence as a wheel-turning monarch and so forth . 
 
(11)  
Greatness  
Bodhisattvas have sharp faculties. When they meditate on the close placements of mindfulness for even a short 
time, they are able to achieve 
great benefit.  
(12) If you meditate the close placements of mindfulness, you will naturally have sharp 
faculties.  
 
(12)  
Superiority  
All the bodhisattvas abiding 
on the pure grounds have the same goal of benefiting sentient beings. Whatever meditations they engage in are 
done solely to benefit others 
and never mixed with self interest. As the bodhisattvas have the same goal, therefore their meditations are 
considered superior.  
(13) Its meditation is not 
mixed with the aspiration and so forth of the Hinayana. 
 
 
(13)  
Meditation  
Due to the thorough 
familiarity of their meditation 
and that not being mixed with either the extreme of peace or the extreme of existence, they achieve the final result of 
nirvana without remainder. 
Although they have achieved  
(14) You will come to 
achieve a nirvana without 
remainder 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 15 
Page 8 of 9  Ornament for 
the Mahayana 
Sutras  Guntang Rinpoche’s 
commentary Sera Je text 
the nirvana without 
remainder, nevertheless they 
will become inexhaustible.  
 
(14)  
Perfect 
achievement.  
One will achieve the wisdom of the 10
th ground and the final 
result is buddhahood, perfect 
enlightenment.   
 
At the end of the day, what we need to understand is how the Mahayana close 
placements of mindfulness is superior to the Hinayana because simply reading 
the list in pgs. 174 and 175 of our text, the difference may not be apparent.  
 
Question: 
In accordance with the Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras , the verse 
‘Attainment, superiority of meditation’  is counted as one unit and explained as 
the close placements of mindfulness of the Mahayana is superior because the main attainment is the dharmakaya, not just the separation from the contaminated body. How does “ superiority of meditation ” fit in with (7) from our 
text, “ Having separated yourself from the contaminated body, an 
uncontaminated body is attained ”? 
 
Answer:  
One meditates on the close placements of mindfulness of the Mahayana primarily to attain the dharmakaya and not just to abandon the contaminated body. Because of this attainment, therefore this meditation is superior.  
 
Question: 
What about the close placements of mindfulness according with the practices of the six perfections which also make them superior? 
 
Answer :  
All these 14 points make the close placem ents of mindfulness of the Mahayana 
superior. The source for explaining these 14 points comes from the Ornament 
for the Mahayana Sutras . As the verses are quite terse, therefore we need an 
explanation of them. When we look at the explanations given by the past great masters, all of them explained ‘Attainment, superiority of meditation’  as one 
unit. Therefore, we take it as that.  
 
The earlier section on the manners of meditation on the close placements of mindfulness divides them into common and uncommon. When we look at the uncommon manner of meditation, it is already explained how the close placements of mindfulness of the Mahayana is superior to the Hinayana in terms of the object of observation, mental engagement and attainment.  
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 15 
Page 9 of 9                                                            
The point is there is a difference between the close placements of mindfulness 
of the Mahayana and the close placements of mindfulness of the Hinayana. There are 14 points that make the close placements of mindfulness of the 
Mahayana superior to the close placements of mindfulness of the Hinayana. 
The source is the Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras . 
 
Question:  
According to the chart on page 59 of the Basic Program Study Manual , the four 
close placements of mindfulness are fully attained on the small level of the 
path of accumulation. Why then do the boundaries indicate they exist through 
the buddha ground even when they are already fully attained at the path of accumulation? 
Answer:  
The boundaries indicate that the close placements of mindfulness exist from 
the path of accumulation through the buddha ground. When we look at them 
in terms of the 37 harmonies with enlightenment, the four close placements of mindfulness are practised first at the small level of the path of accumulation. Even though the four close placements of mindfulness are fully attained on 
that  level, one still needs to familiarise with them over and over again.  
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Alison Wong   
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
 
1 Please refer to pgs. 174-175 of the Basic Program Study Manual .  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 16 
Page 1 of 6 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root Verses  of Ornament for Clear Realisations  translated by Venerable 
Joan Nicell; an FPMT Masters Program Project, edition June 2007, ©Joan 
Nicell and FPMT, Inc.  Basic Program Study Manual for Maitreya’s Ornament for Clear Realizations, Chapter 4, compiled by Emily Hsu and Kok Wai Cheong; an FPMT Masters 
Program Project, edition September 2005, © FPMT, Inc. 
             Root Verses  are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added.  
 
Lesson No: 16                     Date: 9th September 2008  
 
In the previous lesson, someone had asked about the way to meditate on the selflessness (or emptiness) of the mind. The meditation is the same as the  
meditation on the selflessness of person. The word “self” in selflessness refers 
to the self that does not exist. Firstly, we need to identify this non-existent self which can be considered in relation to either a person or phenomenon.  
 
When we talk about the self in relation to the person, first, we need to identify how this self or ‘I’ does not exist and how it arises in our minds. All of us have this grasping when we think of this self. It appears to us as completely independent of the body and its parts, i.e., not relying on the body and the 
bodily parts. It appears to us to exist without depending on  conceptual 
designation (labelling) and we grasp at it but such an independent “I” does not exist whatsoever. This is clearly explained in Chapter 9  of The Guide to the 
Bodhisattva’s Way of Life.  
 
If this independent “I” does exist, it will have to exist as either one with the basis of designation (i.e. the body and mind) or different from the basis of designation. Therefore, first, we need to identify the object of negation. What is inherent existence? What is true existence? On the basis of our experience, we then check to see whether it is inherently one with or different from the basis 
of designation.  
 
We had covered this topic before and you need to revisit it on your own. The 
object of negation, the inherently existent “I” is neither one with nor different 
from the aggregates. Why? If the “I” is inherently one with the aggregates, that  
will entail the “I” and the aggregates becoming one. That is ridiculous. If the “I” is inherently different from the aggregates, then the two of them would be completely unrelated and this is also untenable as they are not completely 
unrelated. We have to understand why this is so. This is the way of 
investigating the selflessness of person.  
 
We simply apply the same process of reasoning to the mind. The mind (or 
consciousness) has as its basis a sense power (e.g. the body sense power, the 
mental sense power). The object of inquiry is consciousness and we are now investigating whether it is inherently existent or not. Is the consciousness inherently one with its sense power or is it inherently different from its sense 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 16 
Page 2 of 6 power? If the consciousness is inherently existent, it is either inherently one 
with its sense power or it is inherently different from its sense power. If it is neither inherently one with its sense power nor is it inherently different from its sense power, then it does not exist. 
 
Consciousness can only exist in relation to an object. Without positing an object for that particular consciousness, that consciousness cannot exist. If that is the case, when we reflect on this, we can understand that the consciousness cannot be inherently existent. We can only posit the existence 
of a consciousness when it is generated in the aspect of its object of 
apprehension.   
 
If the consciousness is inherently existent, the principle of subject, object and 
action will not be workable since these are posited in relation to one another. 
We cannot posit an object without a subject or action. They need to depend on one another to exist. As taught in Chapter 9 of  The Guide to the Bodhisattva’s 
Way of Life , when we search for the consciousness, we check:  
- is it the body?  
- is it part of the body? 
- is it inside or is it outside the body?  
If the consciousness is inherently existent, when we look for it, we must be able to find it.  
 
I think one of the most effective ways is to use the logic that was discussed earlier in relation to the inherently existent “I.”  If the “I” is inherently existent, it should be either one with or different from the aggregates. Since it is neither, that inherently existent “I” does not exist. Once we understand this, we can  
switch the object in question to the consciousness. If the consciousness is 
inherently existent, it is either one with or different from its sense power.  Since it is neither, then we will not be able to find such an inherently existent consciousness. That is the selflessness of the mind. 
 
The mind that we have today exists by depending on time - the mind of this morning, the mind of this afternoon and the mind of this evening. Therefore the mind of today consists of the coming together of these three parts.  Without depending on these three parts coming together, we cannot posit the 
mind of today. If we depend on these three parts, then the mind cannot be 
inherently existent.  
 
We can narrow this down to the mind that exists now tonight. Before we can 
even say the mind of tonight, we need to understand that the mind of tonight 
depends on the coming together of each and every single individual moment that makes up tonight. As this is so, therefore this mind of tonight cannot exist inherently.  
 
Let us talk about the generation of the consciousness of tonight apprehending an object and that consciousness not abiding for more than one moment followed by its disintegration. When we think about this at a subtler level, these three events - generation, abiding and disintegration - happen 
simultaneously.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 16 
Page 3 of 6  
We can understand how the consciousness is not inherently existent because 
it is dependent on its parts and we can only posit the consciousness in relation 
to the object that it is apprehending. Without depending on its object, we 
cannot posit that consciousness. By reflecting along these lines, we realise how 
the consciousness is not inherently existent. I think the best method is to analyse whether the mind exists as inherently one or inherently different from  its sense power (basis of designation).  
 
******************* 
Four thorough abandonings1    
The objects of observation of the four thorough abandonings are:- 
1. virtues already generated 
2. virtues not yet generated 
3. non-virtues already generated 
4. non-virtues that are not yet generated 
The four thorough abandonings are in the entity of effort. 
 
How does one meditate on the four thorough abandonings?  One must first generate aspiration. From aspiration comes effort (or joyous perseverance) and after this comes stabilisation through the thorough placement of the mind. 
 
In order to generate virtue not yet generated , one must first generate 
aspiration. This is followed by effort (or joyous perseverance). Then one has to single-pointedly place one’s mind on that endeavour. Laxity and excitement will arise similar to what happens when one is working on developing single- 
pointed concentration.  
 
When there is laxity in the mind, one needs to uplift the mind by reflecting on 
the benefits of generating that virtue. This will help to uplift and make the 
mind happy. Then one can hold on firmly to the virtuous object. 
 
When there is excitement in the mind, one needs to meditate on death and 
impermanence and the faults of cyclic existence. This is to bring the mind back 
to the virtuous object when the mind is distracted.  
 
The point is that when one is putting in effort to generate the virtue that is not 
yet generated, one does this without falling under the influence of laxity or 
excitement. One has to single-pointedly concentrate on that virtue. 
 
In Maitreya’s Discrimination between the Centre and the Extremes , it states that 
the purpose of meditating on these four thorough abandonings is to weaken all 
the phenomena of the discordant class and to increase the class of antidotes.  
 
Another purpose is to be able to develop the four legs of magical manifestation quickly.  
 
The four thorough abandonings come after the four close placements of 
mindfulness. By meditating on the four close placements of mindfulness, one 
can identify clearly what is to be abandoned and what is to be cultivated. Then 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 16 
Page 4 of 6 when one meditates on the four thorough abandonings, one strives to 
overcome the discordant class by identifying clearly the antidotes to the discordant class and to generate virtue.  
 
When one meditates on the four thorough abandonings in relation to non-virtue, one 
abandons those non-virtues already generated  and one strives not  
to generate non-virtues that are not yet generated.  In relation to virtue, one 
increases the virtues already generated  and generate virtues not yet generated.  
 
The definition of a thorough abandoning is  an exalted knower engaged in a path that is an effort that 
delights in rejecting and adopting ab andonments and antidotes [respectively].  
 
The four thorough abandonings are in the nature of effort that acts to: 
 thoroughly abandon non-virtues already generated 
 not generate non-virtues that are not yet generated 
 increase virtues already generated 
 generate virtues not yet generated 
 
The essence of the definition is that the four thorough abandonings is a path and that it is in the entity of effort.   
 
Boundary:  The four thorough abandonings exist from the path of 
accumulation through to the buddha ground. 
 
The four thorough abandonings of the Mahayana are superior to that of Hinayana but no special reasons are given other than saying that the four 
thorough abandonings are a meditation on the antidotes to the discordant 
class which is conjoined with special method and wisdom.  
 
There is also an explanation on how the four thorough abandonings are 
connected with the four opponent powers in purification practices. In the 
commentary on the Abhidharma , it is mentioned:- 
• thoroughly abandoning non-virtues already generated is related to the power 
of basis (or reliance) and the power of eradication (or regret).  
• not generating non-virtues that are not yet generated is related to the power 
of restraint 
• increasing virtues already generated and generating virtues not yet 
generated are subsumed under the power of the antidote (or remedy).  
There are different ways of relating the four thorough abandonings to the four opponent powers but the above seems to be one of the better ones. 
 
In short, in terms of non-virtue, if you haven’t  done it, don’t do it and if you 
have done it, try to abandon it and make su re not to do it again. In terms of 
virtue, if you have not yet done so, generate it and if you have already done so,  
increase it. As the abandonings are in the entity of effort, it mean putting in effort not to commit any non-virtues or let them manifest in our minds. For 
those non-virtues that have already arisen, it means putting in the effort not to 
let them arise again. The path that strives in these four things is the thorough abandonings.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 16 
Page 5 of 6 Question: 
Since the Ornament for Clear Realisations  is presented in accordance with the 
tenets of the Yogic Autonomy Middle Way School, shouldn’t the object of 
negation be the lack of true existence and not inherent existence? 
Answer :  
Chapter 9 of The Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life  is presented in 
accordance with the Prasangika view. When the analysis is done in relation to 
the Autonomy Middle School, the object of negation cannot be existence by 
way of its own character or inherent existence as this would not be in accordance with that tenet system.  
 
Question:  Is the self-knower posited by the Mind Only School different from the 
self-knower posited by the Yogic Autonomy Middle Way School? 
Answer:   
They are the same. When we talk about the entity of self-knower, it is the self, the aspect of the apprehender. If we relate the self-knower to the different 
assertions of lower schools, then there is more to say.  
 
Question:  
With regards to the close placement of mindfulness on bodies, does that refer only to matter?  
Answer: The objects of observation of the close placement of mindfulness of 
bodies are the outer body, inner body and both outer and inner body and they 
are forms.  
 
Question :  
What is a form that is not matter? 
Answer:  
If you assert that form and matter are not the same, then an illustration of a form that is not matter would be the Buddha’s body. If you say the Buddha’s body is matter, then the Buddha’s body has to be atomically established but 
we can’t say this because the Buddha’s body is a reflective appearance of his 
wisdom. Therefore the Buddha’s body is form but not matter. This means form is not matter.  
 
Question: 
With relation to the consciousness, Geshe-la mentions its generation, abiding and disintegration occurring simultaneously. How is this possible – are they not cause and effect relationships which must occur sequentially? 
Answer: 
The three factors of production, abiding and disintegration occurring simultaneously are based on the subtle point of view. Our conventional point of view is a gross one. For example, in relation to a house, at the coarse level 
we say the house is built, it abides for a while and then the house no longer 
exists. However, at the subtle level, these three factors occur simultaneously as that which is produced is that which abides and that which abides is that which disintegrates. There is no separation.  
  
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 16 
Page 6 of 6                                                            
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Alison Wong   
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
 
 
1 Please refer to pg. 61 of the Basic Program Study Manual .  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 17 
Page 1 of 6 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root Verses  of Ornament for Clear Realisations  translated by Venerable 
Joan Nicell; an FPMT Masters Program Project, edition June 2007, ©Joan 
Nicell and FPMT, Inc.  Basic Program Study Manual for Maitreya’s Ornament for Clear Realizations, Chapter 4, compiled by Emily Hsu and Kok Wai Cheong; an FPMT Masters 
Program Project, edition September 2005, © FPMT, Inc. 
             Root Verses  are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added.  
 
Lesson No: 17                  Date: 11th September 2008  
 
Whatever joy there is in this world 
All comes from desiring others to be happy, 
And whatever suffering there is in this world 
All comes from desiring myself to be happy. 
Verse 129, Chapter 8 
A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life  
 
This verse by Shantideva is extremely meaningful. If possible, please memorise and recite it as part of your daily prayers. We should also reflect on its  meaning and check whether it is really true. When we look at the words in this 
verse, they are very simple but we do not reflect on their meanings.  
 
Instead we run after advanced practices such as deity yoga. Firstly, we do not 
really understand what deity yoga is so there is no way we can  practise it well so there is no way we can experience any positive change from the practice. I 
am not saying that practising deity yoga  is not good but if we were to compare 
what is more beneficial for us, then reciting this verse and reflecting on its 
meaning would be more beneficial.  
 
When we really analyse and think about the meaning of this verse, we definitely will see some positive change. Rather than doing something like that, we concentrate on reciting prayers and doing commitments without reflecting on them. We will not see any changes and nothing will happen in the end.  
 
When we say we are practising Dharma, our minds should improve at the end of the day. Changing and disciplining our minds can only happen when we reflect on what we have heard especially since we have been listening to the 
teachings for a long time. We should try our best to integrate what we have 
learnt and put them into practice. 
 
We have been spending more than five years learning the Dharma and the central message during this time has always been to encourage learning and 
studying. We have done quite well and studied a lot. Now we should shift  our 
objective to putting what we have learnt into practice. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 17 
Page 2 of 6 All of us experience problems now and then when the conditions are there. We 
become unhappy. At such times, we should look at what we can do to change the situation and make our minds happier.  
 
There are many ways of looking at the lines: “ Whatever suffering there is in this 
world/All comes from desiring myself to be happy .” We can consider them from 
a very simple point of view. Take the scenario of looking after someone who is sick, taking care of that person’s diet and putting in a lot of effort to cook something nice for him. But when we offer the food to him, he does not appreciate it. At that moment, we feel upset.   
 
Geshe-la :  This is my own experience. My teacher was here recently. He was 
sick and is also hard of hearing. He has already left for Sera Je today. He could not sleep well due to the hot weather. He couldn’t chew well as he had swollen gums after his surgery. We always cook po rridge for him and he has been eating 
porridge for breakfast, lunch and dinner everyday! 
 
One day, someone offered him mo-mos (T ibetan dumplings) for lunch. He ate 
them all - about 10 pieces. So for dinner that evening, we spent about two hours 
cutting up the meat into very small piec es in order to make ten mo-mos. But 
when we offered him the mo-mos for dinner, he didn’t want to eat them.   
 
Of course, at that moment, my mind was th inking, “I have put in so much effort 
to prepare this. Why won’t you eat them?” This means that we are not whole-
heartedly doing this for that person but instead we are showing our own self-
cherishing, thinking, “I di d such a good thing. Why don’t you accept it?” I had 
that thought for a brief moment. Later I thought, “He is sick. Whether he wants to eat them or not is his choice.” Just ch anging my thinking in this way made me 
relax immediately.  
 
This is only my example. I am not saying that I am good but, sometimes, we just 
need to change our thinking. “He doesn’t li ke them because he is in pain (or for 
whatever reason). We should just offer what he wants as long he is happy.” When you want to show that you had done  a good thing, this shows that, deep 
inside, there is self-cherishing. Externally  it looks like you ar e helping but inside 
there is the ego which causes proble ms. It is good to know this.   
 
One time, he was asking abou t some secret matters so I had to speak to him 
softly and not too loud. He couldn’t hear me. He then asked, “What?” Speaking a little louder, I tried to explain to him again. He didn’t want anyone to hear this but I had to repeat a second time. But wh en I had to repeat myself the third 
time, I started to get upset because I thought I spoke well and loud enough for him to hear. But once I started to think, “He can’t hear me  because he has a hearing problem,” my mood changed. The anger and unhappiness immediately 
subsided.  
 
When we check up, we come across many  such incidents in our daily lives.  
Whatever we do, we always say, “I am he lping this person,” but deep inside we 
are always thinking of ourselves. That is the reason why when the other party does not accept what we do, we immediately feel unhappy. All these situations 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 17 
Page 3 of 6 boil down to our self-cherishing. It is  good to know this. It cannot reduce our 
anger but it definitely makes some differ ence to our thinking by our thinking of 
the other person first.  
 
If we analyse this, we can see that it is really true that self-cherishing is the 
root of all our problems in all situations. Self-cherishing causes us to be unhappy and causes relationship problems between spouses, partners and friends. Fighting, quarrelling and jealousy arise from self-cherishing. Because of self-cherishing, we become unhappy with our virtuous friends and gurus.  
 
This is just an example but whenever we meet with challenging, difficult and unhappy situations, instead of blaming others, we should point the finger at ourselves first. We have to acknowledge that we are also at fault and have 
made mistakes. Once we are able to do that, immediately our negative 
emotions are weakened although they may not completely disappear. When  we are able to do this, we can look at the faults in our own minds rather than those in other people’s minds. We will benefit from this.  
 
We always look at situations thinking, “I have already tried my best. I was really sincere so it is his fault if he does not appreciate it.” Whether our efforts 
are pure and sincere or not, that is a big question mark. As long as self-
cherishing is involved, how can our efforts ever be pure?  As the great 
bodhisattva Shantideva has said, “ Whatever suffering there is in this world/All 
comes from desiring myself to be happy .” When we encounter problems and 
difficulties in our daily lives, we should check and see if what he said is true or not.  
 
Geshe-la : Here is another story about me talking to people on the phone. People 
do call me up and I have to talk to them. As English is my second language, 
compared to the locals, my pronunciati on may be incorrect. When I speak to 
people, some people may not understand me. I think I speak pretty good English and I think my pronunciation is correct. But I have to repeat what I have said 
with my broken pronunciation (which I believe was correct). When the other party doesn’t understand me, I feel like hanging up the phone!  
 
This example shows that one believes one is good and speaks well. One does  
not think about why the other person do es not understand what one have said. 
It is not one’s problem. One thinks that this is the other person’s problem. He 
may have hearing problems! 
 
Actually it is my problem because of the way I speak. For those who are used to 
talking to me, they can understand me ea sily. But for those who are new to me, 
they may have difficulties as they may not understand me. I realise that what I 
believe (i.e. speaking good English with correct pronunciation) is untrue and that is what causes the unhappiness. By chan ging the thinking, one will feel better, 
more relaxed and happier. One can eat we ll and sleep well. If not, we will 
remain unhappy and we cannot eat or sleep well . 
 
Anyway this is my own experience. I am not telling you this to show that I did good but they may be useful examples for everyone here. All of us are under 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 17 
Page 4 of 6 the control of the three mental poisons but the important thing is that when 
those emotions arise during difficult situations, we have to practise transforming our minds for the better. When we try, we will improve over time.  
 
Geshe-la : In our daily lives, we may meet someone and when we say hello to 
them, they just turn away. On one occasion, I tried to talk to this person but he pretended not to see me and turned his face away from me. That was  difficult for me and I am not sure how to deal with  that situation. I sincerely wanted to 
say hello to him but for some reason he  pretended not to see me. It would be 
different if he really hadn’t seen me.  I wasn’t sure how to calm down my mind 
in that situation. It is definitely due to  self-cherishing, involvi ng the  ego in some 
way.  
 
We have to see for ourselves whether what Shantideva has said is true or not. 
We need to check whether when we cherish others, is there happiness and joy 
in our hearts and when we cherish ourselves, do our minds become very tight? 
 
We have to depend and rely on others in our daily lives. We smile at and laugh 
with people whom we do not associate with regularly. But we show our 
displeasure and unhappiness with those we associate with regularly, those we rely on in our daily lives. The persons closest to us in our daily lives are the source of our happiness but we relate to them in a completely opposite 
manner. This is a mistake. We should be extra careful in these situations by 
generating a positive mind and developing some forbearance. When we can think and behave well in such situations, there will be improvement in our minds and attitudes and we will then experience more happiness.  
 
*********** 
During the time of the Buddha, there was a layperson by the name of Chunkhawoh who had a very pretty and attractive wife. He was so attached to her he couldn’t bear to be separated from her for a single moment.  
 
One day, the Buddha saw that it was time to help Chunkhawoh. He went for alms rounds with Ananda to Chunkhawoh’s home. When he walked past Chunkhawoh’s home, through his power, he manifested as a standing corpse 
outside the door of Chunkhawoh’s house.  
 
When Chunkhawoh saw this, he concluded it must be the work of Buddha. He 
sent someone to check on this and that person confirmed that the Buddha was 
sitting outside the house. Upon hearing this, Chunkhawoh decided to go and 
see the Buddha.  
 
When he was about to leave the house, he was stopped by his wife who thought that if her husband met the Buddha, the chances were that he might 
become ordained. He asked his wife to let him go so that he could see and 
make three prostrations to the Buddha. He promised to return immediately after that.  
 
His wife agreed but insisted that he must come back quickly after seeing the Buddha. She dipped her finger into a glass of water and placed her wet finger 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 17 
Page 5 of 6 on Chunkhawoh’s forehead. She warned him that he must return before that 
water mark on his forehead dried up or else he would be punished. Chunkhawoh agreed and he set off  to see the Buddha.  
 
He quickly made three prostrations to the Buddha and then took the Buddha’s alms bowl back to his home to fill it up with food. He then went back to return the alms bowl to the Buddha but the Buddha was no longer there. Chunkhawoh then asked Ananda to accept the alms bowl but was told by  Ananda, “Whomever you took the alms bowl from, you should offer it back to 
that person.”  
 
So, Chunkhawoh took the alms bowl and went to search for the Buddha whom 
he found near a monastery. He offered the alms bowl to the Buddha. Buddha 
ate some of the food offered and left some for Chunkhawoh. After Chunkhawoh 
ate the food, the Buddha asked him, “Do you want to be ordained?” Chunkhawoh immediately agreed.  
 
Buddha then asked Ananda to look for a barber to shave Chunkhawoh’s hair. When the barber was about to shave Chunkhawoh’s hair, he said to the barber, “Soon I will become a king and if you shave my hair now, I will cut off your hand (since a bald king won’t look very good).” The barber got frightened 
and ran away. Ananda heard about this and he told the Buddha what had 
happened.  
 
Buddha then asked Chunkhawoh again, “Don’t you want to become a monk?” Chunkhawoh replied, “Yes, I do.” The Buddha then sprinkled some water on 
his head and the barber then started to shave his head.  Chunkhawoh was 
then ordained as a monk.  
 
Chunkhawoh then thought, “I will become a monk for the time being to serve 
the Buddha but I will return home at night.” The Buddha knew what 
Chunkhawoh was thinking so when Chunkhawoh set off for home that night, he manifested a big hole along the road so that Chunkhawoh couldn’t  continue his journey.  
 
Chunkhawoh became worried, depressed and unhappy. He then planned to continue his journey after sunrise. The Buddha knew that Chunkhawoh was depressed and missing his wife as he was still very attached to his wife.  
Buddha then requested Ananda to find a place for Chunkhawoh to stay. 
Ananda followed the Buddha’s instructions and went off to look for Chunkhawoh and found him a place to stay.  
 
When Chunkhawoh woke up the next morning, he found that he was the only 
one left behind in the monastery as everyone else had gone out for their alms 
rounds with the Buddha. Chunkhawoh decided to clean the place before he set off for home but no matter how hard he tried, there was always dirt around. This was the manifestation of the Buddha who wanted to ensure that 
Chunkhawoh would not be able to complete the cleaning.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 17 
Page 6 of 6 After some time, Chunkhawoh  gave up and decided to leave. He tried to close 
the doors before leaving but he had trouble closing the doors. When he closed one side of the door, the other side which he had closed earlier would open 
again. He became frustrated and he decided, “Whatever happens to this temple 
is none of my business. When I become a king, I will build something a 
thousands times better than this.” He then set off for home.  
 
Chunkhawoh decided to take the small path instead of the main road so he could avoid the Buddha. As the Buddha knew this, he also took the same 
small path. Along the way,  Chunkhawoh saw the Buddha from afar. He tried 
to avoid the Buddha by hiding behind a bush. The Buddha then used his miraculous power to expose where  Chunkhawoh was hiding. Chunkhawoh felt so embarrassed when he faced the Buddha. The Buddha then asked 
Chunkhawoh to follow him.  
 
The Buddha knew Chunkhawoh was still very attached to his wife and if he 
did nothing to help him to overcome this attachment and pacify his mind, 
Chunkhawoh would remain miserable and tormented. The Buddha then 
thought of a way to subdue Chunkhawoh  mind……..(To be continued) . 
 
These accounts from the Jataka Tales  of the Buddha are not meant for 
pleasure reading or entertainment nor sh ould we think of them as insignificant 
as they are meant to help us overcome the three mental poisons. We can learn 
from this story as it will teach us how to overcome desire and attachment. This 
story shows how attachment and desire can torment our minds and make us suffer like Chunkhawoh. Even though he had agreed to become a monk, his attachment to his wife made him want to go home and unable to serve the 
Buddha. 
  
Recently we looked at the four close placements of mindfulness. By 
understanding them, we then understand what is to be abandoned and what is to be cultivated.  But it is not that simple. When we look at the entity of the 
close placements of mindfulness, their entity is investigative wisdom that 
investigates what is bad and what is good; what is helpful and what is not helpful; what is to be abandoned and what is to be cultivated. Based on the wisdom that really understands this, then comes the four thorough 
abandonings, the entity of which is the effort that strives to overcome the 
faults and to cultivate the antidotes. This is how they are related:  The entity of the thorough abandonings is joyous perseverance (effort) that can come only after we have the investigative wisdom that realises what is to be abandoned 
and what is to be cultivated.  
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Alison Wong   
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 18 
Page 1 of 8 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root Verses  of Ornament for Clear Realisations  translated by Venerable 
Joan Nicell; an FPMT Masters Program Project, edition June 2007, ©Joan 
Nicell and FPMT, Inc.  Basic Program Study Manual for Maitreya’s Ornament for Clear Realizations, Chapter 4, compiled by Emily Hsu and Kok Wai Cheong; an FPMT Masters 
Program Project, edition September 2005, © FPMT, Inc. 
             Root Verses  are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added.  
 
Lesson No: 18                   Date: 16th September 2008  
 
It is said that when the mind is subdued and disciplined, then there will be happiness. But if the mind is unsubdued and undisciplined, the mind will be 
unhappy and then there will be suffering. If what we desire is happiness, then 
we need to discipline and subdue our minds and overcome the three mental poisons by seeing them as faults, relying on their antidotes and striving to weaken them.  
 
For example, we can see in the close placement of mindfulness of bodies that their nature is filthy, unclean and impure. Although this is the reality, we relate to our bodies in a completely distorted way, grasping at them as very 
pure and clean. Because of this mistaken apprehension, we develop 
attachment which causes undesirable consequences and problems.  
 
Likewise with the close placement of mindfulness of feelings: even pleasant 
feelings are in fact contaminated and are in the nature of suffering. Yet, we do 
not realise this and, instead, we see them as real happiness. From that comes the desire for these feelings which gives rise to undesirable consequences and problems again.  
 
As I have mentioned before, since we are already here, why waste our time?  When we listen to the teachings, we have to pay full attention and think, “Is what is being said true or not?” Other wise, there will not be much benefit in 
coming to class. You are all adults, not children. If I keep on repeating this   
many times, it is irritating and you may be offended. If you need to do 
something else or to talk, please do so during the break at 9pm.  
 
In the context of the close placement of mindfulness of minds, the mind is 
impermanent but this is not how we understand it to be. We grasp at the mind 
in a completely distorted way thinking and believing strongly that the mind is permanent. Likewise, we relate to our bodies, wealth or possessions, thinking they will last forever. Because of this, they become so important to us and suddenly we feel we have so many things to do (to take care of them). In the 
process, we have so much unhappiness and problems although these things 
are by nature impermanent.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 18 
Page 2 of 8 Likewise, for the sense of the “I” and “self,” we grasp at them to be inherently 
existent. Because of this belief, we have to do so many things to work for the “I.”  
 
We completely distort reality and see our bodies, feelings, minds, selves and phenomena in an erroneous way and, as a result, we get into trouble and encounter problems and unhappiness. The only way to free ourselves from these problems is to overcome these erroneous views by meditating on how: 
• the bodies are by nature impure 
• the feelings are in the nature of suffering 
• the minds are by nature impermanent and 
• the nature of the “I” and phenomena is that they do not truly exist.   
 
Meditating in this way will weaken our erroneous views. When such views are weakened, there will be fewer problems and less suffering. When there is less suffering, there will be more mental happiness, peace and satisfaction.  
It becomes very clear then that without subduing and disciplining our minds, 
we will become unhappy and have many problems. That is guaranteed. But it 
doesn’t simply stop there. If we get into trouble and that is it, then that is all 
right. But when our minds are unsubdued, not only do we suffer but it also 
causes problems and difficulties for others because of how we express ourselves through our physical actions and speech.  The consequences of our actions will be suffering in our future lives. Only after we have subdued and 
disciplined our minds will our physical and verbal behaviour become pleasant 
and beneficial for others, bringing them happiness.  
Having all the wealth, status, possessions and good things in life do not 
necessarily mean our minds will be subdued and happy. Whether the mind 
will be subdued or not depends on the type of perspective we adopt, how we use our minds and what kind of thoughts we have.  
 
Studying, learning and attending the teachings of the Buddha alone will not enable us to discipline our minds. In order to discipline our minds, we need to practise. This means that we need to reflect on and analyse whatever we have 
heard, read or studied and integrate that knowledge with our minds. Simply 
attending classes, listening to teachings or reading the text alone will not help us to change our minds. I have mentioned this many times.  
 
We have received so many teaching but there is a great need to apply what we have learnt. We must practise especially when we meet with challenges and difficulties. At that time, we need to give ourselves some time and sit down for five to ten minutes, reflecting on whatever we have learnt and see how we can 
apply that knowledge, using it as an antidote to the problems we are facing.   
 
When we do this, when we can experience even the slightest benefit from and 
taste the Dharma, our interest in Dharma practice will arise. From our own side, we will be able to see that the Dharma is fantastic. Until we have put the 
Dharma into practice and reflect on it, it is very difficult to see this.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 18 
Page 3 of 8 As I have mentioned before, most of us do daily commitments, sadhanas and 
mantra recitations. Some people may even spend hours on their commitments. At the end of these sessions, we should ask ourselves truthfully, “Does my daily recitation help me? Have they done anything to subdue my mind?” Most 
of the time, it is quite difficult to say “Yes.”  
 
On the other hand, if we study and learn this text and come to the 
ascertainment that this is the antidote that will fix our problems, then we should put aside some time - even 10 minutes - reflecting on and putting the 
antidote into practice to change our minds. We should check and see whether 
doing this will benefit our minds. 
 
Until we are able to discipline and subdue our minds, it will be difficult. The 
main purpose of practising the Dharma - reciting the sadhanas and mantras, 
doing the visualisations, etc. - is for them to become antidotes to our negative emotions and to subdue our minds. When our practices do not fulfil this purpose, then there is not much difference from a parrot reciting OM MANI 
PADME HUM.  
 
These things I have been talking about, it is very important that you keep them 
in mind all the time. When we practise the Dharma, we do so to subdue our 
own minds and not to control other people. We are the owner of our minds and 
our problems. We know how unhappy we are and the problems, sufferings and faults in our minds. Nobody else knows this. Therefore we have to subdue our own minds and not the minds of other people.  
 
There is a lot of advice in A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life by 
Shantideva on the kind of physical demeanour we should adopt so that we can relate to others in a pleasant way. When we talk to people, we should use pleasant words. This happens naturally when the mind is subdued and disciplined. A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life explains in great detail 
what we should do with our bodies, speech and mind. We should remember 
those instructions.  
 
Geshe-la :  There is an Indian guy working at  the petrol station I frequent. 
Whenever I go there, I find it amazing ho w he smiles at and welcomes people. 
He doesn’t do this for tips. No one gives tips at the petrol station. So far, from what I have seen he does not hope for that.  
 
He will just smile to whoever comes to the petrol station, we lcoming him or her. 
He will say, “Hello. Welcome.” He talk s nicely and in a friendly manner. Even 
though I have no connection with him, he will say, “Hi, sifu (Venerable in 
Chinese).”  
 
This makes a difference to my mind. His actions make me feel  happy even when 
I am upset. He will show you the way to the shop at the petrol station and say, 
“This way please.” He opens the door  for you and says, “Welcome.” Not 
everyone can do that. So far I have seen on ly one such person here. It is quite 
interesting how he serves and welcomes people. We are just normal people, not 
rich. He doesn’t own the petrol station. He is just working for a salary but how  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 18 
Page 4 of 8 he shows respect sincerely from his heart makes a huge difference to people’s 
minds and they are totally changed by th is. At that time, I thought we should 
have this guy at ABC. I am not the only one who sees that. Many people also see that. He doesn’t only treat me that way. He does that for everyone.  
 
The story will be different if he owns the petrol station. If he does that, then more people will come to patronise the petrol station and it will make him more money. 
But he doesn’t own the petrol station yet he makes a big difference. Even if you 
are upset, when you go there, you will  be happy when he talks to you.  
 
This is quite interesting. Instead of, for example, you are happy but when the 
other party shows you a black face, your mind will be disturbed and become unhappy. When you talk to this person, he does not smile at you and his face 
looks unhappy, you will not enjoy talking to him. Therefore the action of the other 
person does make a big difference.  
 
My point is that we should try our best to serve, talk with and smile at people 
from our hearts like that guy (in the petrol station). This is important to the centre. Many people have remarked that students from ABC have studied so much Buddhadharma but they are not nice. They shake their heads.  This is true if we do not change our behaviour. It does not mean that we are good if we 
have studied a lot. People will judge whether you are good or  not.  We cannot 
say we are good. Some people are getting worse and worse after learning so 
much and nothing seems to change so th ey do not see the point of studying..  
 
Our focus is important. Studying is one thing. The other is to change our 
behaviour. When new people come, we sh ould welcome and talk to them. Maybe 
our Asian culture is that normally we do not talk much and do not bother with 
strangers. We don’t really care. This is  one of the Asian problems. We do not 
say, “Hello, how are you?” But we need to change like what Obama declared in 
his presidential campaign, “Change!” John McCain and Obama talk about big 
changes but I do not know how much they can change. I am just advertising 
change. 
 
Just listening to the teachings or studying them alone will not bring about any change. Change can only come about when we analyse and reflect on them  and then put them into practice. Only then can change come.  
 
This is the whole point behind Kyabje Zopa Rinpoche’s plans for this five year Basic Program. At the end of each cycle of the Basic Program, Rinpoche wants all students to do retreat for three months in order to complete the course. The purpose of the retreat is to put into practice what has been learnt. This is Rinpoche’s idea all the while.  
 
There is no doubt that we need to study. The main purpose of studying is to be able to put the teachings into practice gradually in order to subdue our minds. Therefore there is the retreat requirement. We should remember all this in our 
hearts. Of course, subduing and disciplining our minds is difficult but 
nevertheless we have to work at it. 
*********** 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 18 
Page 5 of 8 3. Four legs of magical manifestation1  
The four legs of magical manifestation are: 
1. leg of magical manifestation of aspiration 
2. leg of magical manifestation of effort 
3. leg of magical manifestation of intention 
4. leg of magical manifestation of analysis 
The entity of the legs of magical manifestation is meditative stabilisation.  
 
The manner of meditating on the four legs of magical manifestation is the same 
as developing concentration or meditative stabilisation. One meditates by 
abandoning the five faults by applying the eight antidotes or applications. 
 
There are five faults that hinder the development of single-pointed 
concentration. These are:  
1. Laziness  
2. Forgetfulness  
3. Laxity and Excitement  
4. Non-application (of antidote) 
5. Over-application (of antidote) 
• At the beginning, laziness prevents us from getting started.  
• At the time of preparing to develop single-pointed concentration, there is the 
fault of forgetting the instructions.  
• Then during the actual meditation when one is engaged in the practice of 
developing single-pointed concentration, either laxity or excitement arises as obstacles to the practice so there is a need to rely on antidotes to overcome 
them.  
• Over-application is when one applies antidotes at those times when laxity 
and excitement are not manifesting.   
Faults Antidotes 
 
1. Laziness  
1. Faith 
2. Aspiration 
3. Effort 
4. Pliancy 
 
2. Forgetfulness   
5. Mindfulness 
 
3. Laxity and Excitement  
6. Introspection 
 
4. Non-application   
7. Intention 
 
5. Over-application  
8. Equanimity 
The eight antidotes to the five faults are listed in the table above: 
• The first four antidotes – faith, aspiration, effort and pliancy – act against 
laziness.  
• The remedy for forgetting the instructions is to be mindful, which means 
bringing to mind the instructions for developing the single-pointed mind. 
• One has to rely on introspection (or vigilance) to check whether the mind is 
under the influence of laxity and excitement. Therefore, the antidote to laxity and excitement is introspection. 
• Intention is the antidote to the non-application of antidotes.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 18 
Page 6 of 8 • When one applies antidotes at those times when there is no need to do so, 
this is called over-application and the antidote to that is equanimity. 
If you want to read more about these five faults, you should refer to the Middle 
Length Lam Rim  which we had already studied in a previous module.  
 
Aspiration means wanting to possess a single-pointed mind. When there is the 
aspiration, one will generate the effort. Effort can only come about on the basis of having the aspiration to develop the single-pointed mind. Before aspiration 
can arise, we must have the faith of conviction in the qualities of the single-
pointed mind, “This is what I will get if I have a single-pointed mind.” Our aspiration leads us to putting in the effort to develop the single-pointed mind and with  effort comes pliancy. 
 
When we talk about practising the Dharma, one will not have any interest to start doing so if there is no faith. For example, without faith in the law of cause and effect, there is no basis for want ing to practise or aspiration for the 
Dharma. Without aspiration for the Dharma, there will be no effort. Without 
effort, there is no result. In order to have results, we need to generate the  
effort to strive towards them. Effort can only come when there is an aspiration to reach the goal. In order to have that aspiration, we need to have faith. This process can be applied to anything and shows how important faith is.  
 
The obstacle to practising the Dharma is laziness. In order to practise, there must be effort. In order to have effort, there must be aspiration. In order to have aspiration, there must be faith. Without faith, we cannot overcome 
laziness. 
 
The meaning of faith here is not blind faith. Faith is the mind that comes from 
wisdom. At the beginning, we learn the instructions through hearing and 
studying. We then critically analyse what we have heard or studied and reflect 
on their meaning to arrive at the conclusive ascertainment of that particular topic. This ascertainment is called the faith of conviction.  
 
The faith that arises in the mind through hearing or studying the teachings is 
unstable compared to the strong faith that arises from reflection and 
ascertainment. It is like one hearing a particular restaurant has good food compared to tasting the food for oneself. It is the same with the Dharma. What we have heard would be different from what we have tasted or experienced. 
Therefore, it is always mentioned that reflection is extremely important. We 
should not leave the teachings at the level of hearing or studying but we should reflect on and critically analyse what we have learnt. From this, we can  arrive at a conviction or ascertainment. When this happens, happiness begins, 
when the door of Dharma opens and the change for the better starts.  
 
Laziness is overcome when one achieves pliancy. Presently, we have neither  
mental nor physical pliancy. Even if we want to practise the Dharma, our minds don’t feel like doing so and our bodies feel heavy. When we have pliancy, 
there is no difficulty in performing virtue. Both physical and mental pliancy 
must be achieved before one can say one has achieved the fully qualified calm abiding.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 18 
Page 7 of 8  
In the order of achievement, mental pliancy comes first. On the basis of that,  
one achieves physical pliancy. After that, one achieves the bliss of physical pliancy which is then followed by the bliss of mental pliancy. This is the order. 
If you want to revisit this topic in greater detail, you can refer to the Middle 
Length Lam Rim or other relevant texts.  
 
********************* 
(Continuation of the tale of Chunkhawoh ). 
 
When we listen to the Jataka Tales,  it is not like listening to an ordinary story 
for entertainment. We should pay attention to this story to see what kind of advice we can derive from it. Up to this point of the story, the main point is to 
subdue the mind and to overcome desire and attachment. In the case of Chunkhawoh, the main character of this story, we saw how he was tormented by his desire and attachment even after ordination. This shows that simply 
changing the external by putting on robes does not mean that the mind will be 
subdued or change. Becoming a monk or nun does not necessarily mean all the desires and attachment have been abandoned.  
 
Now we shall see the skilful means that the Buddha employed to subdue and pacify Chunkhawoh’s desire. His mind was not calm and peaceful even after his ordination due to his strong attachment to his wife.  The Buddha thought, “What can I do to help Chunkhawoh overcome his desire?” 
 
The Buddha then asked Chunkhawoh. “Have you ever seen a mountain with very beautiful scenery?”  
 
Chunkhawoh replied that he had not. Buddha then asked Chunkhawoh to 
hold on to his robes and they flew to such a mountain. On the mountain, 
Chunkhawoh saw a blind monkey. The Buddha asked Chunkhawoh, “If you were to compare your wife with this monkey, who is more beautiful?” 
 
Chunkhawoh replied, “Without any doubt, my wife is hundred of times more beautiful than this monkey. There is no basis for comparison.” 
 
The Buddha then asked Chunkhawoh, “Have you seen the celestial mansion of the gods?”  
 
Chunkhawoh replied that he had not. The Buddha then asked Chunkhawoh to hold on his robes and he flew with Chunkhawoh to the Heavens of the Thirty-three.  Upon reaching there, the Buddha told Chunkhawoh to look around the 
celestial mansions and see what the gods are doing, how they are playing and 
enjoying themselves. 
 
In one of the celestial mansions, Chunkhawoh saw the gods and goddesses 
playing together. However in another celestial mansion, he only saw goddesses, 
without any gods around. They were just sitting around and not doing anything. Chunkhawoh asked them, “Why are you all alone and not mixing around with the other gods?” 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 18 
Page 8 of 8                                                            
The goddesses replied, “The Buddha told us that there is a monk named 
Chunkhawoh who has just been ordained and who is keeping his vows. After he dies, he will be reborn here as a god. We are waiting for him.” 
 
When Chunkhawoh heard this, he was very happy. When he returned to the Buddha, the Buddha asked him what he had seen and he told the Buddha everything. 
 
Then the Buddha asked Chunkhawoh, “How does your wife compare with those goddesses that you had just seen?” 
 
Chunkhawoh replied, “Comparing the goddesses that I had seen just now to 
my wife is the same as comparing my wife with the monkey.” 
  
The Buddha said, “If that is the case, then you may as well remain as a monk 
and keep your vows properly because this is the result you will achieve in the 
future.” 
 
The Buddha and Chunkhawoh then flew back to earth. Chunkhawoh 
remained an ordained monk, remembering what the Buddha had told him of 
the happiness that awaited him in the future if he did so and kept his vows 
properly. ( To be continued ).  
  
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Alison Wong   
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
 
1 Please refer to pg. 61 of the Basic Program Study Manual .  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 19 
Page 1 of 9 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root Verses  of Ornament for Clear Realisations  translated by Venerable 
Joan Nicell; an FPMT Masters Program Project, edition June 2007, ©Joan 
Nicell and FPMT, Inc.  Basic Program Study Manual for Maitreya’s Ornament for Clear Realizations, Chapter 4, compiled by Emily Hsu and Kok Wai Cheong; an FPMT Masters 
Program Project, edition September 2005, © FPMT, Inc. 
             Root Verses  are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added.  
 
Lesson No: 19                   Date: 18th September 2008  
 
As I had mentioned before, whether we are happy or unhappy, it all depends on whether our minds are subdued or not. When our minds are not subdued 
and disciplined, we become unhappy and we suffer. Happiness and 
unhappiness do not exist inherently from their own side. They arise from causes and conditions. It is the mind that leads us to happiness. Likewise it is the mind that leads us to unhappiness. 
 
The way to overcome unhappiness is to change the way we look at things. It depends on the mental perspective we have. When we have the correct mental perspective and know how to think wisely and correctly, our mental 
unhappiness is immediately weakened. If this is so, we can infer that our 
mental unhappiness can be completely removed. The way to do this is to change our way of thinking   to one that completely opposes that which causes the unhappy mind. The trick is to make the mind think in the correct way.  
 
Nothing will happen if we just hope for the best or pray for things to change. When we encounter challenges or difficulties, we must reflect on what we have learnt and see how that can help to reduce our mental unhappiness. It is good when our problems and unhappiness are reduced by our learning to put our 
Dharma knowledge into practice. You have to try this out for yourself. I have 
mentioned this several times. Just hearing what I say alone will not be of any benefit. You have to apply whatever you have learnt and studied at those times when you are unhappy and then see whether there is any positive change that 
reduces your mental unhappiness. When it works, then that is good.  
 
When our minds are subdued and disciplined, our physical and verbal actions 
will naturally be pleasant and virtuous. When our minds are not subdued, the 
actions of our bodies, speech and minds will not be pleasant or virtuous. 
Generally speaking as a Buddhist and particularly since we consider ourselves to be  followers of the Mahayana, this becomes an important point to remember. 
 
We are supposed to be studying the teachings and great treatises with their profound advice. It is, therefore, important for us to analyse and reflect on the teachings that we have heard or studied. When we compare the impact of hearing as opposed to reflection on our minds, the mental impact we get from 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 19 
Page 2 of 9 reflecting on the Dharma is stronger. The imprints that are placed in our 
minds through reflection will be stronger and more stable.  This is apparent from the fact that we tend to forget easily what we have learnt if we did not reflect on it. However, when we do reflect on those points that we have studied, 
it would be difficult for us to forget what we have ascertained. From this, we 
can see how important reflection is compared to merely listening to or studying the teachings.  
 
We accept that there are imprints and future lives. What will happen to us in 
our future lives will depend on the imprints that go on to our future lives. They 
do make a difference. In order for such imprints to have any positive effect, they must be really stable in the first place. If the imprints are from merely listening to and hearing the teachings, we have to consider whether they will 
have any positive effect in our future lives or not.  
 
What we need to do now is to place stable imprints in our minds so that we 
can enjoy them in our future lives. In order for the imprints to be stable and 
firm, we have to do reflect on and analyse the teachings we have received. If we 
just study and listen to the teachings, we will forget them easily. It is difficult to say those imprints will benefit us in our future lives. I am not saying that they are of no benefit but we have to think about whether we can say that they 
will benefit us in our future lives.  
 
Geshe-la :  I am just wondering. We believe that when we listen to the Dharma, 
those imprints can benefit us in our next  lives and many life times to come. When 
we listen today and we forget what we have heard tomorrow, how do those 
imprints help us in our future lives? I am not saying it is right or wrong. I am just 
wondering. 
 
This is just my opinion. When we listen to or study the teachings and then critically analyse the information and reflect on them, we can remember and 
not forget them. Even when we reach the age of 60 or 70 years old, we can still 
remember the information. That is a real sign that the imprint is stable.  
 
In terms of virtue, we should strive to develop the virtue we have not yet 
developed and whatever virtue we have developed, we should strive to increase 
them so that the imprints placed in the mind are strong and firm. At the time of death, we will die with our virtuous mind manifesting due to our familiarity with virtue. When  we die with such a virtuous state of mind, then we can say 
there is real hope for us in our future lives.  
 
If we are not able to familiarise our minds with the virtue of what we have 
learnt, then it quite difficult to say the imprints will benefit us in our future lives. We can infer this based on our dream experiences. The state of our 
minds when we fall asleep affects our dream state. When we fall asleep with an 
anxious or virtuous state of mind, we may forget those thoughts when we are asleep but these thoughts will continue as imprints and we may dream of something that is related to these earlier states of mind. The next morning 
when we wake up, we can immediately remember what had happened in our 
dream.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 19 
Page 3 of 9  
Therefore we should always practise placing powerful and stable imprints in 
our minds. The only way to do this is through analysis so that we become more familiar with virtuous thoughts. Then at the time of death, we can die 
with a virtuous state of mind and there will be real hope for us in our future 
lives. Because of having strong imprints, it is possible for us to develop virtuous thoughts even at a young age in our next life. This is like the analogy I  mentioned earlier: when we wake up from our dream, we can still remember it clearly. In the same way, we can posit that when we take rebirth in our next 
life, positive imprints will give rise to positive thoughts, even when we are 
young.  
 
This is my answer to the view of some  people who assert that all this studying 
is useless as their minds have not changed. In order for our minds to change, studying and listening alone is not enough. We have to reflect and critically analyse what we have studied. It is particularly important at those times when we encounter difficulties and challenges. For positive change to happen, we 
should take 10 to 15 minutes to reflect on whatever we have learnt.  
 
************* 
The purpose of meditating on the four legs of magical manifestation is that when one has achieved them and attained meditative stabilisation, it is very 
easy for one to engage in virtue as one has overcome laziness. Based on such meditative stabilisation, one can perform many magical manifestations and with that one can accomplish the welfare of others.  
 
• The leg of magical manifestation of aspiration  is the not the mental 
factor of aspiration. It is the single-pointed concentration that focuses on its 
object of observation. This concentration came about by depending on very 
strong aspiration.  
• The leg of magical manifestation of effort  is not the mental factor of effort 
but rather it is the single-pointed concentration that focuses on its object of observation that came from the application of constant effort. 
• The leg of magical manifestation of intention  is the single-pointed 
concentration that focuses on its object of observation that came from the familiarisation with concentration from previous lives.   
• The leg of magical manifestation of analysis  is the single-pointed 
concentration that focuses on its object of observation that arose by 
depending on the instructions (or doctrine) that were taught by others.  
 
The definition of leg of magical manifestation is  an exalted knower engaged in a path that is a meditative 
stabilization based on the eight applications that aband on, these being the antidotes to the five faults.1 
The leg of magical manifestation of the Mahayana is superior to that of the 
Hinayana because it is conjoined with method and wisdom.  
 
Boundary:  They exist from the path of accumulation through to the buddha 
ground. 
  
The way to meditate on the four legs of magical manifestation is through applying the eight antidotes that abandons the five faults. According to the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 19 
Page 4 of 9 Compendium of Higher Knowledge , the eight antidotes can be condensed into 
four methods:- 
1. Faith, aspiration and effort are posited as the causes for one to engage 
quickly in meditative stabilisation and can be condensed into the method 
of striving. 
2. Pliancy is the method that benefits the body and mind and is called the 
method of benefiting.  
3. Mindfulness and introspection are classified as the method that directs 
one’s attention to the object of observation.  Mindfulness prevents one 
from losing the object of observation. Introspection checks whether the mind is losing the object of observation. 
4. Intention and equanimity are classified as the method of antidote .  
 
4. Five powers & 5. Five forces 
The entity of the five powers is given in the definition: 
The definition of a power from within the thirty-seven harmonies with enlightenment is an exalted knower 
that independently produces a superior’s path, its result.2
In some commentaries, “independently” is explained to mean literally, “owner.” 
 
They exist from the heat and peak levels of the path of preparation through to the buddha ground whereas the five forces exist from the forbearance and 
supreme mundane quality levels of the path of preparation through to the 
buddha ground. 
 
When we compare the five powers to the five forces, the five forces are enumerated in a manner similar to the five powers. The five powers are: 
1. the power of faith, which is a c onviction regarding the four noble truths. 
2. the power of effort, which delights in discardi ng true sufferings and true origins and adopting true 
cessations and true paths. 
3. the power of mindfulness, which does not forget  the observed objects and as pects of the four noble 
truths. 
4. the power of meditative stabilization, which is a single-pointed mind focused on  the four noble truths 
without distraction. 
5. the power of wisdom, which discriminates t he mode of abidance of the four noble truths. 
 
The five forces are:  
1. the force of faith, which is a c onviction regarding the four noble truths. 
2. the force of effort, which qui ckly realizes the four noble truths. 
3. the force of mindfulness, which does not forget  the observed objects and as pects of the four noble 
truths. 
4. the force of meditative stabilization, which is a single-pointed mind focused on the four noble truths 
without distraction. 
5. the force of wisdom, which discriminates individual aspects of the four noble truths. 
 
Both have the same objects of observation which are the Four Noble Truths. However we have to make a distinction between the five powers and five forces as they differ in their entities and boundaries. When we look at the entity of the five forces: 
The definition of completely pure forces from within the thirty-seven harmonies with enlightenment is  an 
exalted knower that cannot be ov ercome by its discordant class.3
  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 19 
Page 5 of 9 • The discordant class of faith is non-faith.  
• The discordant class of effort is laziness.  
• The discordant class of mindfulness is forgetfulness.  
• The discordant class of meditative stabilisation is distraction. 
• The discordant class of wisdom is erroneous wisdom. 
As the five forces is an exalted knower that cannot be overcome by its 
discordant class, there is no opportunity for the discordant class to manifest 
when one is in meditative stabilisation. It is said that during the post-meditative stabilisation, the discordant class will also not arise. At the forbearance and supreme mundane quality levels of the path of preparation, when one is mediating on the five forces, for example, on faith, there is no way 
that the discordant class, non-faith, can arise. Even when one is not 
meditating on faith, non-faith will also not arise. 
 
On the other hand, at the heat and peak levels of the path of preparation, 
when one is mediating on faith, non-faith will not arise. But when one is not 
meditating on faith, it is said that the discordant class of faith, non-faith, will 
arise many times. This is the difference asserted by Gyaltsab Je in his Essential Ornament.  His source was Haribhadra’s commentary on the 
Ornament for the Clear Realisations .  
 
This is how one differentiates between the five powers and the five forces. 
When  meditating on any of the five objects of observation, there is no 
opportunity for the discordant class to arise. But when one is in the post-meditative session, in the case of the five powers, there are many opportunities for the discordant class to arise whereas in the case of the five forces, the 
discordant class will not arise.  
************ 
(Continuation of the tale of Chunkhawoh) 
 
We saw how the Buddha was very skilful in making Chunkhawoh remain as a 
monk.  
 
The Buddha then instructed Ananda, “You and the other monks should not stay together or associate with Chunkhawoh. Leave him alone.” Ananda 
informed all the monks about this instruction. From then on, the monks did 
not associate with Chunkhawoh. Chunkhawoh was embarrassed and wondered why everyone was avoiding him.  
 
One day, Chunkhawoh spoke to Ananda, “It is all right for me if the other monks are avoiding me but you are closest to me and you are also avoiding me. What is the reason?” 
  
Ananda replied, “It is true that I am closest to you but, since we are on different paths, I am avoiding you.” 
 
Chunkhawoh asked, “What do you mean that we are on different paths? Why 
is your path different from mine?” 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 19 
Page 6 of 9 Ananda replied, “Our paths are different. Your purpose of keeping the vows is 
to achieve rebirth as a god. My main goal of practising is to achieve the sorrowless state and nirvana. Therefore our paths are different.” 
 
Chunkhawoh felt sad when he heard Ananda say that. The Buddha knew of Chunkhawoh’s sadness. He went to talk to Chunkhawoh and asked him, “Have you ever seen the hells?” 
 
Chunkhawoh replied that he had not. The Buddha then asked Chunkhawoh to 
hold on to his robes and they went to th e hell realms. Upon arriving at the hell 
realms, the Buddha asked Chunkhawoh to look around. As Chunkhawoh 
walked around, he came across many cauldrons filled with molten iron and boiling waters. There were living beings inside all the cauldrons except one. 
Chunkhawoh asked the hell guardian, “Why is that particular cauldron empty 
whereas the rest of the cauldrons are filled with living beings?”  
 
The hell guardian replied, “The Buddha told us that there is a fully ordained 
monk named Chunkhawoh who will be reborn as a god as the result of 
remaining an ordained monk. However, after that rebirth, he will be end up in this cauldron.” 
 
Chunkhawoh was terrified when he heard this and said to himself, “Goodness! If the hell guardian found out that I am Chunkhawoh, he will put me in this cauldron straight away!” He quickly left the hell guardian and returned to the Buddha.  
 
The Buddha asked Chunkhawoh, “What have you seen?” Chunkhawoh told the Buddha. 
 
The Buddha told him, “If your motivation for remaining as an ordained monk 
is to achieve rebirth as a god and experience those enjoyments that will be the 
end result. It would be better if your goal of remaining as an ordained monk is to achieve the sorrowless state and nirvana.” They then left the hell realm. 
 
Chunkhawoh then changed his goal to achieving the sorrowless state and nirvana. Since he had changed his goal, he returned to the sangha community and followed the Buddha.  
 
Once when the Buddha gave teachings to all the monks, the Buddha said, “The three inner stains are to be abandoned. The three inner stains are the three poisons which are ignorance, anger and attachment.” Chunkhawoh received these teachings and by reflecting on them, he achieved the path of seeing and gradually became an arhat. The story ends here. We do not know 
what happened to him after he became an arhat. 
 
We can learn many things from these events that happened in the Buddha’s 
times. Whether one is ordained or is someone engaging in virtue, one’s 
motivation is important. When one’s motivation is merely to achieve a good 
rebirth as a human and god, there is no guarantee that one will not fall back to the lower realms. Therefore, one’s ultimate goal should be to achieve the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 19 
Page 7 of 9 sorrowless state and nirvana. In order to achieve the sorrowless state of 
permanent and everlasting happiness, we have to abandon the three inner stains of ignorance, anger and attachment. Without abandoning them, there is no way to achieve the sorrowless state and as long they remain in our minds, 
there will always be problems and unhappiness. Even one does not wish for 
problems, one will experience them.  
 
We can see that there is nothing much to talk about after the achievement of arhatship. However, before achieving arhatship, there are so many things to 
talk about. There is a story in the first place because there is so much to talk 
about, there are so many problems.  
 
Geshe-la : After liberation, there is no prob lem therefore there is no story ! 
 
************  
Question : If calm abiding is manifest in the post-meditative session, how can 
the discordant class arise? 
Answer : We are not saying that the discordant class will definitely arise in the 
post-meditative session. It is just that there are opportunities  for them to do so 
and they can arise during the post-meditative session.  
 
One does not necessarily focus on emptiness during the meditation session. For example, one can meditate on faith. If someone is single-pointedly focussing on faith, that person is probably in meditative stabilisation focussing on faith. During that time, there is no room for non-faith to arise but when he 
arises from that meditative stabilisation focussing on faith, non-faith may not 
necessarily  arise but it can  arise. That is what the text is saying. 
 
Question : The bodhisattva on the Mahayana path of preparation will not fall 
into the lower realms. Is this due to the attainment of the five powers? 
Answer : I guess we can say so. When we look at the definition, the five powers 
is an exalted knower that independently produces a superior’s path, its result. 
When we achieve the five powers it will lead to the attainment of the arya path. 
On that basis, we become superior beings and will not go to the lower realms from there.  
Extract from Geshe Jampa Gyatso FPMT Master Program 1998 (pg 631~633) 
Five aspects of the faculties  (Five powers) 
Since the preparations of heat and peak ar ise (after) having thoroughly trained the 
mind, there are five aspects of faculties of 1) faith, 2) joyous effort, 3) mindfulness, 4) 
meditative stabilization, and 5) wisdom that are the entities of heat and peak on the 
path which prepares for clear realization. 
 
Chokyi Gyeltsen defines the five faculties/powers that are included in the group of the 37 harmonies with enlightenment as: an exalte d knower which is independently able to 
generate its result, the arya path. Facult ies or powers are so-called because they 
empower one to give rise to its result. 
 
Gyeltsab says that after the legs of magical emanation comes the path that connects to or prepares for the clear realization of the truth. There is a reason for the order of this presentation; it is because in order to have a complete training of the mind in 
meditative stabilization one needs the heat an d peak levels of the path of preparation 
which control the clear realization of the truth. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 19 
Page 8 of 9 The faculty/power that is the entity of heat an d peak (subject) is of five types because it 
is:- 
(1) a faith in the truth,  
(2) an effort that takes place in practicing and discarding,  
(3) a mindfulness that does not forget the obse rved objects and aspects [of the truths],  
(4) a meditative stabilization that is single-pointed, and  
(5) a wisdom that discriminates the fina l mode of existence of the truths.  
 
These are the five. The remaining will be explained afterward. Here the word ‘remaining’ 
could refer to the observed objects (the trut hs) or the way in which the five faculties 
enable one to realize the truth or the arya path, as here it is simply said that with these five faculties one can ge nerate the arya path. 
 
The five faculties are: 
(1) faith - This is a faith that believes in the four noble truths. It is a believing faith that 
true sufferings arise from true origins and that true cessations arise from true paths. 
(2) effort - This effort is one that takes plea sure in discarding true sufferings and true 
origins and adopting true cessations and true paths. 
(3) mindfulness - This mindfulness is one does not forget the observed objects and 
aspects of the four noble truths after become familiar with them. 
(4) meditative stabilization - This meditati ve stabilization is one that after having 
learned about them concentrates on the noble truths that are to be discarded and 
adopted as well as their observed objects and without distraction. 
(5) wisdom- This is the wisdom that discrimin ates the mode of existence/reality of each 
of the four noble truths. 
 
These five faculties are included in the heat and peak levels of the path of preparation. 
Their result is the arya path, the path of seeing. This meditation completes the four 
levels of the path of preparation quickly so that one soon achieves the path of seeing. 
 
Aspects of the strengths (Five forces)  
Since tolerance and supreme dharma arise (after) having attained heat and so forth, 
the five aspects of strengths of 1) faith, 2) joyous effort, 3) mindfulness, 4) meditative 
stabilization, and 5) wisdom with the entity of tolerance and highest quality on the path 
connected with clear realizations. 
 
These strengths, or forces, are also called a path connected, or associated, with the 
clear realization [of the truths]. These are the same as the five faculties but here they are called the five strengths because of the different context. 
 
According to Chokyi Gyeltsen the definition of the five strengths that are included in 
the 37 harmonies with enlightenment is: an exalted knower that cannot be oppressed 
by its respective discordant class. 
 
On the first occasion, when they are called the five faculties, there is a possibility for 
the five discordant classes to arise while on the second occasion, when they are called the five strengths, the five discordant classes no longer arise. Gyeltsab says that after 
the five faculties come the five strengths associated with the clear realization of the 
truths. The reason for presenting them in this  order is that from attaining the heat level 
and so forth, which are the entity of the faculties, comes the tolerance and supreme 
qualities levels which are the entity of the strengths. The five strengths are: 
 
(1) faith -This is a faith that believes in the truths. 
(2) effort -This is effort in quickly realizing the truths. 
(3) mindfulness -This is a mindfulness that does not forget the observed objects, the truths. 
(4) meditative stabilization -This is a single-pointed mind. 
(5) wisdom -This is the wisdom that indi vidually discriminates the aspects of the 
truths. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 19 
Page 9 of 9                                                           These five strengths could be considered to be an owner or controller of the clear 
realizations of the truth, but they are slightly  different from the five that were meditated 
on before. The difference is that while one is meditating on the five faculties the five 
discordant classes - non faith, laziness, forgetfulness, distraction, and corrupt wisdom- 
are oppressed and therefore do not arise, but in subsequent attainment they can arise many times. In the case of the second occasion, when they are called five strengths, the 
five discordant classes do not arise even in subsequent attainment, or [if they do arise] 
they do not do so intensely. Thus, it is easy to understand why we ordinary beings have 
the five discordant classes, non-faith, lazi ness, forgetfulness, distraction, and corrupt 
wisdom, since even a bodhisattva on the path of preparation has them. 
 
It is important to know these five, which are given different names in different contexts. When one is on the heat and peak levels they are called the five faculties, but on the tolerance and supreme qualities levels they are called five strengths. Then on the path 
of seeing these five are called the faculty possessing all-knower. The names are 
different as their entity is improved. 
 
 
 
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Alison Wong   
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
 
 
1 Please refer to pg. 61 of the Basic Program Study Manual .   
2. Please refer to pg. 62 of the Basic Program Study Manual .   
3. Please refer to pg. 63 of the Basic Program Study Manual .    
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 20 
Page 1 of 6 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root Verses  of Ornament for Clear Realisations  translated by Venerable 
Joan Nicell; an FPMT Masters Program Project, edition June 2007, ©Joan 
Nicell and FPMT, Inc.  Basic Program Study Manual for Maitreya’s Ornament for Clear Realizations, Chapter 4, compiled by Emily Hsu and Kok Wai Cheong; an FPMT Masters 
Program Project, edition September 2005, © FPMT, Inc. 
             Root Verses  are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added.  
 
Lesson No: 20                         Date:2nd October 2008  
 
When we reflect on the meaning of practising the Dharma, it means to transform our minds for the better especially when we have all the favourable conditions now. We should try to place as many imprints as we can on our 
minds. If we do not do this, it will be difficult to get such an opportunity again 
in the future. As to the manner in which imprints are left on our mental continua, they are left on our mental continua through hearing the teachings, from reflecting on or analysing the teachings and from meditating or 
familiarising ourselves with the teachings. The imprints from reflection are 
more powerful than those from listening to the teachings alone. The imprints from meditation are more powerful than those from reflection.  
 
We need to ensure that the imprints left on our minds are firm, stable and lasting. This is more important than simply leaving imprints on the mind. If the imprints are not stable, they may not ripen easily in the future. Therefore it is very important for us to place stable and powerful imprints on our mental continua. Otherwise, it would be difficult for virtuous thoughts to manifest due 
to our strong habituation to negativities. Our negative thoughts are far  
stronger than our virtuous thoughts. The best way of placing firm and strong imprints on our mental continua is through reflection and then familiarising ourselves with the meaning. That is meditation.  
 
Up to now, all of us have done a fair bit of studying. Now it is important for us to reflect on and analyse the teachings we have heard and studied. We should mix this knowledge with our minds and then familiarise ourselves with it 
through meditation so that firm and stable imprints will be left on our minds. 
We must keep this in mind.  
 
From our side, we must try our best, as much as possible, to reflect and 
meditate on the teachings with the purpose of correcting our own faults and 
changing ourselves for the better. The purpose of learning and practising the Dharma is not to expose the faults of others but to correct and improve  ourselves. 
 
******** 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 20 
Page 2 of 6 We have been looking at the 37 harmonies with enlightenment: 1
 
Name Description Full Attainment on  
 
1. Four close placements of 
 mindfulness  
The path that thoroughly investigates things 
  
Small level of the path of accumulation 
2. Four thorough 
 abandonings 
 The path that arises from effort 
 Middling level of the path of accumulation 
3. Four legs of magical 
 manifestation The path that is thoroughly trained in meditative stabilization 
 Great level of the path of accumulation 
4. Five powers The path that prepares for clear 
realizations 
 Heat and peak levels of the path of preparation 
5. Five forces The path that connects to clear 
realizations 
 Tolerance and supreme mundane qualities levels of path of preparation 
6. Seven branches of  enlightenment 
 The path of clear realizations 
 Path of seeing 
7. Eight branches of a  superior’s path  The completely pure path of definite deliverance  Path of meditation  
 
6. Seven branches of enlightenment    
 
The definition of a branch of enlightenment is  an exalted knower in a superior’s continuum that acts as a 
cause of the enlightenment which is its result.2
 
  
The Seven 
Branches of 
Enlightenment   
The Analogy of  Seven 
Precious Objects  
 
 
1  
The branch of 
enlightenment that is correct mindfulness  
It is also called the branch of 
abiding  because with 
mindfulness one will not be distracted by other objects.  
It is likened to the precious wheel which allows one  to be victorious in overcoming everything. Likewise with 
correct mindfulness, one 
is able to sustain mindfulness continually and with familiarity, one can strengthen it over 
time. 
 
2 The branch of 
enlightenment 
that is a fine 
discrimination of phenomena directly realising 
selflessness   
It is also called the branch of 
nature because it is in the 
nature of a no n-conceptual 
exalted wisdom and is the main cause of achieving enlightenment.  
It is likened to the 
precious elephant  which 
can destroy the enemy in 
the battle. Likewise, this wisdom will destroy our  grasping at true existence.
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 20 
Page 3 of 6   
The Seven 
Branches of 
Enlightenment   
The Analogy of  Seven 
Precious Objects  
 
 
3  
The branch of 
enlightenment that is effort  
This is also called the branch of 
definite emergence , for it is 
with effort that one distances oneself from the mundane levels 
and frees oneself from the state 
of being an ordinary being.  
It is likened to the precious horse  which can 
travel very fast. Likewise, with effort, one will 
quickly actualise 
enlightenment.  
 
4  
The branch of 
enlightenment 
that is joy  
This branch is described as the 
branch which benefits body 
and mind. It brings joy.  
It is likened to the 
precious wish-fulfilling 
jewel which increases the 
illumination of all uncontaminated 
phenomena and brings 
joy.   
 
5  
The branch of 
enlightenment 
that is pliancy  
It is called the branch of basis 
without afflictive emotions and since that is similar to pliancy (which makes the body and mind serviceable and able to perform virtues due to 
overcoming the unserviceable 
states of body and mind) this branch is condensed into the branches that are without afflictive emotions.  
  
It is likened to the 
precious queen because 
through this pliancy, one 
is able to experience uncontaminated bliss. 
 
6  
The branch of 
enlightenment 
that is meditative stabilisation  
It is condensed into the 
branches that are without 
afflictive emotions because it is this meditative stabilisation that destroys the afflictions. This is also called the branch of 
abiding without afflictive emotions.    
It is likened to the 
precious householder  
who has all the necessary 
resources. With the branch of enlightenment that is meditative 
stabilisation, one is able 
to achieve all the purposes, goals and  qualities such as clairvoyance and so forth. 
 
7  
The branch of enlightenment 
that is 
equanimity  
It is included within the branches without afflictive 
emotions because the entity of 
equanimity is abiding in a state of concentration that is not influenced by either the faults of laxity or excitement.  
With equanimity one counteracts the unbalanced  
It is likened to the precious minister .  The 
branch of enlightenment that is equanimity enables one to abide in the way one wishes for as long as one desires. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 20 
Page 4 of 6   
The Seven 
Branches of 
Enlightenment   
The Analogy of  Seven 
Precious Objects  
 
state of mind that abides 
harmoniously with afflictive emotions. Hence, this is the branch of entity without afflictive emotions . 
Note: The three branches of enlightenment that is pliancy, meditative stabilisation 
and equanimity are given the name the branches that are without afflictive 
emotions .  
 
When we condense these seven branches of enlightenment into the five 
branches, it helps us to understand better what they are: 
1. The branch of abiding 
2. The branch of nature 
3. The branch of definite emergence 
4. The branch that benefits body and mind 
5. The branches that are without afflictive emotions. 
The source for this classification is Maitreya’s Discrimination between the 
Centre and the Extremes. The Ornament of the Mahayana Sutras  also provides 
the use of the analogies of the seven kinds of precious materials to help us understand these seven branches of enlightenment.  
 
These seven branches exist from the path of seeing and are called “branches” mainly because they are the causes of enlightenment. When we look at its definition, it is an exalted knower in a superior’s continuum that acts as a 
cause  of the enlightenment which is its result.  
 
The definition mentions, “in a superior’s continuum.” Would that include all 
superiors? Would it include the Buddha superior? Does this branch of enlightenment exist in the Buddha’s mind?  
 
Earlier on when we studied the four close placements of mindfulness, the four thorough abandonings, the four legs of magical manifestation, the five powers and the five forces, their boundaries exist up to the buddha ground. These seven branches of enlightenment are said to exist from the path of seeing. Similarly, the eight branches of a superior’s path exists from the path of 
meditation. It seems that the earlier harmonies with enlightenment are found 
all the way up to the buddha ground, but not these seven branches of enlightenment.  Why? Think about it. Maybe we can say the seven branches of enlightenment are also found on the buddha ground.  
 
What about the five powers and five forces - do they exist on the buddha ground? When we consider their definitions and boundaries, they exist even on the buddha ground. Since that is the case, maybe we can say that the seven 
branches of enlightenment and the eight branches of a superior’s path are also  
found on the buddha ground. 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 20 
Page 5 of 6 Question : If a branch of enlightenment exists on the buddha ground won’t that 
contradict the definition of a branch of enlightenment? In the definition, it is 
an exalted knower in a superior’s continuum that acts as a cause  of the 
enlightenment which is the result . That would mean at the time of the result, 
the cause is there. 
Answer : Following this logic, one would then also have to question the 
definition of the five powers (an exalted knower that independently produces a superior’s path, its result). Do the five powers exist on the path of seeing?  
 
There shouldn’t be any problem in the definition of the branch of enlightenment, even for the Buddha. The Buddha superior that exists in one particular moment is the cause of the Buddha superior of the next moment. If 
that is the case, there shouldn’t be any problem with the definition.  
 
The qualm that we are considering is whether the branch of enlightenment 
exist during enlightenment? We are saying that the branch of enlightenment 
exists on the buddha ground, i.e., it exists in the mind of the Buddha. But if 
that is so, then the definition may not apply to the Buddha.  
 
As Buddhists, we do not assert simultaneous cause and effect. A specific cause 
of a specific effect cannot exist simultaneously as one follows the other. But in 
general, there are many things that are both cause and effect. For example, you are a cause as well as the effect.  
 
If you were asked: “Are you the cause?” You would have to say, “Yes.” “Are you 
the effect?” You would also have to say, “Yes.” If that is the case, isn’t cause 
and effect simultaneous? As long as it is a composed phenomenon, it is definitely a cause and also definitely the effect – they are mutually inclusive. 
 
Question : Are these seven branches of enlightenment one entity or different 
entities?  
Answer : The seven branches of enlightenment are not one entity. They are 
posited as different entities. For example, effort and mindfulness are separate mental factors. These seven branches of enlightenment can exist within the 
continuum of a person but they do not need to manifest simultaneously. For 
example, mind generation exists on the uninterrupted path. Does bodhicitta 
exist on the uninterrupted path? When a bodhisattva meditates on emptiness directly, is there bodhicitta in his mind?  
 
Question : Are these seven branches of enlightenment produced in a gradual 
manner, in a particular order or are they generated simultaneously?   
Answer: It is possible  that they can be generated simultaneously even while 
the mind is focusing on one object, such as four noble truths. For example, if the object of observation is true sufferings, one generates these seven branches of enlightenment with true sufferings as the object of observation.  
 
Can these seven branches of enlightenment be generated simultaneously? Generally speaking, it is very difficult to ascertain when different minds are produced simultaneously and when they are not. There is a discussion on this 
particular topic in the Abhidharma.   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11 
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 20 
Page 6 of 6                                                           In the earlier modules, we had studied the mind and mental factors. There is a 
class of mental factors called the five omnipresent mental factors – discrimination, feeling, contact, intention and attention. As long as there is a mind, these five omnipresent mental factors are necessarily present in any 
kind of mind.  
 
Then there are the five object ascertaining mental factors – wisdom, belief, 
aspiration, mindfulness, meditative stabilisation. These mental factors also accompany the main mind.  
 
There is a main mind focusing on a particular object and at the same time, there are these five omnipresent mental factors and these five object ascertaining mental factors. Many minds are operating at the same time. When 
we are talking about the five omnipresent mental factors, we are not talking 
about them appearing in a sequential way. As long as there is a main mind, these five omnipresent mental factors will be there. The discussion on mind and mental factors is quite challenging. Unless there is some definitive text 
that can be used as the basis for ascertaining some of these issues, it is 
difficult to say anything. 
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Alison Wong   
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
 
 
1 Please refer to pg. 59 of the Basic Program Study Manual .  
2. Please refer to pg. 63 of the Basic Program Study Manual.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 21 
Page 1 of 6 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root Verses  of Ornament for Clear Realisations  translated by Venerable 
Joan Nicell; an FPMT Masters Program Project, edition June 2007, ©Joan 
Nicell and FPMT, Inc.  Basic Program Study Manual for Maitreya’s Ornament for Clear Realizations, Chapter 4, compiled by Emily Hsu and Kok Wai Cheong; an FPMT Masters 
Program Project, edition September 2005, © FPMT, Inc. 
             Root Verses  are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added.  
 
Lesson No: 21                         Date: 7th October 2008  
 
As I have mentioned many times before, while we have all the conditions and the opportunity, particularly since our bodies are still functioning, it is the 
time for us to study the teachings of the Buddha. We should strive to place as 
many imprints of the teachings on our mental continua as possible.  
 
We had talked about how imprints are placed on the mind through hearing, 
reflection and meditation. Whatever we have learnt through hearing or reading 
or self-studying the teachings, we should analyse and reflect on their meaning. It is through this process of analysis and reflection that strong imprints will be left on the mental continuum and we will not forget the teachings.  
 
The reason that we do not remember the teachings we had heard or read is because we do not reflect on and analyse them. This process of reflection and analysis can only be done by ourselves. Until we have reflected on those 
teachings that we have heard or studied, real practice is very difficult. By just 
listening to or reading the teachings without any reflection and hoping to do some serious practice, that will be very difficult.  
 
We have to gain some ascertainment of the teachings and such ascertainment 
can only come about through the process of analysis and reflection. Once we 
ascertained the teachings, we will naturally want to practise them  without any prodding or encouragement from others. However, when we do not reflect on the teachings that we had heard or read, then nothing will happen. 
 
The main point is to analyse and reflect on the teachings so that we are able to remove any doubts pertaining to the particular subject that we are analysing. Once we have cleared our doubts, we can then put those teachings into 
practice and the practice will be excellent.  
 
At this time when all the favourable conditions for us to study and practise the 
budhhadharma are present, it is very important for us to seize the opportunity to place as many imprints on our mental continua as possible. Placing 
imprints alone is not enough. The imprints must be very firm and stable. 
When the imprints are strong and stable, then there is hope for us to attain a perfect human rebirth and to meet the teachings of the Buddha in our next life. Then it will be so much easier for us to understand and realise whatever 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 21 
Page 2 of 6 teachings we listen to or study in that life. Like that, we will slowly become a 
better person and there will be hope for us to achieve enlightenment.  
 
If we want to achieve full enlightenment, it is extremely important for us to 
place stable and firm imprints on our minds. If we are not doing that now, it 
will be very difficult. Look around you. There are people who are naturally interested in the teachings of the Buddha and there are some people who have no interest in the buddhadharma at all, no matter what we say to them or how we encourage them to do so. The same thing happens here with studying the 
buddhadharma. There are some people who naturally want to learn and they 
are quite good at it whereas there are others who do not have much interest and they find it difficult.   
 
What is the cause of such differences? It is the imprints that were inherited from past lives. This is a fact. Hearing this explanation, there are bound to be people who will then say, “I am really hopeless. I don’t have many imprints. I may as well forget about it.”  This is the wrong conclusion. This is not the point.  
 
The point is that at this moment when we have this opportunity, if ultimately what we want is happiness now and in our future lives, we must place as many imprints as possible and not give up. Therefore it is very important for 
us to remember that analysing and reflecting on the teachings is very 
important. This can only be done by ourselves and not others. Through this  process of analysis and reflection, we will definitely gain an ascertainment of the teachings. Then Dharma practice will come naturally to us without any 
need of encouragement from others. Having ascertained the teachings, then 
change will come. 
 
*********** 
The seven branches of enlightenment are posited on the path of seeing whereas the eight branches of a superior’s path are posited on the path of 
meditation. Through meditating on the seven branches of enlightenment, one achieves the eight branches of a superior’s path.  
1  
 
Definition: A branch of a superior’s path is an exalted knower in a superior’s 
continuum that is a cause of a superior’s path, its result. 
 
Boundary : It exists from the path of meditation through to the buddha ground. 
 
The eight branches of a superior’s path are as follows. 
1. Correct view 
2. Correct thought  
3. Correct speech 
4. Correct aims of actions  
5. Correct livelihood 
6. Correct effort 
7. Correct mindfulness 
8. Correct meditative stabilisation  
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 21 
Page 3 of 6 1. Correct view  
As mentioned in the Lamrim Chenmo , the worldly correct view is the 
understanding of the law of cause and effect (karma). However, in this context,   
correct view refers to having the correct understanding of how thing exist in reality. It refers to the correct view “ which thoroughly analyses in subsequent 
attainment the reality (emptiness) that wa s realised in medita tive equipoise on 
the path of meditation. ”
2 (Subsequent attainment is also translated as the post 
meditative equipoise). 
 
As explained in the Lamrim,  meditation on emptiness in meditative equipoise is 
called the space-like meditative equipoise. When one arises from that session, one practises by seeing all phenomena as illusory. That is what is referred to 
here as correct view. Although phenomena appear to exist inherently those are  
mistaken appearances as things do not exist in that way in reality. In this  context, correct view is the view of phenomena as being illusory and empty of true existence.  
 
2. Correct thought 
Correct thought is that “ which motivates speech that teaches one’s own 
realizations to others.”  This refers to the intention that motivates one to teach 
others what one has realised i.e., the correct view of phenomena as illusory and being empty of true existence. 
 
3. Correct speech 
In this context, since it has to be a path, it does not refer to truly qualified speech but rather it refers to ethics, in particular the ethics of refraining from 
the four non-virtuous actions of speech.  It is the mind that guards against 
this. 
 
4. Correct aims of actions 
This is the mind that refrains from the three non-virtuous actions of the body.  
 
5. Correct livelihood 
This is the mind that refrains from the non-virtuous actions of the body and speech. Motivated by attachment, one engages in all kinds of physical actions 
such as adopting certain physical postures and demeanour to cheat or taking 
advantage of others. One also engages in flattery with the aim of being rewarded or to sustain one’s livelihood. The mind that guards against such actions of body and speech is correct livelihood. 
 
6. Correct effort 
This is the effort of applying the antidotes that abandons the objects of abandonment on the path of meditation. As this path is a long path and it 
takes a long time to remove the objects of abandonment, one has to rely on the 
effort of applying the antidotes without being discouraged.  This refers to the effort that abandons the obstructions to omniscience.  
 
7. Correct mindfulness 
This refers to not forgetting to apply the antidote against excitement and laxity when they arise when one is engaged in meditation. When excitement arises, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 21 
Page 4 of 6 one reflects on unpleasant and impure objects to calm the mind down. When 
laxity arises, one uplifts the mind by remembering pleasant objects that one has faith in such as one’s guru, the deities and so forth. When one is in a state of equanimity, in which neither excitement nor laxity arise, one should not 
apply any antidote but simply continue with the meditation. 
 
8. Correct meditative stabilisation 
This is the “meditation on objects that are the special excellent qualities such as 
the clairvoyances.” 
 
According to Maitreya’s Discrimination of the Centre and the Extremes  and 
Asanga’s Compendium of Higher Knowledge, t hese eight can be condensed into 
four branches:   
1. the branch that thoroughly analyses 
2. the branch that brings about understanding 
3. the branch that brings about trust in others 
4. the branch that is an antidote to the discordant class 
 
• Correct view is included in the branch that thoroughly analyses  the truths 
realised during meditative equipoise which is done during the subsequent attainment. 
• Correct thought is included in the branch that brings about understanding 
as it is the intention of wanting to teach others what one has realised.  
• Correct speech, correct aims of actions and correct livelihood are included in 
the branch that brings about trust in others . They are primarily the minds 
that guard against the non-virtuous actions of body and speech (i.e., ethics). It 
is through our practice of ethics that others will trust us.  
• Correct effort, correct mindfulness, and correct meditative stabilisation are 
included in the branch that is an antidote to the discordant class . Correct 
effort is the effort of applying the antidotes that abandons the objects of 
abandonment on the path of meditation. Correct mindfulness is the antidote to the excitement and laxity, which are secondary afflictions that arise during 
one’s meditation. Correct meditative stabilisation overcomes the obstacles for 
achieving the special excellent qualities such as clairvoyance.  
 
These eight paths of the superiors are commonly translated as the Noble Eightfold Path. They can also be condensed into the three higher trainings:  
1. The higher training of wisdom  - correct view, correct thought, and correct 
effort* 
2. The higher training of ethics  - correct speech, correct aims of actions, and 
correct livelihood.  
3. The higher training of concentration  - correct mindfulness and correct 
meditative stabilisation 
 
*In my (Geshe-la’s) text, correct mindfulness is included in the higher training 
of wisdom. However, putting correct mindfulness under the higher training of 
concentration makes more sense as correct mindfulness is related to the development of concentration. 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 21 
Page 5 of 6 Using the analogy of the wheel to explain the Noble Eightfold Path:- 
1. The higher training of wisdom overcomes the discordant class and is 
likened to the spokes of the wheel that are able to overcome foes and destroy the enemies. 
2. The higher training of ethics is likened to the hub of the wheel as ethics are the bases of all qualities. 
3. The higher training of concentration is likened to the rim of the wheel that keeps the individual spokes in place. Correct mindfulness and correct meditative stabilisation enable the mind to withdraw and focus on the 
object of observation. 
 
Based on the correct view of the nature of reality comes the correct thought 
that is the intention to teach our realisation to others. We then need to 
generate correct speech, correct aims of actions and correct livelihood to 
become an ethical person so that othe rs will trust us. Then we need to have 
correct effort, correct mindfulness and correct meditative stabilisation which will enable us to apply antidotes continuously to overcome discordant class. 
 
There are 110 aspects of an exalted knower of all aspects and within these 110 aspects are the 37 aspects of an exalted knower of all aspects harmonious with hearers. The hearers have it. So does the Buddha. If the Buddha does not have 
it, we cannot say it is harmonious with hearers.  
 
We have to say that these 37 harmonies with enlightenment are also present in 
the Buddha’s mind. Therefore the Buddha also possesses correct thought.   However the Buddha does not have any motivation because he does everything 
spontaneously and he does not possess any conceptuality. How then do we 
explain correct thought? Please reflect on this. 
 
Based on the definitions, although the eight branches of a superior’s path are 
posited on the path of  meditation through to the buddha ground, we may have 
to say that they also exist on the path of seeing in the continua of the superior beings. If that is the case, then the seven branches of enlightenment and the eight branches of a superior’s path should be the same. Looking at the two 
definitions, are they talking about the same thing?: 
• A branch of a superior’s path is an exalted knower in a superior’s 
continuum that is a cause of a superior’s path, its result. 
• A branch of enlightenment is an exalted knower in a superior’s continuum 
that acts as a cause of the enlightenment which is its result. 
If you are interested to do so, you can think more about this. There are many 
things to analyse.  
 
Some texts mention that the 37 harmonies with enlightenment exist from the 
path of accumulation through to the buddha ground. 
 
Question :  
Do the  correct aims of actions refer to vows? 
Answer :  
The correct aims of actions are basically ethics. Based on the four tenets, there are different views on the entity of vow. The Sutra School, Mind Only School 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 11
  Ornament for Clear Realisations 
Lesson 21 
Page 6 of 6                                                           and the Autonomy Middle Way School posit vows as consciousness, a mind of 
restraint. The Great Exposition School and the Consequence Middle Way School posit vows as forms. Ethics include not only the correct aims of actions but also correct speech and correct livelihood and according to the Great 
Exposition School and the Consequence Middle Way School, they are 
considered form whereas the other tenet systems consider them to be consciousnesses. 
 
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Alison Wong   
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong  
 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
 
 
1 Please refer to pg. 64 of the Basic Program Study Manual . 
 