Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/Transcript pdf/ORN_GTTnotes_17.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:51:44.682214
================================================================================

Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 17: 9-13 June, 2008 
 
 1  
Masters Program: Ornament for Clear Realization 
Commentary by Geshe Tenzin Tenphel 
 
Monday afternoon, 9 June 2008 
 
[Geshe-la gave some advice in English on practice, at the beginning of the session and a few times 
during the session. Below is a summary of some of t he main points:] 
 
It’s very important to work on our mind, to get the  afflictions under control, instead of being 
controlled by them. This is the basis for developin g calm abiding, special insight, renunciation, 
bodhicitta, and so forth. If we reduce our afflicti ons, we will have more peace, less desire, anger, 
etc. and we will be very near to calm abiding. Many  people try to develop calm abiding but fail to 
attain it, because they have not done the right pre paration. So we need to observe our mind and 
understand where our thinking is wrong, and then wo rk on changing it. This is basic, to make our 
mind strong, stable, and peaceful.  
Just living here and hearing many teachings doesn’t  necessarily make you a better person, e.g. you 
may become proud, looking down on those who don’t k now as much as you, being upset if they 
don’t respect you, etc. So just by hearing many tea chings, you may become worse! If there is 
someone who makes us angry or causes problems for u s, we can think that this person is helping us 
to practice. Bodhisattvas actually pray to meet peo ple like this! We need such people to be able to 
practice well. They help us to see how strong our m ind is, how good our practice is, what afflictions 
we have in our mind so that we can work on them. If  everyone and everything around us is very 
nice, then we may think “I’m OK,” but we don’t real ly see our mind. If we don’t have difficult 
people and situations, we don’t know how strong we are. So we are very fortunate when we have 
such people around. We can think that such people a re so kind, that they are dedicating their life for  
us, to help us practice. Whether such people help u s or harm us depends on our mind, on our way of 
thinking. So be careful, don’t have mistaken thinki ng. Without such people we can’t develop. 
Some people say “I can’t practice in this place” or  “I can’t practice with this person around, he 
disturbs me.” If we have this kind of attitude, we don’t even need other people to disturb us. Even 
when no one is around, our mind can be disturbed! W e can be disturbed by a pen, or a book. If we 
think about it, getting angry at such things is use less. If you change, everybody changes. It doesn’t 
mean they change, but we have a different way of lo oking and thinking, so it’s as though we are in a 
different world. One master said that we don’t need  to pray to be born in Tushita; if we have peace 
inside and change our way of looking and thinking, there is Tushita. If we don’t change our mind, 
then even if we pray to be born in Tushita, we won’ t be born there, because there’s no cause to be 
born there.  
So from now on, when you see someone who makes you angry or causes you problems, think “they 
are dedicating their life for me, destroying their life for me, so that I can practice.” If you think like 
this you won’t get angry at them. Whether or not th ey have this motivation is not sure, but it seems 
like they are dedicating their life for us. When As anga saw Maitreya for the first time, Maitreya was 
in the form of a wounded dog. So maybe this person doing stupid things is a buddha or a 
bodhisattva, and because of our karma we see them l ike this. If he is a buddha or bodhisattva, you 
are so lucky, because you are so near to seeing the m. But even if they are not, if you think “they are  
so kind, now I have a chance to practice,” then you  can be happy. 
 
Corrections:  
 
1) Ornament of the Essence , p. 129, one-third down the page: 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 17: 9-13 June, 2008 
 
 2 (9) After tha t, as before , bodhisattvas on the path of seeing  meditation  who strive for 
the sake of attaining the liberated path…  
 
2) Chart 23 (The Eight Approachers and Abiders) pag e 3, # 7 “approacher to foe-destroyer,” in the 
last column the boundaries for the simultaneous approacher to foe-destroyer  should read: “From 
the sixteenth instant of clear realization of the t ruth, when one strives to abandon the great-of-the-
great afflictions of the three realms , through abiding on the uninterrupted path that ab andons the 
small-of-the-small objects to be abandoned by the p ath of meditation.” 
 
3) Chart 24 (The Four Results), in the column under  “Abandonments,” in the list of the five partial 
concordances with the upper, #5 should read: afflic tive  ignorance. 
 
The teachings continue: 
In the last session we mentioned the four types of conceptualizations that are objects to be 
abandoned. These will come up during our discussion  about the path of preparation, so rather than 
explain them now, we will look at them as they come  up in Gyeltsab Je’s text. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 132: 
2B2C-1A2B-2A2C. Mode of generation (continued)  
 
QUALM: What are the differences among the three typ es of wisdom observing 
emptiness? 
RESPONSE: At the time when a wisdom arisen from hea ring or contemplation 
observes emptiness, which is a mere negation of ela borations of true existence, although 
a generality of the object dawns well, the object a nd the object-possessor appear as 
though unrelated due to being together with very co arse dualistic appearances. {188} 
However, when a wisdom arisen from meditation obser ves it, although there are 
dualistic appearances, due to having overcome the c oarse dualistic appearances as in the 
previous two cases, it appears as if one has penetr ated the object. And due to being 
transformed in a manner of water placed in water, a nd appearing like a chamber, the 
dawning of the meaning generality of emptiness in s uch a manner is described as 
“dharmata appearing clearly.” Nevertheless this is not a clear appearance that is free 
from conceptions.  
 
In this passage the differences among the wisdom ar isen from hearing , the wisdom arisen from 
contemplation,  and the wisdom arisen from meditation observing emptiness are described. The 
wisdoms arisen from hearing and contemplation obser ving emptiness are such that although the 
generality of the object dawns well, the object and  the object-possessor appear as though unrelated 
because of the presence of very coarse dualistic ap pearances. In the case of the wisdom arisen from 
meditation observing emptiness, although there are dualistic appearances, it appears as if one has 
penetrated the object, emptiness, due to having ove rcome the coarse dualistic appearances as in the 
case of the wisdoms arisen from hearing and contemp lation. When this wisdom arisen from 
meditation observes emptiness, it is as though wate r is placed in water. Although this happens, this 
is not a clear appearance that is free from concept ions. 
 To talk about these three wisdoms in a general man ner, when I am explaining some meaning to 
you, you first hear this meaning and due to that he aring, a wisdom arisen from hearing arises. 
Following that, you contemplate the meaning that ha s been heard and, as a result of the 
contemplation, a wisdom arisen from contemplation a rises. Following that, you meditate on the 
meaning that has been contemplated and this gives r ise to a wisdom arisen from meditation. This is 
the general procedure, and as we pass through these  steps, the object becomes clearer and clearer. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 17: 9-13 June, 2008 
 
 3 Isn’t that the general way when we study the text? 
 
Q: So when Geshe-la explains some meaning, one hear s this explanation and from that a wisdom 
arisen from hearing arises without having to unders tand it? 
A: What I described is a general procedure. Of cour se, when an explanation is given and the 
students hear it, the kind of wisdom arisen from he aring that is generated varies from person to 
person. Depending on one’s faculty, one’s mind, one ’s mental strength, one may attain a very good 
wisdom arisen from hearing, or one may have a poor wisdom arisen from hearing. The same applies 
for the wisdom arisen from contemplation. The meani ng heard is contemplated upon, but the quality 
of this wisdom arisen from contemplation depends on  the individual student. Similarly, the wisdom 
arisen from meditation depends upon how it is medit ated on by the individual student. However in 
general, we do say that from hearing, a wisdom aris en from hearing arises. Then from 
contemplating what has been heard, a wisdom arisen from contemplation arises, and from 
meditating on what has been contemplated, a wisdom arisen from meditation arises. 
 
Q: How about cats and dogs that hear the explanatio n? 
A: There should be some motivation to hear because without this motivation we cannot say that this 
explanation gives rise to a wisdom arisen from hear ing. Imprints can be deposited in their minds 
due to hearing, but there is no understanding invol ved.  
 
Q: What does the term generality of the object  from the previous passage mean? 
A: It refers to a meaning generality of the object.   
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 132: 
 
 Furthermore, through the force of analyzing well w ith reasoning the meaning of 
emptiness from within the state of meditative equip oise in calm abiding, from that 
juncture in which one is able to induce the bliss o f pliancy of the body and the mind, 
one attains the fully qualified special insight obs erving emptiness, and is said to have 
attained a union of those. In spite of that, you sh ould know that the mere union of calm 
abiding and special insight exists even in those wh o are on the path of accumulation, as 
well as in some non-Buddhists. When one initially g enerates such a union of calm 
abiding and special insight realizing emptiness, on e is said to have “generated the heat 
level of the path of preparation.”  
 
This passage talks about when this wisdom arisen fr om meditation observing emptiness arises. It 
says that from within calm abiding, through the for ce of analyzing well with reasoning the meaning 
of emptiness, one will be able to induce the bliss of pliancy of the body and the mind. At that point,  
one has attained the fully qualified special insigh t observing emptiness and one is also said to have 
attained a union of calm abiding and special insigh t observing emptiness. For someone who is 
definite in the Mahayana lineage, the attainment of  a union of calm abiding and special insight 
observing emptiness occurs simultaneously with the attainment of the heat level of the path of 
preparation. However, we do not say that when a uni on of calm abiding and special insight is 
attained, one also attains also the heat level of t he path of preparation. In fact, the union of calm 
abiding and special insight exists in those who are  on the path of accumulation and even in those 
who have not entered the path; it even exists in so me non-Buddhists.  
 We have attained a union of calm abiding and speci al insight many times in our past lives, but do 
not have it now. How did that benefit us? We have a ttained the union of calm abiding and special 
insight many times, and calm abiding alone and spec ial insight alone many times. So, if these are 
used for the sake of generating renunciation or def inite emergence from samsara, to generate 
bodhichitta, and to generate the correct view, then  they become the causes for eliminating cyclic 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 17: 9-13 June, 2008 
 
 4 existence. In that way they are very beneficial. Ot herwise, such calm abiding and special insight 
simply become the cause to reborn in samsara again.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 132: 
 
Even though one is able to ascertain the presence o f dualistic appearances through the 
force of experience even while being in meditative equipoise at that time, since one is 
not able to ascertain it in such a manner as  at the time of attaining the forbearance level 
of the path of preparation, it has been explained i n {page 133} [Asanga’s] Hearers’ 
Grounds , “It is not that the vanishing of dualistic appear ances is the vanishing of 
counterfeit dualistic appearances.” 
 
This last bit of the passage is pointing out an exp lanation given by Asanga’s Hearers’ Grounds . In 
general, we say that on the four levels of the path  of preparation—heat, peak, forbearance and 
supreme mundane quality—there are dualistic appeara nces and a person is able to ascertain the 
presence of these dualistic appearances even while in meditative equipoise. However, we would not 
say that, on these four levels of the path of prepa ration, dualistic appearances have vanished.  
 It is not very clear what this passage is trying t o say. There are dualistic appearances both on the 
heat level of the path preparation and on the forbe arance level of the path of preparation. It almost 
seems as if this passage is saying that on the heat  level of the path of preparation, one is able to 
ascertain the presence of dualistic appearances thr ough the force of experience. However, one is not 
able to do that on the forbearance level of the pat h of preparation. This passage is awkward. Perhaps 
it means this: at the time of attaining the forbear ance level of the path of preparation, because ther e 
are dualistic appearances, one is able to ascertain  the vanishing of dualistic appearances. We can 
take this as a particular way of explaining stemmin g from this text called Hearers’ Grounds. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 133: 
2B2C-1A2B-2A2D. Meaning of the individual divisions  
It is very difficult to differentiate among the fou r levels of path of preparation by means 
of (i) the apprehended-objects lacking nature and b eing small, middling and great clear 
appearances and (ii) their apprehender-subjects lac king nature and being complete clear 
appearance, because one is placed in the meditative  equipoise on their emptiness of true 
existence by simultaneously withdrawing all phenome na that are apprehended-objects 
and their apprehender-subjects during meditative eq uipoise, and there is no difference 
with respect to their meaning-generalities of dharm ata dawning clearly. 
 
Here it says that the four levels of the path of pr eparation: heat, peak, forbearance and supreme 
mundane quality, do not differ in terms of (i) thei r objects lacking nature and being small, middling,  
and great clear appearances and (ii) their subjects  lacking nature and being complete clear 
appearance. From these points of view, it is diffic ult to differentiate among the four levels of the 
path of preparation because, at that time, one is p laced in the meditative equipoise on their 
emptiness of true existence by simultaneously withd rawing all phenomena that are objects and 
subjects, and there is no difference with respect t o their meaning generalities of dharmata dawning 
clearly. Since it is difficult to differentiate amo ng the four levels of the path of preparation by 
means of the criteria mentioned in this paragraph, how should we differentiate them? The answer 
comes in this next paragraph: 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 133: 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 17: 9-13 June, 2008 
 
 5  Therefore, the ability to abandon the conception o f true existence of apprehended-
objects becomes more and more outstanding on the oc casions of the first two levels of 
the path of preparation. Hence, at the time of havi ng generated the forbearance level of 
the path of preparation, due to having weakened the  coarse potency of even the manifest 
innate conception of true existence of apprehended- objects, when arising from 
meditative equipoise {189} the generality of appear ances of phenomena that are 
apprehended-objects, such as forms, dawns well, lik e a reflection in a mirror. And at the 
time of having generated the supreme mundane qualit y level, apprehender-subjects also 
appear in that manner through the strength of medit ation. The stages unfold in this way 
through the force of the degree of difficulty and e ase of abandoning the adherence to the 
apprehended-objects and apprehender-subjects as tru ly existent. 
 
We can explain the four levels of the path of prepa ration with respect to the abilities to destroy fou r 
types of manifest conceptions: 
• The heat  level of the path of preparation has the ability t o destroy the manifest conceptions  
regarding  apprehended-objects of the  thoroughly afflicted class  that are knowledge 
obscurations; 
• The peak  level of the path of preparation has the ability t o destroy the manifest conceptions 
regarding  apprehended-objects of the  completely pure class  that are knowledge 
obscurations; 
• The forbearance  level of the path of preparation has the ability t o destroy the manifest 
conceptions regarding apprehender-subjects of  substantial existence  that are knowledge 
obscurations; 
• The supreme mundane quality  of the path of preparation has the ability to dest roy the 
manifest conceptions regarding  apprehender-subjects of  imputed existence  that are 
knowledge obscurations. 
You can see from this description that the first tw o levels of the path of preparation are correlated 
with the conceptions regarding the apprehended-obje cts, whereas the third and the fourth levels of 
the path of preparation are correlated with the con ceptions regarding apprehender-subjects. 
 
Let us look at examples of these various types of c onceptions: 
 1) As an example of a conception regarding apprehended-objects  of the thoroughly afflicted 
class, we can posit the conception of the suffering aggre gates as truly existent objects of utilization. 
Basically, this is a conception of true existence i n which the suffering aggregates are apprehended 
as truly existent objects of utilization. The suffe ring aggregates are an example of true sufferings.  
 2) An example of a conception regarding the apprehended-objects  of the completely pure class  is 
a conception of true existence in which completely pure aggregates are apprehended as truly 
existent objects of utilization.  
 3) An example of a conception regarding apprehender-subjects  of substantial existence  that are 
knowledge obscurations is a conception of true exis tence in which an apprehender-subject of the 
aggregates as substantially existent is apprehended  as a truly existent utilizer. Basically, there is an 
apprehender-subject that apprehends the aggregates as substantially existent, and this [third 
conception] is a conception of that apprehender-sub ject as a truly existent utilizer. Understand that 
when we talk about these conceptions, these concept ions observe apprehender-subjects of 
substantial existence, and the apprehender-subjects  themselves observe substantial existence.  
 4) Similarly, for the fourth type of conception, w e have conceptions that observe the 
apprehender-subjects  of  imputed existence . The apprehender-subjects themselves observe imput ed 
existence. Let us take a person, which is an impute d existent. There is an apprehender-subject that 
observes the person, an imputed existent. The conce ption of such an apprehender-subject as a truly 
existent utilizer is an example of the fourth type of conception, conceptions regarding apprehender-
subjects  of imputed existence  that are knowledge obscurations. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 17: 9-13 June, 2008 
 
 6  
Questions and answers: 
 
Q: What is the afflicted ignorance from the five pa rtial concordances with the upper? 
A: This afflicted ignorance is the conception of a self of persons. 
Q: How is this different from the view of the trans itory collection? 
A: They are different. A view of the transitory col lection is a conception of self of persons, but a 
conception of self of persons is not a view of the transitory collection. So what is the view of the 
transitory collection? It is a view such that by ob serving either the “I” or the “mine” in one’s own 
continuum, it apprehends the “I” to be established as self-sufficient, substantially existent. So the 
difference is the conception of a self of persons d oes not have to observe the “I” or the “mine” in 
one’s own continuum; it can observe the “I” or the “mine” in others’ continua. 
 
Q: A hearer arya does not abandon afflicted doubt u ntil the sixteenth instant of the path of seeing. 
So in our studies, how do we differentiate between afflicted doubt and useful doubt?  
A: This is a matter of perception. For example, it is said that the conception of true existence 
benefits the realization of the absence of true exi stence. Because of the existence of the conception 
of true existence, one understands the mode of appr ehension of the conception of true existence. In 
order to realize emptiness of true existence, one n eeds to know the mode of apprehension of the 
conception of true existence. For that reason, it i s said that the conception of true existence benefi ts 
the realization of emptiness of true existence. It is from this point of view that we make such a 
statement. In fact, we would not identify the conce ption of true existence as benefiting the 
realization of true existence. While we can say tha t the conception of true existence benefits the 
realization of emptiness of true existence, we can also say that the conception of true existence is a  
hindrance to realizing the emptiness of true existe nce. These statements are made from the point of 
view of varying perceptions. 
 
Q: If we see this place as Tushita, we will not gen erate renunciation, therefore we will not be able t o 
generate bodhichitta.  
A: If one is able to see one’s environment as Tushi ta, then one will not encounter problems 
regardless of what kind of people or circumstances one meets. Although one does not encounter 
problems, one can see that other people have proble ms. If one is able to have this kind of view, then 
others’ suffering will not harm oneself. In this wa y, one is actually able to generate exceptional 
compassion through seeing others’ suffering. Althou gh there is the opportunity for them to became 
free from suffering, they are tormented by sufferin g. In this way, exceptional compassion arises in 
one’s mind. Venerable Milarepa says: “Others see me  as crazy, but I see others as crazy.” 
 
 
Tuesday afternoon, 10 June 2008 
 
[Geshe-la began by speaking about the importance of  taking care of the mind.] 
 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 133 (end of the second paragraph): 
2B2C-1A2B-2A2D. Meaning of the individual divisions  
The stages unfold in this way through the force of the degree of difficulty and ease of 
abandoning the adherence to the apprehended-objects  and apprehender-subjects as truly 
existent. 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 17: 9-13 June, 2008 
 
 7 Yesterday we explained that the four levels of the path of preparation—heat, peak, forbearance, and 
supreme mundane quality—can be correlated with the four types of conceptions that are knowledge 
obscurations: conceptions regarding apprehended-obj ects of the thoroughly afflicted class, 
conceptions regarding apprehended-objects of the co mpletely pure class, conceptions regarding 
apprehender-subjects of substantial existents, and conceptions regarding apprehender-subjects of 
imputed existents. These are correlated with the fo ur levels of the path of preparation through the 
force of the degree of difficulty and ease of aband oning the respective conceptions . You should 
know that the first two levels of the path of prepa ration are correlated with conceptions regarding 
apprehended-objects, and the second two levels are correlated with conceptions regarding 
apprehender-subjects. This kind of presentation is done from the point of view of difficulty and ease 
of abandoning conceptions regarding apprehended-obj ects and conceptions regarding apprehender-
subjects.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 133: 
 
 It is just as it has been posited (from the side o f what has been abandoned) in the 
Ornament for the Great Vehicle Sutras (Mahayanasutralamkara ): “At that time, the 
distractions to apprehended-objects will be abandon ed,” and “In this way, at the end of 
that, the distractions to apprehender-subjects will  be abandoned.” The claim that 
“Differentiation is made on the basis of whether or  not clear appearance of exalted 
wisdom is present” is one that is clearly deprived of anything to say. 
 
This presents a reason for saying that the presenta tion is based on the degree of difficulty and ease 
of abandoning the four types of manifest conception s. This presentation is not made from the point 
of view of whether or not there is clear appearance  of exalted wisdom. This is why it says “It is just  
as it has been posited (from the side of what has b een abandoned).” The presentation is made from 
the point of view of difficulty and ease of abandon ment.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 133: 
2B2C-1A2B-2A3. Analysis of the awareness and knower  
With respect to such a path of preparation, it is i nappropriate to assert that, at the time of 
meditative equipoise, it is free from conception th at apprehends a sound-generality and 
a meaning-generality with respect to dharmata as be ing suitable to be mixed, because (i) 
dharmata is a hidden phenomenon for ordinary beings  and (ii) such a non-conceptual 
mind cannot possibly comprehend a hidden phenomenon . If it were mistaken with 
respect to dharmata, then it would also be incorrec t for it to eliminate manifest 
superimpositions, because it would be a non-concept ual wrong consciousness. And if it 
were not mistaken, then it follows that even the se eds that are the objects to be 
abandoned by the path of seeing would have been aba ndoned, because it would be non-
conceptual and unmistaken with respect to dharmata.   
 
[Geshe-la mentioned that, if we do not understand t his commentary, we should not put it aside and 
read easier commentaries instead, because they only  explain the easy points. It’s OK to use easier 
commentaries to understand this one, but it’s impor tant to continue trying to understand this one. If 
we are able understand this commentary, we will und erstand the difficult points.] 
 
In this section, we are analyzing the awareness and  knower. In the subject of Lo Rig (awarenesses 
and knowers), we have the general classification in to two main categories:  
1.  Valid cognizers [sometimes translated as “prime cog nizers”] 
2.  Non-valid cognizers [sometimes translated as “non-p rime cognizers”] 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 17: 9-13 June, 2008 
 
 8 Valid cognizers are of two types:  
1.  Direct valid cognizers  
2.  Inferential valid cognizers 
Non-valid cognizers are divided into: 
1.  Subsequent cognizers 
2.  Correct assumption 
3.  Awareness to which an object appears but is not asc ertained 
4.  Doubt 
5.  Wrong consciousness  
 
In this outline, we are analyzing the nature of the  meditative equipoise of the path of preparation in  
the continuum of someone definite in the Mahayana l ineage. From among the seven types of 
awarenesses [mentioned above], which one is this? B asically, it is a subsequent cognizer. We need 
to prove that such an awareness of meditative equip oise is not any of the other six types.  
• Such a meditative equipoise is not a direct valid c ognizer, because it is an awareness 
realizing emptiness in the continuum of an ordinary  being.  
• It is also not an inferential valid cognizer, becau se an inferential valid cognizer has to be a 
new realization, but such an exalted wisdom is not a new realization.  
• This exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise is not a correct assumption, an awareness to 
which an object appears but is not ascertained, or doubt, because it is a path to liberation.  
• It is not a wrong consciousness because it is a rea lizing awareness, and a realizing awareness 
realizes its object, while a wrong consciousness do es not. 
This is not explained clearly in Gyeltsab Je’s comm entary, because his explanation is explained in 
the form of a debate.  
 
It is significant to specify that such an exalted w isdom of meditative equipoise of the path of 
preparation belongs to the continuum of someone definite in the  Mahayana lineage , because if we 
omit this qualification, then such an exalted wisdo m of meditative equipoise of the path of 
preparation realizing emptiness can be a direct val id cognizer.  
 In the phrase, “With respect to such a path of preparation,” “such” means the path of pr eparation 
of someone definite in Mahayana lineage. “Such a no n-conceptual mind” refers to a non-conceptual 
mind of ordinary beings, meaning that this mind can not realize a hidden phenomenon. “If it were 
mistaken with respect to dharmata, then it would al so be incorrect for it to eliminate manifest 
superimpositions, because it would be a non-concept ual wrong consciousness,” means that if such a 
mind were mistaken with respect to dharmata, which is its main object, then it would be incorrect 
for such a mind to eliminate manifest superimpositi ons, because if it were mistaken with regard to 
its main object, it would be a non-conceptual wrong  consciousness. This sentence follows from the 
assertion of the opponent, which is presented in th e first sentence of the paragraph: “…it is 
inappropriate to assert that, at the time of medita tive equipoise, it is free from conception …” and so 
on. If such an exalted wisdom of meditative equipoi se were free from conception, and if it were 
mistaken with respect to dharmata, then it would be  incorrect for it to eliminate manifest 
superimpositions, because it would be a non-concept ual wrong consciousness. The main object of 
this exalted wisdom is dharmata. According to the a ssertion, it is non-conceptual. If it were also 
mistaken with respect to dharmata, its main object,  then it would be a non-conceptual wrong 
consciousness. Do you get the point? 
 
Q: Why is it mistaken with respect to dharmata? 
A: It is not mistaken with respect to dharmata, but this is a re futation of the opponent’s assertion 
that it is free from conception. We are saying: “ If it were mistaken with respect to dharmata…” 
According to our system, it is not mistaken with respect to dharmata. But it is  a mistaken 
consciousness. Why? Because the meaning-generality is mistaken as the object with respect to the 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 17: 9-13 June, 2008 
 
 9 appearance factor. In other words, it is a mistaken  consciousness because it is a conception that 
apprehends a meaning-generality and a sound-general ity as suitable to be mixed. If it is a 
conception, it is pervaded by being a mistaken cons ciousness.  
 
Q: What does it mean to say that “a sound-generalit y and a meaning-generality” are seen “as 
suitable to be mixed”?  
A: There is a lot to say about this. To give an exa mple of what we mean by a sound-generality, if 
there is a person who has never been to Sera Monast ery, and if someone describes Sera Monastery 
to this person, the person will have an appearance induced by those sounds. If this person actually 
goes to Sera, then he/she will have an appearance o f Sera Monastery; this appearance is a meaning-
generality. In general, we say that a sound-general ity is  a meaning-generality. Here, when it says, “a 
sound-generality and a meaning-generality” are seen  “as suitable to be mixed,” it means that a 
sound-generality is suitable to be mixed with a mea ning-generality, and a meaning-generality is 
suitable to be mixed with a sound-generality.  
 There are different types of sound-generality: it can arise from seeing something, or from not 
seeing an object. For example, you see Geshe Tenphe l. If you go to a place, such as Cecina, where 
Geshe Tenphel is not present, and if someone says “ Geshe Tenphel,” when you hear those sounds, 
an appearance of Geshe Tenphel induced by sound ari ses; this is a sound-generality that is 
associated with having seen Geshe Tenphel. It is no t the case of a sound generality that arises from 
merely hearing sounds without having actually seen a particular object.  
 Why do we say that a conception is a mistaken cons ciousness? We need to understand that a 
conception apprehends the meaning and the meaning-g enerality as suitable to be mixed.  
 
Q: It is not clear whether or not the two reasons s tated above—“(i) dharmata is a hidden 
phenomenon for ordinary beings and (ii) such a non- conceptual mind cannot possibly comprehend a 
hidden phenomenon”—are asserted by Gyeltsab Je to p rove that the opponent is incorrect?  
A: Yes, they are reasons given by our system to ref ute the assertion of the opponent.  
 
The next sentence says, “And if it were not mistake n, then it follows that even the seeds that are the  
objects to be abandoned by the path of seeing would  have been abandoned, because it would be 
non-conceptual and unmistaken with respect to dharm ata.” If you are not familiar with the style of 
debate, then this passage is difficult. The way in which debate is carried out is important, because i t 
is a mode of analysis. If someone is able to debate  well, to understand well the various modes of 
debating, and to posit well the subject, the predic ate, and the sign, then this person will have very 
good, clean-clear analysis.  
 For example, an incorrect syllogism would be: “The  subject—sound—is impermanent because it 
is sound.” Such a statement is incorrect because th e subject, which is the basis of dispute, and the 
sign are the same: sound. Another example: “The sub ject, sound, is impermanent because it is an 
object of hearing.” This is also incorrect. Why? We  need to prove that sound is impermanent; this 
needs to be proved to someone who does not know tha t sound is impermanent. It is not suitable to 
posit as the sign “it is an object of hearing” to s omeone who does not know that sound is 
impermanent. Such a person knows what sound is, but  does not know that it is impermanent. If this 
person knows that an object of hearing is impermane nt, it is impossible that he does not know that 
sound is impermanent. This person, if he has realiz ed that an object of hearing is impermanent, and 
if he realizes that sound is an object of hearing, then he would have realized that sound is 
impermanent. Therefore, stating “it is an object of  hearing” is not correct in proving that sound is 
impermanent.  In a correct proof statement, the sub ject, predicate, and sign must be mutually related 
but different.  
 An example of a correct syllogism is: “The subject —sound—is impermanent because it is a 
product.” In order to prove that sound is impermane nt, you must proceed as follows: the subject, 
sound, is impermanent because it is a product; it i s a product because it is produced. We can thus 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 17: 9-13 June, 2008 
 
 10  see the importance of a correct sign in proving a s tatement. This is why Tag Rig, or Signs and 
Reasonings, is a very important subject.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 133-34:  
 
Therefore, such a meditative equipoise on the path of preparation, having transformed 
into a wisdom arisen from meditation through the st rength of having familiarized the 
continuum with a subsequent cognizer realizing empt iness, is of the entity analyzing the 
clearly appearing meaning-generality of emptiness. Some ignoramus asserted that the 
classifications of the three wisdoms are inferentia l cognizers based upon the sign of 
freedom from one and many. {190} 
 
2B2C-1A2B-2B. Meaning of the branches  
2B2C-1A2B-2B1. Brief indication  
2B2C-1A2B-2B2. Extensive explanation  
2B2C-1A2B-2B1. Brief indication  
2B2C-1A2B-2B1A. Making a connection 
2B2C-1A2B-2B1B. Root text 
2B2C-1A2B-2B1C. Commentary 
2B2C-1A2B-2B1A. Making a connection 
COMMENTARY 
Beginners, having obtained the instructions in that  manner, since the branches of 
definite discrimination will arise, the branches of  definite discrimination. 
 
EXPLANATION 
Beginners , those abiding on the path of accumulation, medita te on the meaning of the 
instructions by having obtained the instructions in that manner ; since the branches 
of definite discrimination will arise, the branches  of definite discrimination —the 
path that accords with the generation of the path o f seeing after it—will be explained. 
 
This wisdom arisen from meditation due to having me ditated on the meaning of the instructions will 
arise; therefore, the branches of definite discrimi nation will be explained after the instructions.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 134: 
2B2C-1A2B-2B1B. Root text 
1.26 By way of object of observation, aspect, 
Cause, and tutor, 
The heat level and so forth of bodhisattva protecto rs— 
In accordance with their nature 
 
1.27 Relying on possessing four conceptions, 
The small, middling, and great— 
Are superior 
To those  of the hearers along with the rhinoceros-like. 
 
EXPLANATION 
Overtly, the middle four lines [1.26cd–1.27ab] indi cate the meaning of the bases for the 
attributes, the first two lines [1.26ab] the attrib utes, and the last two [1.27cd] those to 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 17: 9-13 June, 2008 
 
 11  whom they are superior. In addition, the distinctio ns of being great, middling, and small 
is  are  indicated as an  attributes  in this commentary by implication . This is also clearly 
taught in Acarya Arya [Vimuktisena]’s commentary. { 191} 
 Thus, the subject— the heat level and so forth of bodhisattva protecto rs —are 
superior to  the paths of preparation of the hearers along with the rhinoceros-like  
because of being superior by way of object of observation, aspect, cause, and  tutor,  
and by way of being supported on possessing four conceptions in accordance with 
their nature and the small, middling, and great . The reason for the small and 
middling serving as attributes is that enhancing an d familiarizing more and more with 
the full complete corpus of the Mahayana path is an  unsurpassable attribute. According 
to what is overt in the commentary, the sixth line [1.27b] refers to the bases for the 
attributes. The remaining meanings of these will be  explained below. 
 
These two stanzas of the root text indicate the six  attributes of the Mahayana path of preparation. If  
you understand this point roughly, then it will be easy to follow the rest of the explanation. The six  
attributes are: 
1.  Object of observation  
2.  Aspect 
3.  Cause 
4.  Tutor 
5.  Possessing four conceptions 
6.  Divisions into small, middling, and great  
I will explain these tomorrow. 
 
Questions and answers 
 
Q: We said the mental support of the path of prepar ation is an actual concentration. We also said the 
path of preparation is attained with the union of c alm abiding and special insight. How can they 
both be supports for generating the path of prepara tion at the same time?  
A: In order to attain an actual concentration, one must first have a union of calm abiding and special  
insight. To explain this briefly: initially, one at tains calm abiding; this is solely calm abiding. After 
this, one attains a similitude of special insight, and then an actual special insight. Actual special 
insight is special insight that is attained from wi thin the state of calm abiding. One attains calm 
abiding, and from within that state, one abides sin gle-pointedly on an object, analyzing the object 
with wisdom. When one is able to induce the bliss o f pliancy of body and mind through the force of 
analysis, then one attains special insight. This ta kes place from within the state of calm abiding. At  
that point, one attains the union of calm abiding a nd special insight, and with that one can proceed 
to suppress or abandon the manifest desire realm af flictions. Eventually one will abandon the nine 
desire realm afflictions, and at that point one att ains an actual concentration. Without a union of 
calm abiding and special insight, such an abandonme nt cannot take place. 
 
Q: For the new generation of the path of preparatio n, is the physical support only human, or can it 
also be desire realm gods or form realm gods?  
A: If we look at p. 131, we see that it can be newl y attained by all of them: “The body supports of 
men and women of three [human] continents as well a s gods of the desire realm are the support of 
body [for generating a path of preparation]. Althou gh not the support for actually generating the 
supreme mundane quality level, apparently some bein gs of the form realm also generate the heat 
and peak levels.” This refers to the new generation of the path of preparation. In this pass age, it says 
that the form realm is not the support for generati ng the supreme mundane quality level; this is 
because it is not a support for generating the path  of seeing, because a support for generating the 
path of seeing has to be one in which there is stro ng despondency regarding cyclic existence. It is 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 17: 9-13 June, 2008 
 
 12  said that the best support for newly generating the  path of seeing is a support of the desire realm. I n 
particular, we say that the human support in the de sire realm is most suited for generating the path 
of seeing. If one is extremely tormented by sufferi ng, it is difficult to generate despondency 
regarding suffering, and if one is extremely happy,  it would be difficult to generate despondency. 
Therefore, it is said that the human support, which  is like the middling level among the various 
levels of the desire realm, is the best for generat ing despondency regarding the suffering of cyclic 
existence. Although we cannot see hell beings and g ods, we can look at the people in our society: 
those who are extremely unhappy find it difficult t o practice Dharma, and those who are extremely 
happy find it difficult to practice. Therefore, we are free from the two extremes, and have the best 
opportunity.  
 
Q: Is it correct that bodhisattvas generate an actu al concentration before the path of seeing, and tha t 
a hearer can attain nirvana merely on the basis of a preparation for a concentration?  
A: Yes. When we talk about a hearer who attains nir vana without a concentration, we are talking 
about a simultaneous hearer, who abandons the objec ts of abandonment simultaneously. 
 
 
Wednesday, June 11, 2008 (morning) 
 
Yesterday [in relation to outline 2B2C-1A2B-2B1B: Root text , p. 134], we went through the root 
text, where six attributes are mentioned. They indi cate that the Mahayana path of preparation is 
superior to the Hinayana path of preparation. These  attributes are sometimes said to be six, and 
sometimes five. Let us consider the subject, the Ma hayana path of preparation. 
1.  The subject—the Mahayana path of preparation—is sup erior to the Hinayana path of preparation 
from the point of view of the object of observation , because it observes the four noble truths by 
means of infinite aspects, whereas the Hinayana pat h of preparation does not.  
2.  The subject—the Mahayana path of preparation—is sup erior to the Hinayana path of preparation 
from the point of view of aspect, because it bears the aspect of stopping adherence t o the four 
noble truths as truly existent by means of infinite  enumerations of reasonings. 
3.  The subject—the Mahayana path of preparation—is sup erior to the Hinayana path of preparation 
from the point of view of cause,  because it acts as the proximate cause of the Maha yana path of 
seeing by way of completing the class of realizatio ns of the three vehicles, whereas the 
Hinayana path of preparation is not like that. 
4.  The subject—the person on the Mahayana path of prep aration—the supreme emanation body 
acts as the tutor to this person (on the Mahayana path of preparation ) by means of revealing the 
complete Mahayana path, whereas this is not the cas e for a person on the Hinayana path of 
preparation.  
5.  The subject—the person on the Mahayana path of prep aration— possesses the four conceptions 
as the main objects of abandonment, but this is not  the case for the person on the Hinayana path 
of preparation. 
6.  For each of the four levels of the Mahayana path of  preparation—heat, peak, forbearance, and 
supreme mundane quality—there are divisions into small, middling, and great , but this is not the 
case for the Hinayana path of preparation.  
 
I would like to talk about the fourth attribute, th at of tutor . We said the supreme emanation body 
acts as a tutor for the person on the Mahayana path  of preparation by means of revealing the 
complete Mahayana path. Thus it seems the supreme e manation body has some kind of 
discrimination against those on the Hinayana path o f preparation by not acting as their tutor! This is  
not a case of prejudice, because the supreme emanat ion body reveals teachings in dependence on 
the trainees; if the trainees are not suitable vess els, it would not be beneficial to reveal the 
respective teachings to them. For this reason, we s ay the person on the Mahayana path of 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 17: 9-13 June, 2008 
 
 13  preparation has a tutor who reveals the complete Ma hayana path, whereas the person on the 
Hinayana path of preparation does not. A supreme em anation body does not teach everything to 
everybody: it depends on the dispositions of traine es; what is suitable for them is revealed to them. 
Thus, the fact that the supreme emanation body does  not teach to everyone is not the fault of the 
supreme emanation body.  
 
Let us look at the sixth attribute [ divisions into small, middling, and great ]: it says that for each of 
the four levels of the Mahayana path of preparation —heat, peak, forbearance, and supreme 
mundane quality—there are divisions into small, mid dling, and great, but that this is not the case for  
the Hinayana path of preparation. In fact, the heat , peak, and forbearance qualities of the Hinayana 
path of preparation each have divisions into small,  middling, and great, but the supreme mundane 
quality level of the Hinayana path of preparation i s not divided into small, middling, and great. This  
is said to be one reason why the Mahayana path of p reparation is superior to the Hinayana path of 
preparation. You may think, “In fact, this is why t he Hinayana path of preparation is superior to the 
Mahayana path of preparation, because the Hinayana supreme mundane quality level does not have 
these divisions, and one can quickly move to the pa th of seeing!” You should not judge the two 
paths of preparation, thinking that if one abides l onger on the supreme mundane quality, that this is 
a sign of the person being weak in terms of mental strength. In fact, for the Mahayana path of 
preparation, the objects of abandonment are more di fficult to abandon, because the bodhisattva 
needs to abandon both afflictive and knowledge obsc urations. Because of the need to suppress more 
manifest objects of abandonment, the bodhisattva ne eds to abide longer on the supreme mundane 
quality level. The objects of abandonment of the Hi nayana person are not so difficult to abandon, so 
there is no need for someone on the Hinayana path o f preparation to abide for a long time on the 
supreme mundane quality level. There is much to thi nk about in relation to this point, but this is the  
essence.  
 
Let us go through the root text. The explanation sa ys that “the middle four lines [1.26cd—1.27ab] 
indicate the meaning of the bases for the attribute s, the first two lines [1.26ab] the attributes, and  the 
last two [1.27cd] those to whom they are superior. In addition, the distinctions of being great, 
middling, and small are indicated as attributes in this commentary. This is also clearly taught in 
Acarya Arya [Vimuktisena]’s commentary.” The first two lines of the root text: 
 
1.26 By way of object of observation, aspect, 
Cause, and tutor, 
 
overtly, by way of the explicit words, indicate the  attributes . The next four lines: 
 
The heat level and so forth of bodhisattva protecto rs – 
In accordance with their nature 
 
1.27 Relying on possessing four conceptions, 
The small, middling, and great— 
 
indicate the meaning of the  bases for the attributes , which are the bases that bear those attributes. 
The last two lines:  
 
Are superior 
To those  of the hearers along with the rhinoceros-like. 
 
indicate those to whom they are superior, i.e. that  the various levels of the Mahayana path of 
preparation—heat, peak, forbearance, and supreme mu ndane quality—are superior to “those,” i.e. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 17: 9-13 June, 2008 
 
 14  the heat, peak, etc., of the Hinayana path of prepa ration of hearers along with the “rhinoceros-like,”  
meaning the solitary realizers.  
 In terms of what is overtly stated, we say the fir st two lines indicate the attributes , the next four 
the bases of the attributes , and the last two, those to whom they are superior . Four attributes are 
overtly indicated in the first two lines; the disti nction of great, middling, and small is indicated i n 
the next four lines. This can be an indication of e ither the bases for the attributes or the attribute s 
themselves. In this commentary, it is treated as an  attribute rather than as a basis for the attribute s. 
The fact that each of these four levels can be divi ded into small, middling, and great can be seen as 
an attribute for saying that the Mahayana path of p reparation is superior to the Hinayana path of 
preparation. In general, we can say that the Mahaya na path of preparation is superior from the point 
of view of six attributes, or from the point of vie w of five.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 134: 
2B2C-1A2B-2B1B. Root text (continued) 
 Thus, the subject— the heat level and so forth of bodhisattva protecto rs —are 
superior to  the paths of preparation of the hearers along with the rhinoceros-like  
because of being superior by way of object of observation, aspect, cause, and  tutor,  
and by way of being supported on possessing four conceptions in accordance with 
their nature and the small, middling, and great . The reason for the small,  and 
middling,  [and great ] serving as an  attributes  is that enhancing and familiarizing more 
and more with the full complete corpus of the Mahay ana path is an unsurpassable 
attribute. According to what is overt in the commen tary, the sixth line [1.27b] refers to 
the bases for the attributes. The remaining meaning s of these will be explained below. 
 
Although the text explicitly mentions small and mid dling, the great is also implied. This is saying 
that the division into small, middling, and great f or each of the four levels is an attribute for sayi ng 
that the Mahayana path of preparation is superior, because “enhancing and familiarizing more and 
more with the full complete corpus of the Mahayana path is an unsurpassable attribute.” The “sixth 
line” (“The small, middling, and great”) refers to the basis for the attributes. This is saying that 
according to what is explicit in Haribhadra’s Commentary Clear Meaning , the sixth line refers to 
the bases for the attributes , but in the previous paragraph, it is said that th ese distinctions are 
mentioned as being an attribute in this commentary. Thus, overtly, although it refe rs to a basis for 
the attributes, the meaning indicated is that it is  an attribute.  
 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 135: 
2B2C-1A2B-2B1C. Commentary 
2B2C-1A2B-2B1C-1. Proving as superior to the Hinayan a path of preparation 
2B2C-1A2B-2B1C-2. The twelve modes of observation s ummarized into four 
2B2C-1A2B-2B1C-1. Proving as superior to the Hinayan a path of preparation 
2B2C-1A2B-2B1C-1A. How it is superior 
2B2C-1A2B-2B1C-1B. The reason for that 
2B2C-1A2B-2B1C-1A. How it is superior 
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. To attain the culmination  of the best hearing and so forth of 
bodhisattvas, the partial concordance with liberati on; after the roots of virtue with the 
characteristics of faith and so forth, concordant w ith realizing the four truths, the four 
partial concordances with definite discrimination…  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 17: 9-13 June, 2008 
 
 15   
EXPLANATION 
The subject— the four partial concordances with definite discrim ination  of 
bodhisattvas —{192} are superior to the heat level and so forth of the hearers because 
of being superior to those by way of six or five at tributes. The explanation of the bases 
for the attributes themselves are as follows. They possess superior cause because, due to 
being induced by the very force of the roots of virtue with the characteristics of fai th 
and so forth that are skilled in the objects, faith and so forth , by attaining the 
culmination of the best hearing, contemplation, and  so forth with respect to the 
Mahayana paths along with their results and complet ing all the Mahayana qualities, 
without exception, in the objects of faith, the par tial concordance with liberation, they 
will arise after  that. They are together with special result becaus e they are causes 
concordant with generating the path of seeing directly realizing the four truths. , the 
four partial concordances with defini te discrimination . 
 
This passage starts by saying that the four partial  concordances with definite discrimination of 
bodhisattvas are superior to those of hearers by wa y of five or six attributes. In the phrase “The 
explanation of the bases for the attributes themsel ves are as follows,” the “bases for the attributes”  
refer to the heat, peak, forbearance, and supreme m undane quality levels of the Mahayana path of 
preparation. These bases for the attributes possess  superior cause , and are together with special 
result and special entity .  
 How do these four partial concordances with defini te discrimination of bodhisattvas possess 
superior cause? “Due to being induced by the very f orce of the roots of virtue with the 
characteristics of faith and so forth that are skil led in the objects, faith and so forth, by attainin g the 
culmination of the best hearing, contemplation, and  so forth  with respect to the Mahayana paths 
along with their results and completing all the Mah ayana qualities, without exception, in the objects 
of faith, the partial concordance with liberation.”  This is saying that they possess superior cause  
because they arise after the special cause, the par tial concordance with liberation, or the path of 
accumulation. The text then says, “They are togethe r with special result because they are causes 
concordant with generating the path of seeing direc tly realizing the four truths.” This means that it 
has a special result because the path of seeing wil l arise; they are the causes of the path of seeing.   
 Delete the phrase “the four partial concordances wi th definite discrimination” at the end of this 
paragraph, as it was already mentioned before. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 135: 
 
They possess their own special entity… [sentence co ntinues in Explanation  below] 
 
COMMENTARY 
…arisen from mundane meditation, the root of virtue  called “transformed into heat;” 
after that, “transformed into peak;” after that, “t ransformed into forbearance;” and after 
that, “supreme quality”—due to progressively genera ting “small” and so forth, 1 or due 
to the particularities of persons of dull faculties  and so forth related  to bodhisattvas, the 
small, middling, and great. 
 
EXPLANATION 
[continuing from Explanation  above] …because they are paths of the occasion whe re 
that arisen from mundane meditation  observing emptiness has become principal. 
With respect to that, the divisions of the entity a re the four:  the root of virtue called 
                                                 
1 This last phrase here has been shifted up from the  subsequent section in the Tibetan text, since the immediately 
following explanation elucidates its meaning. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 17: 9-13 June, 2008 
 
 16  “transformed into heat”  observing emptiness ; after that,  that strongly transformed 
from that [heat] itself,  “transformed into peak;” after that , due to initially attaining 
the forbearance that is unafraid of emptiness,  “transformed into forbearance;” and 
after that, “supreme  mundane quality.” And the divisions of the occasions ( due to 
progressively generating “small” and so forth, generating the three—beginning, 
middle, and end—in a single continuum, or due to the particularities of persons of 
dull faculties and so forth related to bodhisattvas  of different continua)— the small, 
middling, and great —are superior. Alternatively, they are correlated w ith the attributes 
and explained. {193}  
 
In terms of the entity, we say that they are paths arisen from meditation observing emptiness. What 
has arisen from meditation observing emptiness is p rincipal on those occasions. Then there are 
divisions of the entity; if the  entity  of the Mahayana path of preparation is divided, th ere are four: 
heat, peak, forbearance, and supreme mundane qualit y. Next, there are divisions of the occasions : 
divisions into small, middling, and great. This can  be interpreted in two ways:  
1.  that generated at the beginning is small, that gene rated in the middle is middling, that generated 
at the end is great; or 
2.  that small, middling, and great are related to diff erent faculties: small related to those of dull 
faculty, middling related to those of middling facu lty, and great related to those of sharp faculty.  
When the text says, “because they are paths of the occasion where that arisen from mundane 
meditation observing emptiness has become principal ,” we are saying they are paths where the 
wisdom arisen from meditation observing emptiness i s principal , but there is no pervasion that they 
are wisdoms arisen from meditation observing emptiness.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 136: 
 
COMMENTARY 
The very entity of the attribute of observation to be explained is the observation of the 
properties of the four truths; due to being  the very antidotes  to viewing phenomena, 
engaging the aspects of lack of strong adherence an d so forth; the entities that are the 
causes of realizing the three vehicles together; by  the very characteristics of skill in 
means of the spiritual guide, possessing the tutor;  the four types of conceptualization of 
apprehendeds and apprehenders, which are the object s to be abandoned by the paths of 
seeing and meditation—arising in relation to the ma nner that will be explained.  
 
EXPLANATION 
Why are they superior? The very entity of the attribute of observation to be 
explained  below  is the observation of the properties of the four t ruths  distinguished 
by the sixteen attributes, impermanence and so fort h, because they are held as the bases 
for eliminating superimpositions [by means of infin ite enumerations of reasonings ]; that 
meditative equipoise of the path of preparation engages the aspects of lack of strong 
adherence  as truly existent  and so forth, due to being  the very direct antidote (to 
viewing phenomena,  in which apprehended-objects and apprehender-subje cts are 
adhered to as truly existent) [by means of infinite  enumerations of reasonings ]; the 
causes of the special results are superior due to b eing powerful potency, because they 
are  the special entities that are the causes of  the path of seeing that directly realizes 
the three vehicles together ; they  a bodhisattva on the path of preparation  possesses  the  
special tutor , because of being directly taken care of  by the supreme emanation body , 
the special spiritual guide,  by the very characteristics of skill in means,  in which the 
complete Mahayana path is revealed ; they are  distinguished by the four types of 
conceptualization of apprehendeds and apprehenders,  which are the objects to be 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 17: 9-13 June, 2008 
 
 17  abandoned by the paths of seeing and meditation  included within the peak, {194} 
because the four are distinguished by  arising  in taking thorough affliction  in relation to 
the manner which will be explained below.  
 
Here, there is explanation of why the Mahayana path  of preparation is superior by way of five 
attributes. It begins by asking, “Why are they supe rior?” and then the five attributes are explained. 
The five attributes are presented here in a particu lar mode. The five attributes are: 
1.  object of observation 
2.  aspect  
3.  cause 
4.  tutor 
5.  four types of conceptualization 
The text begins, “Why are they superior? The very e ntity of the attribute of observation to be 
explained below is the observation of the propertie s of the four truths distinguished by the sixteen 
attributes, impermanence and so forth, because they  are held as the bases for eliminating 
superimpositions.” This last phrase needs to be ann otated, because even the Hinayana path of 
preparation holds the sixteen attributes, impermane nce and so forth, as bases for eliminating 
superimpositions. We thus need to add the phrase “b y means of infinite enumerations of 
reasonings” [which has been inserted above].  
 We also need to annotate the next phrase: “that me ditative equipoise of the path of preparation,” 
which refers to the meditative equipoise of the Mah ayana path of preparation observing emptiness. 
Here, it talks about the “direct antidotes to viewi ng phenomena.” Such antidotes can also exist for 
the meditative equipoise of the Hinayana path of pr eparation. For this reason, we should add the 
same phrase as before: “by means of infinite enumer ations of reasonings.” This means that this 
meditative equipoise of the Mahayana path of prepar ation engages the aspect of lack of strong 
adherence as truly existent and so forth. This medi tative equipoise realizing emptiness has the 
aspect of realizing emptiness of true existence, an d this acts as an antidote to the conception 
adhering to apprehendeds and apprehenders as truly existent. But this does not just distinguish the 
Mahayana path of preparation, since the Hinayana pa th of preparation can also act as an antidote to 
the conception adhering to apprehendeds and apprehe nders as truly existent. Thus we need to add 
the phrase “by means of infinite enumerations of re asonings” because in the Hinayana case, there is 
the absence of these enumerations of reasoning. 
 So far, we have gone through two attributes. In th e Mahayana case, there is an elimination of 
superimpositions by means of infinite enumerations of reasonings. In terms of the second attribute, 
there is a direct antidote by means of infinite enu merations of reasonings. One may think these 
infinite enumerations of reasonings are absent in t he Hinayana path of preparation, but aren’t the 
Mahayana practitioners sharper in faculty? Then why  do they need to use “infinite enumerations of 
reasonings”? You should not interpret this to mean that Mahayanists need infinite enumerations of 
reasonings, while Hinayanists do not; rather, it me ans that Mahayanists are able to use infinite 
enumerations of reasonings to realize emptiness, wh ile Hinayanists are not able to do so. We 
understand that in ordinary circumstances, a sharp faculty person can derive many levels of 
understanding from receiving an explanation, while someone of dull faculty is not able to do so.  
 What exactly is meant by “infinite enumerations of  reasonings?” It means that when 
Mahayanists think about emptiness, they can derive many levels of understanding, while 
Hinayanists are not able to do this. Therefore, we are not saying that there is some reasoning that a 
Mahayanist uses which is not employed by the Hinaya nist. If you think there is, then you should be 
able to posit it. Is there some reasoning used by t he Mahayanist that is not used by the Hinayanist? 
There is not. You must understand what it means to say that Mahayanists can realize emptiness by 
means of infinite enumerations of reasonings: it me ans they can understand it on many levels.  
 
Q: But don’t the Mahayanists have a subtler object of negation? 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 17: 9-13 June, 2008 
 
 18  A: The subtlety of the object of negation for reali zing emptiness for Hinayanists and for 
Mahayanists is the same.  
Q: But Hinayanists realize selflessness of persons,  whereas Mahayanists realize emptiness of true 
existence. 
Q: Hinayanists can realize emptiness too. 
 
 
Wednesday June 11, 2008 (afternoon) 
 
In this section, in the phrase “the objects to be a bandoned by the paths of seeing and meditation 
included within the peak,” “peak” refers to peak ap plication. There are four divisions: peak 
application of the path of preparation, peak applic ation of the path of seeing, peak application of th e 
path of meditation, and uninterrupted peak applicat ion. Here, “paths of seeing and meditation 
included within the peak” refers to the peak applic ation of the path of seeing and the peak 
application of the path of meditation.  
 Then it says, “because the four are distinguished by  arising in taking thorough affliction  in 
relation to the manner which will be explained belo w.” The explanation will come later, but bear 
this in mind. The four types of conceptualizations or objects of abandonment can be acquired or 
innate . On the path of preparation, the manifest forms ar e suppressed, and this suppression actually 
damages both the acquired and innate forms.  
 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 136: 
2B2C-1A2B-2B1C-1A. How it is superior (continued) 
The Great Commentary  says: 
 
Thus these partial concordances with definite emerg ence should be expressed 
based upon the thoroughly afflicted, exactly in res pective order, by way of the 
four types of conceptualization of apprehendeds and  apprehenders, which are 
objects to be abandoned by the paths of seeing and meditation included within the 
clear realization of peak, which will be explained below. 
 
Therefore, since the conceptions indicated in this context are taught to be abandoned by 
the peak application, which will be explained below , the explanation that the paths of 
those occasions exist only on the occasions of the pure grounds is well refuted. Also, 
regarding the mode of possessing conceptualization,  since it has been taught that they 
possess in taking thorough affliction, the assertio n that they possess the entity of 
meditative equipoise has transgressed the paths of reasoning.  
 
When it says “Therefore, since the conceptions indi cated in this context are taught to be abandoned 
by the peak application,” this is saying that the p eak application of the path of seeing and the peak 
application of the path of meditation abandon respe ctively the objects to be abandoned by the path 
of seeing and the objects to be abandoned by the pa th of meditation.  
 Then it says, “the explanation that the paths of t hose occasions exist only on the occasions of the 
pure grounds is well refuted.” In other words, the assertion that these conceptions are abandoned 
only on the three pure ground is incorrect, because  the manifest conceptions are abandoned even on 
the path of preparation, and some of the seeds of t hose conceptions are abandoned on the first seven 
grounds. For example, the objects to be abandoned b y the path of seeing are abandoned on the 
occasion of the path of seeing, so even the seeds t hat are objects to be abandoned by the path of 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 17: 9-13 June, 2008 
 
 19  seeing are abandoned before the pure grounds. The a ssertion that these conceptions are abandoned 
only on the pure grounds is thus refuted.  
 In the passage, “Also, regarding the mode of posse ssing conceptualization, since it has been 
taught that they possess in taking thorough afflict ion,” “they” refers to the four levels of the path of 
preparation, and they “possess conceptualization.” Why are we talking about possessing 
conceptualization? In the root text, line 1.27a (p.  134) says: “Relying on possessing four 
conceptions…” Here we are trying to interpret this phrase. So what does it mean to possess 
conceptions or conceptualizations? Basically, the e xplanation is saying that “possessing 
conceptualization” means that the four levels of th e path of preparation possess the objects of 
abandonment, the four types of conceptualization, a nd the assertion that they possess the entity of 
meditative equipoise is incorrect.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 137: 
 
Does “the heat level and so forth possessing the fo ur conceptions in respective order” 
mean that they possess seeds, or that they possess the manifest [conceptions] in 
respective order? Or, does it mean abandonment in t hat order? The first is incorrect 
because the seeds of all four conceptions are posse ssed at the time of the heat level of 
the path of preparation. In the case of the second,  are [the heat level and so forth, and 
the manifest conceptions] simultaneous or not? If t hey are simultaneous, are they  one 
[entity] or different entities? That they are one e ntity is incorrect, because the two—(1) 
the conception of apprehendeds and apprehenders as truly existent and (2) the 
realization of emptiness of true existence—have dir ectly contradictory modes of 
apprehension in observing a single observed object.  Simultaneous different entities is 
also inappropriate, because it is incorrect for two  manifest conceptions of different 
entities to be produced together in one continuum. For it would follow that there are 
many continua [with respect to] a single person. Ev en if they are not simultaneous, [it is 
also inappropriate], because there is no reason for  the four levels of the path of 
preparation to individually possess four conception s. Further, it is inappropriate to make 
differentiations by way of whether or not the four phenomena of apprehendeds and 
apprehenders are realized as lacking true existence , because all phenomena are realized 
as being empty of true existence, even at the time of the heat level of the path of 
preparation. {195} 
 
Here, when it says “the first is incorrect,” “the f irst” refers to the assertion that the seeds of the  four 
conceptions are possessed in respective order [i.e.  that the heat level and so forth possess the seeds  
of the four conceptions  in respective order]. “Possessed in respective ord er” means that the seeds of 
the first type of conceptualization are possessed b y the heat level, the seeds of the second type of 
conceptualization are possessed by the peak level, the seeds of the third type of conceptualization 
are possessed by the forbearance level, and the see ds of the fourth type of conceptualization are 
possessed by the supreme mundane quality level. Thi s assertion is incorrect, “because the seeds of 
all four conceptions are possessed at the time of t he heat level of the path of preparation.” It is no t 
the case that only the seeds of the first type of c onceptualization are possessed at the time of the 
heat level, and the seeds of the other three types of conceptualizations are not possessed then. 
Therefore it is incorrect to say that the seeds of the four conceptions are possessed in respective 
order.  
 When it says “In the case of the second,” “the sec ond” refers to the assertion that the manifest 
conceptions are possessed in respective order [i.e.  that the heat level and so forth possess the 
manifest conceptions  in respective order]. In this case, “are [the heat  level and so forth, and the 
manifest conceptions] simultaneous or not? If they are simultaneous, are they one [entity] or 
different entities?” [So if the four levels of the path of preparation and the manifest conceptions ar e 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 17: 9-13 June, 2008 
 
 20  simultaneous , there are two possibilities: they are one entity,  or different entities. Let’s consider the 
first possibility, that they are one entity ]: “That they are one entity is incorrect, because the two—
(1) the conception of apprehendeds and apprehenders  as truly existent and (2) the realization of 
emptiness of true existence—have directly contradic tory modes of apprehension in observing a 
single observed object.” So simultaneous one entity is incorrect. 
 Let us consider the other possibility, being simultaneously different entities : “Simultaneous 
different entities is also inappropriate, because i t is incorrect for two manifest conceptions of 
different entities to be produced together in one c ontinuum. For it would follow that there are many 
continua [with respect to] a single person.” In gen eral, it is  possible for two manifest conceptions of 
different entities to be produced together in one c ontinuum, but it is not possible for two manifest 
conceptions of different entities with directly contradictory modes of apprehension i n observing a 
single observed object  to be produced together in one continuum. 
 After this, we consider the last possibility, that  they are not simultaneous  [i.e. that the four levels 
of the path of preparation and the four conceptions  are not simultaneous]: “Even if they are not 
simultaneous, [it is also inappropriate], because t here is no reason for the four levels of the path o f 
preparation to individually possess four conception s. Further, it is inappropriate to make 
differentiations by way of whether or not the four phenomena of apprehendeds and apprehenders 
are realized as lacking true existence, because all  phenomena are realized as being empty of true 
existence, even at the time of the heat level of th e path of preparation.”  
 Indeed, it is the case that the various conception s are abandoned in that order. There is a 
question, later in this paragraph: “Or, does it mea n abandonment in that order?” Our own system’s 
answer to that question is: “Yes, it refers to aban donment in that order,” meaning that the 
abandonment takes place in the respective order. In  other words, the heat level abandons the 
manifest conceptions regarding apprehended-objects of the thoroughly afflicted class, the peak level 
abandons the manifest conceptions regarding apprehe nded-objects of the completely pure class, and 
so on. The abandonment occurs in this order. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 137 
 
OPINION: If one were to realize the emptiness of tr ue existence of only apprehendeds, 
one would be observing a trifling [form of] emptine ss. 
RESPONSE: That is a great fault, because whether or  not one realizes pervasive 
emptiness is posited to whether or not one complete ly severs the coarse and subtle 
elaborations of true existence; it is not posited b y way of the extensiveness or 
narrowness of the property-possessors. Otherwise, a  bodhisattva on the path of seeing 
would not directly realize pervasive emptiness, bec ause he has not directly realized all 
property-possessors. Furthermore, it is incorrect t o differentiate the conceptions of 
apprehended-objects and apprehender-subjects by mea ns of the object of observation, 
because “conceiving apprehended-objects” and “conce iving apprehender-subjects” 
explain the modes of apprehension of the aspects; t hey do not explain the observed 
objects of the conceptions. 
 
In our own system, we posit that the four levels of  the path of preparation are antidotes to the four 
types of conception respectively. The reason they a re posited this way is not  due to the fact that the 
four levels of the path of preparation differ from the point of view of realizing emptiness, or their 
having clear appearance. Our system makes this pres entation from the point of view of the length of 
time of familiarization with the object. Compared t o the heat level, the peak level has longer 
familiarization with the object, and therefore has greater potency to abandon the conception of true 
existence. Another point is that in terms of the ea se and difficulty with regard to abandoning the 
various types of conceptions, conceptions regarding  apprehended-objects are easier to abandon than 
conceptions regarding apprehender-subjects , because apprehender-subjects are consciousnesses.   
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 17: 9-13 June, 2008 
 
 21   From the point of view of the property-possessors,  there is a difference in regard to ease and 
difficulty of abandoning the manifest conception of  true existence. For example, consider two 
property-possessors: coarse form and consciousness.  It is easier to abandon the manifest conception 
of coarse form as truly existent, and more difficul t to abandon the manifest conception of 
consciousness as truly existent. The difference ari ses from the point of view of the property-
possessor.  
 To give an example of how one would realize emptin ess in terms of different property-
possessors: if one starts with the form aggregate, analyzing it with different types of reasoning, one  
will realize that it is empty of true existence. Ha ving realized the emptiness of true existence of th e 
form aggregate, when one tries to realize the empti ness of true existence of other phenomena, one is 
able to realize their emptiness of true existence s imply by recalling the reason; one does not need to  
undergo as extensive a process of reasoning as befo re.  
 Based upon this explanation, one would say that th e opinion given by this person is incorrect, i.e. 
that “If one were to realize the emptiness of true existence of only apprehendeds, one would be 
observing a trifling [form of] emptiness.” This per son is thinking that if one realizes the emptiness 
of true existence of only apprehendeds, this realiz ation does not benefit the realization of emptiness  
of true existence of other phenomena, therefore one  would be observing a trifling form of 
emptiness. Our system says this is a great fault, b ecause “whether or not one realizes pervasive 
emptiness is posited to whether or not one complete ly severs the coarse and subtle elaborations of 
true existence; it is not posited by way of the ext ensiveness or narrowness of the property-
possessors.”  
 The four levels of the path of preparation are the  same in realizing emptiness and in having clear 
appearance with respect to emptiness, but they are not the same with respect to the length of time in 
which they have familiarized with emptiness. As a r esult, they are not the same in their capacity to 
abandon the conception of true existence. These fou r levels are posited from the point of view of 
their capacity to sever or abandon the manifest con ceptions of true existence. They are not posited 
from the point of view of the extensiveness or narr owness of the property-possessors. It is not the 
case that some have extensive property-possessors a nd others have narrow property-possessors. The 
meaning of “the extensiveness or narrowness of the property-possessors” is: extensiveness of the 
property-possessor means many objects, and narrowne ss of the property-possessor means few 
objects. So we are not saying that one level of the  path of preparation realizes the emptiness of true  
existence of a few objects, and that another level realizes the emptiness of many objects.  
 The text says, “Otherwise, a bodhisattva on the pa th of seeing would not directly realize 
pervasive emptiness, because he has not directly re alized all property-possessors.” According to our 
system, a bodhisattva on the path of seeing in medi tative equipoise directly realizes the emptiness of 
all phenomena , but has not directly realized all phenomena .  
 The text says, “it is incorrect to differentiate t he conceptions of apprehended-objects and 
apprehender-subjects by means of the object of obse rvation, because ‘conceiving apprehended-
objects’ and ‘conceiving apprehender-subjects’ expl ain the modes of apprehension of the aspects; 
they do not explain the observed objects of the con ceptions.” This means that when we say 
“conceiving apprehended-objects,” this refers to co nceiving of apprehended objects as truly existent 
objects of utilization,  and when we say “conceiving apprehender-subjects,”  it refers to conceiving 
apprehender-subjects’ as truly existent utilizers . Therefore, we are talking about the modes of 
apprehension, not the observed objects.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 137: 
 
OPINION: It is also incorrect that the four levels of the path of preparation abandon the 
four conceptions sequentially, because when the hea t level of the path of preparation 
realizes that all phenomena that are apprehended-ob jects and apprehender-subjects are 
empty of true existence, it is incorrect that the s uperimpositions that are the conceptions 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 17: 9-13 June, 2008 
 
 22  of apprehended-objects as truly existent are severe d, but the conceptions of true 
existence of apprehender-subjects are not severed. 
RESPONSE: With respect to this, someone’s assertion  that the path of preparation and 
the manifest conceptions of this are one entity is inappropriate, because one would need 
to assert that there is a common locus between the two, direct benefit and harm to  the 
peak application of the path of seeing by the supre me mundane quality level of the path 
of preparation that realizes that apprehended-objec ts and apprehender-subjects lack true 
existence . And that [supreme mundane quality level] and the two adherences to 
apprehended-objects and apprehender-subjects as tru ly existent would not be  the object 
directly harmed and the harmer that are based upon contradictories which do not abide 
simultaneously. In that case, if even the supreme m undane quality level of the path of 
preparation itself would need to be  abandoned  deliberately, then “Bodhisattvas must 
accomplish it with effort for many eons through bei ng ornamented by infinite 
collections, but  they should abandon it  through effort” are senseless words. {196} 
 
According to our system, the four levels of the pat h of preparation abandon the four conceptions 
sequentially, but this person says that this is not  correct. Our response says, “With respect to this,  
someone’s assertion that the path of preparation an d the manifest conceptions of this …,” “manifest 
conceptions of this” meaning manifest conceptions t hat are objects of abandonment of the path of 
preparation. Someone’s asserting that the path of p reparation and these manifest conceptions are 
one entity is inappropriate, “because one would nee d to assert there is a common locus between the 
two, direct benefit and harm to  the peak application of the path of seeing by the supreme mundane 
quality level of the path of preparation that reali zes that apprehended-objects and apprehender-
subjects lack true existence .” Why do we say that one would need to assert that  there is a common 
locus between direct benefit and harm to the peak a pplication of the path of seeing? This follows 
because if the path of preparation and the manifest  conceptions to be abandoned by it are one entity, 
then the supreme mundane quality level of the path of preparation would both harm and benefit the 
path of seeing. It would harm the path of seeing be cause the manifest conceptions that are objects to 
be abandoned are one entity with, and it would bene fit the path of seeing because it is a path of 
preparation.  
 To make this easier, we can posit two consequences :  
• “The subject—the supreme mundane quality level of t he path of preparation—it follows that it 
harms the path of seeing, because the manifest conc eptions that are objects to be abandoned are 
one entity with it.”  
• “The subject—the supreme mundane quality level of t he path of preparation—it follows that it 
benefits the path of seeing, because it is the path  of preparation.”  
 
In the phrase “And that [supreme mundane quality le vel] and the two adherences to apprehended-
objects and apprehender-subjects as truly existent… ,” “that” refers to the supreme mundane quality 
level of path of preparation that realizes the empt iness of true existence . The reason for this 
statement is because that supreme mundane quality l evel of the path of preparation that realizes the 
emptiness of true existence and the two adherences to apprehended-objects and apprehender-
subjects as truly existent are one entity. Remember  that the path of preparation and the manifest 
conceptions that are its objects of abandonment bei ng one entity is the assertion of the “trouble-
maker” at the beginning of this response. 
 Then it says: In that case, if even the supreme mu ndane quality level of the path of preparation 
itself would need to be  abandoned  deliberately, then “Bodhisattvas must accomplish i t with effort 
for many eons through being ornamented by infinite collections, but  they should abandon it  through 
effort’ are senseless words.” If the path of prepar ation and the objects of abandonment are one 
entity, the supreme mundane quality level of the pa th of preparation itself would need to be 
abandoned. This is because it is one entity with th e objects to be abandoned. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 17: 9-13 June, 2008 
 
 23   Our system says that in fact bodhisattvas need to accomplish the supreme mundane quality level 
of the path of preparation with effort for many eon s through being ornamented by infinite 
collections; it is something to be accomplished, no t something to be abandoned deliberately. If this 
person’s assertion is correct, then it should be ab andoned deliberately. The words “they should 
abandon it  through effort” are words that follow from this pe rson’s assertion that the path of 
preparation and the manifest conceptions to be aban doned by it are one entity.  
 
 
Thursday June 12, 2008 
 
[Geshe-la began by speaking about how we should be careful about how we think about other 
people, the disadvantages of becoming angry with ot hers, and the advantages of practicing patience 
and not harming others.]  
 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 138: 
2B2C-1A2B-2B1C-1A. How it is superior (continued)  
OPINION: Just as a swan separates milk that has bee n mixed in water, although they are 
one entity, they are to be differentiated into indi viduals. 
RESPONSE: Understand that no matter how great the p otency of the cause that 
generates as a single entity may be, the cause for generating (i) a valid cognizer 
realizing sound is impermanent and (ii) the manifes t superimposition that apprehends 
sound as permanent as a single entity does not even  exist slightly. 
 Hence, just as in the meaning of the partial conco rdance with definite discrimination 
possessing the conceptualizations cited above, sinc e that has been taught to be 
possession in taking thorough affliction, it is to possess [those conceptualizations] as 
objects of abandonment. If it were to refer to poss essing seeds, then since all possesses 
all, the meaning of possessing sequentially would n ot be possible.  
 
In this response, it is said that regardless of how  great “the potency of the cause that generates as a 
single entity may be, the cause for generating (i) a valid cognizer realizing sound is impermanent 
and (ii) the manifest superimposition that apprehen ds sound as permanent as a single entity,” i.e. the  
cause for generating these two minds as a single en tity, “does not even exist slightly.” Our system’s 
position is that when we say “possession in taking thorough affliction,” or when we say the path of 
preparation possesses the conceptualizations, which  has been taught to mean “possession in taking 
thorough affliction,” it means possessing those con ceptualizations as objects of abandonment .  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 138: 
 
 Regarding the meaning of possession in taking thor ough affliction, hearers seeking 
mere pacification act to abandon afflictive obscura tions deliberately; since otherwise 
they would not attain the result that is desired, t hey make effort for the purpose of that. 
Likewise, bodhisattvas take the conceptualizations that apprehend apprehended-objects 
and apprehender-subjects as truly existent to be th e main objects to be abandoned 
deliberately; since otherwise they would not attain  omniscience, the desired result, they 
make effort for the sake of that. This is the meani ng of possession in taking thorough 
affliction, because it is said, “The afflictions of  the bodhisattvas are the 
conceptualizations.” 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 17: 9-13 June, 2008 
 
 24  Here, there are two possible meanings of possession  in taking thorough affliction. The first 
connotation applies to hearers: hearers need to aba ndon the afflictive obscurations deliberately; 
otherwise, they would not attain the result of mere  pacification. The second connotation applies to 
bodhisattvas. Bodhisattvas need to deliberately aba ndon conceptualizations that apprehend 
apprehended-objects and apprehender-subjects as tru ly existent, otherwise they would not attain 
omniscience. This comes from the two interpretation s of the term “thorough affliction.” For hearers, 
it refers to mere afflictions; for bodhisattvas, it  refers to the conceptualizations of true existence .  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 138: 
 
 For otherwise, it would be incorrect for their con ceptualizations to be afflictions, and 
another meaning of taking [those] as afflictions wo uld also be incorrect. By way of the 
essential point of the degree of difficulty and eas e of abandoning the four 
conceptualizations, on the occasion of the heat lev el, in merely weakening the 
conceptions of apprehended-objects as truly existen t in regard to the objects of 
abandonment, with respect to the antidotal class th ere is no degeneration of the 
conceptions of apprehended-objects as truly existen t. Thus, although there is no 
difference in all phenomena being realized as empty  of true existence, due to the 
differences in the force of the length of time of f amiliarization and the increase of 
excellent qualities, since the four manifest concep tualizations will progressively become 
weaker on those four occasions, that is the meaning  of possession by that manner of the 
manifest [conceptualizations] being the objects of abandonment. 
 
This passage is related to the phrase “The afflicti ons of the bodhisattvas are the conceptualizations. ” 
If it were not for this interpretation, then it wou ld be incorrect for the conceptions of bodhisattvas  to 
be afflictions. In fact, the afflictions referred t o are the conceptualizations. Another meaning of 
taking those as afflictions would be incorrect. 
  The passage then explains the way in which the co nceptualizations are abandoned by the path of 
preparation. The four levels of the path of prepara tion are correlated to the four types of 
conceptualization that are abandoned respectively. The reason for this particular order is that, in th e 
list of conceptualizations, those at the top are ea sier to abandon, whereas those at the bottom are 
more difficult. The reason the later levels of the path of preparation are able to abandon the 
conceptualizations that are more difficult to aband on is because they have familiarized with 
emptiness for a greater length of time, and in term s of excellent qualities of realization, they have 
more. Because of differences in the length of time and the increase of excellent qualities, the 
various levels of the path of preparation have the ability to abandon their respective objects of 
abandonment. 
 
When we explain these four levels of the path of pr eparation—heat, peak, forbearance, and supreme 
mundane quality—do not think that they belong to th e continua of different people, although it can 
be the case that they belong to different peoples’ continua. Without attaining the heat level, there i s 
no attainment of the peak level; without attaining the peak level, there is no attainment of the 
forbearance level; without attaining the forbearanc e level, there is no attainment of the supreme 
mundane quality level. Regardless of whether these levels of the path of preparation belong to one 
continuum or different continua, they have a defini te sequence. On the heat level of the path of 
preparation, the corresponding manifest conceptions  are suppressed; likewise, on the peak, 
forbearance, and supreme mundane quality levels of the path of preparation, the corresponding 
manifest conceptions are suppressed.  
 There is this strange phrase: “with respect to the  antidotal class there is no degeneration of the 
conceptions of apprehended-objects as truly existen t.” This is strange, because in fact there is 
degeneration of the conceptions of apprehended-obje cts as truly existent. Here, degeneration 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 17: 9-13 June, 2008 
 
 25  probably refers to abandonment. This may refer to a  previous assertion that there is the weakening 
of these conceptions, but there is no abandonment. Otherwise, we can say “there is no degeneration 
from the root of the conceptions…”  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 139: 
2B2C-1A2B-2B1C-1B. The reason for that 
COMMENTARY  
They are superior to the heat levels and so forth o f the hearers and so forth. Because it 
occurs in the tradition that the roots of virtue of  “transformed into heat” and so forth of 
those: observes the four truths, the nature of the properties of the definitions “that 
suitable as form” and so forth; by way of just the antidotes to viewing self, engaging in 
the aspects of impermanence and so forth; for the p urpose of realizing only their own 
vehicle; are separated from a tutor; and arise not possessing the four types of 
conceptualization. 
 
EXPLANATION 
That very Mahayana path of preparation is  superior to the Hinayana path of 
preparation because  it occurs in the tradition  of the great trail-blazers who made the 
presentation of the hearers’ vehicle that  the roots of virtue of “transformed into heat” 
and so forth of those hearers and solitary realizers : observe the four truths, the 
nature of the properties of the definitions of  purified suffering and origins, included 
[respectively] within “that suitable as form” and so forth  contained in the 
contaminated  and  within actions and afflictions,  and purified cessations and paths; by 
way of  just  acting as the mere antidotes to viewing a self of persons , engaging in the 
aspects of impermanence and so forth; and does not teach realizing selflessness with 
that very mind realizing impermanence; for the purpose of the cause that is realizing 
only the  hearers’ own vehicle ; are separated from a tutor  by means of completely 
teaching method and wisdom; and arise not possessing the four types of 
conceptualization  of apprehended-objects and apprehender-subjects an d the antidotes 
to the objects of abandonment. 
 
This outline says “the reason for that,” meaning th e reason for the Mahayana path of preparation 
being superior to the Hinayana path of preparation by way of five or six attributes. The reason for 
the Mahayana path of preparation being superior to the Hinayana path of preparation is presented in 
this section by stating that the Hinayana path of p reparation does not possess those five or six 
attributes. In terms of the objects of observation , the Hinayana path of preparation observes the fou r 
truths. In terms of the aspects , it is stated that the Hinayana path of preparatio n engages in the 
aspects of impermanence and so forth “by way of jus t acting as the mere antidotes to viewing a self 
of persons.” Here, the Hinayana path of preparation  is said to act as a mere antidote to viewing the 
self of persons, without mentioning that it acts to  stop the adherence to true existence. So the 
Hinayana path of preparation does not stop the adhe rence to true existence, because it “acts as the  
mere antidotes to viewing a self  of persons engaging in the aspects of impermanence and so forth.” 
This passage is not saying that, by realizing imper manence, one has an antidote to viewing a self of 
persons. In the phrase “engaging in the aspects of impermanence and so forth,” “and so forth” 
includes the aspects of suffering, emptiness, and s elflessness, so in that way, such minds do act as 
the antidotes to viewing a self of persons.  
 By way of cause , it says, “for the purpose of the cause that is re alizing only the hearers’ own 
vehicle.” The Hinayana path of preparation acts as the cause for realizing only the hearers’ own 
vehicle, whereas the Mahayana path of preparation a cts as the cause of realizing the three vehicles 
together. With regard to the next attribute, the Hi nayana path of preparation is “separated from a 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 17: 9-13 June, 2008 
 
 26  tutor by means of completely teaching method and wisdom.”  Finally, it arises by “not possessing 
the four types of conceptualization of apprehended-objects and apprehender-subjects.” I n other 
words, the Hinayana path of preparation does not ar ise possessing the four types of 
conceptualization and also the antidotes to the obj ects of abandonment. In this way, we see that the 
Hinayana path of preparation is separated from thes e five attributes. Therefore, the Mahayana path 
of preparation is superior to it.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 139: 
 
QUALM: What are the purified cessations and paths i n which the aspects of the 
attributes have been abandoned like? 
RESPONSE: When one initially comprehends the object s to be known and objects to be 
abandoned, the purified bases for characterization of sufferings and origins, one will 
subsequently be able to comprehend the existence of  merely true cessations (in which 
sufferings and origins are ceased) and true paths, which act to attain that. {198} After 
that, one will be able to actualize the cessations in which sufferings are ceased and, in 
order to do that, since one will comprehend that tr ue paths are to be relied on for a long 
time in the continuum, having taken cessations and paths which have been previously 
realized as the bases for the attributes, one medit ates by way of making distinctions of 
the eight attributes.  
 
This passage explains how one should train in the f our noble truths. First one needs to understand 
true sufferings, then understand true origins as th e objects to be abandoned. Next, one realizes that 
one is able to actualize true cessations, and final ly one understands that true paths are to be 
practiced for a long time. Without understanding tr ue sufferings at the beginning, one will not 
generate the mind wishing to separate from true suf ferings and without a mind wishing to separate 
from true sufferings, a mind wishing to separate fr om true origins will not arise; therefore one needs  
to understand true sufferings well and generate the  mind wishing to separate from the cause of 
sufferings. From that, one understands that one can  separate from the causes and develops the wish 
to actualize cessations; in order to actualize true  cessations, one relies upon true paths. At the end  of 
this paragraph, it mentions the “eight attributes;”  this refers to the four attributes of true cessati ons 
and the four attributes of true paths.  
 
Questions and answers: 
 
Q: Regarding the troublemaker and response that we discussed yesterday (p. 138), this person says: 
 
“It is also incorrect that the four levels of the p ath of preparation abandon the four 
conceptions sequentially, because when the heat lev el of the path of preparation realizes 
that all phenomena that are apprehended-objects and  apprehender-subjects are empty of 
true existence, it is incorrect that the superimpos itions that are the conceptions of 
apprehended-objects as truly existent are severed, but the conceptions of true existence 
of apprehender-subjects are not severed.” 
 
Why does our system say that this person asserts th at the path of preparation and the manifest 
conceptions that are its objects of abandonment are  one entity, since this is not stated in the 
opinion? 
A: This is a rather strange statement. Perhaps the statement, “With respect to this, someone’s 
assertion that the path of preparation and the mani fest conceptions of this are one entity is 
inappropriate,” is said by a second person, and is not posited by our system as a response. The first 
person says, “It is also incorrect that the four le vels of the path of preparation abandon the four 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 17: 9-13 June, 2008 
 
 27  conceptions sequentially,” and a second person says  “path of preparation and the manifest 
conceptions of this [path of preparation] being one  entity is inappropriate.” The order of these 
words is strange.  
 
Student: Perhaps this response says implicitly that  this troublemaker is saying that the apprehended-
objects and apprehender-subjects are the same entit y because they are all observed as empty of true 
existence. 
A: It is possible that an apprehended and an appreh ender are one entity. For example, we can take 
form and the direct valid cognizer realizing form; they are empty of being different substantial 
entities.  
 
Q: It says in the text (p. 137) “All phenomena are realized as empty of true existence, even at the 
time of the heat level of the path of preparation.”  Is this possible, since it seems that this realiza tion 
only occurs at the time of the path of seeing?  
A: Our system asserts that even though one does not  have a direct realization of emptiness at the 
time of the path of preparation, all phenomena are realized as being empty of true existence.  
Q: Is this also true for Prasangika? 
A: Yes, they assert that all phenomena are realized  as being empty of true existence at the time of 
the heat level.  
 
Q: Is a subsequent cognizer incontrovertible? Is it  a valid cognizer? 
A: A subsequent cognizer is incontrovertible. It is  not a valid cognizer; the reason is because it is 
not a new, or prime, cognizer. According to the Pra sangikas, the definition of a valid cognizer is: an  
incontrovertible knower. According to the lower sch ools, however, it has a different connotation: a 
new , incontrovertible knower.  
 
Q: Is the path of preparation reversible? In other words, is the union of calm abiding and special 
insight observing emptiness something that can dege nerate? 
A: No.  
 
Q: The other day Geshe-la said that the path of pre paration is not a correct assumption, an 
awareness to which an object appears but is not asc ertained, or doubt. The reason given that it is 
none of these three is because the path of preparat ion is a path to liberation. Why is this the case? 
A: This is because a path to liberation is incontro vertible; the path to liberation is something 
genuine. 
 
Q: Regarding p. 137: “Also, regarding the mode of p ossessing conceptualization, since it has been 
taught that they possess…” This seems to say that t he assertion that the four levels of the path of 
preparation possess the entity of meditative equipo ise is incorrect. Is this the case?  
A: Are the four levels of the path of preparation i n the entity of meditative equipoise? They can be 
in the entity of meditative equipoise, but it is al so possible that they are not. What is mainly 
indicated in this context are the four levels of th e path of preparation that are in the entity of 
meditative equipoise.  
 
Q: What is the meaning of this statement that “the assertion that they possess the entity of 
meditative equipoise has transgressed the paths of reasoning”? 
A: This is incorrect, i.e. has transgressed the pat hs of reasoning, because it is an incorrect 
interpretation of “possessing conceptualization.” “ Possessing conceptualization” means possessing 
the objects of abandonment and does not mean posses sing the entity of meditative equipoise. 
 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 17: 9-13 June, 2008 
 
 28  Friday June 13, 2008 
 
[Geshe-la began by thanking students and encouragin g them to keep studying during the break.  
 
Main points:  
Do a brief meditation before breakfast: generate a good motivation. Don’t give up studying—do at 
least one hour each day, e.g. after breakfast; if y ou can do more than one hour, that is good. Be 
aware of your mind during the day, don’t stop takin g care of your mind, try to develop it little by 
little. At the end of the day, do at least five or ten minutes of meditation, check to see if you’ve d one 
good or bad actions, try to improve the next day. D edicate your merits for all beings, and rejoice. If  
you do brief meditation like this twice a day, morn ing and evening, it will change your life. 
 For monks and nuns: if it is difficult to wear you r robes, if you have to wear lay clothes 
sometimes, then do three prostrations to Buddha and  ask permission to wear lay clothes. But even if 
you wear lay clothes, you should keep the mind of a  monk or nun; that is the most important thing.] 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 139: 
2B2C-1A2B-2B1C-2. The twelve modes of observation s ummarized into four 
2B2C-1A2B-2B1C-2A. Actual 
2B2C-1A2B-2B1C-2B. Observing by means of other aspe cts 
2B2C-1A2B-2B1C-2C. The reason for not actually show ing that here 
2B2C-1A2B-2B1C-2D. Dispelling objection 
2B2C-1A2B-2B1C-2A. Actual 
COMMENTARY  
The bodhisattvas’ partial concordances with definit e discrimination, through the 
strength of skillful means, observe the properties of the four truths, however possible: 
(1) by means of cause on some, (2) by means of resu lt on some, (3) by means of the 
very entity on some, and (4) by means of the aspect s of dharmata on some. 
 
EXPLANATION 
The subject— the bodhisattvas’ partial concordances with definit e discrimination —
observe the properties of the four truths, however  possible  the modes of 
apprehension of their aspects are, because of obser ving the four truths through the 
strength of skillful means  in practicing the complete path: (1) by means of cause on 
some  occasions of middling forbearance, (2) by means of result on some  occasions of 
small supreme mundane quality, (3) by means of the very entity  of the two truths on 
some  occasions of small forbearance, and (4) by means of the aspects of dharmata on 
some  occasions that are the nine others. It is said tha t “For they observe  by means of the 
aspects of dharmata during meditative equipoise, an d by means of entity, cause, and 
result during subsequent attainment.” {199} This is  because the individual occasions are 
posited through the force of the mentality of close  trainees; otherwise, all would observe 
all. 
 
Corresponding to the four levels of the path of pre paration, we have twelve modes of observation, 
three for each of the four levels. These twelve are  summarized into four:  
1.  by means of cause 
2.  by means of result 
3.  by means of entity and 
4.  by means of the aspect of dharmata.  
On some occasions of middling forbearance, it obser ves by means of cause ; on some occasions of 
small supreme mundane quality, it observes by way o f result ; on some occasions of small 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 17: 9-13 June, 2008 
 
 29  forbearance, it observes by means of entity ; and on the nine others, by means of the aspect of 
dharmata .  
• [In terms of the first:] The subject—some occasions  of the middling forbearance—observe the 
four truths by means of cause because they apprehen d that the realization of the lack of true 
existence of samsara and nirvana is the cause of th e five pure aggregates, the body and so forth. 
This presentation appears in Lama Tsong Khapa’s Golden Rosary  as well as in Jetsun Chogyi 
Gyeltsen’s General Meaning . 
• For the second syllogism, we can say: the subject—s ome occasions of the small supreme 
mundane quality—observe the four truths by means of  result because they apprehend that the 
meditative stabilizations “Blazing Progression” and  so forth are the results benefiting sentient 
beings.  
• [For the third:] The subject—some occasions of smal l forbearance—observe the four truths by 
means of the very entity of the two truths because they apprehend that those  lacking entitiness 
ultimately exist conventionally. 
• With respect to the last, we say: some occasions th at are the nine others observe the four truths 
by means of  the  aspects of dharmata . This means that they view the four truths as lack ing entitiness 
ultimately.  
 In Gyeltsab Je’s explanation, it is said that duri ng meditative equipoise there is observation by 
means of the aspects of dharmata, and during subseq uent attainment there is observation by means 
of entity, cause, and result. In the statement, “fo r they observe  by means of the aspects of dharmata 
during meditative equipoise, and by means of entity , cause, and result during subsequent 
attainment,” “they” refers to the twelve levels of the Mahayana path of preparation (three for each 
of the four levels). The last part of this passage says “This is because the individual occasions are 
posited through the force of the mentality of close  trainees; otherwise, all would observe all.” This 
correlation—that on some occasions of middling forb earance there is observation by means of 
cause, on some occasions of small supreme mundane q uality by means of result, and so forth—is 
posited for the sake of making the trainees underst and this presentation. In fact, all would observe 
all, meaning all twelve divisions observe by way of  cause, result, entity of the two truths, and by 
means of the aspects of dharmata. This explanation is for the sake of causing the trainees to quickly 
understand the various illustrations.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 140: 
2B2C-1A2B-2B1C-2B. Observing by means of other aspe cts 
COMMENTARY 
Know that, like the former, they also always observ e the four truths by way of other 
aspects. 
 
EXPLANATION 
Know that, like the former  path of preparation of the hearers , they also always 
observe the four truths by way of other aspects , impermanence and so forth . This is 
because they must train well in the mentality of th e beings of middling capacity for the 
sake of destroying the glory of afflictions, genera ting disillusionment of cyclic 
existence, and taking care of Hinayana lineage-bear ers on that occasion. 
 
There are two modes of observing the four noble tru ths: the Mahayana mode of observing them 
involves stopping adherence to true existence, whil e the Hinayana mode does not involve stopping 
adherence to true existence. However, the Mahayanis ts also observe the four truths by way of the 
aspect of lack of self of persons, or by the aspect  of selflessness of persons. This is for the sake o f 
training in the mentality of the medium scope—the m entality of the beings of middling capacity—
so they can destroy the glory of afflictions, gener ate disillusionment of cyclic existence, and take 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 17: 9-13 June, 2008 
 
 30  care of Hinayana lineage-bearers on that occasion. This passage points out that the Mahayanists 
also observe the four truths by way of other aspect s.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 140: 
2B2C-1A2B-2B1C-2C. The reason for not actually show ing that here 
COMMENTARY  
Since I wished to briefly summarize and express mer ely in comment, I have not 
elaborated. 
 
EXPLANATION 
I have not  actually elaborated on the modes of observation here, s ince I wished to 
briefly summarize and express the meaning of the words of the root text merely in 
comment . 
 
In this outline, when it says “the reason for not a ctually showing that here,” “that” refers to the 
Hinayana mode of observing the four truths. This pa ssage says that “I have not elaborated on this 
mode of observation because I wished merely to expr ess the meaning of the words of the root text.”  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 140: 
2B2C-1A2B-2B1C-2D. Dispelling objection 
COMMENTARY 
Why? This is solely a dissimilar presentation; beca use of that, repudiations based on the 
other vehicles should not be expressed at any time.  
 
EXPLANATION 
OPINION: If one were to observe the four truths by way of infinite aspects, this would 
contradict [Vasubandhu’s] Treasury of Manifest Knowledge (Abhidharmakosha ) 
[7.12c], which says “The stainless do not have aspe cts other than the sixteen.” {200} 
RESPONSE: Repudiations based on the other vehicles  that do not meditate on that 
other than the sixteen aspects of the four truths should not be expressed , not just on 
this occasion, but also  at any time , before or later.  Why? Because this  practice of the 
complete aspects of the four truths  is solely a presentation  ( dissimilar  from the 
former) that takes the Mahayana scriptural baskets as valid with respect to Mahayana 
lineage-bearers.  
 
Here we have an objection. This person says that if  one were to observe the four truths by way of 
infinite aspects, this would contradict a statement  from [Vasubandhu’s] Treasury of Manifest 
Knowledge (Abhidharmakosha ), which says “The stainless do not have aspects ot her than the 
sixteen.” What is the meaning of this citation? “Th e stainless” refers to the stainless paths observin g 
the sixteen attributes of the four noble truths, im permanence and so forth. These “do not have 
aspects other than the sixteen.” There are sixteen attributes of the four noble truths, and sixteen 
stainless paths that observe these aspects. These s tainless paths do not have aspects other than those  
attributes.  
 The response mentions “the other vehicles that do not meditate on that other than the sixteen 
aspects of the four truths,” referring to the Hinay ana vehicles, because they meditate on the sixteen 
aspects of the four truths and do not meditate on t hat other than those aspects. The Mahayana does 
not meditate merely on the sixteen aspects of the f our truths; it also meditates on the emptiness of 
true existence of these aspects. The hearer vehicle s do not meditate on that other than the sixteen 
aspects of the four truths, so repudiations based o n the other vehicles “should not be expressed, not 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 17: 9-13 June, 2008 
 
 31  just on this occasion, but also at any time,” in ot her words, they also should not be expressed on the  
occasions of the lower or higher vehicles, i.e. the  Hinayana and the Mahayana.  
 The reason is expressed, saying, “Why? Because thi s practice of the complete aspects of the four 
truths is solely a presentation (dissimilar from th e former) that takes the Mahayana scriptural 
baskets as valid with respect to Mahayana lineage-b earers.” Here we talk about the practice of the 
complete aspects of the four truths being different  from the former, “the former” referring to the 
hearer vehicle.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 141: 
2B2C-1A2B-2B2. Extensive explanation  
2B2C-1A2B-2B2A. Explaining the three former types of  attributes 
2B2C-1A2B-2B2B. Attributes of the conceptions 
2B2C-1A2B-2B2C. Explaining the tutor 
2B2C-1A2B-2B2A. Explaining the three former types of  attributes 
2B2C-1A2B-2B2A-1. Making general connections 
2B2C-1A2B-2B2A-2. Explaining the individual meanings  
2B2C-1A2B-2B2A-3. Dispelling objections about the m ode of expression 
2B2C-1A2B-2B2A-1. Making general connections 
COMMENTARY 
QUALM: How are the attributes of the objects of obs ervation and aspects like? 
RESPONSE: Because of that, the objects of observati on and aspects are explained by 
seven interceding stanzas. 
 
EXPLANATION 
QUALM: How  are the attributes of the objects of observation an d aspects like? 
RESPONSE: Because of that, the objects of observati on and aspects are explained 
by seven interceding stanzas. 
 
This is saying that the objects of observation and the aspects will be explained by seven interceding 
stanzas. What will come is a huge section on the in dividual meanings. If we were to start this now, 
it would be difficult to connect nicely after the s ummer break. We will stop now for questions. 
 
Questions and answers 
 
Q: Is there a difference in meaning between “to vie w” ( lta ba ) and “to observe” ( dmigs pa )? In 
English, observe seems more passive, and view seems  more active.  
A: When we use the word observation, it is used in a particular context. For instance, by observing 
a certain object, one views it in a certain way; on e can develop a correct view, a mistaken view, etc.  
So first there is observation of an object, and bec ause of that observation a certain view arises. Thi s 
is how it is used in Tibetan.  
 
Q: Can Geshe-la explain the meaning of “sound-gener ality and meaning-generality as suitable to be 
mixed”? 
A: With this expression, we are not saying that mea ning-generality and sound-generality are mixed. 
There is the apprehension of a sound-generality and  a meaning- generality  as suitable to be mixed; 
we are not looking at them as mixed. Regarding the mode in which an object dawns to a conception, 
a conception is induced by either a sound or a conc eptualization. Due to sound or conceptualization, 
an object dawns to a conception. For a conception, an object cannot dawn exactly as it is.  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 17: 9-13 June, 2008 
 
 32  Q: What is the meaning of the type of foe-destroyer  who seems to have fear, or worry, about 
degenerating the bliss of abiding happily in this l ife (see Ornament of the Essence , p. 125). If they 
have this worry, it seems they have not passed beyo nd sorrow.  
A: This presentation of the various types of foe-de stroyer: those who bear the property of suicide, 
etc., is mainly from the point of view of the Vaibh ashika (Great Exposition) and Sautr āntika (Sutra) 
schools. Whether or not they are actually like that  is not sure. The Autonomist school may not have 
the exact same assertion regarding these various ty pes of foe-destroyers. In the Great Exposition 
school, foe-destroyers can degenerate; in our syste m, they cannot degenerate.  
 
Q: In our discussion of the twenty sangha, it is st ated that it is possible to attain liberation with only 
the preparation of a concentration. However, in the  book Meditative States in Tibetan Buddhism  (p. 
129), it is stated that to attain the great path of  accumulation of a hearer, solitary realizer, or 
bodhisattva, it is necessary to attain an actual co ncentration. Is there a contradiction there? 
A: This statement applies to those of dull or middl ing faculty.  
 
Q: When do the manifest conceptions of true existen ce cease to arise? On the path of preparation? 
On the path of seeing?  
Student 1: On the path of seeing.  
Student 2: They do arise on the path of preparation , from time to time. 
GTT: On which of the four levels of the path of pre paration do they arise? 
Student: On the first three.  
GTT: Good answer. We can say that from the great le vel of the supreme mundane quality, they do 
not manifest. To be more specific, we would say tha t on the path of preparation, the acquired 
manifest conception of true existence does not aris e, but the manifest innate conception of true 
existence can arise.  
 
Q: At which point do a serialist by way of result, a simultaneous abandoner, a leaper once-returner, 
and a leaper non-returner attain the path of medita tion?  
Student: They attain the path of meditation when th ey start to abandon the objects of abandonment 
of the path of meditation.  
GTT: With respect to that answer, there are actuall y two possibilities. We have to consider someone 
who proceeds by means of a supramundane path and on e who proceeds by means of a mundane 
path. If one proceeds by a supramundane path, when one attains the direct antidote for abandoning 
the object to be abandoned by the path of meditatio n, one attains the path of meditation. If one 
proceeds by way of a mundane path, even when one ab andons the object of abandonment by the 
path of meditation, one has not attained the path o f meditation. One can abandon the objects of 
abandonment of the path of meditation, e.g. the fir st six desire realm afflictions, during the 
subsequent attainment of the path of seeing. It is possible to abandon the afflictions from the desire  
realm afflictions through those of Nothingness by a  mundane path. I think we could ask more 
specifically, “At which point do these persons atta in the direct antidote to the object of 
abandonment by the path of meditation through the f orce of a supramundane path?”  
 
Q: Then can one attain the states of once-returner and non-returner in subsequent attainment of the 
path of seeing? 
A: Yes, it is like that for those who rely on a mundane path . But of course there is no pervasion. 
Those who rely on a mundane path attain their respe ctive results of abider during the subsequent 
attainment of the path of seeing, while those who r ely on a supramundane path attain those 
respective results only upon attaining the path of meditation.  
 If we consider someone who attains the result of s tream-enterer, this must be attained in 
dependence on a supramundane path. After that, if t his person relies on a path bearing the aspects of 
coarseness and peace, they can attain the results o f once-returner and non-returner during the 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 17: 9-13 June, 2008 
 
 33  subsequent attainment of the path of seeing. Those who rely on a supramundane path can become 
abiders in their respective results only upon attai ning the path of meditation.  
 
 
/wheel END /wheel 
 