Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/Transcript pdf/ORN_GTTnotes_03.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:51:44.771696
================================================================================

Masters Program 2008: Ornament  
Week 3: 4 – 5 February, 2008 
 
Masters Program 
Ornament for Clear Realization 
Notes on commentary by  Geshe Tenzin Tenphel 
 
 
Monday, 4 February 2008 
 
Questions and answers: 
 
Q: What is an example of a knower in th e continuum of Mahaya na arya that is not an exalted 
knower? 
 
A: Conception of true existence in co ntinuum of Mahayana learner arya.  
 
Q: For Hinayana foe-destroyer wh o has realized emptiness, would that realization of emptiness 
benefit the cultivation of great compassion? 
 
A: Even Hinayana practitioners have compassion, the mind wishing to benefit others, e.g. some 
have immeasurable compassion, but they have a ve ry strong mind wishing for their own peace, so it 
is hard for a mind wishing to benefit others to be strong. In a bodhisattva, realization of emptiness 
and great compassion assist each other. Through realization of emp tiness, bodhisattva realizes that 
phenomena are not truly existent, afflictions become  weak. Realizes there is method for abandoning 
afflictions, but seeing that sentie nt beings follow afflictions and create causes of suffering, the 
bodhisattva’s compassion increases. A bodhisattva has compassion even for e.g. healthy, young, 
rich people, who are not suffering at this moment but are creating causes for suffering. If we think 
of some politicians, we have anger, not comp assion, because we don’t understand details of their 
suffering.  
 
• Hinayana practitioners have st rong compassion; some texts say they have great compassion, 
others say they don’t.  
 
Measure of great compassion  
Minimum criteria: Must be able to induce “excepti onal resolve,” the sixth cau se in sevenfold cause-
and-effect instruction for generating bodhicitta, which takes responsibility for carrying the burden 
of sentient beings.  
 
Q: Is meditative equipoise of an uninterrupted path or liberated path necessarily a realization of 
non-duality or emptiness, or can  it realize something else? 
 
A: If it is either an uninterrupted path or libe rated path of Mahayana meditative equipoise, it is 
pervaded by being a direct realiz ation of emptiness. Does exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise 
that is neither uninterrupted path nor liberated path have to be direct realiza tion of emptiness? No, it 
could be a direct realization of selflessness. There is a non-manifest direct realization of emptiness 
in this person’s continuum.  
 
Q: Can conventional bodhici tta or great compassion be an exampl e of exalted wisdom of meditative 
equipoise that is neith er uninterrupted path  nor liberated path? 
 
A: No.  
 1
Masters Program 2008: Ornament  
Week 3: 4 – 5 February, 2008 
 
Q: Examples of exalted wisdom of subsequent attainment?  
 
A: When one arises from liberated path and ente rs subsequent attainment , manifest bodhicitta or 
great compassion are examples of exalted wisdom  of subsequent attain ment. Also, manifest 
realization of selflessness or emptiness on occasion of arya  bodhisattva (i.e. when one conceptually  
realizes emptiness, through a “meani ng generality” and not directly).  
 
Q: Is there a common locus betwee n (1) exalted wisdom of subseque nt attainment and (2) exalted 
wisdom of meditative equipoise that is neith er uninterrupted path nor liberated path?  
 
A: There is no common locus.  
 
Q: Can conceptual realization of selflessness, or of impermanence, be examples of exalted wisdom 
of subsequent attainment? 
 
A: Conceptual realization of selflessness, of im permanence, etc., can be illustrations of exalted 
wisdom of subsequent attainment; can even posit direct realization of impermanence as example, 
but not direct realization of selflessness.  
 
Q: The application in complete aspects is define d as “a bodhisattva’s yoga…” Is this yoga a mind or 
mental factor, and is the wisdom that it’ s conjoined with a mind or mental factor? 1
 
A: Bodhisattva’s yoga can be a main mind or a ment al factor. The wisdom conjoined with it is a 
mental factor. In another example, the definiti on of conventional bodhicitta is “a Mahayana special 
main mental knower that arises  concomitant with an assisti ng aspiration…” The conventional 
bodhicitta is a “ main knower ,” i.e. a mind; aspiration that arises concomitant with it is a mental 
factor . Both are applications in co mplete aspects (when talking a bout bodhicitta in continuum of 
bodhisattva). In retinue of bodhicitta, there is aspiration for complete enlightenment, a mental 
factor, and this is also an application in complete aspects.  
 
Q: (a) What is the object of observation of this conventional bodhicitt a (main mind)? (b) Is 
compassion concomitant with that bodhicitta? 
 
A: (a) Object of observation of conventional bodhicitta = enlightenment; (b) compassion (even 
great compassion) is not in the retinue of this  conventional bodhicitta. Compassion is mind wishing 
to separate sentient beings from suffering: through its force comes aspiration seeking enlightenment 
for sentient beings.  
 
Q: Then are there two aspirations that act as causes for c onventional bodhicitta? 
 
A: Yes. In the text, (1) aspiration seeking others’ welfare is cause for conventional bodhicitta, while 
(2) aspiration seeking enlightenment is in retinue  of (i.e. is concomitant with) conventional 
bodhicitta. If there is aspiration seeking complete en lightenment in retinue of the main mind, object 
of observation of main mind must be enlightenment.  
 
 
Category 3: Knower of Bases—continued 
                                                 
1 Mind in Tibetan Buddhism  (Lati Rinbochay, Elizabeth Napper) says that mind ( sems ) is “that which knows the mere 
entity of an object being apprehended” and mental factors  “…apprehend various features of that object.” (p. 35) 
 2
Masters Program 2008: Ornament  
Week 3: 4 – 5 February, 2008 
 
 
7. Application of a bodhisattva indicated in  the context of the knower of bases 
 
Definition:  A bodhisattva’s yoga that cultiv ates an antidote to either (i) erroneous adherence to the 
entity and attributes of the mode of subsistence of conventional base s or (ii) erroneous adherence to 
the entity and attributes of the m ode of subsistence of the ultimate. 
 
“…[E]rroneous adherence to the entity and attribut es of the mode of subsistence of conventional 
bases” 
• Ex. of conventional base  = forms 
• “Entity…of the mode of subsistence of  conventional bases” = entity of form, i.e. form itself 
• “Attributes of the mode of subsistence of conven tional bases” = impermanence of form, 
function of form, existence of form, etc.  
 
“…[E]rroneous adherence to the ent ity and attributes of the mode of subsistence of the ultimate” 
• entity of ultimate = emptiness  
• meaning of “entity” = nature  
• attributes of mode of subsistence of ultimate = existence of emptiness; permanence of 
emptiness; singularity of emptiness  
 
Possible for us to adhere erroneously  to entity and attributes of form s and to entity and attributes of 
ultimate, etc. 
 
Erroneous adherence to  entity of form:  many ways of positing form; we adhere to erroneous 
presentation of form.  
 
• Erroneous adherence = superimposition, conceptual grasping, erroneous view 
• Possible to have it relative to either conventional or ultimate 
• Also possible to have antidote, e.g. bodhisattva’s yoga th at is antidote  
 
Example of erroneous adherence to entity of form : erroneous adherence thinking “form is not 
merely imputed by conception” 
 
Example of erroneous adhere nce to attribute of form : thinking “form is permanent,” when it is 
actually impermanent 
 
 
8. Equality of the applications of a bodhisattva i ndicated in the context of the knower of bases 
 
Definition:  A bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined w ith the wisdom that stops a dherence to the divisions of 
bases, definitions, definienda, objects, and object-possessors as truly existent. 
 
• “Wisdom that stops adherence to… objects and object-possessors as truly existent:” wisdom 
realizing emptiness of  true existence. 
 
 
9. Path of seeing explicitly indicated in this context 
 
Definition:  A Mahayana clear realization of the truth that directly re alizes freedom from elaboration 
that is explicitly indicated in this context. 
 3
Masters Program 2008: Ornament  
Week 3: 4 – 5 February, 2008 
 
• “explicitly indicated in this context” is different from just “indicated in this context:” 
explicitly refers to bodhisattva definite in lineage. If “explicitly” is not present, doesn’t 
necessarily refer to someone definite in Mahayana lineage. 
 
 
CATEGORY 4: Application in Complete Aspects (F0-Jë#<-‚ë9-/-) 
 
11 Topics: 
 
1. knower-aspects of the antidotal class explicitly indicated in this context 
2. principal applications explicit ly indicated in this context 
3. excellent qualities of Mahayana applications 
4. faults of the applications  
5. yoga of the path perfection of wisdom 
6. Mahayana partial concordance with libera tion explicitly indicated in this context 
7. Mahayana partial concordance with definite disc rimination explicitly indicated in this context 
8. bodhisattva sangha who has attain ed a sign of irreversibility 
9. application of equality of cyclic existence and solitary peace  
10. application of pure land  
11. application of skillful means 
 
• First and fourth chapters of Ornament are both very extensive.  
 
 
1. Knower-aspect of the antidotal class explicitly indicated in this context 
 
Definition:  An exalted knower that is able to overcome its discordant class. 
 
• If we look at the definition, this actually exists on paths of accumulation, preparation, 
seeing, meditation, no-more-learning, as  well as on Hinayana paths.  
• Boundary indicated (i.e. on buddha ground) is for uncommon knower-aspects of exalted 
knower of all aspects.  
 
 
2. Principal application explicitly indicated in this context 
 
Definition:  A bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined with the wi sdom that is a union of calm abiding and 
special insight observing emptiness that is  explicitly indicated in this context. 
 
• “Explicitly indicated in this context”: only those definite in Mahayana lineage.  
 
Boundary: exists from the heat level of the Mahayana path of preparation th rough the end of the 
continuum [of a sentient being] 
 
 
3. Excellent quality of Mahayana applications 
 
Definition:  A benefit attained through the force of cultivating a Mahayana application which is the 
method for attaining it. 
 4
Masters Program 2008: Ornament  
Week 3: 4 – 5 February, 2008 
 
Boundary:  Exist from the Mahayana path of accumulation through the buddha ground. 
 
 
4. Fault of the applications 
 
Definition:  A mara’s actions that interf ere with either the production, abidance, or completion of an 
application. 
 
Boundary:  exists from not having entered a path through the seventh ground 
 
“Mara’s actions:”  when thinking of someone who harms us, we usually think of a person who 
harms us directly, but main “harmer” is within us. This is the harmer that  we need to destroy.  
• Examples = all the afflictions: laziness, prid e, jealousy, miserliness, anger, attachment. 
• Afflictions prevent us from generating path. Othe rs harm us only because we have basis, e.g. 
anger, jealousy, etc. 
• One type of mara = Devaputra (“Son of Gods”), an external god; with out inner afflictions, 
this mara is unable to harm us.  
• Meaning of “foe-destroyer (a rhat):” destroys the foes 
• “Faults” = afflictions in our continuum; not able to attain realization because of these, even 
wholesome thoughts are difficult to generate.  
 
D First, need to identify afflictions, then th eir faults, then mind that does not want these 
afflictions. Need to examine where our suffe ring comes from. Source = afflictions, not 
others.   
 
• Shantideva: we feel pain because of having this body; body arose from conditions of one’s 
own karma, created by ourselves.  
• Non-virtuous actions created by body, speech, mind, creating karma. Need to think of “my 
karma,” and apply this to our practice.  
 
 
5. Yoga of the path perfection of wisdom 
 
Definition:  A bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined with a union of calm abidin g and special insight which 
is the method for attaining a resultant perf ection of wisdom, its object of attainment. 
 
Boundary:  Exists from the Mahayana path of accumu lation through the end of the continuum [of a 
sentient being]. 
 
 
6. Mahayana partial concordance with liberation  explicitly indicated in this context 
 
Definition:  A clear realization of the doc trine in the continuum of a bodhi sattva skilled in achieving 
an exalted knower of all aspects in his continuum. 
 
• In general, bodhicitta in continuum of person on path of accumulation can degenerate 
• “Explicitly indicated in th is context” = bodhicitta that cannot degenerate 
• Principally those definite in Mahayana lineage , trainees who are objects of intent of the 
Ornament for Clear Realization;  they will not degenerate bodhicitta.  
 
 5
Masters Program 2008: Ornament  
Week 3: 4 – 5 February, 2008 
 
7. Mahayana partial concordance with definite di scrimination explicitly indicated in this 
context 
 
Definition:  A Mahayana clear realization of the meaning explicitly indicated in this context mainly 
qualified by the quality of method. 
 
Boundary:  Exists only on the Mahaya na path of preparation.  
 
 
8. Bodhisattva sangha who has attained a sign of irreversibility 
 
Definition:  A bodhisattva who has attained any of the fo rty-four signs, such as having turned away 
from manifest adherence to forms and so forth as truly existent. 
 
Boundary:  exists from the heat level of the path of preparation through the e nd of the continuum [of 
a sentient being] 
 
 
“Essential point:” 
 
Three types of lineage-bearers:  
1. Hearer = dull in faculty 
2. Solitary realizer = middling faculty 
3. Mahayana  = sharp faculty 
 
Sharp-, middling-, or dull- facultied:  meaning is not that person is or is not clever. Refers to 
strength of mind.  
• Hearers, solitary realizers, and bodhisattvas respectively have  small, middling, and great 
strength of mind  
• In general, all Mahayana lineage-bearers are shar p-facultied; within them, there are dull- and 
sharp-facultied; there are even  finer divisions of those. 
 
Bodhisattva sangha:  
“Sign of irreversibility:” irreversible = from co mplete enlightenment; one proceeds straight to 
complete enlightenment.  
 
Sharpest bodhisattva:  attains sign of irreversibility on heat level of path of preparation (there is no 
attainment of sign of irreversib ility on path of accumulation) 
 
• There is no degeneration of bodhicitta from middling level of Mahayana path of 
accumulation; doesn’t this mean one is irrevers ible from complete enlightenment? Yes, but 
doesn’t attain sign of irreversibility. 
• If person has inner excellent qua lities, others can sometimes tell through way of speaking, 
behaving, etc., but some speak nicely  although have bad thoughts, etc. 
• Some have good hearts, minds, but don’t know how  to speak nicely. Fault = listeners, not 
speaker.  
• Gradually, we can see others’ qualities, see san gha who’ve attained signs of irreversibility. 
Otherwise, we’re unable even to see a buddha arya in front of us! 
 
 
 6
Masters Program 2008: Ornament  
Week 3: 4 – 5 February, 2008 
Tuesday, 5 February 2008 
 
Questions and answers 
 
Q: What is definition of meditative equipoise? 
 
A: No definition in general, but we could posit  it as “exalted wisdom placed in equipoise on the 
selflessness that is its object.” The selflessness co uld be subtle selflessness of persons, emptiness of 
true existence, or emptiness of duality. 
 
Q: In the application in complete aspects, first topic (knower-aspect of an tidotal class explicitly 
indicated in this context), the boundary is said to be buddha ground. Ge she-la said it exists in both 
vehicles and all five paths, and that “this context” applies to “uncommon” knower-aspects. Please 
explain. 
 
A: Knower-aspects are three types: knower of bases, knower of paths,  exalted knower of all aspects. 
The Tibetan text doesn’t specify boundaries for thes e. This boundary probably applies only to last 
type. In general, knower-aspects  are found on all five paths.  
• Knower-aspects of exalted knower of all aspects = 110.2 They are divided into three groups: 
o 37 similar to those of hearers 
o 34 similar to those of bodhisattvas 
o 39 uncommon aspects of exalted knower of all aspects; not similar to those of 
hearers and bodhisattvas  
 
Q: What is the difference between a Mahayana arya and a Mahayana learner arya? 
 
A: Mahayana arya could be Mahayana learner arya or Mahayana non-learner arya.  
• Boundary for Mahayana arya = pa th of seeing through buddha ground  
• Mahayana learner arya = Mahaya na path of seeing through e nd of continuum of sentient 
being.  
 
Q: What is the object of observation of great comp assion? Is it correct to  posit sentient beings? 
 
A: No, the object must be sentient beings tormented by suffering. 
 
Q: What is the knower-asp ect of great compassion? 
 
A: Great compassion, or mercy.  
 
 
Application in complete aspects 
 
8. Bodhisattva sangha who has attained a sign of irreversibility (continued) 
 
All bodhisattvas are sharp, but t hose can be divided into sharp, middling, and dull. They 
respectively will achieve signs of irreversibility on (1) path of preparation, (2) path of seeing, and 
(3) eighth ground.  
 
 
                                                 
2 These will be discussed extensively in the fourth chapter.  
 7
Masters Program 2008: Ornament  
Week 3: 4 – 5 February, 2008 
9. Application of equality of cy clic existence and solitary peace 
 
Definition:  A yoga of the pure grounds that has exha ustively destroyed th e opportunity for the 
generation of the manifest concep tion of true existence on the occas ions of subsequent attainment 
by means of being conjoined with the wisdom dire ctly realizing cyclic ex istence and peace to be 
empty of true existence. 
 
Boundary:  exists on the three pure grounds 
 
• Why not on seven impure grounds? What if we leave “of the pure grounds” out of the 
definition?  
• Seven impure grounds:  there is wisdom realizing cyclic existence and peace to be empty that 
is able to destroy the generation of the manifest  conception of true existence, but this comes 
through coarse exertion .  
• On pure grounds, no coarse exertion is necessary, so “opportuni ty for generation…” has 
been destroyed. On impure grounds, manifest conception of true existence will not be 
generated if coarse exertion exists.  
• Coarse exertion:  one has to think about something beforehand. On pure grounds, whatever 
appears dawns as empty of true existence, like an illusion; thus no coarse exertion required. 
On lower grounds, it isn’t like this. 
 
 
10. Application of pure land 
 
Definition:  A yoga of the pure grounds in which a root of  virtue, such as a prayer to accomplish the 
special land where he will attain  enlightenment, has become a powerful potency in his continuum. 
 
Boundary:  exists on the three pure grounds 
 
• “Pure land” – special land where one attains enlightenment.  
• In order to have pure land, mu st have pure mind. Application in  pure land = purifying one’s 
own mind. E.g. if one cleans gompa with pur e motivation, create cause for pure land.  
 
[Geshe-la spoke for some time about checking and purifying th e mind, not becoming angry with 
others, etc.] 
 
 
11. Application of skillful means 
 
Definition:  A yoga of the pure grounds that spontaneous ly accomplishes exalted activities by means 
of having pacified coarse exertion. 
 
Boundary:  exists on the three pure grounds 
 
More detailed commentary will come in fourth chapter. 
 
D As we learn more, e.g. studying Madhyamika, etc., it is possible to deve lop pride, e.g. feel 
hurt when not receiving respect; study becomes harmful, rather than beneficial—this is 
danger of studying these texts. Need to respec t others, not expect respect from them.  
 
 
 8
Masters Program 2008: Ornament  
Week 3: 4 – 5 February, 2008 
CATEGORY 5: Peak Application (Iè-‚ë9-) – 8 Topics 
1. peak application of heat 
2. peak application of peak 
3. peak application of forbearance 
4. peak application of supreme mundane quality 
5. peak application of the path of seeing 
6. peak application of the path of meditation 
7. uninterrupted peak application  
8. perverse achieving that is to  be eliminated indicated here 
 
 
1. Peak application of heat 
 
Definition:  A first Mahayana partial concordance with de finite discrimination that has attained any 
of the 12 signs of having attained peak application. 
 
Boundary:  Exists only on the heat level of  the Mahayana path of preparation 
 
• “…that has attained any of th e 12 signs of having attained p eak application:” previously, 
talked about bodhisattva sangha who has attained signs of irreversibility.  
 
 
2. Peak application of peak 
 
Definition:  A second Mahayana partial concordance with definite discriminati on that has attained 
the 16 thorough increases of merit, such as th at exceeding the worshi pping of buddhas equal in 
number to the sentient beings of  the billionfold world systems. 
 
• “Billionfold” = lit. “three thousand” (Tib. tong gsum ), but this isn’t the number 3,000. there 
are small, middling, and large thousands. Geshe-la says small “thousand” is actually a 
billion, second is a billion sets of a billion (118), third is a billion times the middling level 
(127).  
• One world system:  four continents, eight sub-co ntinents, plus sun and moon  
• Bodhisattvas make huge amount of merit, b ecause they make offerings to buddhas while 
thinking of all sentient beings. Object of worship = countle ss buddhas. Merit becomes very 
vast, exceeding number of sentient be ings in billionfold world systems. 
• Compare (1) one bodhisattva meditating on em ptiness for one second with (2) enough 
Hinayana arhats to fill en tire surface of eart h meditating on emptiness for 100 years: 
bodhisattva meditating for one second creates more  merit, because meditates for sake of all 
sentient beings. Merit come s through power of bodhicitta.  
• Mantra system speaks of attaining enlightenment quickly, which is due to generation of bodhicitta.  
• Realization of emptiness (i.e . highest view, Prasangika-Madhyamika) is common to sutra 
and tantra.  
 
Boundary:  exists only on the peak level of  the Mahayana path of preparation.  
 
[long discussion about a ccumulation of merit] 
 
 9
Masters Program 2008: Ornament  
Week 3: 4 – 5 February, 2008 
 
3. Peak application of forbearance 
 
Definition:  A third Mahayana partial concordance with definite discriminati on that has attained 
stability in (i) the wisdom that is a complete  similitude of the three exalted knowers and (ii) 
indivisibility from others’ welfare. 
 
Boundary:  Exists only on the forbearance level of the Mahayana path of preparation.  
 
• “Similitude” = similar; it is not exactly those three exalted knowers  
• “Indivisibility from others’ we lfare:” bodhisattva has attained st ability in this; on heat and 
peak levels, is indivisible from others’ welfare, but has not attained stability; not easy to 
enact others’ welfare.  
• On this level, bodhisattva attains certainty of forbearance. 
 
 
(No teachings until 18 Feb. for Losar break) 
 
END  
 10