Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/Transcript pdf/ORN_GTTnotes_10.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:51:35.275211
================================================================================

Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 10: 7—11 April, 2008 
 
1 Masters Program: Ornament for Clear Realization 
Notes on commentary by Geshe Tenzin Tenphel 
 
Monday afternoon, 7 April 2008 1 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 51: 
 
2B2B-1. Making a connection (continued) 
Since the relationship was not explicitly indicated  by the root text, having asserted the 
elimination of the qualm, the relationship was ment ioned at the outset. 
 
COMMENTARY 
Thus, having indicated the relationship and so fort h—in order to make trainees realize 
easily, and also having seen it as easy to explain by not mixing up the completely classified 
meaning of the treatise—the presentation of the cor pus of the Perfection of Wisdom is 
taught, through indicating briefly and extensively by fifteen verses.  
 
EXPLANATION 
Thus, having indicated 2 the  relationship and so forth, the presentation of the corpus 
of the Perfection of Wisdom is taught ; for the purpose in regards  to the listeners is in 
order to make  listener trainees realize easily  the levels of extensive explanation of the 
branches, and in regards to the explainers, [for th em] to do it also having seen it as easy to 
explain by not mixing up the completely classified  concise meaning of the treatise  with 
the levels of extensive explanation of the branches . A summary of the corpus has 
indicated it  briefly and extensively by fifteen verses .  
 
“[R]elationship and so forth” refers to the propert ies that we have gone through: subject matter, 
purpose, essential purpose, and relationship. Havin g indicated those, “the presentation of the corpus 
of the Perfection of Wisdom is taught.” Here it tal ks about the purpose in regard to the listeners and  
the explainers. The purpose in regard to the listeners is so they can easily realize the extensive 
explanation of the branches, which refers to the st anza that talks about the generated mind and so 
forth. What is this extensive explanation of the br anches? When we talked about the structure of the 
text previously, the fifteen stanzas were mentioned , which give the brief indication of the corpus of 
the text. Following those comes the extensive expla nation of the branches. The purpose in relation 
to the explainers is so that they, “having seen it as easy to explain  by not mixing up,” or confusing, 
“the completely classified concise meaning of the t reatise with the levels of extensive explanation 
of the branches” that will come after those fifteen  stanzas, do this explanation.  
 “Having indicated the relationship and so forth” r efers to the two stanzas that are the statement 
of the purpose and relationship: 1.2 and 1.3. Havin g indicated that, this brief indication of the 
corpus of the Ornament for Clear Realization  is presented. This brief indication of the corpus is 
taught with a purpose. For the listeners, it is so they can “realize easily the levels of extensive 
explanation of the branches;” for the explainers, i t is for them to do it, “having seen it as easy to 
explain by not mixing up the…  concise meaning of the treatise with the levels of  extensive 
explanation of the branches.”  
 
                                                 
1 Note that this week, there were no teachings Wedne sday or Friday morning, due to other teachings give n by Ven. 
Rizong Rinpoche. 
2 Bsnyad  emended to read bstad  in accordance with the commentary above. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 10: 7—11 April, 2008 
 
2 Q: Does the “corpus of the Perfection of Wisdom” re fer to the corpus of the Ornament for Clear 
Realization ? 
A: Here, when it talks about the corpus of the perf ection of wisdom, you can take it to mean the 
corpus of the Ornament for Clear Realization . It is also possible to interpret it as meaning th e 
corpus of the Perfection of Wisdom sutras. Followin g this, we will be looking more closely at the 
term “Perfection of Wisdom.” It can refer to the te xtual, resultant, or causal perfection of wisdom.  
 
Q: What does the “completely classified concise mea ning of the treatise” refer to? 
A: This refers to the fifteen stanzas that are the brief indication of the corpus.  
 
Q: Since there are different interpretations of a t ext such as the Ornament for Clear Realization , 
what is the relationship between the text and the r ealizations that one develops? 
A: It is not the case that if something is explaine d in one way, that the other explanations are 
necessarily wrong. One word can have many meanings.  It is said, either by Gyeltsab Je or Khedrup 
Je, that any text by Lama Tsong Khapa has 100 meani ngs, and that even those 100 are not 
exhaustive! If two teachers explain a single word d ifferently, it is possible that one is wrong, but i t 
is also possible that both are correct.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 51:  
2B2B-2. Setting forth the statement 
2B2B-2A. Brief indication of the corpus 
2B2B-2B. Extensive explanation  
 
Here, “brief indication of the corpus” refers to th e two stanzas: 1.4 and 1.5, which begin below. 
This continues until stanza 1.5d (p. 61): “these ar e the eight.” Then there is an extensive 
explanation, which, in this context, refers to the following thirteen stanzas: 1.6 (p. 63, “Generated 
mind…”) to 1.18 (p. 80, “Nature along with complete  enjoyment…”).  
 
2B2B-2A. Brief indication of the corpus 
2B2B-2A1. Brief indication of the object to be expl ained and that which explains 
2B2B-2A2. The scope of that which explains 
2B2B-2A1. Briefly showing the objects to be explain ed and that which explains 
2B2B-2A1A. Meaning of the words 
2B2B-2A1B. Decisive analysis  
2B2B-2A1A. Meaning of the words {74}  
ROOT TEXT 
1.4ab The Perfection of Wisdom  
Is perfectly explained by the eight categories. 
 
EXPLANATION 
The  three—extensive, medium, and brief textual Perfection of Wisdom —are objects to be 
determined. By what? By this treatise. How? They ar e perfectly , completely and non-
erroneously explained by  the divisions of the expresser into eight chapters , and also the 
divisions of the categories , which are the meaning of the subject matter expre ssed, into 
eight  clear realizations. 
 
In this passage, we should be able to pinpoint “the  objects to be explained” and “that which 
explains” (as indicated in the outline above). “The  three—extensive, medium, and brief textual 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 10: 7—11 April, 2008 
 
3 Perfection of Wisdom—are objects to be determined,”  or the objects to be explained . They are to be 
explained by that which explains: this treatise, the Ornament for Clear Realization . How? They are 
explained by the expresser being divided into eight  chapters and the subject matter expressed into 
the eight clear realizations, or eight categories. The Ornament for Clear Realization  is a 
commentary to the extensive, medium, and brief Perf ection of Wisdom sutras. This may seem 
strange, making things as complicated as they are i n this text, but don’t think like this! The meaning  
of the text can be known in dependence on the words , so it is important to know how they express 
the meaning. We will go through the brief explanati on, the extensive explanation, and the branches.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 52:  
 
2B2B-2A1B. Decisive analysis  
2B2B-2A1B-1. Stating the assertion of the Acharya 
2B2B-2A1B-2. Refuting the wrong explanations given by others 
2B2B-2A1B-1. Stating the assertion of the Acharya 
The Great Commentary  says: 
 
Thus, because of realizing the exalted wisdom of th e exalted knower of all aspects 
through the stages of generating the knowers bearin g the nature of hearing, 
contemplation, and meditation at first, it goes to the other side—that is, the side of 
excellence—whereby it is paramita [usually rendered as “perfection,” literally 
meaning  “that gone to the other side”]. 
 
Further, it has gone to the other side that is wisd om, the characteristic of excellently 
discriminating phenomena that is called “ prajña ,” [usually rendered as “wisdom,” literally 
meaning  “excellent knowing”] [whereby] it is prajñaparamita  [usually rendered as 
“perfection of wisdom,” literally meaning  “that gone to the other side that is wisdom”].  
 Although a buddha bhagavan’s illusion-like  exalted wisdom of non-duality is the actual 
[perfection of wisdom], the texts that are the coll ections of words and statements and the 
paths that bear the characteristics of seeing and s o forth, due to being concordant with the 
attainment of that [exalted wisdom], are imputed “p erfection of wisdom.” {75}  
 
The Great Commentary  (on the Eight Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom Sutra ) is composed 
by Haribhadra, so “Stating the assertion of the Ach arya” refers to Acharya Haribhadra. Here, it talks 
about “knowers bearing the nature of hearing, conte mplation, and meditation.” We have discussed 
this in the context of the statement of purpose-and -relationship, in which it said we should first hea r 
the explanation, then contemplate the meaning, then  meditate on it. By doing that, we “go to the 
other side,” which is excellence, whereby it is paramita , or “that gone to the other side.” The 
explanation says “further, it has gone to the other  side that is wisdom,” wisdom being “the 
characteristic of excellently discriminating phenom ena.” Having gone through this wisdom, it is 
prajñaparamita,  meaning literally “that gone to the other side tha t is wisdom.” When he talks about 
this passage, it is saying that the buddha’s illusi on-like exalted wisdom of non-duality is the actual 
perfection of wisdom. We then have the textual and path perfection of wisdom, which are imputed 
perfections of wisdom, due to being concordant with  the attainment of the buddha’s exalted wisdom 
of non-duality. The textual and path perfections of  wisdom are not the actual perfections of wisdom.  
 
This section discusses the etymology of the express ion “perfection of wisdom,” saying that only a 
buddha’s exalted wisdom of non-duality is the actua l perfection of wisdom. The texts that have the 
perfection of wisdom as their subject matter are th e textual perfection of wisdom; this is not the 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 10: 7—11 April, 2008 
 
4 actual perfection of wisdom, it is imputed. We have  paths, the methods for attaining the actual 
perfection of wisdom, which are also imputed. What could we posit as an illustration of the path 
perfection of wisdom? We could posit bodhicitta, th e mind of enlightenment, or the Mahayana path 
of accumulation, the Mahayana path of preparation, and so on. So we have three types of perfection 
of wisdom: 
1.  textual perfection of wisdom : an example is the Perfection of Wisdom sutras 
2.  path perfection of wisdom : an example is the mind of enlightenment   
3.  resultant perfection of wisdom : an example is the buddha’s exalted wisdom, or an exalted 
knower of all aspects  
We can say that a Perfection of Wisdom sutra is a t extual perfection of wisdom, but is not a 
perfection of wisdom. Although it is not a perfecti on of wisdom, it is called “perfection of wisdom,” 
because its subject matter is the perfection of wis dom. By engaging in hearing, contemplating, and 
meditating on the Perfection of Wisdom sutras, one can go to the other side, which is wisdom. Since 
the term perfection of wisdom is engaged, it is imp uted as perfection of wisdom. Likewise, the path 
perfection of wisdom is not a perfection of wisdom but is imputed “perfection of wisdom” because 
it is a cause of going to the perfection of wisdom.  The resultant perfection of wisdom is the actual 
perfection of wisdom, so resultant perfection of wi sdom and perfection of wisdom are mutually 
inclusive . The resultant perfection of wisdom is pervaded by  being an exalted knower of all aspects.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 52:  
 
Acarya Dignaga also explained that: 
 
The perfection of wisdom is non-dual;  
That exalted wisdom is [of] the Tathagatas.  
Due to the probandum possessing the meaning,  
The paths and texts are termed that. 
 
Therefore, [Acarya Dignaga] definitely held  that “By way of being related to that, all three 
aspects free from being reflections are also perfec tions of wisdom;” it is in terms of that 
other than the principal . It is not that only those  [Mahayana texts, paths, and results are 
determined ] are of those [three aspects] , because that is in terms of all three 
enlightenments, since [the Mahayana texts, paths, a nd results ] would not occur if these  
[Hinayana texts, paths, and results ] were absent. In addition, [the Great Commentary ] 
explains that: 
 
“Also, those who wish to train in the grounds of he arers should listen to this 
Perfection of Wisdom” and so forth will be explaine d. 
 
Here, the term “reflections” refers to the Hinayana , or hearers’ and solitary realizers’,  texts, path s, 
and results. What are the “three aspects free from being reflections”? They are the Mahayana texts, 
paths, and results. These three aspects are also th e perfection of wisdom. This is in terms of “that 
other than the principal,” meaning that not only th e Mahayana texts, paths, and results are indicated 
by this statement. “[B]ecause that is in terms of a ll three enlightenments, since [the Mahayana texts,  
paths, and results] would not occur if these [Hinay ana texts, paths, and results] were absent.” The 
meaning is that what is principally indicated are the Mahayana texts, paths, and result s, but it is not 
the Hinayana texts, paths, and results are not  indicated. This is proved by a quotation from the 
Great Commentary : “‘Also, those who wish to train in the grounds of  hearers should listen to this 
Perfection of Wisdom’ and so forth will be explaine d.” The cited text in this quote is from the Eight 
Thousand Verse Perfection of Wisdom Sutra .  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 10: 7—11 April, 2008 
 
5 Q: Are the Hinayana texts, paths, and results inclu ded in the perfection of wisdom? 
A: The Hinayana texts, paths, and results are indic ated by the Perfection of Wisdom sutras.  
 
Q: Are they perfections of wisdom? 
A: No, because they are reflections, i.e. reflectio ns of the perfection of wisdom.  
 
The Perfection of Wisdom sutras determine both the Hinayana and Mahayana texts, paths, and 
results. The main topic of dispute here is the Hina yana paths.  
 
Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
It means that only a buddhas’ exalted wisdom distin guished by either the three or the four 
attributes 3 is the actual perfection of wisdom; the path perfe ction of wisdom and textual 
perfection of wisdom are imputations. 
 
The  four attributes are the attributes of 
1.  support: it exists only in the continua of buddha a ryas  
2.  aspect: it is non-dual  
3.  entity: it is an exalted wisdom  
4.  being free from the object of negation: it is empty  of true existence, like an illusion. 
 
The three attributes are: 
1.  support 
2.  entity 
3.  aspect and being free from the object of negation c ombined 
 
Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
 With regard to the differences between the actual and the imputed, Acarya Dignaga’s 
text was cited, but it is not identical in every wa y [to the explanation here], [because] 
“illusion-like” is mentioned by asserting [an exalt ed wisdom] distinguished from a truly 
existent knower of emptiness of duality. “By way of  being related to a Mahayana person 
who is the support, all three perfections of wisdom  free from the reflections of perfection 
of wisdom are also perfections of wisdom” is the me aning of “that definitely held” by 
Acarya Dignaga. 
 
It says that Acharya Dignaga’s text “is not identic al in every way.” Here, “illusion-like” is 
mentioned, but Acharya Dignaga explains this from t he point of view of Chittamatra, asserting a 
truly existent knower of emptiness of duality. This  is not asserted by our system. For Dignaga, 
“illusion-like” refers to the non-existence of exte rnal objects, i.e. although there are no external 
objects, the knower of emptiness of duality is trul y existent. According to the Chittamatra system, 
there are no external objects, but the knower is tr uly existent. For Chittamatra, non-duality refers t o 
the emptiness of apprehenders and apprehendeds bein g different substances, i.e. as being “like 
illusions.” For Chittamatra, knowers are truly exis tent.  
 According to our own system, non-duality is also t he emptiness of apprehenders and 
apprehendeds being different substances, but we do not assert that consciousness is truly existent. 
The expression “illusion-like” comes from the earli er passage, “Although a buddha bhagavan’s 
                                                 
3 These are alluded to in Dignaga’s explanation abov e. In accordance with page 118 of the Ganden Jangts e Library 
edition of Jetsun Chokyi Gyeltsen’s Ocean of Sport , the four attributes are (1) the attribute of supp ort: existing in the 
continua of only buddha aryas; (2) the attribute of  aspect: being non-dual; (3) the attribute of entit y: being an exalted 
wisdom; and (4) the attribute of being free from th e object of negation: being empty of true existence , like an illusion. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 10: 7—11 April, 2008 
 
6 illusion-like  exalted wisdom of non-duality…” In this context, f ollowing the system of Acharya 
Haribhadra, when we talk about the exalted wisdom o f non-duality, we can interpret it to mean the 
exalted wisdom realizing the emptiness of apprehend ers and apprehendeds being different 
substances. However, this can also mean the exalted  wisdom of the emptiness of true existence.  
 This is an exalted wisdom in which three types of appearances have vanished:   
1.  the appearance of the object and object-possessor as different; they are like water poured 
into water 
2.  the appearance of conventionalities  
3.  the appearance of true existence  
 
Q: Is it impossible to attain the state of a buddha  without relying on the path and textual perfection s 
of wisdom? 
A: Yes.  
 
Q: So the Buddha also attained Buddhahood in depend ence on these?  
A: Yes, in order to become a Buddha, one needs to r ely on these. After attaining buddhahood, one 
no longer needs to rely on these.  
 
Q: Then what text did the Buddha rely on to attain buddhahood? 
A: I don’t think this particular text existed befor e Shakyamuni Buddha, but there was a similar text.  
 
Q: In general, would an exalted wisdom of non-duali ty be an exalted wisdom of the lack of true 
existence?  
A: In general, “exalted wisdom of non-duality” can mean two things: (1) the exalted wisdom of 
emptiness of apprehendeds and apprehenders being di fferent substances or (2) the exalted wisdom 
of the lack of true existence. 
 
Q: We said the exalted wisdom of a buddha is free f rom the appearance of conventionalities. Is it 
true that conventionalities do not appear to the me ditative equipoise of a buddha? 
A: In the case of a learner, we would say the medit ative equipoise is one in which the appearance of 
conventionalities, or of object and object-possesso r being different, has vanished. Would this also 
apply to a buddha’s exalted wisdom? If in the case of a buddha’s exalted wisdom, objects and 
object-possessors do not appear as different, this would mean that objects and object-possessors do 
not exist differently. We do say that such a mind i s one in which dualistic appearances have 
vanished. We would have to say that for the exalted  wisdom of a buddha, there is the appearance  of 
conventionalities, and there is the appearance of o bjects and object-possessors as different. But in 
the perspective  of a seer that sees emptiness, or dharmata, there is no appearance of 
conventionalities or objects and object-possessors.   
 
 
Tuesday, April 08, 2008 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 53:  
 
2B2B-2A1B-1. Stating the assertion of the Acharya (c ontinued) 
 
QUALM: Why is it that only the three—Mahayana texts , paths, and results—are 
indicated? 
RESPONSE: These are in terms of the principal objec ts to be determined ; they are not 
exhausted in just these, because if the paths of th e hearers and solitary realizers have not 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 10: 7—11 April, 2008 
 
7 been determined, the Mahayana texts and paths would  also not occur, whereby  whereas  
they are determined in terms of the paths of all th ree enlightenments.  
 
The question is asking, Why are only the three—Maha yana texts, paths, and results—indicated? 
“These are in terms of the principal objects to be determined; they are not exhausted in just 
these…,” i.e. they are not exhausted in only these. It is not the case that only Mahayana texts,  paths, 
and results are indicated; they are mainly indicate d, but the Hinayana texts, paths, and results are 
also indicated. In general, when we differentiate b etween Hinayana and Mahayana, we differentiate 
in terms of the attitude, or scope, of one’s thinki ng. They are relative—in relation to the smaller 
scope, we speak of Mahayana, while in relation to t he great scope way of thinking, we speak of the 
Hinayana. When we speak of a Mahayanist, this is so meone with a very extensive attitude to benefit 
others; this person needs to take care of the three  types of lineage-bearers, and thus needs to know 
the paths themselves. We discussed this in the sect ion on the perfect end. Since Hinayana and 
Mahayana are relative, if there is no Hinayana, the re is no Mahayana.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 53:  
 
2B2B-2A1B-2. Refuting the wrong explanations given by others 
OPINION: Because of this statement, “in terms of th at other than the principal,” that in 
terms of the resultant perfection of wisdom, the pr incipal among the three perfections of 
wisdom is indicated.  
RESPONSE: Your assertion is a wrong explanation. {7 6} For this text by Acarya Dignaga 
explicitly indicated the three—Mahayana texts, path s, and results. The proof is indicated 
by the passage: 
 
The three Mahayana dharmas—freedom from being (i) a  reflection of the path 
perfection of wisdom, an exalted wisdom realizing i mpermanence and so forth 
that is bound by the conception of true existence, (ii) a reflection of the resultant 
perfection of wisdom that is to be attained by mere ly that, and (iii) a reflection of 
the textual perfection of wisdom in which mainly th ose are being determined—is 
the perfection of wisdom. 
 
This opinion says that the resultant perfection of wisdom is indicated. Our system’s response is that 
this is not correct, because the following text by Dignaga explicitly indicated the three: Mahayana 
texts, paths, and results. The three Mahayana dharm as refers to freedom from being the three:  
1.  “a reflection of the path perfection of wisdom,” wh ich refers to “an exalted wisdom realizing 
impermanence and so forth that is bound by the conc eption of true existence…” 
2.  “a reflection of the resultant perfection of wisdom  that is to be attained by merely that:” 
“merely that” refers to the Hinayana, i.e. the exal ted wisdom realizing impermanence that is 
bound by the conception of true existence.  
3.  “a reflection of the textual perfection of wisdom i n which mainly those” i.e. the Hinayana 
path and result, “are being determined.”  
 
That which is free of these is the perfection of wi sdom. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 53: 
 
For this is also the meaning of the statement “It i s the principal object to be determined;” 
there is no qualm regarding indicating the resultan t perfection of wisdom as principal. 
Since all three enlightenments would not occur in t he absence of this perfection of wisdom, 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 10: 7—11 April, 2008 
 
8 the paths of all three are indicated. Where? The st atement “Also those who wish to train in 
the grounds of hearers… ” will be explained, below  and also [it is indicated in the context 
of] “the cause of attaining the three vehicles toge ther.” 
 
The meaning here is that all three —Mahayana texts, paths, and results—are indicated a s principal. 
It is not that only the resultant perfection of wis dom is principal. “Since all three enlightenments 
would not occur in the absence of this perfection o f wisdom, the paths of all three are indicated.” 
“Also, those who wish to train in the grounds of he arers…” is a statement from the sutra (cited on p. 
52). Here, another source is also mentioned, which is actually from the Ornament for Clear 
Realization : “the cause of attaining the three vehicles togeth er.” This will come later, in the context 
of the path of preparation.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 54: 
 
 The two—the textual and path perfections of wisdom —are imputed perfections of 
wisdom. The reasons for the imputation are (i) beca use [the textual perfection of wisdom] 
indicates the resultant perfection of wisdom as the  subject matter, and (ii) because [the path 
perfection of wisdom] is the method for attaining i t. The purpose of the imputation is to 
make known that those who wish to attain the result  must hear and contemplate upon the 
texts and practice the paths. They are not the actu al, because they lack the culmination of 
wisdom. 
 
This passage says that the textual and path perfect ions of wisdom are imputed; they are not actual 
perfections of wisdom.  
• The textual perfection of wisdom indicates the resultant perfection of wisdom as the subject 
matter, so it is imputed.  
• The path perfection of wisdom is the method for attaining the resultant perfection of wisdom, 
and is thus imputed as perfection of wisdom.  
The purpose of this imputation is to “make known th at those who wish to attain the result must hear 
and contemplate upon the texts.” In order to make k nown that those who wish to attain the result 
must practice the paths, the path perfection of wis dom is imputed as “perfection of wisdom.” Thus 
there are two purposes for the imputation.  
 
In this passage, there are three essential points :  
1.  reasons for the imputation 
2.  purpose of the imputation 
3.  that the path and textual perfection wisdom are not  actual perfections of wisdom.  
 
• From the point of view of subject matter , the textual perfection of wisdom is imputed as 
perfection of wisdom. 
• From the point of view of method , the path perfection of wisdom is imputed as perfe ction of 
wisdom 
• In terms of the purpose , it is made known that it is necessary to contempl ate the texts and to 
practice the path.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 54: 
 
 Someone’s assertion—that a perfection of wisdom is  pervaded by being a wisdom—
does not differentiate between etymology and engage ment. Because, [the practice of ] the 
perfection of generosity and so forth in the mental  continuum of a bodhisattva causes one 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 10: 7—11 April, 2008 
 
9 to go to the other side of wisdom  are als o taken to be perfections of wisdom  due to this, 
whereby the etymology “perfection of wisdom” is pre sent. 
 
Hence, the textual perfections of wisdom are the co llections of texts, the expresser in 
which the Mahayana paths along with their results a re being principally  determined. {77} 
The path perfection of wisdom is the paths in the m ental continuum of a bodhisattva that 
are explicitly conjoined with the wisdom realizing emptiness and the method of great 
compassion. The resultant perfection of wisdom is t he culminated exalted wisdom 
distinguished by the four attributes, just as expla ined above.  
 
This person says that a perfection of wisdom is per vaded by being a wisdom. This does not 
differentiate between etymology and engagement, i.e . an explanation of  a term and the engagement 
with a term. “Because, the perfection of generosity  and so forth in the mental continuum of a 
bodhisattva are also taken to be perfections of wis dom due to this, whereby the etymology 
‘perfection of wisdom’ is present.” This refers to the fact that, according to our school, there is no  
perfection of wisdom in the continuum of a bodhisat tva, although there is the practice of the 
perfection of wisdom. This passage is related to th e previous paragraph, where it says “They are not 
the actual, because they lack the culmination of wi sdom.” This means that a bodhisattva does not 
have an actual perfection of wisdom.  
 We have to apply understanding of the previous par agraph to understand this. The path and 
textual perfections of wisdom have the etymology  of the perfection of wisdom, but are not the 
perfection of wisdom. The textual perfection of wis dom has the perfection of wisdom from the 
point of view of subject matter , and the path perfection of wisdom has the perfect ion of wisdom 
from the point of view of method , but they are not actual perfections of wisdom. On ly the resultant 
perfection of wisdom is the actual perfection of wi sdom. The path perfection of wisdom is the 
method for going to the other side of wisdom, so it  is the etymology, but does not engage the term, 
“perfection of wisdom.” This means that it is not “ that gone to the other side that is wisdom;” 
however, it has the etymology in the sense that it causes the going to the perfection of wisdom. 
Etymology means “explaining the term.”  
 
Q: What is “engaging the term”? 
A: The path perfection of wisdom does not engage in  the term perfection of wisdom. Indeed, this 
expression path perfection of wisdom contains the t erm “perfection of wisdom,” but this is an 
explanation of the term; it does not engage the ter m. In dependence on the path perfection of 
wisdom, one is able to go to the other side that is  wisdom, so in that sense there is the explanation 
of the term perfection of wisdom. In the continuum of a bodhisattva, there is no perfection of 
wisdom; there is the path  perfection of wisdom, which causes one to go to th e other side of wisdom, 
therefore the etymology “perfection of wisdom” is p resent. 
 
Q: Are the resultant perfection of wisdom and the actual perfection of wisdom both exalted 
knowers? 
A: Yes. They are both exalted wisdom. They are mutu ally inclusive.  
 
This person says the perfection of wisdom is pervad ed by being a wisdom. The perfection of 
wisdom is not pervaded by being a wisdom; for examp le, the bodhicitta of a buddha arya is a 
perfection of wisdom, but is not a wisdom. Wisdom i s pervaded by being a mental factor. Since all 
the main minds in the continuum of a buddha arya ar e not mental factors, they are not wisdoms.  
 
The definition of a resultant perfection of wisdom  is “the culminated exalted wisdom distinguished 
by the four attributes.” The boundaries of the thre e perfections of wisdom:  
• Textual : from before entering a path through the buddha gr ound 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 10: 7—11 April, 2008 
 
10 • Path : from the Mahayana path of accumulation through th e end of the continuum of a sentient 
being  
• Resultant : Buddha ground  
 
Q: Is the textual perfection of wisdom a mind? 
A: No, it’s a text.  
 
Q: Then why does it have boundaries?  
A: A textual perfection of wisdom is speech; it is not paper. Usually we talk about a book being a 
text, but this is just print. Text is speech. For e xample, when we say “no form,” etc., in the Heart 
Sutra, then text is speech. This can exist before entering  a path. The letter “A,” for example, what is 
it? If we write it, it is form.  
 
Q: The actual perfection of wisdom is the culminate d exalted wisdom distinguished by the four 
attributes, so it is non-dual. Is the bodhicitta in  the continuum of a buddha arya an actual perfectio n 
of wisdom? 
A: Yes.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 54: 
 
2B2B-2A2. The scope of that which explains 
 
This outline comes from p. 51 (2B2B-2A: Brief indic ation of the corpus). 
 
2B2B-2A2A. General presentation of the path 
2B2B-2A2B. Explanation of the individual entities 
2B2B-2A2A. General presentation of the path 
2B2B-2A2A-1. Positing the tradition of the previous acharyas 
2B2B-2A2A-2. Examining whether they are correct or i ncorrect 
2B2B-2A2A-3. Our own system 
2B2B-2A2A-1. Positing the tradition of the previous acharyas 
 
Here, we have six opinions from past masters. 
 
OPINION 1: The three exalted knowers are determined  to be the general clear realizations 
that are to be generated in the continua of all ary as of the three times. The four applications 
and the truth body are indicated to be mere paths t hat are to be generated in the continua of 
present trainees who are the intended objects of th e Ornament . Hence they are asserted to 
be generality and instances, and to be broadly and narrowly pervasive. 
 
This is saying that the three exalted knowers are d etermined to be the general clear realizations that  
are to be generated in the continua of all aryas of the three times —past, present, and future —while 
“The four applications and the truth body are indic ated to be mere paths that are to be generated in 
the continua of present  trainees who are the intended objects of the Ornament .” This person says 
the three exalted knowers are generalities, and the four applications and the truth body are instances 
of this generality. The refutation will come in the  subsequent outline; first, we will look at the six  
opinions.  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 10: 7—11 April, 2008 
 
11 Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
OPINION 2: It has been said that “The three exalted  knowers, like a sword placed on a 
plain, lack boundaries, whereas the four applicatio ns and the truth body, like a sword held 
in the hand, have boundaries posited.”  
 
However, this is not much different from the former  [position]. 
 
This is like saying that the three exalted knowers do not have boundaries, but the four applications 
and truth body have boundaries.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , 
 
OPINION 3: It has been said that “The chapters of t he three exalted knowers principally 
indicate the objects to be determined by way of hea ring and contemplation, whereas the 
four applications and the truth body indicate the s tages of the path of practice by way of 
the wisdom arisen from meditation.”  
 
OPINION 4: Someone deprived of anything to say asse rts that the first three chapters 
indicate view; the middle four, cultivation and con duct; and the last, the result. 
 
In opinion three, the person says the chapters on t he three exalted knowers principally indicate the 
objects to be determined by way of hearing and contemplation , whereas the four applications and 
the truth body indicate the stages of the path of p ractice by way of the wisdom arisen from 
meditation . In opinion four, the person says that the first t hree chapters indicate view ; the middle 
four, cultivation and conduct ; and the last, the result. 
 
Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
{78} OPINION 5: Taken in the system of solely paths :  
• an exalted knower of all aspects is to be cultivate d on the occasions of the paths of accumulation 
and preparation,  
• a knower of paths from the first to the sixth groun ds, 
• a knower of bases on the seventh ground, 
• the four applications are cultivated sequentially o n the three pure grounds, and  
• the truth body is generated on the buddha ground. 
 
ACARYA DHARMAMITRA: Having progressively generated the paths of the hearers and 
the paths of the solitary realizers indicated on th e occasion of the second chapter, and the 
Hinayana paths indicated in the third and fourth ch apters, the result of foe-destroyer is 
actualized and one absorbs in the sphere of peace. Then, rising from that, one generates in 
the continuum the first and second generated minds indicated on the occasion of the first 
chapter, and the partial concordance with liberatio n indicated on the occasion of the fourth 
chapter; this is engaging in the Mahayana path.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 55: 
 
2B2B-2A2A-2. Examining whether they are correct or i ncorrect 
It is difficult to posit most of those [as being co rrect]. It is impossible for aryas of the three 
times, who have generated in their continua a knowe r of paths and an exalted knower of all 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 10: 7—11 April, 2008 
 
12 aspects, not to have generated in their continua th e four applications and the truth body,  (i) 
because even though [the eight categories ] have  been determined here, there does not exist 
even slightly a valid cognizer of definite discrimi nation that individually discriminates that 
“This indicates paths of all three times,  this indicates paths of only someone in the 
present,” and (ii) because even if others were to p osit what is opposite in meaning to that, it 
would be extremely difficult to demonstrate damage.   
 
Refutation of the first opinion  
 
Opinion one says that the three exalted knowers are  general and are to be determined in all three 
times, and the four applications are to be determin ed in present trainees. Our system says it is not 
possible to have not generated the four application s and truth body for such aryas. In the continuum 
of a buddha arya, there is an exalted knower of all  aspects, a knower of paths, and the truth body. 
The four applications have been generated in the co ntinuum of a buddha arya. Before attaining 
buddhahood, the four applications must have been ge nerated, but in the continuum of a buddha 
arya, these applications are not necessarily presen t.  
 
The term “here” (“Even though [the eight categories ] have  been determined here”) refers to the 
Ornament for Clear Realization . Here, the paths of all three times are indicated;  there is no 
differentiation, e.g. “These are paths of the prese nt,” “These are paths of the future,” etc. We 
previously said that the eight clear realizations i n the Ornament for Clear Realization  are the clear 
realizations, or knowers, of all aryas of the three  times. All the clear realizations of aryas of the 
three times are included in the eight clear realiza tions. By determining the eight clear realizations,  
all the clear realizations of the three times are d etermined. There is no distinction made, i.e., that  
those are of the three times and that those are of the present, etc. The text says “because even 
though [the eight categories] have been determined here, there does not exist even slightly a valid 
cognizer of definite discrimination that individual ly discriminates that ‘This indicates paths of all 
three times, this indicates paths of only someone i n the present.’”  
 
In the phrase “because even if others were to posit  what is opposite in meaning to that, it would be 
extremely difficult to demonstrate damage,” “that” refers to what was said in the previous reason: 
the discrimination that “this indicates the paths o f the three times, this indicates paths of the 
present,” etc. “If others were to posit what is opp osite in meaning to that, it would be extremely 
difficult to demonstrate damage.” What is “opposite  in meaning to that” is actually correct, whereby 
it would be difficult to demonstrate damage. To dis criminate, saying “this indicates paths of three 
times,” etc., is incorrect; to not discriminate is correct.  
 
Opinion one says: “The three exalted knowers are de termined to be the general clear realizations 
that are to be generated in the continua of all ary as of the three times. The four applications and th e 
truth body are indicated to be mere paths that are to be generated in the continua of present trainees  
who are the intended objects of the Ornament .” We could also interpret this to mean that the th ree 
exalted knowers are to be generated in present trai nees and the four applications and truth body are 
general realizations to be generated in the continu a of all aryas of three times. Although the above 
opinion is wrong, according to our system, it is di fficult to prove that it is wrong.  
 
Refutation of the second opinion 
 
Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
 The second system is also incorrect because, no ma tter in which person’s continuum 
they are generated, one must posit definite boundar ies with respect to the eight clear 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 10: 7—11 April, 2008 
 
13 realizations; otherwise, the explainers and listene rs of the path would become totally 
confused, since they would not know the sequence of  the paths in which first this is 
cultivated and afterwards that is cultivated. 
 
Here, it is saying that it is necessary to posit bo undaries with respect to the eight clear realizatio ns. 
Since these exist, they should be posited, since on e needs to know when a realization is generated; 
“otherwise, the explainers and listeners of the pat h would become totally confused.”  
 
Refutation of the third opinion 
 
Ornament of the Essence , 
 
 {79} The third system—[which asserts that] having determined something by way of 
hearing and contemplation, one meditates on somethi ng else unrelated to that at the time of 
meditation—is extremely vile; it would become unrel ated, just like consistently showing a 
horse where to race, and then taking somewhere else  to be the race tracks. Therefore, one 
must practice by meditating on just that which has been determined by way of hearing and 
contemplation, because, without having determined b y way of hearing and contemplation 
that very meaning that is to be meditated upon, one ’s meditation would become erroneous. 
 
This third opinion expresses the view that one hear s and contemplates a topic but does not need to 
meditate on what has been heard and contemplated, a nd that what one meditates on does not need to 
have been heard and contemplated before. Our system  says this is incorrect. Therefore, what has 
been heard and contemplated on needs to be meditate d on, and we need to meditate on what we 
have heard and contemplated.  
 Aren’t we like this? We hear and contemplate certa in topics, and we don’t meditate on them, 
while we meditate on things we haven’t heard or con templated on. It would be strange if one, 
through the process of hearing and contemplation or  discussion, tried to eliminate superimpositions 
with regard to a certain topic, but when it came to  meditating, did not meditate on that topic. If we 
meditate on a topic with regard to which we haven’t  eliminated superimpositions, then our 
meditation will not be correct.  
 For example, a topic that is coming up is the Thre e Jewels of refuge: Buddha, Dharma, and 
Sangha. Once we discuss the meaning, how do we medi tate on it? It doesn’t mean we have to look 
at this text and meditate on it, but it can have an  effect on our daily practice. For example, when we  
recite our daily prayers, we can apply what we have  learned and apply it in our practice.  
   
 
Wednesday, 9 April 2008 (evening) 
 
Discussion regarding 2B2B-2A2A-2: Examining whether  they are correct or incorrect 
(Ornament of the Essence , p. 55)  
 
Translator: I asked Geshe-la if there is a differen t kind of interpretation to point (ii) “because eve n if 
others were to posit what is opposite in meaning to  that, it would be extremely difficult to 
demonstrate damage?”  
 In this phrase, what is “opposite in meaning to th at?” I asked Geshe-la if it is possible to interpre t 
it in this way: in opinion one on page 54, it says that “the three exalted knowers are determined to 
be the general clear realizations that are to be ge nerated in the continua of all aryas of the three 
times. The four applications and the truth body are  indicated to be mere paths that are to be 
generated in the continua of present trainees who a re the intended objects of the Ornament .” Can 
we interpret “opposite in meaning to that” to mean that “the three exalted knowers are indicated to 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 10: 7—11 April, 2008 
 
14 be mere paths that are to be generated in the conti nua of present trainees who are the intended 
objects of the Ornament, and the four applications and the truth body are de termined to be the 
general clear realizations that are to be generated  in the continua of all aryas of the three times”? In 
that way we reverse the two. Geshe-la said this int erpretation is acceptable. It is extremely difficul t 
to demonstrate damage.  
 
Q: So does it mean that the meaning is correct? 
A: No, this is not correct. In this passage it says  that if someone were to posit that, meaning the 
three exalted knowers as related to the present tim e and the four applications and the truth body as 
related to all three times, it would be difficult t o say that this is wrong, i.e. to demonstrate damag e. 
 
Q: Is it wrong? 
A: It is wrong, but it is very difficult to demonst rate damage. If we were to reverse that phrase and 
posit that, although it is wrong, it is difficult t o demonstrate that there is damage. It is not our 
system’s position that if we reverse the two, then it becomes correct. This is a case of our system 
flinging an undesired consequence to that person wh o expressed the opinion.  
 Our system’s position is stated at the beginning o f that paragraph (p. 55): “It is impossible for 
aryas of the three times, who have generated in the ir continua a knower of paths and an exalted 
knower of all aspects, not to have generated in the ir continua the four applications and the truth 
body.”  
 This opinion is incorrect because it says that the  three exalted knowers are to be generated in the 
continua of all aryas of the three times, whereas t he four applications and the truth body are to be 
generated in the continua of present trainees who a re the intended objects of the Ornament. Our 
system says that you generate the four applications  first; by generating the knower of paths, one will  
go on to simultaneously attain the exalted knower o f all aspects and the truth body. If others would 
posit what is opposite to that, meaning to reverse that, saying that the three exalted knowers are to 
be generated in the continua of present trainees wh o are the intended objects of the Ornament and 
the four applications and the truth body are determ ined to be generated in the continua of all aryas 
of the three times, it would be difficult to demons trate damage.  
 You have to understand that it is incorrect to pos it that the three exalted knowers are to be 
generated in the continua of all aryas of the three  times and the four applications and the truth body  
are to be generated in the continua of the present trainees who are the intended objects of the 
Ornament . As long as you have understood that, it is fine. A similar kind of argument comes in the 
next passage.  
 
Refutation of the third opinion 
 
In Ornament of the Essence,  (p. 54)  opinion three says: “The chapters of the three exal ted knowers 
principally indicate the objects to be determined b y way of hearing and contemplation, whereas the 
four applications and the truth body indicate the s tages of the path of practice by way of the wisdom 
arisen from meditation.” The refutation follows.  
 
Ornament of the Essence, p. 55: 
 
 {79} The third system—[which asserts that] having determined something by way of 
hearing and contemplation, one meditates on somethi ng else unrelated to that at the time of 
meditation—is extremely vile; it would become unrel ated, just like consistently showing a 
horse where to race, and then taking somewhere else  to be the race tracks. Therefore, one 
must practice by meditating on just that which has been determined by way of hearing and 
contemplation, because, without having determined b y way of hearing and contemplation 
that very meaning that is to be meditated upon, one ’s meditation would become erroneous. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 10: 7—11 April, 2008 
 
15  For, if it is necessary beyond doubt for the treat ise to individually indicate those two 
[(1) the objects to be determined by way of hearing  and contemplation, and (2) the stages 
of the path of practice by way of the wisdom arisen  from meditation], then even if it is 
asserted that the remaining five chapters indicate the determination by way of hearing and 
contemplation, whereas the first three chapters ind icate practice by way of meditation, 
there would not be even the slightest damage that c an be demonstrated.  
 
“Those two” are (1) the objects to be determined by  way of hearing and contemplation, and (2) the 
stages of the path of practice by way of the wisdom  arisen from meditation. If we compare this to 
opinion three, the person says that the first three  chapters “principally indicate the objects to be 
determined by way of hearing and contemplation, whe reas the four applications and the truth body 
indicate the stages of the path of practice by way of the wisdom arisen from meditation.” Basically 
this passage (p. 55) says that if you were to rever se this assertion—saying that the remaining five 
chapters indicate determination by way of hearing a nd contemplation, and the first three indicate 
practice by way of meditation—even if this were ass erted, there would not be even the slightest 
damage that could be demonstrated. 
 Our own system’s position says that all eight chap ters are objects to be determined by hearing, 
contemplation, and meditation. We don’t differentia te, saying “From here, these points need to be 
determined by hearing and contemplation, and from t his point on, these are to be meditated on.” We 
say that all the subjects are to be determined by h earing, contemplation, and meditation. Here again 
we fling an undesired consequence to the person. If  you were to insist that the first three chapters 
indicated objects to be determined and the rest the  stages to be practiced by meditation, then if 
someone were to assert that the first three chapter s are to be determined by meditation, and the next 
five by hearing and contemplation, one would not be  able to demonstrate damage to that.  
 
Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
For if the person who practices the four applicatio ns does not practice [the topics] ranging 
from the generated mind to the achievings and so fo rth, then this contradicts the practice of 
the four applications; and if he does practice them , then he must practice them just as 
indicated on the occasion of the first chapter, whe reby it is very inappropriate to delineate 
as separate the passages for hearing and contemplat ion and the passages for practice.  
 
“It is very inappropriate to delineate as separate the passages for hearing and contemplation and the 
passages for practice” means it is incorrect to say  that the objects to be determined by hearing and 
contemplation and the stages of path of practice by  way of wisdom arisen from meditation are 
indicated separately.  
 Is there a person who practices the four applicati ons (application in complete aspects, peak 
application, serial application, and instantaneous application)? If we look at the boundaries of the 
four applications, it is not possible to posit a person who practices the four applications. If we were 
to say is there a person who practices the applicat ion in complete aspects, or one who practices the 
peak application, etc., we could say “Yes,” but if we ask if there is one person who practices the 
four , we have to say No.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 56: 
 
 This is because it seems that there are many follo wers who, as signs of not having 
gained a comprehensive understanding regarding thes e points, despite having learnt the 
scriptural baskets well their entire lives, at the time of generating a desire to henceforth 
perform practice, do not even know any of the names  imputed to the practices.  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 10: 7—11 April, 2008 
 
16 This is saying there are many followers who, despit e having studied the scriptural baskets well, 
when they wish to practice, do not know any of the names of the practices. This is a sign that they 
have not understood these points in a comprehensive  way. There are people who study very well 
their entire lives, but do not know how to practice  well. In the monasteries, it is said that there ar e 
some people who study well and become geshes, but t hen go back to their homeland to a small 
monastery and just engage in a mistaken way the pra ctice of Chöd, understanding it just to be a 
practice of using implements such as a damaru (hand  drum) and so forth. On the other hand, if one 
knows the lam rim well, it becomes a good practice,  even without a damaru! Similarly, if one 
practices phowa (transference of consciousness), on e should practice the lam rim well and generate 
bodhicitta, and this becomes a good practice of pho wa. Otherwise, it will not be a good practice.  
 
Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
For it seems that even at the time when those who h ave formed a little understanding 
perform hearing and contemplation, as signs that th ey have taken the path only as an object 
of observation of awareness without generating it i nto the entity of awareness, even 
explainers become weary due to explaining and liste ners also probably become weary due 
to listening. 
 
This means that there are listeners who receive tea chings but do not know how to practice, that is, 
they do not generate the path into the entity of aw areness, and thus do not generate realizations. No 
matter how much the explainers explain, the listene rs only become tired.  
 
 
Refutation of the fourth opinion  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 56: 
 
 It is easy to realize that the fourth system is in correct; it obviously does not know even 
the general presentation of the treatise. 
 
What is wrong with this opinion? When this person s ays that the “first three chapters indicate 
view,” he indicates that the other chapters do not teach cultivation, conduct, and the result, that th e 
middle four do not teach the view and the result, a nd that the last does not teach view, cultivation, 
and conduct. We respond that this person “obviously  does not know even the general presentation 
of the treatise.” 
 
Refutation of the fifth opinion 
 
Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
 {80} The fifth system appears to be that posited a s our own system in the brief 
commentary composed by the Acarya, but [it is not],  because a piercing refutation of it is 
made below in this commentary, Clear Meaning.  Without understanding the teaching on 
how misconceptions regarding the sequence are refut ed, even the explanation called “text 
indicating that the three paths are imputations” ca n appear correct. 
 
This refutes the fifth opinion. This says that late r in the Commentary Clear Meaning , this fifth 
system will be refuted. In this paragraph, the Acha rya is Haribhadra, and the brief commentary is 
the Brief Commentary that is Easy to Realize . This fifth system appears to have been posited in  that 
commentary.  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 10: 7—11 April, 2008 
 
17  The last phrase refers to the “text indicating tha t the three paths are imputations.” These three 
paths refer to hearer, solitary realizer, and buddh a paths. It says in this wrong explanation that the  
hearers’ paths in the continuum of a bodhisattva ar e imputations, the solitary realizer paths in the 
continuum of a bodhisattva are imputations, and the  buddha’s paths in the continuum of a 
bodhisattva are real. This is not our system; it wi ll be refuted later. 
 
 
Refutation of the sixth opinion 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 56: 
 
 The last system [posited by Acarya Dharmamitra] sh ould be analyzed because, if one 
were to assert that “Trainees who are the intended objects of the Ornament must definitely 
engage the Mahayana path preceded by the Hinayana p ath,” then, even though there may 
be some of dull faculty who discard the shortcut th at proceeds to omniscience and instead 
engage in the long path, this is impossible for tra inees who are the intended objects of this 
treatise.  
 
This refutes Acharya Dharmamitra’s opinion. He is s aying that one enters the Hinayana path, attains 
the state of foe-destroyer, and then enters the Mah ayana path. Our system says this is not the way 
the intended trainees of this treatise engage; it i s the procedure of those of dull faculty. Such peop le 
proceed to omniscience in a long way, discarding th e short path.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 56: 
 
If one were to consider the possibility of a person  who engages progressively in the paths 
of the three vehicles, then [this should also be an alyzed] because, in the context of 
indicating the stages of the path of a person who i s definite in the Mahayana lineage, it 
would be inappropriate to discard that and indicate  something else that is unrelated. 
 
When it says “If one were to consider the possibili ty of a person who engages progressively in the 
paths of the three vehicles,” this is actually inap propriate in the context of indicating the stages o f 
the path of a person who is definite in the Mahayan a lineage; one should indicate something that is 
related. To indicate the path of someone indefinite  in the Mahayana linage is irrelevant; for those 
definite in the Mahayana lineage, we should indicat e the stages of the path for someone definite in 
Mahayana lineage. The trainees who are the intended  objects of this treatise are those definite in 
Mahayana lineage, that is, those who enter the Maha yana from the start, and this opinion is not 
applicable to someone definite in Mahayana lineage.   
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 56: 
 
 Further, someone, while asserting  that just as in the assertion of someone ( that the first 
three chapters indicate the objects of engagement o f a Mahayana person, the middle four 
the yogas that engage in them, and the last the res ult that has been engaged in , also the 
asserts that a knower of bases [exists] only in hearers an d solitary realizers and that 
buddhas do not have a knower of paths; this  is only something to be reflected upon [by the 
assertor] . 
 
Here, we have someone who asserts that the first th ree chapters indicate objects of engagement; the 
middle four, the yogas that engage in them (the obj ects of engagement, i.e. the three exalted 
knowers); and the last chapter, the result that has  been engaged. This part of the opinion is actually  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 10: 7—11 April, 2008 
 
18 correct. The second part of the assertion, however,  says that the knower of bases only exists in 
hearers and solitary realizers, and that buddhas do  not have a knower of paths. The reason why this 
second assertion is incorrect is because he asserts  that the first three chapters indicate the objects  of 
engagement of a Mahayana person, meaning that they do not merely indicate the objects of 
observation of a Mahayana person, but rather they indicate the objects to be engaged in by a 
Mahayana person. In that case, the assertion that a  knower of bases exists only in hearers and 
solitary realizers would not be correct; in fact, M ahayanists also have the knower of bases. 
Therefore, asserting that “a knower of bases [exist s] only in hearers and solitary realizers and that 
buddhas do not have a knower of paths” is only some thing to be reflected upon.  
 
In summary, our own system is saying that the inten ded trainees are definite in Mahayana lineage. 
If you indicate that someone first enters the Hinay ana, then attains foe-destroyer, and then enters th e 
Mahayana, this is not a beneficial explanation.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 56: 
 
2B2B-2A2A-three. Our own system 
Just as indicated in the section on the purpose-and -relationship, easily realizing all the 
eight clear realizations by means of hearing and co ntemplation is the purpose. Since it has 
been taught that one traverses the ten grounds thro ugh practice by meditating on that which 
has been taken as the object of mindfulness by mean s of hearing and contemplation, the 
meaning that is to be determined by a Mahayana pers on by means of hearing and 
contemplation is indicated by all the eight chapter s. Since that very meaning that has been 
determined by means of hearing and contemplation is  practiced by means of meditation, 
know that the mode of practice is also indicated by  all the eight chapters. 
 
This is saying there is no differentiation of the e ight chapters into a section for hearing and 
contemplation, and another for meditation.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 56:  
 
 {81} The Great Commentary says, “The nature of achieving the mind of enlighte nment, 
the oral instructions and so forth are all differen tiations due to divisions of the eight 
occasions.” Taking those very ten topics that chara cterize an exalted knower of all aspects 
as the basis of the path, it is differentiated by m eans of the eight occasions, the eight clear 
realizations.  
 
This passage explains the sequence of the ten topic s that characterize the exalted knower of all 
aspects in the first chapter. If we read the senten ce, “Taking those very ten topics that characterize  
an exalted knower of all aspects as the basis of th e path, it is differentiated by means of the eight 
occasions, the eight clear realizations,” it seems to say that if you take the ten topics as the basis  of 
the path, you will end up with this differentiation  by means of the eight chapters, but this is not th e 
meaning. The meaning is that the ten topics that ch aracterize the exalted knower of all aspects are 
explained in the first chapter; in the second chapt er, we have the eleven topics of the knower of 
paths, in the third, the nine that characterize the  knower of bases, and in that way we have the eight  
clear realizations in the eight chapters. In Tibeta n, we memorize the following formula, which helps 
to be able to remember the seventy topics easily: “ 10, 11, 9, 11 / 8, 1three, 4, and 4.” Of course, in  
English there is not the same rhythmic meter that t here is in Tibetan.  
 
Ornament of the Essence, p. 57:  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 10: 7—11 April, 2008 
 
19  
Further, one practices the path for the sake of ach ieving that very meaning of the promise 
by means of the generated mind. The so-called “prac tice of the achievings” is presented 
and great compassion must precede the generated min d. In order for that [to occur], one 
must first train in the attitude of a being of midd ling capacity, the path of the sixteen 
[attributes of the four noble truths], impermanence  and so forth, which has been 
determined in the third chapter. In dependence on t hat, one becomes motivated by the 
generated mind [aspiring] towards supreme enlighten ment. With respect to that very path 
directly realizing impermanence and so forth that i s conjoined with the wisdom directly 
realizing emptiness, indicated on the occasion of t he second chapter, one should also apply 
the modes of knowing hearers’ paths and, likewise, knowing solitary realizers’ paths. 
When both paths that stop the extremes of cyclic ex istence and solitary peace are directly 
known by a bodhisattva, they are called “knowers of  bodhisattvas’ paths,” and by means of 
being paths distinguished by making joyous effort d iligently in those, they receive the 
convention “achievings.” 
 
“Further, one practices the path for the sake of ac hieving that very meaning of the promise by 
means of the generated mind:” one practices the pat h for the sake of achieving that which has been 
promised by means of the bodhichitta mind. The four  achievings are presented and great 
compassion must come before bodhichitta. Before tha t, one must generate the path of medium 
capacity—the sixteen attributes, etc.—and in depend ence on that, one becomes motivated by 
bodhicitta. Here, when we talk about achievings, we  are talking about the four achievings: the 
achieving of armor, the achieving of engagement, th e achieving of accumulation, and the achieving 
of definite issuance.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 56:  
 
 Those very achievings cultivate the full complete aspects of the three exalted knowers. 
That very yoga that acts to destroy the afflictions  and conceptualizations through a union 
of the two—calm abiding and special insight—is call ed “application.” That itself is divided 
into four applications by means of occasion and the  mode of cultivation. The achievings 
which are of the same entity as the applications ar e also divided into four. In order to 
practice the Mahayana path, one must first initiate  joyous effort in the extensive attitude. 
{82} In dependence on that, an extensive practice o f the applications will arise. In 
dependence on extensive attitude and application, o ne will be able to gather extensive 
accumulations of the causes of omniscience. Hence, the achievings are divided into four by 
way of their ability to definitely give rise to omn iscience beyond doubt. Also, with respect 
to that, for the sake of the three objects of inten t, one must first observe the eleven objects 
of observation. 
 
In this passage, there is discussion of the four achievings and four applications . The four achievings 
are what one practices, and the four applications a re what connects, or applies. These achievings 
and applications are differentiated from the point of view of functions, but are not contradictory. In  
dependence on extensive attitude and extensive appl ication, one can gather extensive accumulations 
of the causes of omniscience.  
 The three objects of intent are:  
1.  great heroic mind: the great exalted wisdom of a bu ddha 
2.  great realization: the exalted knower of all aspect s  
3.  great abandonment: non-abiding nirvana in the conti nuum of a buddha arya 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 10: 7—11 April, 2008 
 
20 “One must first observe the eleven objects of obser vation” refers to virtue, non-virtue, the 
unspecified, and so forth—the eleven objects of obs ervation of Mahayana achievings.  
 
 
Thursday, 10 April 2008 
 
Questions and answers 
 
Q: In Ornament of the Essence , on p. 48, there is the phrase: “Through division into eight 
occasions, having taken that as the basis, the ten topics” (which Geshe-la said refers to the ten 
perfections), “which closely characterize all the c lear realizations are taken earnestly by the 
Teacher.” Why do the ten perfections perfectly desi gnate a buddha’s clear realizations? Is it because 
when a buddha perfectly attains the ten perfections , he also attains all the clear realizations?  
A: When someone practices the eight clear realizati ons, then this person is also practicing the ten 
perfections. The ten topics characterizing the exal ted knower of all aspects are taught in the first 
chapter. When one practices the first, generated mi nd, one practices the ten perfections. The ten 
perfections exist only on the buddha ground, but th e practice of them exists also on the learner 
paths (the paths of accumulation, preparation, etc. ). On the Mahayana path of accumulation, there is 
no perfection of generosity, but there is the practice of the perfection of generosity, which still 
needs to be improved. The limit for improvement has  not been completed yet, but on the first 
ground, the bodhisattva attains the surpassing prac tice of the perfection of generosity. On the 
second ground, the surpassing practice of perfectio n of ethics is attained, on the third ground, the 
surpassing practice of perfection of patience, and so forth. On the buddha ground, generosity, 
ethics, and so forth become culminated: there is no  room for improvement. These ten are “gone to 
the other side.”  
 These assertions regarding the perfections are sli ghtly different in the Consequence school. They 
say the perfections do exist on the learners’ paths, i.e. they say that on  the first ground, there is the 
perfection of generosity.  
 
Q: Is the existence of the perfection of generosity  on the buddha ground related to the fact that at 
that point the buddha does not have conceptualizati on? 
A: On the seventh ground and below, coarse exertion  is required; on the pure grounds (the eigth 
through tenth grounds), subtle exertion is required ; on the buddha ground, no exertion is required 
and the activities of the Buddha take place spontan eously, in a effortless way. That is why on the 
Buddha ground these activities, generosity and so f orth, are perfections. 
 
Q: Does a buddha have mental factors? 
A: Yes, they can have virtuous mental factors.  
 
Q: In Prasangika, how can the perfections be “gone beyond” before attaining buddhahood, since on 
the first ground, etc., one has not gone to the oth er side? 
A: There are two types of having “gone to the other  side”: ordinary and principal ; someone on the 
first ground has gone beyond in the ordinary sense,  but not in the principal sense. Compared to the 
practice of the perfection of generosity of an ordi nary being, a first-grounder has attained the 
perfection of generosity that has gone to the other  side.  
 
Q: Since mental factors necessarily perceive only a n aspect of an object, and are thus limited, how 
is it possible that a buddha has mental factors, si nce all of a buddha’s consciousnesses are 
omniscient? 
A: In a buddha’s continuum, there are main minds. I n the retinue of a main mind, there is, for 
example, feeling, meditative stabilization, wisdom,  mindfulness, and aspiration. If these mental 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 10: 7—11 April, 2008 
 
21 factors were not present, the buddha would not have  feelings, wisdom, i.e. the ability to 
discriminate, no mind seeking to be separated from suffering, no single-pointed placement, etc. But 
each of these in the retinue of a main mind is an omniscient mind.  
 There is a main mind in the continuum of a buddha arya; this is not aspiration, wisdom, feeling, 
meditative stabilization, or mindfulness. We do  find aspiration, etc., in the continuum of a buddh a. 
When one attains buddhahood, it is not that the men tal factors transform into main minds, but they 
do become omniscient minds. A main mind has something in its retinue; we  cannot talk about a 
retinue without a main mind.  
 
 
Commentary on Ornament of the Essence   
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 57: 
 
2B2B-2A2A-three. Our own system (continued) 
 
 Although lineage is explained in the context of th e path of preparation, the Mahayana 
lineage must be awakened prior to generating the ge nerated mind in one’s continuum. In 
order for that [to occur], you must understand the methods for examining which lineage is 
possessed, just as they have been explained in Hearers’ Grounds (Sravakabhumi ), and the 
signs of having awakened the lineage, just as they have been explained in the  Ornament for 
the Great Vehicle Sutras (Mahayanasutralamkara ) and the Bodhisattvas’ Grounds 
(Bodhisattvabhumi ). Thus, in accordance with the stages of leading t rainees, you must lead 
them by way of lineage before leading them to great  compassion.  
 In the context of the instructions for the achievi ngs, even though nothing other than the 
isolates of the ten topics has been taught, you mus t receive instructions on all the paths of 
the three vehicles as well as their results, withou t exception. Due to meditating upon the 
meaning of emptiness on the occasion of the path of  accumulation, the initial boundary 
where it transforms into a wisdom arisen from medit ation, the path of preparation, is 
indicated. The presence of other special purposes r egarding that will be explained. Since 
how one practices the stages of clear realizations will be explained separately [elsewhere], 
here I will not elaborate more beyond just that. 
 
In the first sentence, “lineage” refers to the line age abiding in the nature. In the listed order of t he 
ten topics, the first four are: generated mind, ins tructions, path of preparation, and lineage abiding  
in the nature. Although Mahayana generated mind com es before the lineage in this list, the lineage 
should be awakened before generating the Mahayana g enerated mind. “You must understand the 
methods for examining which lineage is possessed,” and you also need to know the signs of 
awakening lineage.  
 The method for awakening the lineage in general is the proper going for refuge to the Three 
Jewels. If we recite “I go for refuge to Buddha,” e tc., these are just words. Properly going for refug e 
means identifying the Three Jewels and practicing t he advice given by them. This advice is mainly 
to not harm others. If one goes for refuge and aban dons harming, this is a proper refuge, but if one 
just recites the refuge formula and continues to ha rm others, this is not proper refuge. We probably 
don’t engage in coarse forms of harming others, but  by looking down on others, speaking harshly, 
etc., we do harm them. By not harming others, our m ind will become more positive, and we come 
closer to generating renunciation, bodhicitta, etc.  When the drawbacks of samsara are explained, 
and someone experiences signs such as tears and goo se bumps, then the Hinayana lineage has been 
awakened. When the vast and extensive Dharma, such as bodhicitta, is explained, someone’s 
shedding tears, etc., is a sign of awakening the Ma hayana lineage. Such signs cannot occur in 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 10: 7—11 April, 2008 
 
22 someone who harms others. Someone who harms others has strong non-virtue, and is difficult to 
transform, because of having a hard mind. If someon e has awakened the Hinayana lineage, it is easy 
to lead such a person into the Hinayana path, and l ikewise if someone has awakened the Mahayana 
lineage, they should be taught the Mahayana path.  
 
Hindrances to awakening the lineage  
 
There are four hindrances to awakening the lineage:  
1.  Very strong familiarity with afflictions : we need to be careful with afflictions, applying the 
correct methods to reduce them. Otherwise, they wil l become stronger and stronger. Beings 
like us have strong attachment, which is a source o f suffering.  
2.  Being held by negative companions : this means being under the control or power of ou r 
companions, or it can mean going with them. We need  to be careful about who we spend our 
time with; if we cannot benefit others (who are neg ative companions), then there is no reason 
to stay with them, but if we can benefit them, it c an be useful.  
3.  Being deprived of necessities to practice Dharma : having necessities to practice means that 
we should be content with sufficient resources. We should not think that everything has to be 
perfect before we can begin studying Dharma. It is difficult to acquire the resources to 
practice. We need to develop contentment when we ha ve sufficient resources for study and 
practice; otherwise, we will be dissatisfied and al ways search for more.  
 In Tibet, before 1959, the way some of the monks s tudied was as follows. At night, since 
there was no electricity, the monks who studied wel l would use the light from a stick of 
incense to read their texts. The middling students had more time, for instance to go to Lhasa 
and buy lights and so forth, while those who did no t study had the most time, e.g. to go for 
walks, etc. Although they had a difficult economic situation, some managed to study very 
well. In India, after 1959, eventually the economic  situation improved, and monks had less 
time for study, becoming more involved in other mat ters, such as work. Thus there are now 
fewer monks who have studied really well, with resp ect to the pre-1959 period.  
 The necessities of this life have no benefit beyon d this life, whereas on the basis of our 
study, we can develop realizations and have benefit s in life after life. If you want benefit for 
future lives, you need to work on your mind and try  to develop realizations.  
4.  Not having freedom to practice Dharma due to being under the control of others : if we do not 
have freedom, it is difficult to practice Dharma. T his is related to ordinary people. We need 
time, space, and so forth to study and understand D harma, but for those who have 
realizations, such as those on the path of accumula tion, they do not need to look at texts. 
Even if they are under the control of others, such as being put in prison, they may even 
develop more in difficult situations. However, for ordinary people, we need to have the time 
and the conditions to practice. The measure of prac ticing Dharma is that we are able to 
transform the mind, for instance to attain the stat e of nirvana. The main meaning of 
practicing Dharma is to not harm others.  
 
No teachings on Friday, 11 April.  
 
 
 
END 
 
 