Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/Transcript pdf/ORN_GTTnotes_07.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:51:38.395939
================================================================================

Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 7: 10-14 March 2008 
 
1 Masters Program: Ornament for Clear Realization 
Notes on commentary by Geshe Tenzin Tenphel 1 
 
Monday afternoon, 10 March 2008 
 
2B1C-4A3A. Explicit teaching by way of the conventio ns of names of the three levels of the wheels of Dh arma 
occurring in the Sutra Unraveling the Thought (Samdhinirmocanasutra ) (continued) 
 
Ornament of the Essence,  p. 26, says: 
 
Just as it has been said, taking as the basis of th ought the three types of modes of 
naturelessness of the three natures, it has been ta ught that “All phenomena are natureless.” 
Hence the Mother Sutras are not literally acceptabl e. Nevertheless, although being 
interpretable meaning, they are the principal sutra  sets determining extensively the 
emptiness that is included within thoroughly establ ished natures, which are unchanging 
objects of observation of non-conceptual wisdom. Tr ainees who are the intended objects of 
those [Mother Sutras] realize the complete thought without needing to rely on other sutra 
sets commentating on the thought, and do not hold t hem to be literally acceptable. Lineage-
bearers who need to be shown through a sutra such a s the Sutra Unraveling the Thought 
(Samdhinirmocanasutra ) by clearly discriminating their thought are Mahay ana lineage-
bearers, but they are of lower faculty than the for mer [trainees who realize the complete 
thought without needing to rely on other sutra sets ].  
 
The middle or second wheel of Dharma is interpretab le meaning, that is, it is not literally 
acceptable; however, the trainees who are the inten ded objects of the second wheel are able to 
realize the complete thought without needing to rel y on the sutra sets, whereas those who are the 
intended trainees of the Sutra Unraveling the Thought  are of lower faculty than them. 
 
Ornament of the Essence  says: 
 
Although the two great charioteers of the Middle Wa y and Cognition-Only are not alike 
with regards to the differences between the interpr etable and the definitive, they are similar 
in asserting that [the Mother Sutras] are the basis  for characterization of the second wheel 
explained here. 
 
While the two great charioteers—Nagarjuna and Asang a—are similar in saying that the first wheel 
of Dharma is the teaching on the four noble truths,  the second is the extensive, medium, and brief 
Perfection of Wisdom Sutras and the Heart Sutra , and the third is the Sutra Unraveling the 
Thought , they are not alike in terms of which ones they as sert to be interpretable meaning and 
definitive meaning. Among the followers of the Midd le Way, the Autonomists say that the first and 
third wheels of Dharma are interpretable meaning. A mong the sutras in the second wheel of 
Dharma, there are those that are interpretable mean ing—the Heart Sutra —and those that are 
definitive meaning: the extensive, medium, and brie f Perfection of Wisdom Sutras. They say that 
the Heart Sutra  requires interpretation because this sutra says “F orms do not inherently exist,” 
                                                 
1 Technical note :  
• In these notes, corrections and additions to the tr anslation of Maitreya’s, Haribhadra’s, and Gyeltsab ’s texts are 
indicated by underlining the altered or added text.  Note that some terms have already been underlined in the 
original translation as the translator’s indication s of terms that refer to previous passages.  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 7: 10-14 March 2008 
 
2 whereas according to them forms do  exist inherently. Because of this, they say it is necessary to 
interpret this statement to mean “ Ultimately  forms do not exist inherently.”  
 
 
Different systems on interpretable and definitive m eaning sutras 
 
According to the Autonomists , an interpretable meaning sutra is either: 
• one which is not suitable to be asserted as being l iterally acceptable or 
• one whose explicit subject matter is indicated as b eing mainly conventional truths. 
On the other hand, the criteria for being a definit ive meaning sutra is: 
• it is suitable to be asserted as literally acceptab le, due to mainly indicating emptiness as its 
explicit subject matter. 
 
The Consequentialists  say that the criteria for being an interpretable m eaning sutra is: 
• it mainly indicates conventional truths as its expl icit subject matter 
The criteria for being a definitive meaning sutra i s: 
• it mainly indicates emptiness as its explicit subje ct matter.  
 
According to the Consequentialists: 
• if it is a second wheel of Dharma, it is pervaded b y being a definitive meaning sutra, 
• if it is a third wheel of Dharma, it is pervaded by  being an interpretable meaning sutra, and 
• among the sutras of the first wheel of Dharma, ther e are both interpretable meaning and 
definitive meaning sutras. 
Thus, they say that the sutras in the first wheel t hat indicate impermanence  or suffering  as their 
subject matter are interpretable meaning, whereas t hose that indicate the selflessness of persons  and 
so forth as their subject matter are definitive mea ning.  
 
However, even within a single sutra, there can be s tatements that are considered to be interpretable 
meaning and those that are considered to be definit ive meaning. 
 
Student : Do definitive meaning sutras include those that i ndicate the coarse selflessness of persons 
or the subtle selflessness of persons or both? 
Geshe Tenzin Tenphel : Those that indicate the subtle  selflessness of persons. 
 
According to Mind-Only Proponents : 
• whatever is of the first and second wheel of Dharma  is interpretable meaning and 
• whatever is of the third wheel of Dharma is definit ive meaning.  
 
According to Mind-Only, the criteria for being an i nterpretable meaning sutra: 
• it is a sutra that is not suitable to be asserted a s literally acceptable. 
The criteria for being a definitive meaning sutra i s: 
• it is a sutra that is suitable to be asserted as li terally acceptable. 
 
Ornament of the Essence,  p. 26, says: 
 
 It boils down to un derstanding Just understand the first wheel explained here.  
 
This means that the first wheel of Dharma is easy t o understand. “Here” refers to the previous 
citation: “Initially, in the area of Varanasi in th e Deer Park called ‘Sage’s Propounding,’ the 
Supramundane Victor thoroughly turned a wheel of do ctrine…” It is easy to understand because 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 7: 10-14 March 2008 
 
3 merely by hearing this citation, one can understand  that it refers to the wheel of Dharma of the four 
noble truths.  
 
 
The third wheel of Dharma 
 
Next is a discussion of the third or final wheel. Ornament of the Essence  says: 
 
A Tibetan asserted that “Taking that which is the f inal wheel as definitive meaning, as its 
bases for characterization there are these  this very sutra sets , the Matrix of the One-Gone-
Thus Sutra (Aryatathagatagarbhanamamahayansutra ), and so forth.” Also, someone 
propounded that “Those sutras prove the ultimate tr uth. Clung to by a mind that has 
mistaken self-powered permanents, imputational natu res, and other-powered natures, they 
are posited. There is not the slightest existence b y way of its own nature.” {38} In 
particular, the latter assertions regarding the pri ncipal subject matter revealed by the 
Perfection of Wisdom Sutras lacked even the ability  to discriminate the coarse meaning of 
the sutras and the commentaries on their thought.  
 
First opinion : “The final wheel of Dharma is definitive meaning and its bases for characterization 
are the Sutra Unraveling the Thought , the Matrix of the One-Gone-Thus Sutra , and so forth.” Here 
“this very sutra set” refers specifically to the Sutra Unraveling the Thought,  which was cited 
previously.  
 
Second opinion : “Those sutras, the Matrix of the One-Gone-Thus Sutra  and so forth, prove ultimate 
truth. Clung to by a mind that has mistaken self-po wered permanents, imputational natures, and 
other-powered natures, they are posited. There is n ot the slightest existence by way of its own 
nature.” 
 
The “latter assertions,” that is, the second opinio n, regarding the principal subject matter revealed 
by the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras, lacks even the ability to discriminate the coarse meaning of the 
sutras and the commentaries on their thought.  
 
Ornament of the Essence  says: 
 
It is taught in these  this very sutra sets  that other-powered natures and thoroughly 
established natures are truly existent, and that th ere are three final vehicles. The teaching 
that all phenomena are empty of true existence, tha t stains are adventitious, and that there 
is one final vehicle in the Matrix of the One-Gone-Thus Sutra , the Lion's Roar of 
Shrimaladevi Sutra  ( Shrimaladevisimhanadasutra ), and so forth, have been well 
established by the Great Vehicle Treatise on the Sublime Continuum 
(Mahayanottaratantrasastra ). Hence, if one were to reflect upon whether or no t their 
meanings are the same, in the commentary of the Great Vehicle Treatise on the Sublime 
Continuum , the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras are also pointed to as reference regarding the 
way of realizing the meaning of the mode of abidanc e, and from that only self-emptiness is 
indicated.  
 Also, know that the assertion—that the teachings o n ultimate true existence in the 
Matrix of the One-Gone-Thus Sutra  are commented upon by the Great Vehicle Treatise on 
the Sublime Continuum —is just a hodgepodge of contradictions. Since they  appear to be 
topics of extremely coarse wrong conceptions, I wil l not elaborate more beyond just this. 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 7: 10-14 March 2008 
 
4 Again “this very sutra set” refers to the Sutra Unraveling the Thought . It teaches that other-powered 
natures and thoroughly established natures are trul y existent, and that there are three final vehicles . 
 
 
Jonangpa system’s explanation of self-emptiness and  other-emptiness 
 
1. self-emptiness : the emptiness of other-powered natures  and the conventional truths included in 
imputational natures  of being established from their own side.  
2. other-emptiness  
The Jonangpas propound two types of thoroughly esta blished natures: 
• the emptiness of form and its apprehender being dif ferent substances and  
• the emptiness of a self-sufficient substantially ex istent person. 
Other-emptiness: the emptiness of thoroughly established natures  of being other-powered natures 
and of being conventional truths included in imputa tional natures.  
 
Q: Based on which sutra of the third wheel of Dharm a did the Jonangpas assert self-emptiness and 
other-emptiness? 
A: Their assertions are probably based on the Sutra Unraveling the Thought  itself.  
 
Q: Does the entire section from “A Tibetan…” throug h “I will not elaborate more beyond just this” 
set out various mistaken positions? 
A: Various mistaken assertions are set out, but the y are interspersed with our own system’s 
assertions: 
• Our own system  says: “In particular, the latter assertions regard ing the principal subject 
matter revealed by the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras lacked even the ability to discriminate 
the coarse meaning of the sutras and the commentari es on their thought. It is taught in this 
very sutra set that other-powered natures and thoro ughly established natures are truly 
existent, and that there are three final vehicles. The teaching that all phenomena are empty 
of true existence, that stains are adventitious, an d that there is one final vehicle in the Matrix 
of the One-Gone-Thus Sutra , the Lion's Roar of Shrimaladevi Sutra , and so forth, have been 
well established by the Great Vehicle Treatise on the Sublime Continuum .” 
 
• The statement “Hence, if one were to reflect upon w hether or not their meanings are the 
same, in the commentary of the Great Vehicle Treatise on the Sublime Continuum , the 
Perfection of Wisdom Sutras are also pointed to as reference regarding the way of realizing 
the meaning of the mode of abidance, and from that only self-emptiness is indicated” is also 
correct when it says that the commentary on the Great Vehicle Treatise on the Sublime 
Continuum  says that one should refer to the Perfection of Wi sdom Sutras regarding how to 
realize the meaning of the mode of abidance. 
 
• The statement “Also, know that the assertion—that t he teachings on ultimate true existence 
in the Matrix of the One-Gone-Thus Sutra  are commented upon by the Great Vehicle 
Treatise on the Sublime Continuum —is just a hodgepodge of contradictions” sets out a n 
incorrect assertion: i.e., that the teachings on ul timate true existence in the Matrix of the 
One-Gone-Thus Sutra  are commented upon by the Great Vehicle Treatise on the Sublime 
Continuum . This assertion contradicts the previous assertion  that “in the commentary of the 
Great Vehicle Treatise on the Sublime Continuum , the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras are also 
pointed to as reference regarding the way of realiz ing the meaning of the mode of abidance.” 
 
The “matrix of the one-gone-thus” is a new translat ion by Jeffrey Hopkins of the term “tathagata 
essence” or “buddha nature.” The first chapter of t he Great Vehicle Treatise on the Sublime 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 7: 10-14 March 2008 
 
5 Continuum  sets out a discussion of going for refuge to the T hree Jewels and on the buddha lineage, 
in the context of which emptiness is discussed.  
 
Ornament of the Essence,  p.26, says: 
 
 Further, it is incorrect for someone to hold the Sutra Unraveling the Thought  in its 
entirety to be the basis for characterization of th e mentioned proximate word, “This  … is 
unsurpassable” [cited above], because the other que stions and answers in which individual 
dissimilar questions were posted to the Teacher by ten bodhisattvas who are lords of the 
ten grounds in that [ Sutra ] have no relation to the basis for characterizatio n of “This.” 
Hence the answer in response to the question on int erpretable meaning and definitive 
meaning asked by the Bodhisattva Paramarthasamudgat a is just those very words spoken 
by the Teacher. Summarizing the meaning of the answ er spoken by the Teacher regarding 
this sutra cited above, Paramarthasamudgata said in  brief, “I have understood thus.”  
 
The word “This ” refers to the previous citation: “This  wheel of doctrine turned by the 
Supramundane Victor is unsurpassable , does not afford an occasion [for refutation], is of definitive 
meaning, and does not serve as a basis for controve rsy.” The word “This” refers to the third wheel 
of Dharma. This statement is a summary of the Buddh a’s reply to Paramarthasamudgata’s question. 
However, it is not that the entire sutra is unsurpa ssable. In this sutra there are questions asked by ten 
bodhisattvas to the Buddha as well as his answers t o them, and not all of these answers are 
unsurpassable. The word “unsurpassable” refers spec ifically to the passage in which the Buddha 
responds to Paramarthasamudgata’s question regardin g what is interpretable meaning and definitive 
meaning.  
 
• In the context of discussing the first wheel , this sutra says “ That  wheel of doctrine…”: 
“Initially, in the area of Varanasi in the Deer Par k called “Sage’s Propounding,” the 
Supramundane Victor thoroughly turned a wheel of do ctrine for those engaged in the Hearer 
Vehicle, fantastic and marvelous which none—god or human—had previously turned in a 
similar fashion in the world, through teaching the aspects of the four noble truths. 
Furthermore, that  wheel of doctrine thoroughly turned by the Supramu ndane Victor is 
surpassable, affords an occasion [for refutation], requires interpretation, and serves as a 
basis for controversy.”  
 
• Likewise in relation to the second wheel , this sutra says “ That  wheel of doctrine…”: “Based 
on just the naturelessness of all phenomena and bas ed on just the absence of production, the 
absence of cessation, quiescence from the start, an d naturally passed beyond sorrow, the 
Supramundane Victor turned a second wheel of doctri ne for those engaged in the Great 
Vehicle, very fantastic and marvelous, through the aspect of speaking on emptiness. 
Furthermore, that  wheel of doctrine turned by the Supramundane Victo r is surpassable, 
affords an occasion [for refutation], requires inte rpretation, and serves as a basis for 
controversy.” 
 
• In relation to the third wheel of Dharma , the sutra says “ This  wheel of doctrine…”: 
“However, based on just the naturelessness of pheno mena and based on just the absence of 
production, the absence of cessation, quiescence fr om the start, and naturally passed beyond 
sorrow, the Supramundane Victor turned a third whee l of doctrine for those engaged in all 
vehicles, possessed of good differentiation, fantas tic and marvelous. This  wheel of doctrine 
turned by the Supramundane Victor is unsurpassable , does not afford an occasion [for 
refutation], is of definitive meaning, and does not  serve as a basis for controversy.” 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 7: 10-14 March 2008 
 
6 Here, these three wheels of Dharma are presented in  terms of time, meaning that: 
• first the first wheel of Dharma was turned in the a rea of Varanasi, 
• then the second was turned, and 
• then the third was turned. 
Although the three wheels of Dharma are presented i n this way in terms of time, it is not that: 
• whatever was taught in the first period of time is necessarily a first wheel of Dharma,  
• whatever was taught in the second period of time is  necessarily a second wheel of Dharma, 
and  
• whatever was taught in the third period of time is necessarily a third wheel of Dharma.  
 
There are the Hinayana sutras, which were taught pu blicly, and the Mahayana teachings, which 
include: 
1.  the sutras of the perfection vehicle  
2.  the tantras. 
Compared to the Hinayana sutras, the Mahayana are m ore secret in that they were not taught as 
publicly as the Hinayana sutras. Among the Mahayana  teachings, the tantras were taught more 
secretly than the sutras of the perfection vehicle.  Due to this, it is propounded by some that the 
Mahayana sutras and tantras were not taught by the Buddha. However, these days it is the opposite! 
 
 
NO CLASS TUESDAY, 11 MARCH  (Geshe Tenphel was ill) 
 
 
Wednesday, 12 March 2008 
 
Re. other-powered natures 
 
I suggested some “homework” at the end of last week , in terms of observing other-powered natures. 
By observing other-powered natures, is it the case that obscurations cannot be purified? When we 
do, for example, the Confession of Downfalls, prost rations, reciting the Vajrasattva mantra, etc., we 
can purify negativities. Saying that by observing o ther-powered natures, obscurations are not 
purified because they are not final object of obser vation of a pure path means that by observing 
other-powered natures, we cannot directly purify the conception of self. We can purify negati vities 
through these practices, but cannot abandon obscurations from the root . In general, practices such 
as Vajrasattva recitation cannot remove obscuration s, but if they are conjoined with the wisdom 
realizing emptiness, it is a different case and the y can counteract the conception of self. One might 
think that since we have not realized emptiness, th ese practices cannot remove afflictions from the 
root, so it is not necessary to do them. However, i f we perform them with good motivation, 
negativities can be purified. Slowly, through this process of purifying negativities, we can realize 
emptiness and eliminate afflictions from their root .  
 
Characteristics of the three wheels of Dharma  
 
The following definitions of the three wheels of Dh arma are from Jedzun Chogyi Gyeltsen’s 
commentary, the Ocean of Sport .  
 
First wheel of Dharma : An uncommon Hinayana sutra that mainly indicates the four noble truths as 
its explicit subject matter. 
 
Second (middle) wheel of Dharma : An uncommon Mahayana sutra that mainly indicates emptiness 
as its explicit subject matter. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 7: 10-14 March 2008 
 
7  
Third (or final) wheel of Dharma : A sutra of the common vehicles that indicates by clearly 
differentiating the three natures as being truly ex istent or not, as asserted by the followers of Mind -
Only (Chittamatrins). 
 
“Common” here means common to Hinayana and Mahayana . You can see from these definitions 
that the first wheel has to do with uncommon Hinaya na, the second with uncommon Mahayana, the 
third with the common, i.e. common to both Hinayana  and Mahayana. When we look at the terms 
“Hinayana” and “Mahayana,” does Hinayana refer to h earers and solitary realizers or to the 
propounders of Vaibhashika (Great Exposition) and S autrantika (Sutra) tenets? Does Mahayana 
refer to those who propound Mahayana tenets, i.e. M ind-Only and Middle Way?  
 
According to the Autonomist system, the intended tr ainees of the first wheel  are the Hinayanists. 
We can look at this in terms of tenets and paths .  
• With regard to tenets, they are those who propound Great Exposition and Sutra System 
tenets.  
• With regard to paths, they are Hinayanists.  
 
The intended trainees of the middle wheel  are Middle Way Autonomists.  
• In terms of tenets, they are those who propound Mah ayana tenets 
• In terms of path, they are Mahayanists.  
 
The final wheel  is of the common vehicles. The sutras of the third  wheel are uncommon sutras of 
Mind-Only proponents, but they are referred to as c ommon vehicles. Sutras of the third wheel are 
common vehicle because the intended trainees of the  third wheel of Dharma are Chittamatrins, who 
are of two types:  
1.  those who have entered the Hinayana path and  
2.  those who have entered Mahayana path.  
 
With respect to the Autonomy school, there are four  possibilities in the relationship between 
propounders of those who hold Hinayana tenets and t hose who are Hinayana by way of path:  
1.  Someone who is a propounder of Hinayana tenets but is not Hinayanist by path : for 
example, Atisha’s guru, Serlingpa. Serlingpa propou nded Vaibhashika tenets when he was 
Atisha’s tutor, although he later came to hold high er tenets. However, he was actually a 
bodhisattva on the small level of the path of accum ulation, so he was a propounder of 
Hinayana tenets but a Mahayanist by path.  
2.  Someone who does not propound Hinayana tenets but i s Hinayanist by path : A hearer who 
is an Autonomist.  
3.  Someone who is both a propounder of Hinayana tenets  and a Hinayanist by path  
4.  Someone who is neither a propounder of Hinayana ten ets nor a Hinayanist by path  
 
It is easy to posit examples of the last two. With respect to the relationship between propounders of 
Mahayana tenets and those who are Mahayana by way o f path, there are also four possibilities:  
 
1.  Propounder of Mahayana who is not Mahayana by path : an Autonomist who does not have 
conventional bodhicitta in his continuum.  
2.  Someone who is Mahayana by path but not a propounde r of Mahayana : Serlingpa. He did 
not propound Mahayana tenets, but was a Mahayanist.  
3.  Someone who is both  
4.  Someone who is neither  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 7: 10-14 March 2008 
 
8 The criterion for being a Mahayanist is to have bod hicitta. If you have it, you are a Mahayanist. It 
does not depend on the tenets one propounds or on t he type of texts one studies.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 27: 
 
2B1C-4A3A. Explicit teaching by way of the conventio ns of names of the three levels of the wheels of Dh arma 
occurring in the Sutra Unraveling the Thought (Samdhinirmocanasutra ) (continued) 
 
 {39} It is clear that those who inverted  have misunderstood  the basis  bases  for 
characterization of the Sutras, having ignored  retained  the conventions of interpretable and 
the definitive of the middle and final wheels, depe nded only upon the words, without even 
slightly analyzing the meaning. 
 
Here it talks about those who have “inverted the ba ses for characterization of the Sutras.” In the 
context of the Mind-Only system, we say the middle wheel is interpretable and the final wheel is 
definitive. Some have misunderstood this, and have reversed the illustrations for these two wheels. 
They posit a sutra of the middle wheel as being int erpretable and a sutra of the final wheel as being 
definitive, but in terms of the bases for character ization, they have reversed them. Bases for 
characterization of the middle wheel—the extensive,  middling, and brief perfection of wisdom 
sutras—are taken as illustrations for the final whe el, and the bases for characterization of the final  
wheel are taken as bases of characterization of the  middle wheel.  
 
According to the analysis of the meaning commented upon by Acarya Arya Asanga in the 
commentary of Great Vehicle Treatise on the Sublime Continuum , and the commentaries 
on the thought of Acarya Nagarjuna by Acarya Buddha palita and Acarya Chandrakirti, the 
Sutra Unraveling the Thought  was asserted not to be literally acceptable and to  be of 
interpretable meaning, while the second wheel expla ined here, the Mother Sutras , was 
accepted to be of definitive meaning. The teachings  on impermanence and so forth in the 
first wheel are also interpretable meaning, but tho se teaching the subtle emptiness of 
selflessness of persons and phenomena are definitiv e meaning. It is asserted that at the time 
when the first wheel of Dharma was turned, the grou p of five [former ascetic companions 
who became the first disciples of the Buddha], 80,0 00 gods, and so forth also directly 
realized that very subtle selflessness. In [Nagarju na’s] Sixty Stanzas of Reasoning 
(Yuktisastikakarika ) and Precious Garland of Advice for the King  
(Rajaparikatharatnavali ), it is also proven that the teaching on this very  subtle selflessness 
is a Hinayana scriptural basket, and that even thos e trainees must realize just that in order 
to attain the result of foe-destroyer. 
 
This passage explains the Consequentialist assertio ns. According to them, the second wheel is 
pervaded by being definitive meaning, the third whe el is pervaded by being interpretable meaning, 
and the first wheel has parts that are interpretabl e and parts that are definitive. In the first wheel , 
teachings on impermanence, etc., are interpretable,  but those that expound subtle emptiness of 
selflessness of persons and phenomena are definitiv e meaning.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 27: 
 
 Those who—in dependence on having heard the mere r epetition of that said by  of  the 
great beings, that Acarya Bhavaviveka and so forth,  having at first familiarized with the 
methods of realizing the meaning of emptiness based  upon the ways of the Autonomists 
(Svatantrikas) for a long time, will  would  comprehend subtle emptiness as soon as their 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 7: 10-14 March 2008 
 
9 continua ripen—propound that “It is impossible for hearer aryas to realize subtle 
selflessness” are like a fox competing with an elep hant in strength.  
 
In general, according to the Autonomist system, hea rers do not need to realize emptiness; however 
there are  hearers who realize emptiness. There are those who  propound that it is impossible for 
hearer aryas to realize subtle emptiness, but this is a faulty assertion. The “great beings” referred to 
here are Bhavaviveka, Haribhadra, Vasubandhu, and s o forth. Although we refer to them as being 
of a particular tenet system, e.g. Bhavaviveka is a n Autonomist, we do not know what their actual 
system is. Those who make these wrong assertions ar e like “a fox competing with an elephant in 
strength.” They hear assertions of the great beings  and make their own interpretations, saying, for 
example, that it is impossible for hearer aryas to realize subtle emptiness.  
 
Q: Has Bhavaviveka realized emptiness? 
A: According to the Consequentialist system, given that he was an Autonomist, Bhavaviveka had 
not yet understood subtle emptiness. This is in ter ms of appearance, whereas we do not know 
whether or not this is true in terms of his actual realizations.  
 
Ornament of the Essence :  
 
Therefore, those who wish good for themselves shoul d be careful about this topic, because 
leisures and endowments will quickly disintegrate a nd also the fulfillments of this life are 
insignificant in essence. {40}  
 
This is a word of caution. Nowadays, many people gi ve explanations and compose texts; we should 
be careful not to believe just anything that is sai d. We do need to read texts, but it is important to  
check whether what is said in them is accurate. Oth erwise, our precious human rebirth will be 
wasted; we should extract the essence of our leisur es and endowments. This advice traces back to 
the Buddha, who told his disciples to examine whate ver he said, and also to examine whatever 
treatise we look at. If we do not analyze the meani ng of a treatise, we cannot understand what is 
said in the treatise.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 27: 
 
 The bodhisattva Kamalashila said [in the extensive  commentary to the Seven Hundred 
Stanza Perfection of Wisdom Sutra ] that the  very imputation by others that the person, 
aggregates, and so forth are truly existent is an i mputational nature; their  its  lack of even 
the slightest nature is taught in the Sutra Unraveling the Thought  to be the meaning of 
imputational natures being character-non-natures. W hen refuting other-powered natures to 
be truly existent, as an auxiliary, thoroughly esta blished natures are also refuted to be truly 
existent. Thus, he asserted that, for the sake of p roving that the very teaching that all 
phenomena are not truly existent in the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras is definitive meaning, 
the Sutra Unraveling the Thought  pointed to the texts of [the Perfection of Wisdom 
Sutras].  
 
This paragraph shows that bodhisattva Kamalashila a ctually explained things differently. When it 
says “he asserted that, for the sake of proving tha t the very teaching that all phenomena are not trul y 
existent in the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras is defi nitive meaning, the Sutra Unraveling the Thought  
pointed to the texts of [the Perfection of Wisdom S utras],” it means that the Sutra Unraveling the 
Thought proved the Perfection of Wisdom sutras to be of def initive meaning. According to 
Kamalashila, the Sutra Unraveling the Thought  actually pointed to the Perfection of Wisdom sutra s 
as being of definitive meaning. He said that the te aching in Sutra Unraveling the Thought  of the 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 7: 10-14 March 2008 
 
10 three natures—other-powered natures, imputational n atures, and thoroughly established natures—as 
being “non-natures” is a teaching of the lack of tr ue existence of all three.  
 
In the Sutra Unraveling the Thought,  it is taught that  
• imputational natures are character non-natures 
• other-powered natures are production non-natures 
• thoroughly established natures are ultimate non-nat ures.  
 
Kamalashila explained this to mean that all three a re not truly existent. “Its lack of even the slight est 
nature” with respect to imputational natures is the  meaning of imputational natures being character 
non-natures. He says that other-powered and thoroug hly established natures are refuted as being 
truly existent. In this way, he has a different exp lanation of the Sutra Unraveling the Thought .  
 
In the first chapter of [Jedzun Chogyi Gyeltsen’s?]  General Meaning,  it  says that Kamalashila says 
that Sutra Unraveling the Thought is a scripture of the Middle Way system. He said th is because the 
Sutra Unraveling the Thought  proved that the Perfection of Wisdom sutras are of  definitive 
meaning; therefore the Sutra Unraveling the Thought  itself is a Middle Way scripture. According to 
our own system, this is not true; we say that the Sutra Unraveling the Thought  is a Mind-Only 
scripture.  
 
Q: Is the sentence, “It is clear that those who inv erted the bases for characterization of the Sutras, 
having ignored the conventions of interpretable and  the definitive of the middle and final wheels, 
depended only upon the words, without even slightly  analyzing the meaning” a refutation of the 
Mind-Only system?   
 
A: This sentence is a refutation by taking the Mind -Only system as a basis. Having taken the Mind-
Only system as a basis, it is pointing out that the se people have made mistakes.  
 
We can say that Kamalashila is a Middle Way propone nt. He asserted that the Sutra Unraveling the 
Thought pointed to the Perfection of Wisdom sutras in order  to prove that the Perfection of Wisdom 
sutras are of definitive meaning. This is Kamalashi la’s assertion, not that of our system. According 
to our system, Sutra Unraveling the Thought  is a Mind-Only scripture. 
 
Q: In the sentence, “Those who—in dependence on hav ing heard the mere repetition of that said by 
the great beings, that Acarya Bhavaviveka and so fo rth, having at first familiarized with the 
methods of realizing the meaning of emptiness based  upon the ways of the Autonomists 
(Svatantrikas) for a long time, will comprehend sub tle emptiness as soon as their continua ripen—
propound that ‘It is impossible for hearer aryas to  realize subtle selflessness’ are like a fox 
competing with an elephant in strength,” is this a warning not to look down on those of the 
Hinayana? 
 
A: Yes. The point is to look at your mind and check  if you have the inner qualities. Studying a 
Mahayana text does not mean you have these qualitie s. In terms of the Vinaya, the Vinaya is 
principally taught from the point of view of the Va ibhashika system. It is taught there that ethics 
must be the foundation for concentration, and with this basis, we can attain the training in wisdom. 
Without ethics, there is no concentration or wisdom . So without the Hinayana as a basis, there is no 
Mahayana practice. Vinaya does not just refer to et hics for ordained people, but also includes that of  
lay people.  
 
The three trainings 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 7: 10-14 March 2008 
 
11 There is a difference between the “three trainings”  and the “three higher  trainings.” The higher 
training of ethics is not cultivated simply to obta in a good rebirth, but involves creating conditions  
for attaining liberation and enlightenment. This is  the same for the higher training in concentration:  
it is not just for a rebirth in the form and formle ss realms; it can be assisted by bodhicitta, wisdom , 
and so forth. The higher training in wisdom is not merely cultivating wisdom, but is wisdom 
cultivating selflessness of persons or emptiness.  
 The sequence is ethics, then concentration, then w isdom. Why is this sequence definite? When 
we have ethics, we can restrain from coarse forms o f misbehavior of body and speech. With 
concentration, we can restrain from coarse forms of  misbehavior of the mind. With wisdom, we can 
restrain from the root, or uproot, the subtle forms  of misbehavior. In order to remove afflictions 
from the root, first we must be able to suppress th em; otherwise, we cannot remove the coarse 
forms of misbehavior of body and speech.  
 Special insight is a meditative stabilization in w hich the bliss of pliancy of body and mind has 
been induced through the force of analysis from wit hin the state of calm abiding. “Special insight” 
means seeing in an exceptional way; it refers to a mind that is able to see in an exceptional way 
while abiding single-pointedly without distraction.  Those who have attained special insight do not 
have manifest anger; they still have anger, but it is not coarse.  
 
 
Wednesday, 12 March 2008 (afternoon) 
 
Q: In the following phrase ( Ornament of the Essence , p. 27), who does “those” refer to? 
 
 Those who—in dependence on having heard the mere r epetition of that said by the great 
beings, that Acarya Bhavaviveka and so forth, havin g at first familiarized with the methods 
of realizing the meaning of emptiness based upon th e ways of the Autonomists 
(Svatantrikas) for a long time, will comprehend sub tle emptiness as soon as their continua 
ripen—propound that “It is impossible for hearer ar yas to realize subtle selflessness” are 
like a fox competing with an elephant in strength. 
 
A: This passage seems to be explained from the poin t of view of the Consequence school. Who are 
the ones who familiarized with the “methods of real izing the meaning of emptiness based upon the 
ways of the Autonomists…”? It is Acharya Bhavavivek a and so forth—the Autonomist masters. 
The person expressing this view has made a mistake,  because it is not the case that one will 
comprehend subtle emptiness as soon as the continuu m is ripened, even though one has familiarized 
with the methods of realizing the meaning of emptin ess based upon the Autonomy system.  
 
More regarding the three trainings  
 
On the basis of ethics, one develops concentration,  and on that basis, one develops wisdom. Ethics 
is mainly taught in the Vinaya, which contains ethi cs for both ordained and lay people. If someone 
becomes ordained and these vows are not well kept, we cannot say that ethics has been kept well. 
The definition of ethics is “the intention to guard  against a mind of affliction.” If one does not gua rd 
against these, one is not keeping ethics. If lay pe ople are able to guard against afflictions, they ar e 
keeping ethics. By guarding the mind against afflic tions, the mind is less likely to fall under the 
influence of laxity and excitement, and it is easie r to develop concentration. In the Vinaya, it talks  
about guarding body and speech; guarding the mind i s not explicitly taught. On one hand, we need 
to display proper conduct of body and speech, but w e should take care that our actions are preceded 
by a good motivation.  
 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 7: 10-14 March 2008 
 
12 Ornament of the Essence , p. 28: 
[2B1C-4A3B. Indication by means of the three levels  of leading trainees occurring in the Questions of King 
Dharanishvara (Dharanishvararajapariprchchhasutra )2 although the conventions of names have not been 
taught explicitly] 
The Questions of King Dharanishvara (Dharanishvararajapariprchchha-sutra ) does not 
speak of the conventions of the three wheels, but i n the analogy of the way a jewel is 
cleaned by a skillful jeweler, it takes three level s of guiding trainees after they have been 
adopted: “(1) Having produced despondency towards f or  cyclic existence through a 
disillusioning discussion of impermanence, sufferin g, selflessness, and uncleanliness at 
first, cause sentient beings who bear the cause of various natures to be entered into the 
subduing dharma of the aryas. (2) And after that, m ake them realize the modes of the 
tathagatas through discussion of emptiness, signles sness, and wishlessness. (3) And then 
cause them to be entered into the place of the tath agatas, through discussion of the wheels 
of irreversible Dharma, discussion of the completel y pure three wheels.”  
 
The analogy used in this sutra is that of the way a  jewel is cleaned by a skillful jeweler. Nowadays, 
there are sophisticated tools used to polish crude gems into fine jewels, but in the past there were 
different methods. A skilled jeweler would be able to tell that this mineral is precious, and would 
soak it in salt water, afterwards polishing it with  a coarse cloth woven from hair. Then he would 
soak this in a type of fish solution, wipe it with woolen cloth, then soak it in mercury, then polish it 
with a fine cloth. This way, the stains were remove d and he had a polished jewel.  
 These stages correspond to three levels of guiding  trainees. There are two types:  
1.  those who are definite in Mahayana lineage and  
2.  those who are not definite in Mahayana lineage.  
 For one who is not definite , at first teachings on impermanence, suffering, co arse selflessness, 
and uncleanliness are given. After that, this perso n receives teachings on emptiness and subtle 
selflessness, and in that way is led to the second stage. At the second stage, he is led to attain 
liberation, and at the third stage he is led to the  Mahayana. 
 For one who is definite , first the continuum is ripened by teachings on im permanence, etc., then 
teachings on emptiness, then at the third stage, he  is taught meditation on emptiness while being 
conjoined with extensive method.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 28: 
 
QUALM: What is indicated by this? 
RESPONSE: It indicates the stages of proceeding on the path of both of those  the causing 
of  trainees: those who  to  enter the three vehicles progressively and those  who are definite 
in the Mahayana lineage. If it is someone definite in the Hinayana lineage, then, his 
continuum having been ripened with the first level,  he  is freed from [cyclic] existence with 
the second level, and led to the Mahayana path by m eans of the third level. Also if it is 
someone definite in the Mahayana lineage, his conti nuum is ripened with the first level, 
just as before, and then he practices the meaning o f the second level. Following that, the 
way of practicing by fully upholding that very wisd om realizing emptiness with the 
extensive factor of method is indicated by the thir d level.  
 
Those who are in the Mahayana lineage are two types : definite and indefinite. Someone who is 
definite, regardless of the kind of teacher he/she meets, whether Hinayana or Mahayana, will enter 
the Mahayana path. Someone indefinite in Mahayana l ineage can either (i) meet a Hinayana teacher 
                                                 
2 Its alternative title as:  de bzhin gshegs pa'i snying po chen po nges par bst an pa (Tathagatamahakarunanirdesa-nama-
mahayanasutra ), Great Vehicle Sutra Teaching the Great Compassion o f a Tathagata. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 7: 10-14 March 2008 
 
13 and enter the Hinayana path or (ii) meet a Mahayana  teacher and enter the Mahayana path. For 
someone indefinite in  Mahayana lineage, there is n o certainty as to the vehicle they will enter. It 
depends on their meeting a teacher of a particular vehicle. This understanding of being definite and 
indefinite also applies to the Hinayana vehicle.  
 Someone being definite or indefinite in a lineage is due to their way of thinking, their attitude in 
this life, although imprints from past lives may pl ay a role. Through contemplation, they may be 
certain that they want to engage in the Hinayana or  Mahayana path. If someone has little mental 
courage, they can think that thinking of “all senti ent beings” is too much, and just work for their 
own welfare. Another may think it is not correct to  think only of their own welfare, and decide to 
enter the Mahayana. 
 We may think of how our body comes from the kindne ss of our parents, the union of the sperm 
and egg and so forth. Our parents came from their p arents, and so on, so countless sentient beings 
have brought about the existence of our bodies. The  causes of this body in this life may be very 
distant; it’s very difficult to trace them. When we  think of mother sentient beings, we need to think 
in a very extensive way. If we think about the bodi es that we have had, many sentient beings are 
involved.   
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 28: 
 
QUALM: The selflessness of the first level is a coa rse selflessness, but that indicated by 
the second level is very subtle. It is incorrect to  meditate on that  at the second level, 
because the factor of method must precede the wisdo m realizing emptiness. 
RESPONSE: There is no fault, (i) because, just as t aught in the commentary of Ornament 
of the Middle Way , sharp-faculty Mahayana lineage-bearers must proce ed to the realization 
of emptiness prior to generating the mind [aspiring ] towards supreme enlightenment, and 
(ii) because these levels are mainly  taught also in terms of the main  trainees. According to 
these [levels], the Matrix of the One-Gone-Thus Sutra  should also be taken as a basis for 
characterization of this third level, because that is very clearly the meaning of the passage 
that reveals the purpose at the conclusion of the f irst chapter of the Great Vehicle Treatise 
on the Sublime Continuum 3. Know their meanings from what has already been ex tensively 
explained in the exposition of that treatise. It bo ils down to  Just understanding  the measure 
of an aggregate of Dharma, the way of asserting of a hearer school follower, and so forth.  
 
Objection : This person says that it is incorrect to meditate  on emptiness at the second level, because 
meditation on emptiness needs to be preceded by the  factor of method, which is mainly bodhicitta.  
 
Response : There is no fault, because sharp-faculty Mahayana  lineage-bearers realize emptiness 
before generating bodhicitta. “According to these [ levels], the Matrix of the One-Gone-Thus Sutra  
should also be taken as a basis for characterizatio n of this third level”: the Matrix of the One-Gone-
Thus Sutra  should be taken as an illustration of the third le vel that involves leading trainees into the 
Mahayana path, because it is clearly explained in t he Great Vehicle Treatise on the Sublime 
Continuum in this passage that reveals the purpose at the con clusion of the first chapter. “According 
to these [levels]” refers to the three levels expla ined above.  
 “Know their meanings from what has already been ex tensively explained in the exposition of 
that treatise:” “their meanings” refers to the mean ings that have been clearly revealed in the first 
chapter of the Great Vehicle Treatise on the Sublime Continuum,  mentioned in the sentence above. 
The meanings regarding the sutra, the Matrix of the One-Gone-Thus Sutra,  are taken as a basis for 
characterization of the third level as explained in  the passage that reveals the purpose at the 
conclusion of the first chapter of the Great Vehicle Treatise on the Sublime Continuum . There is a 
                                                 
3 The first chapter of this text is entitled the “Ma trix of the One-Gone-Thus”or “Tathagatagarbha.” 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 7: 10-14 March 2008 
 
14 text that explains that treatise, so you have to kn ow those meanings from the exposition of that 
treatise. The preceding sentence, “[B]ecause that i s very clearly the meaning of the passage,” is 
what is referred to in the next sentence, where it says “Know their meanings.” Gyeltsab Je says that 
if you want to know the meanings, you have to look at that exposition of that treatise! 
 The Matrix of the One-Gone-Thus Sutra  refers to the buddha lineage, which is dharmata, o r 
emptiness, with respect to the mind. In order to at tain buddhahood, we need to realize the dharmata 
of the mind. In this sutra, it talks about how the dharmata of the mind is the buddha lineage, and 
that all sentient beings are pervaded by having thi s lineage, and are thus suitable to become 
buddhas. One becomes a buddha by realizing the dhar mata of the mind.  You might think that just 
by realizing the dharmata of the mind, one obtains buddhahood, but one must be conjoined with 
special method to attain buddhahood. One needs wisd om conjoined with method. This is explained 
in the sutra and explained in the first chapter of the Great Vehicle Treatise on the Sublime 
Continuum.   
 The measure of an aggregate of Dharma  is a scripture that teaches the complete antidote to one 
affliction. There are said to be 84,000 afflictions : 21,000 of attachment, 21,000 of ignorance; 21,000  
of hatred, and 21,000 where the three poisons are o f equal proportion. One aggregate of Dharma is 
an antidote to one of these afflictions.  
 In the first chapter of Jedzun Chogyi Gyeltsen’s General Meaning, he mentions the way of 
asserting of a hearer school follower. One such ass ertion is the way of saying that the wheel of 
Dharma was taught by Buddha Shakyamuni to his five good disciples. They say the five disciples 
attained the path of seeing, and the gods in the sk y proclaimed that “the Buddha turned the wheel of 
Dharma, and the path of seeing is attained.” Based on this, hearer school followers say this teaching 
is called “the Dharma wheel of only the path of see ing.” 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 29: 
2B1C-4B. Having summarized, paying homage {42}  
COMMENTARY  
To the Mothers who act to accomplish the buddhas su rrounded by hearers and so forth, I 
pay homage. 
 
EXPLANATION 
To the Mothers who act to accomplish  the goals of the buddhas surrounded by 
hearers , bodhisattvas, and so forth, I pay homage . 
 
This outline comes from page 23: 2B1C-4: Meaning of the words .  
 
In this way, we have completed the discussion of th e expression of worship, although there is a 
debate coming up about it.  
 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 29: 
2B2. Having revealed to persons of faith in the ext ensive, to explain  
2B2A. Meaning of the purpose of the treatise 
2B2B. Summarized topics 
2B2C. Meaning of the words  
2B2A. Meaning of the purpose of the treatise 
2B2A-1. Having individually rejected doubts concern ing a lack of purpose in composing the treatise, 
explaining the general presentation of the subject matter, the three exalted knowers 
2B2A-2. Having rejected the fault of repeating the sutras, establishing that a purpose exists 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 7: 10-14 March 2008 
 
15 2B2A-1. Having individually rejected doubts concern ing a lack of purpose in composing the treatise, ex plaining 
the general presentation of the subject matter, the  three exalted knowers 
2B2A-1A. Dispute 
2B2A-1B. Reply 
2B2A-1A. Dispute 
Do assertors of these meanings of whatever is dispu ted actually exist? Even if they do not, 
one is welcome to abide within doubts. In the first  case [where their assertors actually 
exist], the dispute is either about the Mother Sutr as or about the treatise. In the first case 
[where the dispute is about the Mother Sutras], sin ce emptiness is extensively determined 
in the sutras by having held the three exalted know ers and so forth as the bases of 
attributes, there would not be doubt wondering, “Ar e only the bases taught?” In the second 
case [where the dispute is about the treatise], has  [the assertor] seen the complete treatise 
or  [He]  has he  merely seen the expression of worship?  If he has not seen it even in the 
slightest, then statements such as “The Acarya paid  homage in that way” would have no 
relation.  
 
 
Outline 2B2 comes from page 11, 2B: Setting forth the explanation itself .  
 
The dispute mentioned here is not very evident. The re are three exalted knowers, and their objects 
are bases, paths, and aspects. The paths are referr ed to as “antidotes” in this dispute.  
 The dispute is:  
1.  are only the bases the subject matter, or  
2.  are only the antidotes the subject matter, or  
3.  are only aspects the subject matter?  
First, there is a discussion of whether there actua lly are people who assert this. If they exist, is t his 
dispute about the Mother Sutras or the treatise?  
 In the first case, where the assertor exists, if i t is about the Mother Sutras,  “since emptiness is 
extensively determined in the sutras by having held  the three exalted knowers and so forth as the 
bases of attributes, there would not be doubt wonde ring, ‘Are only the bases taught?’” In the first 
case, it is about the Mahayana sutras; in the secon d case, it is about the treatise (the Ornament for 
Clear Realization ). In the second case, the assertor has merely seen  the expression of worship.  
 Maitreya composed the expression of worship, and H aribhadra composed a commentary on the 
Ornament for Clear Realization . In Haribhadra’s commentary, he first explains the  purpose and 
reason for the expression of worship, and then the way faith is generated in the two types of 
trainees. Before explaining the purpose and relatio nship, he goes through a debate, which is what 
we are looking at now. It is incorrect to say this dispute is about the Mother Sutras, because in the 
Mother Sutras, it has already been determined that bases are realized as lacking a self, that paths ar e 
empty of true existence, and that aspects are empty  of true existence. Therefore, the dispute about 
whether only bases are the subject matter comes lat er; this is a dispute about the treatise, the 
Ornament for Clear Realization . The Ornament is the only subject for this dispute to take place,  not 
the sutras. This disputant has not seen the complet e treatise, but it is not the case that he hasn’t s een 
it at all—he has only seen the expression of worshi p.  
 
 
Thursday, 13 March 2008 
 
Q: According to the Autonomists, some parts of the second wheel of Dharma are interpretable 
meaning and some are definitive meaning. They say t hat the Heart Sutra  cannot be taken literally 
because it says that phenomena are not inherently e xistent, and therefore has to be interpretable 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 7: 10-14 March 2008 
 
16 meaning. Given that they take the Perfection of Wis dom Sutras to be definitive meaning, how is it 
possible that these sutras never mention that pheno mena are not inherently existent?  
A: The Autonomists take the extensive, medium, and brief Perfection of Wisdom Sutras to be 
definitive meaning. In fact in these sutras there a re statements such as “Phenomena are ultimately  
empty of inherent existence,” which are definitive in meaning. The Heart Sutra , on the other hand, 
does not say that phenomena are ultimately empty of inherent existence, but says that forms ar e 
empty of inherent existence, and is therefore consi dered to be an interpretable meaning sutra.  
 
2B2A-1A. Dispute (continued) 
 
As mentioned before, the dispute here (p. 29 of the  translation) occurs after the expression of 
worship has been stated and the way in which traine es generate faith has been explained, but before 
the statement of the purpose-and-relationship. Afte r the expression of worship and the commentary 
on the expression of worship have been given, there  is this dispute about whether the subject matter 
of the corpus, or body, of the treatise is only bas es, only paths, or only aspects. There are two case s 
to consider with respect to this dispute: 
• it is about the Mother Sutras 
• it is about the treatise, the Ornament for Clear Realization . 
Because these sutras were spoken a long time ago, t here can be no doubt about the subject matter of 
the Mother Sutras. Therefore, the dispute is about the treatise. There are three possibilities: 
• the disputant has seen the entire treatise 
• the disputant has seen merely the expression of wor ship 
• the disputant has not seen the treatise at all. 
Gyeltsab first addresses the third possibility, say ing “If he has not seen the treatise even in the 
slightest, then statements such as ‘The Acharya pai d homage in that way’ would be without relation 
because this statement is said after the expression  of worship.” 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 29: 
 
{43} In the first case [where the dispute is about the Mother Sutras  the assertor has seen 
the complete treatise ], why does the [assertor] dispute, despite knowing  what subject 
matter has been taught?  
 
In this case in which the assertor has seen the com plete treatise, there would not be any doubt about 
the subject matter. 
 
Ornament of the Essence : 
 
In the second case [where the dispute is about the treatises  the assertor has merely seen the 
expression of worship ], who is the person who generates such a doubt as soon as 
Venerable [Maitreya] has finished writing the mere stanza of the expression of worship? 
When seeing praise to the Mothers by means of the t hree exalted knowers, there is not the 
slightest certainty that the complete body of the t reatise must accord with how the 
expression of worship has turned out. If there is, then, having already realized how the 
three exalted knowers have been determined, it woul d be a question that does not possess a 
thought wondering, “What has been taken as the subj ect matter?” Thus it is meaningless to 
create such an objection and reply regarding this t reatise. 
 
That the Mothers are praised in the expression of w orship by means of the three exalted knowers is 
how the expression of worship has turned out. Howev er, from this alone, one cannot tell how the 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 7: 10-14 March 2008 
 
17 complete body of the treatise will turn out. This i s because there is no certainty that the complete 
body of the treatise will accord with the expressio n of worship. “If there is” means if there were this 
certainty that the complete body of the treatise mu st accord with how the expression of worship has 
turned out , then this person would have already realized how the three exalted knowers have been 
determined. This is because in the expression of wo rship, the three exalted knowers—the knower of 
bases , knower of paths , and exalted knower of all aspects —are praised and they correspond with 
their respective objects—bases, paths, and aspects.  Thus, if this person knows that the expression of 
worship must  accord with the complete body of the treatise, he would already know from the 
expression of worship that bases, paths, and aspect s are the subject matter of the treatise. 
 In other words, while there is no certainty that t he complete body of the treatise must accord with 
the expression of worship, if  there were this certainty, then because the three exalted knowers are 
taken as the subject matter of the expression of wo rship, they would also be taken as the subject 
matter of the complete body of the treatise. Hence,  there would not be any doubt about the subject 
matter of the treatise.  
 Here, instead of going immediately to a discussion  of the purpose and relationship, this dispute is 
first set out. Is there a reason for this or not? T here is a purpose: it is in order to understand how  
important the three exalted knowers are. Also in th is way, various doubts are raised, which bring 
out particular points for consideration. 
 
Ornament of the Essence,  pp. 29-30: 
 
Even if there is no one who makes such an assertion , if it is set forth by the Acarya for the 
sake of eliminating possible doubts in other possib ilities, since it contradicts the Great 
Commentary,  what it is like must be described and, also, from where this objection ensued 
must be described. 
 
This refers to the case in which no one makes such an assertion. 
 
RESPONSE: True indeed, but saying that—it is an imp licit dispute regarding the thesis 
“He composed a treatise that took the three exalted  knowers as the subject matter”—can 
hardly be correct, because asking “What is the subj ect matter?” while ascertaining such is a 
childish question.  
 
To say that there is an implicit dispute regarding the thesis “He composed a treatise that took the 
three exalted knowers as the subject matter” cannot  be correct, because it would be childish to ask 
“What is the subject matter?” while ascertaining it .  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 30: 
 
For, even implicitly formulating the thesis that “H e composed a treatise in accordance with 
the excellent qualities of the objects of praise” i s uncertain to be related. 
 
“[T]he excellent qualities of the objects of praise ” refers to the excellent qualities of the three 
exalted knowers. Therefore, even if the thesis were  formulated, “He composed a treatise in 
accordance with the excellent qualities of the obje cts of praise,” it would be uncertain to be related . 
This statement is similar to the earlier point: whi le the expression of worship sets out the excellent  
qualities of the three exalted knowers, there is no  certainty that, based on that, the body of the 
treatise will accord with these excellent qualities .  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 30: 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 7: 10-14 March 2008 
 
18  Therefore, if there actually is a person who makes  objection in this way, then, having 
ascertained by means of a correctly assuming consci ousness what are determined to be the 
three exalted knowers, he must at first determine t heir three objects of observation in order 
to determine them, since, without realizing their o bjects of observation—the three, bases, 
paths, and aspects—there is no realization of three  object-possessors.  
 
In order to determine the three exalted knowers, on e must first determine their three objects of 
observation. In other words, without realizing thei r objects of observation, one cannot realize the 
three exalted knowers which are the object-possesso rs. For example, without understanding the 
bases, one will not be able to understand a knower of bases.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 30: 
 
Hence, the basis giving rise to the statement “Ther e will be a fault that will be explained 
below,” as well as the doubt, is the expression of worship. {44} Also in that case, the time 
has arrived to provide the answer to the question o f those with probing minds; it is difficult 
to eliminate the arising of such doubts of those wi th probing minds in dependence on the 
statement of the expression of worship.  
 Hence the principal doubt—the dispute that it foll ows that there would be no purpose in 
composing the Ornament for Clear Realization  when all  the three exalted knowers are 
taken as the subject matter, since it repeats the Sutras—occurs just in making the 
connection of the purpose-and-relationship.  
 
Here, it says that the basis of the doubt is the ex pression of worship. The principal doubt is that “i t 
follows that there would be no purpose in composing  the Ornament for Clear Realization  when all 
the three exalted knowers are taken as the subject matter, since it repeats the Sutras .”  
 Our position is that there is no fault of repetiti on, that is, of the Ornament for Clear Realization  
repeating the Sutras, given that there is a special  purpose to composing the Ornament . This doubt 
occurs just in making the connection of the purpose -and-relationship. This refers to the statement of 
purpose-and-relationship in Maitreya’s text, which occurs immediately after the expression of 
worship. However, in Haribhadra’s commentary, there  is a dispute that occurs prior to commenting 
on the section on the purpose-and-relationship in M aitreya’s Ornament . 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 30:  
 
In order to eliminate its possibility, there is thi s very rejection of the dispute regarding 
taking the parts singly as the subject matter. Henc e, this is clearly the meaning of the 
Acarya’s welcoming those who abide in the previous position. Also, this does not 
contradict the Great Commentary ; it means the flinging of these repudiations that are 
indicated in the context of dispute here if an asse rtion like this were to arise. Those abiding 
in doubts thinking, “Just as it has been explained here, there would be these faults if the 
parts were only indicated singly; if one were to as sert in that way, that would be true, but I 
do not assert such,” are taken up by the Acarya. 
 
While there are no actual disputants, in the case t hat there were someone who brought up such a 
dispute, then this would be the way to resolve it. The Great Commentary  is the Great  Commentary 
on the Eight Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom S utra  (Geshe Jampa Gyatso’s commentary 
says that it is Lamp for the Ornament  by Haribhadra).  
 “[T]he dispute regarding taking the parts singly  as the subject matter” refers to taking only the 
bases as the subject matter, or taking only the pat hs as the subject matter, or taking only the aspect s 
as the subject matter.  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 7: 10-14 March 2008 
 
19  
Ornament of the Essence , p. 30: 
 
 Having reflected upon these objection and replies ensuing from the expression of 
worship, he gathered them into a topic of dispute a nd answer regarding the expression of 
worship. It is clear that the “beings of low intell igence” 4 and so forth explained in the 
dispute and answer regarding the purpose-and-relati onship is a  are  manifestations  of not 
having realized the meaning well. For the sake of p roving that there is a purpose for 
composing the Ornament for Clear Realization , having rejected the doubts of lack of 
purpose, it is very clear that he revealed the gene ral presentation of the three exalted 
knowers, the subject matter of the treatise.  
 
The dispute here is not about the purpose-and-relat ionship; it is mainly about the expression of 
worship. The rejection of this dispute is done in o rder to prove that there is a purpose in composing 
the Ornament for Clear Realization . After this dispute, there is the statement of the  purpose-and-
relationship.  
 Here, a connection is made. In Maitreya’s Ornament for Clear Realization  there are many 
statements that make a connection, but they are ind icated implicitly. In this context, the connection 
is made between  
1.  what came earlier—the expression of worship, and  
2.  what comes later—the statement of the purpose-and-r elationship.  
After having seen the expression of worship, one ma y wonder “While the expression of worship is 
like that, what is the actual treatise like?” Due t o this, there is the explanation that the treatise has: 
1.  a subject matter 
2.  a purpose 
3.  an essential purpose 
4.  a relationship. 
 
The doubt : Since the treatise, the Ornament for Clear Realization,  takes the three exalted knowers 
as its subject matter, this is a repetition of what  is taught in the Sutras, and therefore there is th e 
fault of repetition. 
The response to this doubt : There is no fault of repetition because there is a special purpose to 
composing the treatise. This is because, while empt iness is explicitly indicated in the Sutras, the 
stages of clear realization are indicated in them i n a hidden manner. Thus, by composing this 
treatise, future generations will easily realize th e meaning of the Sutras.  
Ornament of the Essence,  p. 30: 
 
It will also be explained that it is incorrect to i ndividually take the topics of (i) the 
expression of worship and (ii) the purpose-and-rela tionship to be  earlier and later dispute 
and answer. 
 
If one were to take the expression of worship to be  the earlier dispute and answer and take the 
purpose-and-relationship to be the later dispute an d answer, this would be incorrect. Next comes the 
actual dispute. 
 
 
Ornament of the Essence,  p. 31, says: 
 
                                                 
4 See commentary under outline 2B2A-2 below. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 7: 10-14 March 2008 
 
20 COMMENTARY  
If the treatise Ornament for Clear Realization,  preceded by homage and praise in that way, 
includes anything whatsoever from among the bases, antidotes, and aspects: 
 
EXPLANATION {45}  
Therefore, if  one were to investigate, when composing the treatise Ornament for Clear 
Realization  preceded by homage and praise in that way,  whether it includes anything 
whatsoever—from among  (i) the  bases  for the sake of generating the wisdom that 
strongly discriminates phenomena, (ii) antidotes  for the sake of abandoning the discordant 
classes, and  (iii) aspects  for the sake of knowing all objects of knowledge w ithout 
exception—as the subject matter, [one would see tha t] all of these are inappropriate. 
 
At the beginning of composing the treatise, the Ornament for Clear Realization , there is the homage 
and praise. If one were to examine whether this tre atise includes only one of the following as the 
subject matter, one would see that all these possib ilities are inappropriate: 
• only bases are included  for the sake of generating the wisdom that strongly  discriminates 
phenomena 
• only antidotes are included for the sake of abandon ing the discordant classes 
• only aspects are included for the sake of knowing a ll objects of knowledge without 
exception. 
 
Ornament of the Essence  says: 
 
COMMENTARY  
In the case of the first position, effort is meanin gless; in this Perfection of Wisdom, there is 
no occurrence of any basis not mentioned in the tre atises with the characteristics.  
 
EXPLANATION  
In the case of the first position, effort  to compose this treatise is meaningless , because it 
repeats the Abhidharma; for, in this Perfection of Wisdom  Ornament for Clear 
Realization  like that, there is no occurrence of any basis not mentioned i n the treatises 
with the  characteristics  that determine the specific and general characteri stics of 
phenomena, the Abhidharma (Manifest Knowledge) trea tises. 
 
In the case of the first position , it would be meaningless to make the effort to com pose the 
Ornament  because it would be a repetition of the Abhidharma  treatises. Since the bases have 
already been explained in these Abhidharma treatise s which determine the specific and general 
characteristics of phenomena, there would be no pur pose to composing the Ornament  if its subject 
matter were only bases. If the Ornament  explains something that is not explained in the 
Abhidharma treatises, then there is sense in compos ing it. Otherwise, if what is explained in the 
Ornament  had already been explained in the Abhidharma treat ises, there would be the fault of 
repetition.  
 
Ornament of the Essence,  p. 31, says: 
 
COMMENTARY  
In the case of the second, also because of includin g merely the completely pure properties, 
by not including the thoroughly afflicted propertie s, that this is the antidote to what will not 
be understood. 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 7: 10-14 March 2008 
 
21 EXPLANATION 
In the case of the second  position, also because of including merely  the antidotes— the 
completely pure properties— as the subject matter, by not including  the objects of 
abandonment— the thoroughly afflicted properties— as the subject matter, that this  
antidote is the antidote to what object of abandonment will not be understood  in 
dependence on this treatise.  
 
In the case [of the second position ,] that the Ornament for Clear Realization  includes only  antidotes 
as its subject matter, one would not be able to und erstand to what object of abandonment it is an 
antidote.  
 
Ornament of the Essence  says: 
 
COMMENTARY {46}  
In the case of the third, also because of including  merely some aspects without bases, as 
the meaning is not realized because it does not exp lain even slightly, the meaning is not 
realized. Will the aforesaid not become the thought  of others?  
 
EXPLANATION 
In the case of the third  position , are the aspects taught by being together with the b ases, 
or are they taught without relating to the bases? I n the first case, there will be the fault of 
repeating the Abhidharma. In the latter case, also because of including merely some 
aspects without bases  as the subject matter, it follows that it does not  explain even slightly 
the requisite meaning for beings seeking the object  of engagement , as the meaning related 
to the bases that are the aggregates characterized by impermanence, selflessness, and so 
forth is  not even slightly realized  in dependence on this treatise. If you accept that , then it 
follows that composing this treatise is meaningless ,  because it does not explain the 
requisite meaning even slightly  to beings.  Therefore, composing the treatise is without 
purpose . Will the aforesaid not become the thought of othe rs  with probing minds ?  
 
The third position  is that only aspects are included as the subject m atter of the Ornament . There are 
two possibilities with respect to this:  
• that the aspects are taught by being together with bases  
• that the aspects are taught without relation to the  bases. 
If these aspects are taught by being together with bases, there is the fault of repeating what is 
already taught in the Abhidharma. In the case that the aspects are taught without relation to the 
bases, “it follows that it does not explain even sl ightly the requisite meaning for beings seeking the  
object of engagement, as the meaning related to the  bases that are the aggregates characterized by 
impermanence, selflessness, and so forth is not eve n slightly realized in dependence on this treatise.  
If you accept that, then it follows that composing this treatise is meaningless, because it does not 
explain the requisite meaning even slightly to bein gs. Therefore, composing the treatise is without 
purpose.” “The requisite meaning” is a meaning that  is beneficial to beings. This is not explained 
even slightly.  
 
Next, there is the reply of our own system . 
 
Ornament of the Essence,  p. 32, says: 
2B2A-1B. Reply 
2B2A-1B1. Actual reply 
2B2A-1B2. Stating passages of proof 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 7: 10-14 March 2008 
 
22 2B2A-1B3. Explaining the meaning of the passages 
2B2A-1B4. Summary 
2B2A-1B1. Actual reply 
COMMENTARY  
It is not that. Why? Since all clear realizations a re included within the three exalted 
knowers of all, just according to the order of the hearers and solitary realizers, the 
bodhisattvas, and the unsurpassable buddhas, becaus e they are being included also within 
the three positions together. 
 
EXPLANATION 
The subject— Ornament for Clear Realization —it is not that  there is fault by means of 
including only any one of the bases, antidotes, and  aspects singly as the subject matter.  
Why? {47} Because all the three—bases, antidotes, and aspects—are det ermined to be the 
subject matter;  they are being included as its subject matter (by way of manner of 
characterizing the three exalted knowers) also within  the three positions of the bases, 
antidotes, and aspects  together. 
 There is a reason for determining the three exalte d knowers; it is because of desiring to 
determine all the aryas’ clear realizations, since all clear realizations are included within  
the knower of bases, the knower of paths, the exalt ed knower of all aspects, and  the three 
exalted knowers of all, just according to the order  of all the clear realizations of the 
hearers and solitary realizers, the bodhisattvas, a nd the unsurpassable buddhas. 
 
Q: What does “within the three positions of the bas es, antidotes, and aspects together” mean? 
A: It means within the position of the bases, the p osition of the antidotes, and the position of the 
aspects. 
 
Q: Why does Haribhadra bring up this doubt about th e subject matter of the Ornament for Clear 
Realization  being only bases, only paths, or only aspects? Was  this point not addressed by previous 
commentators, such as Vimuktisena? If so, what is t he special point being made by Haribhadra? Is 
he himself not committing the error of repetition? 
A: It may be the case that other masters wrote abou t this dispute; however, since these other 
masters, such as Vimuktisena, did not find the comp lete meaning of the Sutras, there is no fault in 
Haribhadra bringing up this dispute once again when  composing a commentary to the Ornament for 
Clear Realization . Haribhadra wrote his commentary Clear Meaning  through having looked at 
various commentaries, whereas if he had simply look ed at one commentary, he would not have 
found the complete meaning. From among the commenta ries to the Ornament , Haribhadra’s 
commentary is superior, because of having few words  but making the meaning clear. Although the 
meaning is clear, without receiving a commentary on  it, it would be difficult for us to understand!  
 
 
Friday, 14 March 2008 
 
 
Ornament of the Essence, p. 32: 
2B2A-1B1. Actual reply (continued) 
 
 There is a reason for determining the three exalte d knowers; it is because of desiring to 
determine all the aryas’ clear realizations, since all clear realizations are included within  
the knower of bases, the knower of paths, the exalt ed knower of all aspects, and  the three 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 7: 10-14 March 2008 
 
23 exalted knowers of all, just according to the order  of all the clear realizations of the 
hearers and solitary realizers, the bodhisattvas an d the unsurpassable buddhas. 
 
“Three exalted knowers of all” are the knower of ba ses, knower of paths, and exalted knower of all 
aspects. It seems that there is a repetition here, but this isn’t the case. The meaning is that the cl ear 
realizations of hearers and solitary realizers are included in the knower of bases, the clear 
realizations of bodhisattvas are included in the kn ower of paths, and the clear realizations of 
buddhas in the exalted knower of all aspects; in th is way, all clear realizations of aryas are include d 
in the exalted knowers of all. We have to correlate  this in this way: “clear realizations are included  
within the knower of bases, the knower of paths, th e exalted knower of all aspects, and the three 
exalted knowers of all, just according to the order ” means that the knower of bases corresponds to 
all  realizations of hearers and solitary realizers, kn ower of paths to all  clear realizations of 
bodhisattvas, exalted knower of all aspects to all  realizations of buddhas, and three exalted knowers  
of all to all  aryas’ clear realizations.  
 The word “determining” means “knowing at this time ,” i.e. the time has come to know 
something. Determining the three exalted knowers me ans to come to a conclusion through analysis 
about what the three exalted knowers are. Determini ng the knower of bases is to be able to decide 
what a knower of bases is like, and so forth. The s ame goes for the other two exalted knowers.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 32: 
 
OPINION: The clear realizations of the four aryas a re included as the subject matter, 
because the three exalted knowers are included as t he subject matter. There is pervasion, 
because the clear realizations of the four aryas ar e included within the three exalted 
knowers. 
RESPONSE: What is propounded above is posited by so meone who does not understand 
the classification of engagement through exclusion of the expresser. 
 Regarding (i) the three—bases, antidotes, and aspe cts—and (ii) the three exalted 
knowers, in this context, in dependence on one, the  other exists as an object to be 
characterized; if we combined  the bases of attributes and the attributes, they w ould be 
called “the instances of the exalted wisdom realizi ng the two selflessnesses (as well as their 
retinues) upon the bases, the four noble truths,” a nd if they were separated into individuals, 
they would be known as “the three—bases, antidotes,  and aspects.” 
 
This opinion comes about due to our own system’s as sertions above: “There is a reason for 
determining the three exalted knowers; it is becaus e of desiring to determine all the aryas’ clear 
realizations…” Our system’s response is that this o pinion is not correct: “What is propounded 
above is posited by someone who does not understand  the classification of engagement through 
exclusion of the expresser.” When this person says “clear realizations of the four aryas are included 
as the subject matter, because the three exalted kn owers are included as the subject matter,” is this 
person making the statement in the context of the e xpression of worship or in general? They go on 
to say that “There is pervasion, because the clear realizations of the four aryas are included within 
the three exalted knowers.”  
 According to our system, there is a fault with say ing this. When we talk about speech, or sound 
(Tib. sgra ) that expresses the three exalted knowers, does th is speech take the clear realizations of 
the four aryas as its subject matter, i.e. as the o bject that it expresses? If that were the case, the n the 
speech that expresses the three exalted knowers wou ld express the clear realizations of the four 
aryas, but that is not the case. One could go on to say that this sound th at expresses the three exalted 
knower does express the clear realizations of the four aryas, b ecause the clear realizations of the 
four aryas are included within the three exalted kn owers.  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 7: 10-14 March 2008 
 
24  If we were to say this in the form of a consequenc e, it would be: “The subject, speech that 
expresses the three exalted knowers; it follows tha t it includes the clear realizations of the four ar yas 
as the subject matter, because it includes the thre e exalted knowers. There is pervasion, because the 
clear realizations of the four aryas are included w ithin the three exalted knowers.” If this person 
were to say “I accept,” we would say “What is propo unded above is posited by someone who does 
not understand the classification of engagement thr ough exclusion of the expresser.” “Expresser” 
refers to speech that expresses; this speech does n ot express something other than what it expresses, 
i.e. it excludes that which it does not express, so  it is a mode of “engagement through exclusion.”  
 “There is a reason for determining the three exalt ed knowers; it is because of desiring to 
determine all the aryas’ clear realizations”: if we  just express the words “three exalted knowers,” 
only the three exalted knowers are expressed. If yo u look at the expression of worship, 1.1a 
(Ornament of the Essence , p. 13), “That which through the knower of all lea ds hearers seeking 
pacification to peace… ,” many things are expressed in this line. The word s “hearers seeking 
pacification” express more than just hearers; it al so expresses solitary realizers. Also, “knower of 
all” refers to the Hinayana path of accumulation an d path of preparation in addition to the knower 
of bases. Many things are expressed, but when you s ay “three exalted knowers,” these words do not 
express all the aryas’ clear realizations.  
 Regarding engaging through exclusion, this is disc ussed extensively in Dharmakirti’s 
Pramanavartika , saying that sounds and expressions engage through  exclusion. Exclusion means 
excluding that which is not expressed. For example,  the sound “pot” excludes “non-pot.” This is 
similar to identifying isolates, because when we ta lk about isolates, it is the “reverse of non-pot.” 
Here, we are talking about sound, rather than a con cept, but the idea is the same.  
 The words “hearers seeking pacification” engage th rough exclusion because they exclude those 
that do not seek pacification, but this does not el iminate those (solitary realizers) that are not hea rers 
seeking pacification. It would be right to say soli tary realizers seek liberation, or pacification, bu t it 
is not correct to say they are not “hearers seeking  pacification,” because “seeking pacification” 
includes solitary realizers. The pluralizing partic le, “s” (in “hearers”), 5 implies that there are many 
included in the statement, not just the hearers.  
 
Q: Why is there a fault in saying “There is pervasi on, because the clear realizations of the four arya s 
are included within the three exalted knowers”? 
A: According to our system, there is no pervasion. This means that if the three exalted knowers are 
included as the subject matter, there is no pervasi on that the clear realizations of the four aryas ar e 
included as the subject matter. The clear realizati ons of the four aryas are included within the three  
exalted knowers, but just saying the words “three e xalted knowers” does not express the clear 
realizations of the four aryas. Similarly, when you  say “five aggregates,” these words do not express 
forms, feelings, discrimination, etc. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , pp. 32-33:  
 
Regarding (i) the three—bases, antidotes, and aspec ts—and (ii) the three exalted knowers, 
in this context, in dependence on one, the other ex ists as an object to be characterized; if 
we combine the bases of attributes and the attribut es, they would be called “the instances 
of the exalted wisdom realizing the two selflessnes ses (as well as their retinues) upon the 
bases, the four noble truths,” and if they were sep arated into individuals, they would be 
known as “the three—bases, antidotes, and aspects.”  They will be known later in the 
context of the particularities of the knower of bas es.   
 
                                                 
5 In the Tibetan, the root text reads: “ nyan thos zhi ba ‘tshol rnams .” 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 7: 10-14 March 2008 
 
25 In the phrase “bases of attributes and the attribut es,” bases of attributes (khyad gzhi ) are bases, 
antidotes, and aspects and attributes (khyad chos ) are the three exalted knowers. If we were to 
combine the bases of attributes and the attributes,  we would have those that know bases, those 
that know paths, and those that know aspects, i.e. the three exalted knowers. If we separate the 
bases of attributes and the attributes, we have bas es, paths, and aspects.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 33: 
 
OPINION: Regarding that, also in this context, a pa st Tibetan scholar, without realizing the 
occurrence of the dispute (that it follows that com posing the treatise will be without 
purpose if all the three were included as the subje ct matter), through making the 
connection of the purpose-and-relationship, having thought that the dispute and answer 
regarding that are implicitly indicated here, state d the dispute as, “It follows that there are 
three bodies of the treatise if all the three were included” {48} and the reply as, “Since the 
circumstance of a single person attaining enlighten ment is indicated, there would not be 
three bodies.”  
 [ANOTHER PERSON SAYS:]  Well, the three exalted knowers would be the clear  
realizations of only one person. 
 RESPONSE [OF THE TIBETAN SCHOLAR ]: Although they are determined as the 
circumstance of one person, it has been explained t hat, “The three exalted knowers are the 
clear realizations of individual persons; it is thu s.”  
 [OUR SYSTEM’S RESPONSE] : That [posited above] is very incorrect, (i) becau se the 
rejection of the dispute of the parts singly is an ordinary one and (ii) because—that it 
follows that composing the treatise is without purp ose if all the three are included—is the 
principal dispute, whereby it is inappropriate to e xplain it as the implicitly indicated 
meaning of this commentary.  
 
“This context” refers to the context of the dispute . This opinion mentions a Tibetan scholar, who 
“stated the dispute as ‘It follows that there are t hree bodies of the treatise if all the three were 
included’ and the reply as, ‘Since the circumstance  of a single person attaining enlightenment is 
indicated, there would not be three bodies.’” This person says the three exalted knowers are the 
clear realizations of one person.  
 Our system’s response  is that “That [posited above] is very incorrect, ( i) because the rejection of 
the dispute of the parts singly is an ordinary one,  and (ii) because—that it follows that composing 
the treatise is without purpose if all the three ar e included—is the principal dispute, whereby it is 
inappropriate to explain it as the implicitly indic ated meaning of this commentary.” If we look at 
the opinion of the Tibetan scholar, it says “having  thought that the dispute and answer regarding 
that are implicitly indicated here…;” our system sa ys the dispute and answer are explicitly indicated 
in Haribhadra’s commentary, while they are implicit in Maitreya’s root text.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 33:  
 
 Therefore, these rejections of dispute are a gener al presentation of the subject matter of 
the treatise and are for the sake of proving that t here is a purpose for composing the 
Ornament for Clear Realization .  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 33: 
2B2A-1B2. Stating passages of proof 
2B2A-1B2A. Stating the proof from the medium Mother 
2B2A-1B2B. Stating the proof from the brief Mother 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 7: 10-14 March 2008 
 
26 2B2A-1B2C. Making referral to the proof from the ex tensive Mother 
 
The last division—“Making referral to the proof fro m the extensive Mother ”—means that which is 
said in the extensive Mother is not explicitly stat ed, but one can refer to it.  
 
Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
2B2A-1B2A. Stating the proof from the medium Mother 
2B2A-1B2A-1. Brief indication 
2B2A-1B2A-2. Extensive explanation 
2B2A-1B2A-1. Brief indication 
 
The reason why  the clear realizations of the four aryas are inclu ded within the three exalted 
knowers: 
 
COMMENTARY  
Thus, from the medium Mother of the Victors : “Subhuti, {49} the knowers of all are of 
hearers and solitary realizers; the knowers of the paths are of bodhisattvas; the exalted 
knowers of all aspects are of Tathagata Foe-destroy er Samyak Sambuddhas (the One-
Gone-Thus, Foe-Destroyer, Perfectly Complete Enligh tened Ones).” 
 
EXPLANATION 
Thus, from the medium Mother of the Victors , having called out, “Subhuti,” the 
knowers of all (from between (i) the support of presentation and ( ii) the support of 
generation, in terms of the first) are  clear realizations of hearers and solitary realizers; 
the knowers of the paths  (just as before, in terms of the support of presen tation that 
individually discriminates the class of clear reali zation) are  clear realizations  of 
bodhisattvas; the exalted knowers of all aspects  (according to both the supports of 
presentation and generation)  are clear realizations of Tathagata Foe-destroyer Samyak 
Sambuddhas (the one-gone-thus, foe-destroyer, perfe ctly complete enlightened 
ones)." 
 
Here, we have a citation from the medium Mother of the Victors , referring to the 20,000 stanza 
Perfection of Wisdom sutra.  
 
There are two types of support:  
1.  the support of presentation   
2.  the support of generation .  
In terms of the first, the support of presentation,  the knowers of all are clear realizations of heare rs 
and solitary realizers and the knowers of paths are  clear realizations of bodhisattvas. For the first 
two exalted knowers, the support of presentation an d generation are different, but for the exalted 
knower of all aspects, they are the same.  For the exalted knower of all aspects, the supports in 
terms of presentation and generation agree, and the  exalted knowers of all aspects are clear 
realizations of Tathagata Foe-destroyer Samyak Samb uddhas.  
• For the knower of bases , in terms of the support of presentation, we talk about hearer and 
solitary realizer aryas, but the supports of genera tion are all aryas . This pertains to the root 
text (“That which through the knower of all…”).  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 7: 10-14 March 2008 
 
27 • For the knower of paths , this is similar. In the root text (“that which th rough the knower of 
paths…”) the support of presentation are the bodhis attva aryas; they achieve the aims of the 
world. The supports of generation are all Mahayana aryas .  
• For the exalted knower of all aspects , the support of presentation and the supports of 
generation are the same; they are presented in the third line of the root text (“And through the 
perfect possession of which the subduers teach thes e varieties having all aspects”).  
 
In root text 1.1a (p. 13), “that which through the knower of all leads hearers seeking pacification to  
peace,” the knower of bases is indicated. We find t he knower of bases in the continua of hearers, 
who are explicitly indicated, and solitary realizer s, who are implicitly indicated. Hearer and solitar y 
realizer aryas are indicated as having the knower o f bases in their continuum, but they are not the 
only ones who possess the knower of bases. It is fo und in the continua of all aryas, so all aryas are 
presented as the support of generation.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 34: 
 
OPINION: Knowers of bases exist in the continua of only hearers and solitary realizers, 
and knowers of paths in the continua of only bodhis attvas. 
RESPONSE: This assertion is not at all the thought of the treatise because of the following. 
The Great Commentary says, “The subject matter that is explained, the me aning of sutras 
such as the Arya Eight Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom , the nature of 
accomplishing the mind of enlightenment, the oral i nstructions, and so forth are all 
differentiations due to divisions of the eight occa sions.”  
 Furthermore, this has been taught many times also in the commentary in the context of 
saying “No basis, no going, no production” and also  in the commentary on the truth body. 
Thus, taking the eight principal subject matters of  the eight chapters, the ten topics which 
characterize the exalted knower of all aspects, as the basis of the path, their occasions 
divided into eight, they should be practiced by Mah ayana persons. And also in this small 
commentary [Haribhadra’s Clear Meaning ], the natures of the eight clear realizations are 
taught to be objects of experience by bodhisattvas.  {50} According to him [who expressed 
the above opinion], one would have to assert that t he knower of bases was not indicated as 
the principal subject matter of the third chapter. The commentary on the truth body also 
says, “The exalted knowers of all aspects themselve s and. ” There is contradiction with the 
explanation that the term “and” indicates the knowe rs of paths and the knowers of bases 
and so forth.  
 
Here, someone says the knower of bases only exists in hearers and solitary realizers, and the knower 
of paths only in the continua of bodhisattvas. Our system’s response is that this person has not 
understood the thought of this treatise, saying, “T he Great Commentary says, ‘The subject matter 
that is explained, the meaning of sutras such as th e Arya Eight Thousand Stanza Perfection of 
Wisdom , the nature of accomplishing the mind of enlighten ment, the oral instructions, and so forth 
are all differentiations due to divisions of the ei ght occasions.’” The “eight occasions” refers to th e 
eight chapters of the Ornament for Clear Realization  (the Tibetan word, skabs,  is the same for 
“chapter” and “category”). The principal subject ma tter of these chapters is the eight categories. Our  
system’s response is that “this has been taught man y times also in the commentary in the context of 
saying ‘No basis, no going, no production’ and also  in the commentary on the truth body.” Here it 
mentions the first category, the exalted knower of all aspects, and the ten topics that characterize i t. 
Taking these ten topics as the basis of the path, “ their occasions divided into eight, they should be 
practiced by Mahayana persons. And also in this sma ll commentary [Haribhadra’s Clear Meaning ], 
the natures of the eight clear realizations are tau ght to be objects of experience by bodhisattvas.” 
These are to be practiced by bodhisattvas. One woul d have to say that bodhisattvas do not practice 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 7: 10-14 March 2008 
 
28 the knower of bases, and that the knower of bases w as not indicated as the principal subject matter 
of the third chapter. “The commentary on the truth body” refers to the eighth chapter. This person’s 
opinion would contradict the explanation that “and”  indicates the knowers of paths and the knowers 
of bases and so forth.  
 
 
END 