Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/Transcript pdf/ORN_GTTnotes_02.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:51:41.707126
================================================================================

Masters Program 2008: Ornament  
Week 2: 28 January – 1 February, 2008 
 
Masters Program 
Ornament for Clear Realization 
Notes on commentary by  Geshe Tenzin Tenphel 
 
 
Monday, 28 January 2008 
 
Sze Gee’s corrections from last week’s teachings 
 
1. Explanation of ten topics of exalted knower of all aspects:  why do Mahayana instructions come 
after Mahayana conventional generated mind? Good quality Mahayana bodhicitta = contingent 
upon hearing instructions, thus Mahayana instructions are 2nd topic.  
 
Why is 5th topic objects of observation of Mahayana achievings? One needs to  realize nature of 
mind (i.e. the 4th topic) and remove superimpositions with respect to all phenomena (5th topic).  
 
2. Explanation of “abiding in Hina yana class of realizations:”  To be similar in object of observation 
and subjective aspect to princi pal object of cultivation of Hinayana learner arya (not hearer arya).  
 
3. Criteria for attaining c ontrol over aspects of  three exalted knowers:  When you attain special 
insight on path of preparation, you observe as pects of three exalted knowers through gathering 
them. Once you are able to generate  wisdom induced by force of anal ysis observing aspects of three 
exalted knowers through gathering them, you ha ve “attained control”  over the aspects.  
 
 
Geshe Tenphel’s teachings 
 
D Difficult to address all points of doubt regardin g eight categories now, since there are many. 
In the root text, Maitreya will later address how Perfection of Wisdom is explained by these 
eight categories.  
 
Now, we will discuss the various topics that characterize the eight categories.  
 
CATEGORY 1: Exalted Knower of All Aspects (F0-0aè,-) – Ten Topics 
 
1. Mahayana conventional generated mind 
2. Mahayana instructions 
3. Mahayana path of preparation 
→ path of preparation is also called “b ranches of definite discrimination” 
4. lineage abiding in the nature, the support of  Mahayana achievings 
5. objects of observation of Mahayana achievings 
6. objects of intent of Mahayana achievings 
7. achieving of armor 
8. achieving of engagement 
9. achieving of accumulation 
10. achieving of definite issuance 
We will go through their definitions to become clearer.  
 1
Masters Program 2008: Ornament  
Week 2: 28 January – 1 February, 2008 
 
1. Mahayana conventional generated mind  
 
Definition:  a Mahayana special main mental knower part icularly distinguished by abiding in a type 
of path that serves as the door of entry to the Mahayana and that arises concomitant with an 
accompanying aspiration observing complete en lightenment for the welfare of others. 
 
Five essential components of this definition:  
1. The phrase “arises concomitant with an ac companying aspirati on observing complete 
enlightenment for the welfare of others” 
2. “serves as the door of entry to the Mahayana” 
3. “abiding in a type of path” 
4. “Mahayana” 
5. “special main mental knower” 
 
1. Conventional generated mind is usually called “ bodhicitta” or mind of enlightenment. If it is 
Mahayana generated mind, it is perv aded by “ arising concomitant with an accompanying aspiration 
observing complete enlightenment  for the welfare of others.”   
 
2. Conventional generated mind is the “ door of entry to the Mahayana .” Two reasons:  
a. If one has attained and not degenerated Mahayana generate d mind, one is in ranks of 
Mahayana. 
b. If one has not attained it, one is not in ranks of Mahayana 
It is a special main mental know er because it is special mind with these two characteristics.  
 
3. “Abiding in a type of path that se rves as door of entry to Mahayana:” why “abiding in a type of 
path”? Mahayana conventional generated mind in continuum of someone on middling Mahayana 
path of accumulation and above are Mahayana conventional generated mind, but are not door of 
entry to Mahayana—they abide in a type of path that serves as door of en try to Mahayana. Why is 
this not door of entry into Mahayana? Door = entrance; if you haven’t passed through, you are not inside. This person is in ranks of Mahayana, but this bodhicitt a is not door of en try to Mahayana.  
 
o Conventional bodhicitta of someone on small path of accumulation = door of entry to 
Mahayana, i.e. very beginning.  
o Small level of path of accumulation is powerful, but still possible at small level for bodhicitta to degenerate; from middling level and above, will not degenerate.  
 
4. “Mahayana: ” Appears twice in definition.  Is there fault if we leave it out? Consider case of 
contrived Mahayana generated mind (see below for more clarification on “contri ved”): to eliminate 
assertion that such bodhicitta is Mahayana co nventional generated mind, we need to mention 
“Mahayana” in definition.  
 
5. “Special main mental knower:” There are many mental knowers,  for ex. conception of true 
existence, conception of self, mental knowers r ealizing emptiness, self lessness, impermanence, 
sixteen aspects of four noble truths , etc. This has to be a “special ” mental knower; not sufficient just 
to be a mental knower. More discussion on this later.  
 
o In the definition, “complete enlightenment” = buddhahood.  
 
Two types of enlightenment:  
1. truth body (Skt. dharmakaya ); truth body = for one’s own welfare 
 2
Masters Program 2008: Ornament  
Week 2: 28 January – 1 February, 2008 
2. form body (Skt. rupakaya); form body = for others’ welfare  
Both are objects sought by a bodhisattva.  
Truth body = two types: 
1. Nature body ( svabhavavikakaya ) 
2. Exalted wisdom truth body ( jñanadharmakaya ) 
 
Form body = two types:  
1. Enjoyment body ( sambhogakaya) 
2. Emanation body ( nirmanakaya) 
 
Why are the two truth bodies for one’s own purpose, and the form  bodies for others’ purpose?  
o Two truth bodies are exalted bodies for one’s own purpose because in order to culminate 
one’s own purpose, these two need to be obtained.  
→ Nature body and exalted wisdom truth body: direct objects of  utilization of only 
buddhas .  
o Two form bodies perform purpose of others:  
→ enjoyment body = performs purpose of arya beings 
→ emanation body = performs purpose of ordinary beings  
→ therefore: exalted bodies for others’ purpose 
o “Enlightenment” in the definition refers to th ese two types of exalte d bodies (truth body and 
form body). 
 
Thus, in phrase, “Arising concomitant with an a ccompanying aspiration,” aspi ration is two types:  
o for one’s own purpose 
o for others’ purpose 
 
Debate: 
o “Door of entry to Mahayana:” generally, conventional bodhicitta or small path of 
accumulation = door of entry to Mahayana, but if it is a Mahayana conventional generated 
mind, does it have to be door of entry to Mahayana? No, e.g. conve ntional bodhicitta in 
continuum of someone on middling path of accumulation and above is not door of entry to 
Mahayana.  
o If it is conventional bodhicitta in continuum of some one on small level of path of 
accumulation, does not have to be door of entry to Mahayana. For ex., conventional 
bodhicitta in continuum of a specific Indian or  European person on small level of path of 
accumulation. They are not doors of  entry to Mahayana, because some have entered ranks of 
Mahayana but have not attained  the conventiona l bodhicitta of this Indian or European. 
Small level of path of accumulation is door to Mahayana, but we are not talking about a 
particularity, i.e. conventional bodhicitta in continuum of a particular person.  
o Conventional bodhicitta = door of entry to Mahayana, because if person has conventional 
bodhicitta in continuum, is bodhisattva; otherwise, one is not  a bodhisattva. But to enter 
ranks of Mahayana, do not need to attain c onventional bodhicitta that is in continuum of this 
particular Indian bodhisattva . No need to generate every bodhicitta (i.e. of different people) 
in order to become bodhisattva.  
→ Another example: when one takes ceremony of bhikshus (fully ordained monks), vows 
are same for everyone, but the vows they obt ain are different for each individual.  
 
Uncontrived bodhicitta  
o Not possible to generate uncontrived  bodhicitta before small level of path of accumulation; 
when we take initiations, etc., we generate contrived bodhicitta.  
o Conventional bodhicitta must be uncontrived; contrived bodhicitta  is not bodhicitta. 
 3
Masters Program 2008: Ornament  
Week 2: 28 January – 1 February, 2008 
→ contrived = you must make effort to generate it 
→ uncontrived = generated wit hout effort, naturally, no need to think about it  
 
Boundary of Mahayana conventional generated mind:  small Mahayana path of accumulation 
through buddha ground.  
 
 
2. Mahayana instructions 
 
Definition:  Mahayana speech that teaches a method fo r attaining the objects of striving of a 
Mahayana generated mind.  
 
o Mahayana generated mind in definition = same as first topic 
o Object of striving = enlightenment  
o Mahayana speech that teaches method = Mahayana precepts  
 
Meaning of Mahayana speech:  speech taught only for trainees w ho are objects of intent who are 
Mahayana practitioners. If trainees who are objects of intent ar e both Hinayana and Mahayana, 
speech is “common to Hinayana and Mahayana;” if trainees are only  Hinayana practitioners, it is 
“Hinayana speech” or “Hin ayana instructions.”  
 
o Here, Mahayana instructions pos ited from point of view of lis teners, not point of view of 
explainer. Buddha taught three wheels of Dhar ma, in which there are instructions for both 
Hinayana and Mahayana practiti oners, but Buddha is Mahayana.  
 
Boundary:  from before entering a path through the buddha ground.  
 
Speech belongs to continuum of some person, so we can posit boundaries based on where this 
person is. Boundaries of Mahayana instructions are boundaries of speaker of Mahayana 
instructions. E.g. someone who has not entered path may recite Heart Sutra, Ornament, etc. 
Instructions do not necessarily have to be spoken to anyone, e.g. when someone recites scriptures to 
no one in particular.  
 
o If we explain to a bodhisattva how, e.g., to make food, use MP3, etc., it is not Mahayana 
instructions, because does not teach Dharma.  
o “Mahayana speech” = from point of view of re cipient of instructions; boundaries = from 
point of view of explainer.  
 
 
Possible doubts re. conventional bodhicitta:  
 
o Mind seeking enlightenment in a buddha arya. He has attained enlightenment, but also seeks 
enlightenment—why? Because seeks enlightenment  of others. Mind seeking separation from 
suffering also exists in continuum of a buddha arya, although he has separated from suffering; this wish is to separate other sentient beings from suffering.  
o In continuum of arya buddha, there is mind se eking others’ purpose and mind seeking one’s 
own purpose. Why is there mind seeking one’s own purpose in buddha arya? Because he has 
mind seeking exalted body for one’s own purpose ; this is because an arya buddha has the 
wish to attain for others  the exalted body for one’ s own purpose. The b uddha has attained the 
exalted body, but here the seeking is  for others, not for himself.  
 4
Masters Program 2008: Ornament  
Week 2: 28 January – 1 February, 2008 
Tuesday, 29 January 2008 
 
 
Questions and answers 
 
Difference between “cultivating th ree exalted knowers” and “cultiva ting aspects of three exalted 
knowers” (in definition of peak application)? 
 
It’s just an abbreviate d way of saying it. However, there are three exalted knowers,  while there are 
173 aspects.  
 
Is there something that is instant aneous application and knower of bases? 
 
No. Instantaneous application must be direct antidote to knowledge obstructions. An instantaneous 
application necessarily directly real izes emptiness, so is pervaded by not being knower of bases. 
Definitions of all four divisions of instantaneous application have phrase “bodhisattva’s yoga that is 
direct antidote to knowledge obstructions.” In general,  instantaneous applicati on is knower of paths, 
application in complete aspects, and peak application. Instantaneous  application is an uninterrupted 
path. If it is a knower of  bases, it must be involved with one of the sixteen attributes of four noble 
truths. Instantaneous application does not abide in Hinaya na class of realizations.  
 
What’s the difference between “exalt ed wisdom” and “clear realization”? 
 
“Exalted wisdom,” “clear realization,” and “exalted knower” all mean the same thing.  
 
Why do we say “in the continuum of the person who possesses it in his c ontinuum” [in definitions 
of knower of paths and knower of bases]? 
 
This refers to exalted knower being in continuum  of person who possesses it in his continuum. “It” 
refers to knower of paths [or knower of base s]. There’s no problem if we leave out “in the 
continuum of the person who po ssesses it in his continuum.” 
 
 
Continuing with ten topics of exalted knower of all aspects:  
 
3. Mahayana path of preparation  
 
Definition:  A Mahayana mundane path that abides in a class of clear realizations that arise 
subsequent to the completion of the partial concor dance with liberation and is concordant with a 
clear realization of the truth. 
 
o “Partial concordance with liberation”  = Mahayana path of accumulation  
o Clear realization of truth = br ief explanation of path of s eeing; path of preparation is 
concordant with path of seeing  
o Mahayana mundane path: Mahayana pa th of preparati on is necessarily Mahayana mundane 
path, but not necessarily a mundane path  (mundane = not a path of aryas).  
→ For example, a Hinayana foe destroyer can la ter attain Mahayana pa th of preparation; 
this would be a Mahayana mundane path (b ecause he has not atta ined Mahayana arya 
path), but not a mundane path (be cause it is supramundane path).  
 
 
 5
Masters Program 2008: Ornament  
Week 2: 28 January – 1 February, 2008 
4. Lineage abiding in the nature, the support of Mahayana achievings 
 
Definition:  The common locus of that which is the dha rmata in the continuum of a bodhisattva and 
that which acts as the actual supporting basis of Mahayana achievings.  
 
o dharmata = emptiness 
o there are many dharmatas in the continuum of  a bodhisattva. In con tinuum of bodhisattva, 
there are things that are Mahayana achievin gs and things which aren’t achievings.  
→ Achievings: compassion, love, real ization of emptiness, etc. 
→ Not achievings: conception of tr ue existence, conception of self, things of class of 
afflictions   
→ Dharmata means same as emptiness, ultima te truth, suchness, dharmadhatu, final mode 
of abidance 
 
In continuum of bodhisattva, there is a conception of  true existence. We can speak of dharmata of 
this conception of true ex istence in the continuum of the bodhisattva.  Does this act as  actual basis of 
Mahayana achievings? It is a supporti ng basis of Mahayana achievings, but not actual supporting 
basis of Mahayana achievings. To be actual supporting basis of Maha yana achievings, must support 
Mahayana achieving. A conception of true existence is not Mahayana achieving.  
 
o Is dharmata of conception of self in cont inuum of bodhisattva a dha rmata of Mahayana 
achieving? No, because is not the nature (dharmata) of a Mahayana achieving.  
o Lineage abiding in the nature is same  as buddha lineage and Mahayana lineage. 
 
Boundary:  From path of accumulation through end of continuum of a sentient being. 
 
 
5. Object of observation of Mahayana achievings 
 
Definition:  A basis of elimination of superi mpositions by a Mahayana achieving. 
 
o What is elimination of superimpositions? To recognize superimpositions, we need to ask, “is 
it permanent, impermanent, does it exist from  its own side, etc.?, ” like a scientist.  
 
Superimposition  = saying that something which doesn’t exist exists.  
o Ex.: conception of true existence, conception of self, of permanence, that  we won’t die, etc.  
o Also anger, attachment, etc. are superimpositions.  
→ Attachment imputes something as more attractive than it is.  
→ Anger imputes qualities inferi or to that which it has. 
o Not all superimpositions are wrong consciousnesses1  
o All appearances to ordinary beings are inco rrect and to be refu ted. If something good 
appears (to an ordinary being), it can appear  as not good, or something very good appears as 
not good, etc.  
o But no need to refute objects; the problem is  the mode of appearance. By improving mind, 
one can elevate oneself to arya state. 
 
Boundary:  exists on whatever is an established base  
 
                                                 
1 i.e. they are not mistaken with regard to their objects of engagement, although they may be mistaken with regard to the 
way the object appears.  
 6
Masters Program 2008: Ornament  
Week 2: 28 January – 1 February, 2008 
o Established base:  that which is established by a valid cognizer. Esta blished base is the same 
as “existent.” Valid cognizers can exist in continuum of ordinary beings or aryas.  
 
 
6. Object of intent of Mahayana achievings 
 
Definition:  The final result that is the object of intent for which one engages. 
 
o Object of intent = object that you seek, i.e.  for what purpose do we engage in Mahayana 
achievings? To obtain the final result.  
 
Boundary:  exists only on the buddha ground. 
 
 
7. Achieving of armor 
 
Definition:  A bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined with an ex tensive attitude desiring to practice 
inclusively the six perfections, generosity and so forth, in their entirety within each of the six 
perfections. 
 
o Armor = we wear armor when we go into battle; this is armor for the mind.  
o In battle, we cover entire body for protection, not just part of it. Similar to bodhisattva’s 
practice of six perfec tions: when we practice generosity , possible that we don’t practice 
ethics, etc.; here, all six are included, to stop all types of faults  
o Ex. with generosity:  
1. generosity of generosity:  roots of virtue created through ge nerosity are then  given. If one 
gives a substance to someone else, one shoul d not hold on to the roots of virtue, e.g. 
“May I become wealthy,” etc., but offer roots of virtue to others. 
2. ethics of generosity:  avoiding miserly states of mind, e.g. to regret giving something.  
3. patience of generosity:  one practices patience, not ge tting angry if someone doesn’t 
appreciate offering, feels it’s too small.  
4. joyous effort of generosity:  done regardless of hardship, i.e. with enthusiasm 
5. concentration of generosity:  undistracted mind when giving 
6. wisdom of generosity:  wisdom realizing substance, giver,  and recipient are empty of true 
existence at time of giving. Best kind of wisdom.  
 
o Achieving of armor: not prac ticing sequentially, but practici ng all together, i.e. when 
practicing generosity, other perfections are practiced.  
o Nobody can practice this right from beginni ng; comes from training. The word ( sgom ) 
translated as “cultivate,” “meditate,” means to familiarize. Eventually becomes easier 
through power of familiarization.  
o Before attaining Mahayana path of accumulation, there is practice of ge nerosity, generosity 
of generosity, etc., but no armor of achieving. One attains achieving of armor when attains 
path of accumulation. This is result of training prior to Mahayana path of accumulation.  
o Once you attain this achieving, still much more  to be done. As you proceed through paths, 
afflictions become weaker as perfections become stronger. 
 
Three kinds of practitioners who enga ge in correct way (“three scopes”) 
1. Small scope:  can engage in generosity to attain good rebirth as human being or a god 
2. Middling scope:  able to practice small scope, not merely for good rebirth but for sake of 
attaining liberation from cyclic existence.  
 7
Masters Program 2008: Ornament  
Week 2: 28 January – 1 February, 2008 
3. Great scope:  trains in small scope, not for good rebirt h or liberation, but to train in middle 
scope and great scope, i.e. to attain enlight enment. On occasion of small scope, practices 
generosity, etc.  
 
 8
Masters Program 2008: Ornament  
Week 2: 28 January – 1 February, 2008 
Wednesday, 30 January 2008 (morning) 
 
 
8. Achieving of engagement  
 
Definition:  A bodhisattva’s yoga practicing an  application in some type of quality of Mahayana 
cause and effect by means of mainly joyous effort. 
 
o “Mahayana cause:” for ex., meditative stabil ization of form realm concentrations and 
formless absorptions, practice of six perfections , four immeasurables, etc. Later, we’ll go 
through nine divisions. 
o “Mahayana effect:” there are many, but final result = enlightenment.  
 
Involves strong union of calm abid ing and special insight. For so meone definite in Mahayana 
lineage, meditative stabilization of union of calm abiding and special insight is newly attained on 
heat level of path of preparation.  
 
o In 1st chapter, four topics are set aside for extensive discussion. Jetsun Chogyi Gyeltsen 
(Sera Je textbook author) explained them: 
1. Concentrations and formless absorptions 
2. Dependent-arising 
3. Twenty sangha  
4. Interpretable and definitive meanings 
 
In the topic, there is an explan ation of achieving of engagement. 
 
 
9. Achieving of accumulation 
 
Definition:  A bodhisattva’s yoga that surpasses the midd ling level of supreme mundane quality of 
the Mahayana path of prepara tion and below by way of being c onjoined with the two extensive 
accumulations and issues forth great enlightenment as its result. 
 
Two accumulations:  merit and exalted wisdom  
o Accumulation of merit: mainly deposits imprint of form body 
o Accumulation of exalted wisdom: main imprint of truth body  
 
“Surpasses the middling level of supreme mundane quality…:”  However, the two accumulations of 
merit and wisdom do exist on the lower levels (path of accumula tion, heat, peak, forbearance of 
path of preparation, and lower leve l of supreme mundane quality).  
 
o Need to create accumulation over three countless great eons:  
→ 1st eon: paths of accumulation and preparation 
→ 2nd eon: first seven (impure) grounds 
→ 3rd eon: three pure grounds (eighth, ninth, tenth) 
 
On Mahayana path of accumulation, we have to say there are two extensive accumulations. Not 
really comfortable to say otherwise.  
 
From point of view of 1st eon of accumulation:  
→ at middling level of supreme mundane quality of path of preparation, 1st eon not completed.  
 9
Masters Program 2008: Ornament  
Week 2: 28 January – 1 February, 2008 
→ when one reaches great level, accumulation of 1st eon is completed.  
 
 
10. Achieving of definite issuance 
 
Definition:  A yoga of the pure grounds that undoubtedly issues forth an exalted knower of all 
aspects. 
 
o Undoubtedly = definitely 
 
Boundaries for last three achievings:  
→ Achieving of engagement:  exists from the heat level of the Mahayana path of preparation 
through the end of the conti nuum [of a sentient being] 
→ Achieving of accumulation:  exists from the great level of the supreme mundane quality of 
the Mahayana path of preparation through the end of contin uum [of a sentient being] 
→ Achieving of definite issuance:  exists on the three pure grounds 
 
Sequence of four achievings:
Presented from point of view of  accomplishment, or practice.  
1. achieving of armor : inclusive practice of six perfectio ns; through power of this, one attains 
2. union of calm abiding and special insight, and achieving of engagement ; this becomes 
stronger, and one attains  
3. achieving of accumulation ; this becomes str onger, one achieves  
4. achieving of definite issuance , which issues forth enlightenment.  
 
o In general , four achievings are cause and effect (sequentially), but not necessarily true if we 
look at particulars . For example, in general, small path  of accumulation is cause of middling 
path of accumulation; but if it is a small path of accumulation, it is not pervaded by being 
cause of middling path of accumulation. 
→ Cause and effect: effect depends on cause. Therefore, cause is indispensable.  
o Ex: small path of accumulation in continuum of an Indian bodhisattva is not cause of middling path of accumulation, because there are cases of attainment of middling path of 
accumulation that do not depend on this, such as a European person who attains middling path of accumulation.  
o Point = know difference between generals and part icularities; will help to eliminate doubts.  
 
 
CATEGORY 2: Knower of Paths (:0-;è<-) – Eleven Topics  
 
Eleven topics:  
1. branches of a knower of paths 
2. knower of paths knowing hearers’ paths 
3. knower of paths knowing so litary realizers’ paths  
4. Mahayana path of seeing 
5. function of a Mahayana path of meditation 
6. Mahayana path of meditation of belief 
7. benefits of a Mahayana path of meditation of belief 
8. path of meditation of dedication 
9. path of meditation of rejoicing 
10. path of meditation of achieving 
 10
Masters Program 2008: Ornament  
Week 2: 28 January – 1 February, 2008 
11. path of meditation of purity 
 
 
1. branches of a knower of paths 
 
Definition:  A special excellent quality conj oined with great compassion that is included in either the 
cause, entity, or result of a knower of paths. 
 
o “Cause” of knower of paths: e.g. great compassion, conventional bodhicitta, Mahayana path 
of accumulation, heat, peak, forbearance leve ls of path of accumulation, etc.  
o “Entity” = knower of paths itself 
o “Result” = omniscience 
 
Boundary:  exists from having awakened the Mahayana lineage through the buddha ground 
 
“Awakening Mahayana lineage” = ge nerating great compassion. One is still not a “Mahayanist” at 
this point. When one attains uncontrived conventional bodhicitta , one enters Mahayana path and 
attains small path of accumulation. 
 
o Meaning of Mahayanist : not (just) someone who holds Ma hayana tenets. Is someone who 
holds madhyamika tenets Mahayani st? Can be, but not necessarily.  
o Difference between “Mahayana propounder” and “Mahayanist”: Mahayana propounder 
holds Mahayana tenets, Mahayanist has entered Mahayana path  (i.e. generated uncontrived 
conventional bodhicitta) 
o Same criteria for “Hinayana propounder” and “Hinayanist” 
 
 
2. Knower of paths knowing hearers’ paths 
 
Definition : A Mahayana arya’s exalted knower that —by means of being conjoi ned with the three, 
the generated mind, dedication, and the wisdom realizing emptiness —abides in a class of clear 
realizations of what is to be known in order to lead trainees who are hearer lineage-bearers. 
 
o Knowing hearer’s paths: hearer ’s paths, e.g. exalted knower directly realizi ng selflessness. 
Knower of paths knowing this path exists in continuum of Mahayana arya. for what 
purpose? To lead trainees w ho are hearer lineage-bearers. 
o How does it “know” hearer’s paths? In our system , to know is to generate the path in one’s 
continuum.  
o Exalted knower directly realizing selflessness = hearer’s path. A hearer path does not 
necessarily exist in c ontinuum of a hearer. 
o “In order to lead trainees who are hearer lineage-bearers:” when do hearer lineage-bearers 
exist? Even before hearer path of accumulation, there are hearer lineage-bearers; they are led 
to hearer path of accumulation.  
 
Boundary:  exists from the Mahayana path of seeing through the buddha ground 
 
 
3. Knower of paths knowing solitary realizers’ paths 
 
 11
Masters Program 2008: Ornament  
Week 2: 28 January – 1 February, 2008 
Definition:  A Mahayana arya’s exalted knower that—by means of being conjoined with the three 
attributes—abides in a class of clear real izations of what is to be know n in order to lead trainees 
who are solitary realiz er lineage-bearers.  
 
→ “Three attributes” = generated mind, dedica tion, and the wisdom realizing emptiness 
 
Boundary:  exists from the Mahayana path of seeing through the buddha ground (same as knower of 
paths knowing hearers’ paths) 
 
o Solitary realizers do not need to realize emp tiness, but for bodhisattvas to care for solitary 
realizers, this is conjoined with genera ted mind, dedication, an d wisdom realizing 
emptiness. 
o Whatever Mahayana arya does—teaching, prac ticing generosity, etc.—is conjoined with 
these three attributes. But this Mahayana ar ya does not necessarily need to explain the 
wisdom realizing emptiness, e.g. to solitary realizers.  
o For knower of paths to know hearers’ paths in excellent way, is conjoined with these three 
attributes: 
1. Mind seeks enlightenment for others’ sake 
2. dedication for others’ welfare in order to care for trainees 
3. wisdom realizing emptiness abandons knowledge obstructions, in order to care for 
others.  
→ No activity of Mahayana arya is not conjoined with these three attributes 
 
 
4. Mahayana path of seeing 
 
Definition:  A Mahayana clear realization of truth conj oined with the wisdom directly realizing 
emptiness in the continuum of the pe rson who possesses it in his continuum.  
 
o Possible (briefer) definition: Mahayana clear realization of  truth (without the rest of 
definition). 
o Path that newly, direc tly sees the truth.  
 
Boundary:  exists only on the Ma hayana path of seeing. 
 
 
Proceeding through the ten grounds   
 
(see Chart 2: “Path of someone definite in the Mahayana lineage: Svatantrika-Madhyamaka”)  
 
o When we attain 1st ground, we attain the uninterrupted path of path of seeing.  
→ Lasts a very short time.  
→ Direct antidote to acquired conception of true existence.  
o In second instant, attain liberated path . 
→ On liberated path, one has attained sepa ration from acquired conception of true 
existence.  
→ A job has been completed: no need to abide for long time in this meditative equipoise.  
o Next instant, arise in subsequent attainment, which lasts a very long time.  
→ One accumulates merit, trains in meditative st abilization, trains in dexterity of wisdom 
realizing emptiness, etc.  
o When accumulation of merit is sufficient:  
 12
Masters Program 2008: Ornament  
Week 2: 28 January – 1 February, 2008 
→ bodhisattva’s meditative equipoise becomes direct antidote to gross level of great/great 
afflictions that are objects of abandonment 
→ Attains second uninterrupted path of first ground (this is also uninterrupted path of path 
of meditation )  
→ This lasts one instant (las t instant of first ground)  
o Next instant:  
→ Liberated path of path of meditation 
→ Beginning of 2nd ground  
o Next instant:  
→ Subsequent attainment (very long): e xplaining Dharma, practicing meditative 
stabilization, etc. 
o Last instant of 2nd ground:  
→ Uninterrupted path of second ground  
→ Direct antidote to subtle  levels of great/great con ception of true existence  
o Next instant: liberated path of 3rd ground.  
→ Two levels of objects of abandonment ha ve been abandoned (on first two grounds) 
→ Eight more levels to be abandoned 
o Third through tenth grounds are similar 
o Last instant of tenth ground:  
→ Uninterrupted path at end of continuum of sentient being 
→ Direct antidote to small/small conceptions of true existence 
→ Next instant: enlightenment (exalted knower of all aspects) 
 
o when first attain first gro und, attain uninterrupted path 
o when first attain second ground, attain liberated path  
o last instant of each ground = uninterrupted path 
 
Last moment of first ground : bodhisattva enters meditative  equipoise on emptiness, after 
accumulating merit, etc. When accumulation is sufficient, enters meditativ e equipoise, directly 
realizes emptiness, but does not immediately gene rate uninterrupted path. After time, transforms 
into entity of uninterrupted path, the direct antidote to gross level of  great/great conceptions of true 
existence.  
→ Direct antidote to gross of great/great conceptions of true existence has to be uninterrupted 
path. 
 
 
5. Function of a Mahayana path of meditation 
 
Definition:  A benefit attained through the force of cultivating the Mahayana path of meditation 
which is the method for attaining it. 
 
Boundary:  exists from the second instant of cultivati ng the Mahayana path of meditation through 
the buddha ground. 
 
→ “Exists from second instant of cultivating the Mahayana path of meditation:” this is a liberated path . Benefit attained throu gh the force = attained from second instant.   
→ Mahayana path of meditation = method for atta ining it, i.e. what acts to attain it.  
→ Through force of cultivating Mahayana path  of meditation, one attains function of 
Mahayana path of meditation 
 
 
 13
Masters Program 2008: Ornament  
Week 2: 28 January – 1 February, 2008 
Wednesday, 30 January 2008 (afternoon) 
 
D For studies to go well: need to make prayers to eliminate obstacles, dedicate roots of virtue 
from listening to teachings to complete studies and benefit others.  
D Too many doubts not good; hindrance to achieving goal. 
D Great texts: “eye-opener;” one becomes scholar, able to practice well. 
D Skilled person’s negativities are lighter, becaus e is able to confess and restrain from 
negative actions; foolish person unable to confes s, restrain, negativities become heavier.  
 
 
6. Mahayana path of meditation of belief 
 
Definition:  A Mahayana subsequent clear realization c onvinced that the Mothers are the source of 
the three welfares. 
 
o Three welfares: oneself , others, and of both 
o “Belief:” connotation = desire, aspiration; it is a conviction 
o Mothers = words of the Moth er Perfection of Wisdom  
 
Boundary:  exists from the first ground through the e nd of the continuum [of a sentient being] 
 
 
7. Benefits of a Mahayana path  of meditation of belief 
 
Definition:  An excellent quality attained through the force of cultivating the path of meditation of 
belief which is the method for attaining it. 
 
o Benefits: what is attain ed through cultivating path  of meditation of belief 
 
Boundary:  exists from the second instant of cultivati ng the path of meditation of belief through the 
buddha ground 
 
 
8. Path of meditation of dedication 
 
Definition:  A conceptual Mahayana subsequent clea r realization —apprehending sound generalities 
and meaning generalities as suitable to be mixed —that acts to transform either one’s own or others’ 
roots of virtue into a branch  of complete enlightenment. 
 
o This is conception, not direct perceiver 
o Apprehends sound generalities and meaning generalities as suitable to be mixed 
o Is contaminated path of meditation, becau se it is conceptual  
 
Boundary:  exists from the first ground through the e nd of the continuum [of a sentient being] 
 
→ Within this boundary, there is also meditative e quipoise—uninterrupted pa ths that are direct 
perceivers and liberated paths that are direct perceivers 
→ This conception is not necessarily manifest  
 
 14
Masters Program 2008: Ornament  
Week 2: 28 January – 1 February, 2008 
o If we say that “If it exists in continuum of a person, it must be manifest,” then on occasions 
of uninterrupted and liberated paths, there would not be conventional b odhicitta and there 
would be a bodhisattva without bodhicitta in his continuum.  
o Therefore, if a mind exists in a person, it is not necessarily manifest  
 
 
9. Path of meditation of rejoicing 
 
Definition:  A conceptual Mahayana subsequent clea r realization —apprehending sound generalities 
and meaning generalities as  suitable to be mixed —that cultivates joy in e ither one’s own or others’ 
roots of virtue. 
 
o If it apprehends sound generalitie s and meaning generalities as suitable to be mixed, it is 
necessarily a conception.  
D In context of path of meditation of rejoicing, rejoicing in on e’s own or others’ roots of virtue 
is mentioned; we should all do this, instead of  becoming jealous of others. Doesn’t involve 
hardship, but creates great merit.  
 
 
10. Path of meditation of achieving 
 
Definition:  An uncontaminated Mahayana subsequent clear  realization that deposits an imprint for 
the final realization which is  its object of attainment. 
 
o “Final realization” = exalted wisdom, i.e. exalted knower of all aspects   
→ In eighth topic, one dedicates 
→ in ninth, one rejoices 
→ in tenth, one practices (or “achieves”) 
 
 
11. Path of meditation of purity   
 
Definition:  An uncontaminated Mahayana subsequent clear  realization that deposits an imprint for 
the final abandonment which is its object of attainment.  
 
o “Final abandonment” = non-abiding nirvana in continuum of a buddha arya (we can just say 
“non-abiding nirvana”) 
o It is a final abandonment, but not an abandonment; it is object of attainment. 
 
→ Uncontaminated path of medita tion necessarily directly real izes emptiness, but does not 
have to be meditative equipoise  (see following discussion).  
 
Three divisions of path of meditation:  
 
1. exalted wisdom of meditative e quipoise of path of meditation. Divided into: 
a. exalted wisdom of uninterrupted path 
b. exalted wisdom of liberated path 
c. exalted wisdom of meditative equipo ise that is neither of those two 
2. exalted wisdom of subsequent attainment  
3. path of meditation that is neither medi tative equipoise nor subsequent attainment   
 
 15
Masters Program 2008: Ornament  
Week 2: 28 January – 1 February, 2008 
1. Exalted wisdom of meditative eq uipoise of path of meditation  
o Uninterrupted paths and liberated paths were  explained before (see pp. 12-13 and Chart 2) 
o Exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise that is  neither uninterrupted pa th nor liberated path:  
When one attains the 2nd ground, one is on liberated path; one then enters subsequent 
attainment and can enter meditative equipoise  again. As long as me ditative equipoise does 
not become uninterrupted path, it is neither uninterrupted path nor liberated path. This also 
occurs on rest of the gr ounds, up to buddha ground.  
 
2. Exalted wisdom of subsequent attainment   
o Occurs after arising from liberated path; e .g. bodhicitta during subsequent attainment.   
 
3. path of meditation that is neither med itative equipoise nor subsequent attainment  
o For ex., conventional bodhicitta on uninterrupted path of path  of meditation of bodhisattva; 
or conventional bodhicitta on occasion of liberated path; or direct realiz ation of emptiness in 
continuum of bodhisattva in subsequent attainment.  
→ Conventional bodhicitta in the continuum of someone on uninte rrupted path of path of 
meditation is not uninterrupted path, liberated pat h, or subsequent attainment.  
→ Such bodhicitta is necessarily non-manifest  
→ If it is an uninterrupted path or a liberated path, it must be manifest . 
o Uninterrupted path = direct antidote to object of abandonment, so is manifest.  
o Liberated path = state of direct ab andonment, so must be manifest.  
 
Further discussion:  
 
o Exalted wisdom of subsequent attainment: a manifest clear realization on occasion of 
subsequent attainment  
o Direct realization of emptiness on occasion of subsequent at tainment is neither exalted 
wisdom of meditative equipoise nor exalted wi sdom of subsequent attainment, because is 
not manifest.   
o If direct realization of emptin ess in continuum of person during subsequent attainment were 
manifest, this person would not be in subseque nt attainment, but in meditative equipoise. 
o During liberated path of 2nd ground, there is a direct realization of emptiness; when one 
arises into subsequent attainment, one has a non-manifest realization of emptiness.  
o When a Mahayana arya is not in meditative equi poise, i.e. in subsequent attainment, there is 
pervasion that a non-manifest direct rea lization of emptiness exists.  
 
o Difference between a sentient being and a buddha:   
For buddha, exalted wisdom of meditative equi poise and subsequent attainment are not 
contradictory, for sentient being, they are. Se ntient being hasn’t abandoned stains that 
obscure direct realizatio n of two truths simultaneously (if ha s manifest direct  realization of 
conventional truth, cannot have manifest direct  realization of emptin ess, and vice versa). 
→ On uninterrupted path of path of medita tion, mind single-pointedly, directly realizes 
emptiness. Dualistic appearances have vanished for this mind (appearances of 
conventionalities, appearances of true existence, or appearances of objects and object-
possessors as different entities).  
→ This exalted wisdom only realizes emptiness, nothing else; no appearances of 
conventionalities, true existence, etc.  
→ Exalted wisdom of buddha arya realizes all objects of knowledge; very big difference 
between mind of sentient being and mind of buddha. 
 
Contaminated path of meditation  = conceptual path of meditation 
 16
Masters Program 2008: Ornament  
Week 2: 28 January – 1 February, 2008 
Uncontaminated path of meditation  = non-conceptual path of meditation  
 
D We ordinary beings need to ab andon coarse afflictions before s ubtle afflictions, and then the 
seeds of those afflictions. Intellectually we unde rstand that anger, etc., are to be abandoned, 
but seems “beneficial” when arises, e.g. when we  want to get rid of an irritating person.  
D On 1st, 2nd grounds, etc., our attention becomes very sh arp; no need to worry that we won’t 
notice when we attain a ground!  
 
o On Chart 2: Blank space between liberated paths and uninterrupted paths is not all 
subsequent attainment. It can also be meditative  equipoise that is neith er uninterrupted path 
nor liberated path.  
o On Mahayana path of seeing, not necessary fo r meditative equipoise to directly realize 
emptiness. For ex., meditative equipoise that is neither uninterrupted pa th nor liberated path 
can meditate on selflessness, emptiness of duality, etc. for sake of taking care of trainees.  
o Length of time to attain buddhahood in this pr esentation is according to sutra system, not 
tantra—three great countless eons is very long .  
 
 
The two types of objects of abandonment:  
 
1. Afflictive obstructions 
2. Knowledge obstructions 
 
Both divided into:  
1. acquired  
2. innate  
 
o Acquired knowledge obstructions are abandoned by a single uninte rrupted path (i.e. of the 
path of seeing).  
o Innate knowledge obstructions are divided into three: great, middling, small, each of which 
is sub-divided into three (great into g/m/s, mi ddling into g/m/s, small into g/m/s), giving us 
nine.  
o 1st of innate knowledge obstructions (great/great) divided into coarse/subtle. This gives us 
ten levels.  
o 1st ground = path of seeing and path of meditation 
o ten uninterrupted paths on path of meditation correspond to ten levels of innate knowledge 
obstructions. Smallest antidotes abandon the grea ter afflictions, gradua lly greater antidotes 
abandon smaller (i.e. more  subtle) afflictions.  
→ Analogy:  when washing clothes, coarse stains come out just by shaking; for subtler 
stains, we need to wash in water; subtlest stains require detergent.  
 
 17
Masters Program 2008: Ornament  
Week 2: 28 January – 1 February, 2008 
Thursday, 31 January 2008  
 
D Although we’re not directly discussing the m eaning of Gyeltsab Je’s commentary, by 
discussing the seventy topics, we are discussing the main subjects of his commentary. 
 
CATEGORY 3: Knower of Bases (#5Ü-;è<-) – 9 Topics  
1. knower of paths not abiding in cyclic existence through knowing 
2. knower of paths not abiding in solitary peace through compassion 
3. knower of bases that is distant from the re sultant Mother 
4. knower of bases that is n ear to the resultant Mother 
5. knower of bases of the discordant class 
6. knower of bases of the antidotal class 
7. applications of a bodhisattva indicated in the context of the knower of bases 
8. equality of the applications of a bodhisattva indicated in the context of the knower of bases 
9. path of seeing explicitly indicated in this context 
 
 
1. Knower of paths not abiding in cyclic existence through knowing 
 
Definition:  A Mahayana arya’s exalted knower abiding in  a class of realizations that stops the 
extreme of cyclic existence re lative to a conventional base. 
 
o Cyclic existence = samsara (two words in tib. – srid pa (existence) and ‘khor ba)  
o “stopping extreme of cyclic existence:”  
→ One circles in samsara through force of karma/afflictions  
→ We can trace this back to ignorance,  i.e. Conception of self of persons: root of cyclic 
existence  
→ Direct realization of selflessn ess of persons stops cyclic existence, i.e. Stop taking 
rebirth in cyclic existence th rough power of karma/afflictions 
o Cyclic existence: connect from life to life through force of karma/afflictions 
o Location of cyclic existence  = various realms: lowest hell th rough peak of cyclic existence  
o Easy to be born in hell realms; someone dies without having made effort in virtue, etc.; no 
beginning to samsara; don’t know how much negativity we’ve collected 
o If we examine our present actions: virtue is  weak, non-virtue strong, despite knowing that 
non-virtue is bad. Easy to think we have no ne gativities because we st udy dharma, etc., but 
need to check motivation and dedicate pr operly. Difficult to do good quality dharma 
practice; we forget about non-virtues from past lives. 
o Stopping rebirth in hell realms: do we have 100% confidence of not falling into hell realms 
at time of death? If we ha ve doubts, should avoid ten non-vi rtues, practice ten virtues 
o Need good practice of ethics ; then can train in meditative stabilization , then wisdom  that 
stops cyclic existence.  
 
“Realization that stops extreme of cyclic existence relative to  conventional base:”  exalted 
wisdom directly realizing selflessn ess. Must be exalted knower in continuum of Mahayana arya.   
o “conventional base” refers to cy clic existence; refers to person who abides in cyclic 
existence relative to a conventional base.   
o What is “relative to ultimate base”? Woul d refer to person bound by conception of true 
existence, who abides in cyclic exis tence relative to an ultimate base. 
 18
Masters Program 2008: Ornament  
Week 2: 28 January – 1 February, 2008 
o As humans in desire realm, our lives are very short. In Tushita realm, in time of one 
morning, babies in our realm would become old people.  
 
 
2. Knower of paths not abiding in solitary peace through compassion 
 
Definition:  A Mahayana arya’s exalted knower abiding in  a class of realizations that stops the 
extreme of solitary peace rela tive to a conventional base. 
 
o Why doesn’t one abide in solitary peace ? Through force of great compassion.  
o Ex. of knower of paths not ab iding in solitary peace through compassion = great compassion 
in continuum of Mahayana arya.  
o Why are first two topics  of knower of bases called “knower of paths”?  
→ Knower of bases = main method for p acifying suffering, attaining nirvana  
→ In dependence on knower of bases, one attains nirvana  
→ Necessary to have compassion, because without it, one falls into extreme of solitary 
peace  
o Third chapter describes path of Ma hayana practitioner, one who should not abide in solitary 
peace 
 
Entering Hinayana vs. entering Mahayana  
o One person enters Hinayana path, atta ins Hinayana foe destroyer state  
o Another is born in hell realm, later become s free from hell realms and enters Mahayana 
o Second person is said to attain buddhahood ear lier—why? First person takes longer time 
because when one attains state of Hinayana foe-destroyer, one is captivated by bliss of nirvana, enters meditative equipoise that last s many eons. While foe-destroyer is absorbed in 
meditation, Mahayana person proceeds through various paths and levels.  
 
If two enter Mahayana path at same time: (1) Hinayana foe-destroyer an d (2) ordinary being  
→ foe-destroyer will take longer time to attain enlightenment 
→ ordinary being will attain enlightenment fi rst, because foe-destroyer sometimes enters 
meditative equipoise for long time.  
 
Boundaries of first two topics:  from the Mahayana path of seeing through the buddha ground 
 
Next four topics are divisions of knower of bases. 
 
 
3. Knower of bases that is distant from the resultant Mother 
 
Definition:  A knower of bases devoid of great co mpassion and bound by the conception of true 
existence. 
 
o “Resultant Mother”: final result 
o “Distant from…” because of being devoid of great compassion 
 
Mutually inclusive  with knower of bases of discordant  class (which is the fifth topic) 
 
“Bound by the conception of true existence”:  
o Why is this person “bound”? Does conception of true existence exist in their continuum?  Mahayana aryas on ten grounds have conception of true existence until end of continuum, so 
 19
Masters Program 2008: Ornament  
Week 2: 28 January – 1 February, 2008 
having this doesn’t mean being bound; they are not bound, because realize emptiness of true 
existence.  
 
Two types of Hinayana practitioners:  
1. Those who have directly realized emptiness 
2. Those who have not directly realized emptiness  
o In Autonomist system, Hinayana arya does not need  to have directly re alized emptiness; in 
order to attain liberation, need s to realize selflessness.  
o Some Hinayana aryas have dir ectly realized emptiness; so me Hinayana aryas are Middle 
Way Autonomists 
o Is knower of bases in such a being’s continuum a knower of bases distant from resultant 
mother or near to the resultant mother?  
→ It is a knower of bases dist ant from resultant mother because the definition = A knower 
of bases devoid of great compassion and bound by the conception of true existence.2 
→ Not possible for learner hearer to have gr eat compassion; otherw ise Mahayana lineage 
would be awakened. 
→ Such a knower of bases is distant from resu ltant mother because is  knower of bases of 
discordant class, i.e. “knower of base s devoid of special method and wisdom.”  
 Special method and wisdom:  great compassion and wisdom directly realizing 
emptiness of true existence 
 
o Someone who has attained Hinayana foe-de stroyer and enters Mahayana path of 
accumulation, who has not realized  emptiness. Is their knower of bases one of discordant 
class? It is knower of ba ses, but is it devoid of special method and wisdom?  
→ Note that “devoid of the two” can mean he doesn’t have one, but he has the other (not 
just that it doesn’t have either of them).  
 
Causing foe-destroyers to  enter Mahayana path:  
In Sutra Taught only to Foe-Destroyers,  Buddhas say to a Hinayana foe-destroyer, “You have not 
yet passed beyond sorrow; enter the Mahayana,”  upon which the foe-destroyer arises from 
meditative equipoise and enters Mahayana.  
 
Q: When Hinayana foe-destroyer abides  in nirvana, is this attachment? 
A: Not through force of attachment, because Hina yana foe-destroyer has abandoned attachment; it 
is through intention  made before entering meditative equipoise that he may abide in meditative 
equipoise for a certain amount of time.  
 
Q: When Hinayana foe-destroyer enters Mahayana, does he cease to be a Hina yana foe-destroyer?  
A: He is a foe-destroyer, but not a Hinayana foe- destroyer, because he has destroyed afflictions, but 
is not Hinayanist. He is neither  a Hinayana foe-destroyer nor a Mahayana foe-destroyer. We can 
also posit a similar example of an arya that is ne ither a Hinayana arya nor a Mahayana arya, i.e. a 
Hinayana foe-destroyer who is on the Maha yana path prior to the path of seeing. 
 
Hinayana foe-destroyer must en ter Mahayana from path of accumulation, because must gather 
necessary accumulations (of merit) in order to pr oceed on the higher paths. In general, has not yet 
abandoned conception of true existence. Needs to abandon acquired concep tion of true existence 
and its seeds on path of seeing, and seeds of innate conception of true  existence on path of 
meditation.  
 
                                                 
2 The point here is that although such a being is not bound by the conception of true existence, he is devoid of great 
compassion. 
 20
Masters Program 2008: Ornament  
Week 2: 28 January – 1 February, 2008 
Accumulation of merit:  even if a Hinayana foe- destroyer has realized emp tiness previously, he must 
accumulate merit; even his accumulation of wisdom must be improved, because it is not conjoined 
with the Mahayana motivation.  
 
 
4. Knower of bases that is near to the resultant Mother 
 
Definition:  An exalted knower in the continuum of a Maha yana arya abiding in a class of Hinayana 
realizations that is conjoined w ith great compassion and the wisdom  directly realizing emptiness. 
 
Boundary for fourth and sixth topics:  from the Mahayana path of  seeing through the buddha ground. 
Both are mutually inclusive  
 
 
5. Knower of bases of the discordant class 
 
Definition:  A knower of bases devoid of the two, special method and wisdom. 
 
For third and fifth, boundary:  from the Hinayana path of seei ng through the Hinayana path of no-
more-learning. 
 
 
6. Knower of bases of the antidotal class 
 
Definition:  An exalted knower in the continuum of a Maha yana arya abiding in a class of Hinayana 
realizations that is conjoined with  the two, special method and wisdom. 
 
(No class on Friday, 1 February 2008) 
 
 
END 
 21