Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/ORN_GyaltsabComm_translTohSzeGee_ed19Jan2015.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:51:34.355343
================================================================================

 
FPMT MASTERS PROGRAM — ORNAMENT  
 
The Explanation  Ornament of the Essence   
along with  
(i) the Root Text of the Treatise of Quintessential 
Instructions of the Perfection of Wisdom:  
Ornament for Clear Realization  
and 
(ii) the  Commentary Clear Meaning  
 
  
Root Text  [Ornament for Clear Realization]  
by the Protector Venerable Maitreya  
 
Commentary [ Clear Meaning]  
by Acarya Haribhadra 
 
Explanation  [Ornament of the Essence]   
by Gyel -tsab Dar -ma Rin -chen  
 
  
Translated by Toh Sze Gee  
first edition 2008 —2009 
revised January 2015  
 
 
 
FPMT MASTERS PROGRAM TRANSLATION 
 
  
 
    
 
© Toh Sze Gee & FPMT Inc., 2008  
 
revised edition, January 2015  
 
 
No part of this work may be reproduced in any form or by any means,  
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage 
and retrieval system or technologies now known or later developed,  
without permission in writing from Toh Sze Gee & FPMT Inc.  
 
   
 
  
i Note by the Translator  
 
• The Tibetan texts mainly used here  are the 1996 editions published by Drepung Los eling 
Library Society.  
• Throughout the translation, “ROOT TEXT”  refers to Ornament for Clear Realization 
(Abhisamayalamkara )1 by Maitreya ; “COMMENTARY” refers to Clear Meaning  
(Abhisamayalamkara -nama prajnaparamitopadesa -sastra -vivrti , Sphutartha)  by Haribhadra;  
and “EXPLANATION” refers to Ornament of the Essence  (Rnam bshad snying po’i rgyan)  
by Gyel -tsab. 
• The translations  are done by referring the trans lations of Ornament for Clear Realization and 
Clear Meaning by Venerable Geshe Jampa Gyatso, Venerable Thubten Jampa, and Venerable 
Thubten Tsultrim (George Churinoff), as well as materials from the FPMT Masters Program 
1998 -2004 taught by Venerable Geshe Jampa Gyatso.  
• The bulk of Maitreya’s  Ornament for Clear Realization  is contained in eight chapters that 
elucidat e in detail  the eight categories  and the seventy topics  characterizing them . In addition 
to the eight chapters, the root text, as presented in the Tibetan tradition, begins with eighteen 
introductory stanzas,  which  can be likened to an index for understanding the  content of eight 
chapters, and ends with two concluding stanzas describing the sets of six and three 
summarized meaning s. The root text  has been numbered to attempt to reflect this structure. 
For example, “0.17” refers to stanza 17 of the introductory section, “3.1” stanza 1 of chapter 
3, “8.40” stanza 40 of chapter 8, and “9.2” stanza 2 of the concluding section. 
• To aid in following this structure of the eight categories and the seventy 
(10+11+9+11+8+13+4+4) topics, before the start of the translation of the three texts, the 
definienda, definitions, and boundaries of the eight categories and seventy topics a ccordin g to 
Je-tsun Cho -kyi Gyel -tsen’s Seventy Topics  (Don bdun cu) have been  provide d in tables.  
• To highlight the presence of the root text, its words are set in bold when they appear in the 
Commentary or Explana tion that follows immediately.  
• And to highlight the presence of the Commentary , its words are set in bold when they appear 
in the Explanation that follows immediately.  
• Words singled out for elucidation in the explanation are underlined for easy identification.  
• Where a definition is given  in Gyel -tsab’s text, its definiendum is underlined in order to 
highlight it.  
• Numbering and words in square brackets and as well as the footnotes in the English translation 
have been added for the sake of clarification and do not appear in the original Tibetan 
composition s.  
• The word “until” (Tibetan: bar du ) appears very frequently in the translation and is to be 
understood as meaning “up to and including.” For example, “the second ground until the fifth 
ground” refers to  the second  ground , the third ground , the fourth  ground, and also the fifth 
ground. An example of an expression in which the upper endpoint is not included is: “from 
the Mahayana path of accumulation until just prior to the end of the continuum.”  
• “The end of the continuum” (Tibetan: rgyun mtha’ ), referr ing to the end of the continuum of 
the ten grounds, is the occasion just before one attains buddhahood.  
• A “knower” (Tibetan: shes pa) is that which knows, and  throughout this text it refers to the 
direct agent that knows, that is, a consciousness, rather than a person. It is used in a similar way to words like “computer,” “blender,” “lighter,” “eraser,” “dryer,” “wrapper,” “rejoinder,” 
“pacemaker,” and “mixer,” which do not necessarily refer to persons.  
• The expression “sutra says …” indicates a citation from some sutra wh ose title  has not been 
explicitly identified by the text.  
• An English –Tibetan glossary can be found at the end of the translation .
                                              
1 The full title is stated and explained at the beginning of the text. See below. 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence          Definienda, Definitions, Boundaries and Topics of the Eight Categories  
ii  
The Eight Categories : 
Definienda, Definitions, Boundaries and Topics  
According to Je-tsun Cho -kyi Gyel -tsen ’s Seventy Topics  
 
 
 Definiendum  Definition  Boundaries  No
. Topics  
1. Exalted knower 
of all aspects 
 
(Mutually 
inclusive with “an 
exalted knower in 
the continuum of 
a buddha arya”)  A culminated exalted 
wisdom directly 
realizing the ten topics, the 
generated mind and 
so forth.  exists only on 
the buddha 
ground  10  1. Mahayana conventional generated mind  
2. Mahayana instruction  
3. Mahayana path of preparation  
4. lineage abiding in the nature,  the support 
of Mahayana achievings  
5. object  of observation of Mahayana 
achievings  
6. object of intent  of Mahayana achievings  
7. achieving of armor  
8. achieving of engagement  
9. achieving of accumulation  
10. achieving of definite emergence  
2. Know er of paths  
 (Mutually inclusive with “a Mahayana arya’s 
exalted knower”)  A Mahayana  arya’s 
clear realization 
conjoined with a 
wisdom directly realizing emptiness 
in the continuum of 
the person who possesses it in his 
continuum.  exists from 
the Mahayana 
path of seeing until 
the buddha ground  11  1. branch  of a knower of paths  
2. knower of paths knowing hearers ’ paths  
3. knower of paths knowing solitary realizers ’ paths  
4. Mahayana path of seeing 
5. function of a Mahayana path of 
meditation  
6. Mahayana path of meditation of belief  
7. benefit of a Mahayana path of meditation 
of belief  
8. path of meditation of dedication  
9. path of meditation of rejoicing  
10. path of meditation of achieving  
11. path of meditation of purity  
3. Knower of bases  
 
(Mutually 
inclusive with “an 
exalted knower in 
an arya’s 
continuum 
abiding in a 
Hinayana  class of 
realizations”)  An exalted 
wisdom —conjoined 
with a wisdom 
directly realizing 
selflessness in the 
continuum of the 
person who 
possesses it in his continuum —that  
abides in a class of Hinayana realizations.  exists in the 
continua of all aryas  9  1. knower of paths not abiding in cyclic 
existe nce through knowing 
2. knower of paths not abiding in peace through compassion  
3. knower of bases that is distant from the 
resultant Mother  
4. knower of bases that is near to the 
resultant Mother  
5. knower of bases of the discordant class  
6. knower of bases of the antidotal class  
7. applications of a bodhisattva indicated in 
the context of the knower of bases  
8. equality of the applications  of a 
bodhisattva indicated in the context of the knower of bases  
9. path of seeing explicitly indicated in this 
context  
 
 
 
 
  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence          Definienda, Definitions, Boundaries and Topics of the Eight Categories  
iii  
 
 Definiendum  Definition  Boundaries  No
. Topics  
4. Application in 
complete 
aspects  
 
(Mutually 
inclusive with “a  
bodhisattva’s 
exalted knower”)  A bodhisattva’s yoga 
conjoined with a wisdom that 
collectively  cultivates  
the aspects of the three exalted 
knowers.  exists from 
the 
Mahayana path of 
accumulation 
until the end 
of the continuum  11  1. knower -aspect of the antidotal class 
explicitly indicated  in this context  
2. principal applications explicitly indicated in this context  
3. excellent qualit y of a Mahayana 
application  
4. fault  of an application  
5. yoga of the path perfection of wisdom  
6. Mahayana partial conco rdance with 
liberation explicitly indicated  in this context  
7. Mahayana partial concordance with 
definite discrimination explicitly indicated in 
this context  
8. bodhisattva sangha who has att ained a 
sign of irreversibility  
9. application of the equality of  cyclic 
existence and peace  
10. application of pure land  
11. application of skillful means  
5. Peak application  
 
(Mutually 
inclusive with “an 
achieving of 
engagement”)  A bodhisattva’s yoga 
conjoined with a wisdom highly 
transformed from the 
Mahayana path of 
accumulation that 
collectively  cultivates 
the aspects of the 
three exalted 
knowers.  exists from 
the heat level 
of the 
Mahayana 
path of preparation 
until the end 
of the 
continuum  8  1. peak application of the heat 
2. peak application of the peak  
3. peak application of the forbearance  
4. peak application of the supreme 
mundane quality  
5. peak application of the path of seeing 
6. peak application of the path of meditation  
7. uninterrupted peak application  
8. perverse achieving that is to be 
eliminated indicated here 
6. Serial 
application  A bodhisattva’s yoga 
conjoined with a 
wisdom that 
progressively 
cultivates the aspects of the three 
exalted knowers for 
the sake of attaining stability in the 
aspects of t he three 
exalted kno wers.  exists from 
the 
Mahayana 
path of 
accumulation until just prior 
to the end of the continuum  13  1-6. the six serial applications of the six 
perfections;  
7-12. the six serial applications of the 
recollections of the Buddha, Dharma,  
Sangha, ethics, giving, and the gods; and  
13. the serial application of the entitiness  of 
non-thing  
7. Instantaneous 
application  
 Mutually inclusive with “the exalted 
wisdom at the 
end of the 
continuum .” A bodhisattva’s final 
yoga that has 
attained stability in 
the aspects of the three exalted 
knowers.  exists only at 
the end of 
the 
continuum  4  1. non-ripened instantaneous application  
2. ripened instantaneous application  
3. characterless instantaneous application  
4. non- dual instantaneous application  
8. Resultant truth 
body  
 (mutually 
inclusive with 
“buddha”)  A final result 
attained by the strength of cultivating the 
aspec ts of the three 
exalted knowers  that 
is the method for 
attaining it.  exists only on  
the buddha 
ground  4  1. nature body  
2. enjoyment body  
3. emanation body  
4. exalted wisdom truth body  
  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence          Definienda, Definitions, Boundaries and Topics of the Eight Categories  
iv CATEGORY 1: Exalted Knower of All Aspects ( 10 Topics)  
 Definiendum  Definition  Boundaries  
1. Mahayana 
conventional 
generated mind A Mahayana special main mental knower that 
arises concomitant with an accompanying aspiration observing complete enlightenment for 
others’ welfare and is distinguished by abiding in 
a class of paths that serves as the entrance to 
the Mahayana paths.  exists from the Mahayana path 
of accumulation until the buddha 
ground  
2. Mahayana 
instruction  Mahayana speech that teaches a method for 
attaining the object of striving of the Mahayana 
generated mind.  exists from not having entered a 
path until the buddha ground  
 
3. Mahayana path 
of preparation 
(mutually inclusive 
with “Mahayana 
partial 
concordance with 
definite 
discrimination”)  A Mahayana mundane path that abides in a 
class of clear realizations that arise subsequent 
to the completion of the partial concordance with 
liberatio n and is concordant with a clear 
realization of the truth.  exists only on the Mahayana 
path of preparation  
4. Lineage abiding 
in the nature, the 
support of Mahayana 
achievings  The common locus of that which is the dharmata 
in the continuum of a bodhisattva and that which acts as the actual supporting basis of Mahayana achievings.  exists from the path of 
accumulation until the end of the 
continuum  
5. Object of 
observation of a 
Mahayana achieving  
(mutually inclusive with “object of 
knowledge”)  A basis for the elimination of superimpositions 
by a Mahayana achieving.  exists with respect to whatever 
is an established base  
6. Object of intent 
of a Mahayana 
achieving  
(mutually inclusive 
with “buddha”)  The final result that is the object of intent for 
which one engages.  exists only on the buddha 
ground.  
7. Achieving of 
armor  
(mutually inclusive 
with “a 
bodhisattva’s 
exalted knower”)  A bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined with an 
extensive attitude desiring to practice inclusively the six perfections, generosity and so forth, in 
their entirety within each of the six perfections.  exists from the Mahayana path 
of accumulation until the end of 
the continuum  
8. Achieving of 
engagement  A bodhisattva’s yoga practicing an application in 
some type of topic of Mahayana cause and 
effect by means of mainly joyous effort.  exists from the heat level of the 
Mahayana path of preparation 
until the end of the continuum  
9. Achieving of 
accumulation  A bodhisattva’s yoga that surpasses the 
middling level of supreme mundane quality of 
the Mahayana path of preparation and below by 
way of being conjoined with the two extensive 
accumulations and issue s forth great 
enlightenment, its result.  exists from the great level of the 
supreme mundane quality of the Mahayana path of preparation 
until the end of the continuum  
10. Achieving of 
definite 
emergence  A yoga of the pure grounds that undoubtedly 
issues forth an exalted knower of all aspects.  exists on the three pure grounds  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence          Definienda, Definitions, Boundaries and Topics of the Eight Categories  
v CATEGORY 2: Knower of Paths (11  Topics)   
 Definiendum  Definition  Boundaries  
1. Branch  of a knower of 
paths  A special excellent quality  conjoined with 
great compassion that is included in the 
cause, entity, or result of a knower of paths.  exists from having  awaken ed 
the Mahayana lineage until the 
buddha ground  
2. Knower of paths 
knowing hearers’ 
paths  
(Mutually inclusive with 
“a Mahayana arya’s 
exalted knower  abiding 
in a class of hearers’ 
realizations”)  A Mahayana  arya’s  exalted knower that —by 
means of being conjoined with the three, the 
generat ed mind, dedication, and the wisdom 
realiz ing emptiness —abides  in a class of 
clear realizations of what is to be known in 
order to take care of  trainees who are hearer 
lineage- bearers.  exists from the Mahayana  path 
of seeing until the buddha 
ground  
3. Knower of paths 
knowing solitary 
realizers’ paths  
(Mutually incl usive with 
“a Mahayana arya’s 
exalted knower  abiding 
in a class of solitary 
realizers’ realizations”)  A Mahayana  arya’s  exalted knower that —by 
means of being conjoined with the three 
attributes —abides  in a class of clear 
realizations of what is to be known in order to 
lead trainees who are solitary realizer  
lineage- bearers.  exists from the Mahayana  path 
of seeing until the buddha 
ground  
4. Mahayana path of 
seeing  A Mahayana  clear realization of truth 
conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing 
emptiness in the continuum of the person 
who possesses it  in his continuum .  exists only on the Mahayana  
path of seeing 
5. Function of a 
Mahayana  path of 
meditation  A benefit  attaine d through the force of 
cultivating the Mahayana path of meditation 
that is the method for  attaining it.  exists from the second instant 
of cultivating the Mahayana 
path of meditation until the 
buddha ground  
6. Mahayana path of 
meditation of belief  A Mahayana  subsequent clear realization 
convinced that the Mothers are the source of 
the three welfares .  exists from the first ground  
until the end of the continuum  
7. Benefit of a Mahayana  
path of meditation of 
belief  An excellent quality attained through the 
force of cultivating the path of meditation of belief that is the method for attaining it.  exists from the second instant 
of cultivating the path of meditation of belief until the 
buddha ground  
8. Path of meditat ion of 
dedication  A conceptual Mahayana  subsequent clear 
realization —apprehending a sound 
generalit y and meaning generalit y as suitable 
to be mixed—that acts to transform one’s own or others’ roots of virtue into a branch of 
complete enlightenment.  exists  from the first ground  
until the end of the continuum  
9. Path of meditation of 
rejoicing  A conceptual Mahayana  subsequent clear 
realization —apprehending sound generalit y 
and meaning generalit y as suitable to be 
mixed —that cultivates joy in one’s own or 
others’ roots of virtue.  exists from the first ground  
until the end of the continuum  
10. Path of meditation of 
achieving  
(mutually inclusive with “a path of meditation of 
purity ”) An uncontaminated Mahayana  subsequent 
clear realization that establishes the effect 
that is  the final realization to be attained .  exists from the first ground 
until the tenth ground  
11. Path of meditation of 
purity  An uncontaminated Mahayana  subsequent 
clear realization that establishes the effect 
that is  the final abandonment to be attained .  exists from the first ground 
until the tenth ground  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence          Definienda, Definitions, Boundaries and Topics of the Eight Categories  
vi CATEGORY 3: Knower of Bases (9 Topics)   
 Definiendum  Definition  Boundaries  
1. Knower of paths not 
abiding in cyclic existence 
through know ing 
(Mutually inclusive with “a 
knower of paths knowing 
hearer s’ paths ”) A Mahayana  arya’s exalted knower abiding 
in a class of realizations  that stops the 
extreme of cyclic existence relative to a 
conventional base.  exists from the Mahayana 
path of seeing until the 
buddha ground  
2. Knower of paths not 
abiding in peace through 
compassion  
(Mutually inclusive with “a 
Mahayana arya’s exalted 
knower that abides  in a 
class of realizations  of 
special method ”) A Mahayana  arya’s exalted knower abiding 
in a class of realizations  that stops th e 
extreme of peace relative to a conventional 
base.  exists from the Mahayana 
path of seeing until the 
buddha ground  
3. Knower of bases that is 
distant from the resultant 
Mother  
(Mutually inclusive with “a 
knower of bases of the 
discordant class ”) A knowe r of bases devoid of great 
compassion and bound by the conception 
of true existence.  exists from the Hinayana  
path of seeing until the 
Hinayana path of no-
more -learning  
4. Knower of bases that is 
near to the resultant 
Mother  
(Mutually inclusive with “a 
knower of bases of the 
antidotal  class ”) An exalted knower in the continuum of a 
Mahayana arya abiding in a class of 
Hinayana realization s that is conjoined with 
great compassion and the wisdom directly 
realizing emptiness.  exists from the Mahayana  
path of seeing until the 
buddha ground  
5. Knower of bases of the 
discordant class  
(Mutually inclusive with “a 
knower of bases bound by 
the conception of true 
existence in the continuum 
of a Hinayana  arya” ) A knower of bases devoid of the two, 
special me thod and wisdom.  exists from the Hinayana  
path of seeing until the 
Hinayana path of no-
more -learning  
6. Knower of bases of the 
antidotal class  
(Mutually inclusive with “a 
knower of bases in the 
continuum of a Mahayana 
arya”) An exalted knower in the continuum of a 
Mahayana arya abiding in a class of  
Hinayana realization s that is  conjoined with 
the two,  special method and wisdom.  exists from the Mahayana  
path of seeing until the 
buddha ground  
7. Application  of a 
bodhisattva  indicated in 
the context of the knower 
of bases  A bodhisattva’s yoga that cultivates an 
antidote to either (i) erroneous adherence 
to the entity and attributes of the mode of subsistence of conventional bases or (ii) 
erroneous adherence to the entity and 
attributes of the mode of subsistence of the 
ultimate.  exists from the Mahayana 
path of accumulation until 
the end of the continuum  
8. Equality of an application  
of a bodhisattva indicated 
in the context of the 
knower of bases  A bodhis attva’s yoga conjoined with the 
wisdom that stops adherence to the 
divisions of bases, definitions, definienda, 
objects, and object -possessors as truly 
existent.  exists from Mahayana  
path of accumulation until 
the end of the continuum  
9. Path of seeing explicitly 
indicated in this context  A Mahayana  clear realization of the truth 
that directly realizes freedom from 
elaboration that is explicitly indicated in this 
context.  exists only on the 
Mahayana path of seeing  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence          Definienda, Definitions, Boundaries and Topics of the Eight Categories  
vii CATEGORY 4:  Application in Complete  Aspects (11 Topics)  
 Definiendum  Definition  Boundaries  
1. Knower -aspect  of 
the antidotal class 
explicitly indicated 
in this context  An exalted knower that is able to 
overcome its discordant class.  [exists on all paths]  
2. Principal 
application  
explicitly indicated 
in this context  A bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined with 
the wisdom that is a union of calm 
abiding and special insight observing 
emptiness that is explicitly indicated in 
this context.  exists from the heat level of the 
Mahayana path of preparation until the 
end of the continuum  
3. Excellent quality  of 
a Mahayana  
applica tion A benefit  attained through the force  of 
cultivating a Mahayana application that 
is the method for  attaining it.  exist from the Mahayana  path of 
accumulation until the buddha ground  
4. Fault  of an 
application  A mara’s action  that interferes with the 
production, abidance, or completion of 
an application.  exists from not having entered a  path 
until the seventh ground  
5. Yoga of the path 
perfection of 
wisdom  A bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined with a 
union of calm abiding and special insight that is the method for  attaining 
a resul tant perfection of wisdom that is  
its object of attainment.  exists from the Mahayana  path of 
accumulation until the end of the 
continuum  
6. Mahayana partial 
concordance with 
liberation explicitly indicated in this 
context  A clear realization of the doctrine in the 
continuum of a bodhisattva skilled in accomplishing an exalted knower of all 
aspects in his continuum.  exists only on the Mahayana  path of 
accumulation  
7. Mahayana partial 
concordance with definite 
discrimination 
explicitly indicated 
in this context  A Mahayana  clear realization of the 
meaning explicitly indicated in this context mainly qualified by the quality 
of method.  exists only on the Mahayana  path of 
preparation  
8. Bodhisattva sangha 
who has attained a 
sign of 
irreversibility  A bodhisattva who has attained any of 
the forty -four signs, such as having 
turned away from manifest  adher ence  
to forms and so forth as truly existent.  exists from the heat level of the path of 
preparation until the end of the 
continuum  
9. Application of the 
equality of cyclic existence and 
peace  A yoga of the pure grounds  that has 
exhaustively  destroyed the opportunity 
for a manifest conception of true 
existence to be produced on the 
occasions of subsequent attainment by 
means of  being conjoined with the 
wisdom directly realizing  cyclic 
existence and peace to be empty of 
true existence.  exists on the three pure  grounds  
10
. Application of pure 
land A yoga of the pure grounds in which a 
root of virtue, such as a prayer to 
accomplish the special land where one 
will attain enlightenment, has become 
a powerful potency  in one’s continuum .  exists on the three pure gr ounds  
11
. Application of 
skillful means  A yoga of the pure grounds that 
spontaneously accomplishes exalted 
activities by means of having pacified 
coarse exertion.  exists on the three pure grounds  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence          Definienda, Definitions, Boundaries and Topics of the Eight Categories  
viii CATEGORY 5: Peak Application (8 Topics)   
 Definiendum  Definition  Boundaries  
1. Peak 
application of 
the heat A first Mahayana  partial concordan ce with definite 
discrimination  that has attained any of the twelve  
signs of having attained  peak application.  exists only on the heat level of 
the Mahayana path of 
preparation  
2. Peak 
application of 
the peak A second Mahayana  partial concordan ce with 
definite discrimination that has attained the sixteen 
thorough increases of merit, such as that exceeding 
that of making offerings to buddhas equal in number  
to the sentient beings of the billionfold world 
systems .  exists only on the peak level of 
the Mahayana path of 
preparation  
3. Peak 
application of 
the 
forbearance  A third Mahayana  partial concordance with definite 
discrimination that has attained stabili ty in (i) the 
wisdom that is a complete similitude of the three exalted knowers and (ii) indivisibility  from others ’ 
welfare.  exists only on the forbearance 
level of the Mahayana path of 
preparation  
4. Peak 
application of 
the supreme 
mundane 
quality  A fourth partial concordance with definite 
discrimination that has attained an always abiding 
mind with respect to infinite meditative stabilizations, 
on account of  having ripened the potency to 
generate the Mahayana path of seeing that is its 
result . exists only on the supreme 
mundane quality level of the Mahayana path of preparation  
5. Peak 
application of 
the path of 
seeing  A Mahayana  clear realization of the truth abiding in 
a class of direct antidote to the seeds of the 
conceptions that are objects to be abandoned by 
the path of seeing.  exists only on the Mahayana  
path of seeing 
6. Peak 
application of the path of 
meditation  A Mahayana  subsequent clear realization abiding in 
a class of direct antidote to the seeds of the 
conceptions that are objects to be abandoned by 
the path of meditation.  exists only on the [ Mahayana ] 
path of meditation  
7. Uninterrupted 
peak application 
(Mutually 
inclusive with “an exalted 
wisdom of the 
end of the 
continuum” ) A bodhisattva’s final yoga —conjoined with a wisdom 
highly transformed from the Mahayana path of 
accumulation that collectively cultivates the aspects 
of the three exalted knowers —that acts to directly 
produce an exalted knower of all as pects  that is its 
result.  [exists at the end o f the 
continuum]  
8. Perverse 
achieving that 
is to be 
eliminated 
indicated here  That which is included in a seed of a conception or 
a manifest conception apprehending the two truths 
as not suitable to be subsumed as a single entity 
indicated here.  exists from not having entered  a 
path until the seventh ground  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence          Definienda, Definitions, Boundaries and Topics of the Eight Categories  
ix CATEGORY 6: Serial Application (13 Topics)  
 Definiendum2 Boundaries  
1. Serial application of the p erfection of generosity   
exists from the Mahayana path of 
accumulation until just prior to the 
end of the continuum  2. Serial application of the p erfection of ethics  
3. Serial application of the p erfection of patience  
4. Serial application of the p erfection of joyous effort  
5. Serial application of the p erfection of concentration  
6. Serial application of the p erfection of wisdom  
7. Serial application of the r ecollection of the Buddha  
8. Serial application of the r ecollection of the Dharma  
9. Serial application of the r ecollection of the Sangha  
10. Serial application of the r ecollection of ethics  
11. Serial application of the r ecollection of giving  
12. Serial application of the r ecollection of the gods  
13. Serial application of the entitiness  of non -things  
CATEGORY 7: Instantaneous Application (4 Topics)  
 Definiendum  Definition  Boundaries  
1. Non-ripened 
instantaneous 
application  A bodhisattva’s yoga that serves as a direct antidote to the knowledge 
obscurations by means of being conjoined with a wisdom such that, if 
one uncontaminated non-ripened quality is actualized, those concordant 
in type with it are also actualized in the shortest instant in which an 
action can be completed.   
exists only at the 
end of the 
continuum  
2. Ripened 
instantaneous application  A bodhisattva’s yoga that serves as a direct antidote to the knowledge 
obscurations by means of being conjoined with a wisdom such that, if 
one uncontaminated ripened quality is actualized, those concordant in 
type with it are also actualized in the shortest instant in which an action 
can be completed.  
3. Characterless 
instantaneous 
application  A bodhisattva’s yoga that serves as a direct antidote to the knowledge 
obscurations by means of being conjoined with the wisdom directly 
realizing emptiness.  
4. Non-dual 
instantaneous 
application  A bodhisattva’s yoga that serves as a direct antidote to the knowledge 
obscurations by means of being conjoined with the wisdom directly 
realizing the emptiness of apprehendeds and apprehenders being 
different substances.  
CATEGORY 8: Resultant Truth Body (4 Topics)  
 Definiendum  Definition  Boundaries  
1. Nature body  A final sphere possessing the two purities.  
[The two purities are:  
1. purity with respect to inherent stains  
2. purity with respect to adventitious stains]  exists only on the 
buddha ground  
2. Complete 
enjoyment body  A final form body possessing the five certainties.  
[The five certainties are:  
1. certainty of abode: he resides only in Akanistha (Not Low)  
2. certainty of body: he is adorned with the clear and complete signs and exemplificati ons 
3. certainty of retinue: he is surrounded only by bodhisattva aryas  
4. certainty of Dharma: he teaches only the Mahayana Dharma 
5. certainty of time: he remains as long as cyclic existence is not empty]  
3. Emanation body  A final form body distinguished by not possessing the five certainties.  
4. Exalted wisdom 
truth body  An exalted knower that is final insight with respect to modes and 
varieties.  
 
Exalted activity of an  
exalted wisdom truth 
body  A very positive excell ent quality arisen from an exalted wisdom truth 
body (that acted as the empowering condition) that is its cause.  exists from not 
having entered a 
path until the 
buddha ground  
 
                                              
2 The definitions are not explicitly given in Je-tsun Cho -kyi Gyel -tsen’s Seventy Topics.  
 
 
1 The Explanation:  Ornament of the Essence  
Respectfully I always pay homage at the feet of the excellent venerables posses sing great 
exalted  compassion.  
Ornament of the Essence 
An Explanation of Clear Meaning , a Commentary on  
The Treatise of Quintessential Instructions of the Perfection of  
Wisdom: Ornament for Clear Realization 
 
The path traversed by tens of millions supreme scholars, 
The supreme system, the way of Perfection [g one-beyond]  
Is clarified by your kindness;  
I bow down to the venerable guru.  
 
Having seen exactly the essential points of the path of Muni’s complete teachings  
And gained mastery over them,  
You instructed migrating beings with loving- kindness ; 
I bow with  my crown at the feet of the gurus. 
 You have seen all the meaning of the profound and extensive, the modes and varieties, 
without exception  
And come under the influence of exalted compassion;  
I pay homage to the lineage gurus,  
The excellent Regent [Maitreya], Manjugosha, and so forth. 
 
By connect ing the boundaries that are definite in sequence and  
Taking the essence of the meeting points of the root text and explanation,  
Not seeing the realization of even a mere portion of this system ,  
I generated a little interest in uncovering this text. 
 
Those who do not possess the eyes of stainless reasoning and  
Are separated from the leaders for the blind, the excellent spiritual guides  
Desire to enter the city of the omniscient victors  
But are resigned to poorly enter wrongful paths. 
 
Although this profound path is very difficult to realize,  
Since I have familiarized with it in all lifetimes, and  
For the sake of repaying kindness out of gratitude to the deities and gurus,  
I shall explain it. Thus listen respectfully with single -pointedness!  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
2 Here, all of us have obtained leisures and endowments that are very difficult to find, and are 
greatly meaningful when found. At this time, effort for the sake of gain, honor, and the like 
of simply this life —without setting up well the basis that is the temporal and final aims that 
are strongly desired by beings from the next life and beyond, which surpasses the system of the elderly mundane beings —is like winnowed chaff devoid of grain. Having understood 
that doing so does not transcend the behavior of animals, we should make effort in taking 
the essence of our leisures and endowments well. 
 Due to the deeds of turning the wheels of Dharma in three stag es by the Buddha 
Bhagavan [Shakyamuni] who acts solely to benefit all migrating beings, the one called Acarya Arya Asanga subsequently engaged in the systems which have been determined 
with extensive collections of scripture and reasoning by the beings for whom the path (that 
the aryas of the three times have gone and will subsequently go on) along with its result 
have become valid, and understood their meanings. He came to understand that there is no 
supreme method to please the victors other than proper p ractice by means of the three types 
of precious trainings. Also, he acted exceptionally with regard  to many previous victors and 
generated vast roots of virtue. Even now he is being taken care of by the protector buddhas 
and bodhisattvas and his strength o f intelligence surpasses that of others. He accomplished 
well prayers to take responsibility for the teachings of the Subduer Buddha Bhagavan and it was prophesized that he would comment on the complete intention of the definitive and 
interpretable sutras sets. He saw that trainees of future generations will view the Mahayana 
sutra sets as though they are an ocean and will become like travelers who have lost their 
way; if even the relation between earlier and later words is difficult for them to understand, what need is there to mention about them understanding the profound supreme meanings? 
Being aware that the points of the tathagatas’ secrets are hidden phenomena even for 
himself, he thought, “If I were to please the excellent Regent [Maitreya] who posses ses eyes 
for which the secrets of the speech of the Muni are not hidden phenomena, I shall achieve my goal.” By engaging in practice, he beheld [Maitreya] directly. In dependence on the 
Bhagavan [Maitreya]’s miraculous powers, he went to Tushita [Pure Land ], and having 
heard the Dharma, fully realized the intention of the scriptures. 
 For the sake of taking care of future generations of trainees in Jambudvipa [Continent], 
he bestowed also the gifts of excellent Dharma, the five great treatises: the two type s of 
Differentiation
3, the two types of Ornament4, and the Great Vehicle Treatise on the Sublime 
Continuum (Mahayanottaratantrasastra ). 
 With regard  to that, in general the Bhagavan’s scriptures taught two modes of 
differentiating between the interpretable  meaning and the definitive meaning, these being 
taught in (i) the Teachings of Akshayamati Sutra (Akshayamatinirdeshasutra ), the King of 
Meditative Stabilizations Sutra ( Samadhirajasutra), and so forth and (ii) the Sutra 
Unraveling the Thought ( Samdhinirm ocanasutra).  
 According to the first, (a) the teaching that all phenomena are empty of being established 
by way of their own character is indicated as definitive meaning, while (b) teaching the person, aggregates, and the like by means of various words and  syllables is indicated as 
interpretable meaning. The latter sutra set teach es that imputational natures are not 
                                             
 
3  These are (1) Differentiation  of Phenomena and the Final Nature of Phenomena  
(Dharmadharmatavibhaga) and (2) Differentiation  of the Middle and the Extremes (Madhyantavibhaga).  
4  These are (1) Ornament for the Great Vehicle Sutras (Mahayanasutralamkara) a nd (2) Ornament for 
Clear Realization (Abhisamayalamkara ). 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
3 established by way of their own character, whereas other- powered natures and thoroughly 
established natures are established by way of their own  character; (i) the teaching that all are 
not established by way of their own character, and (ii) the teaching that all are  established 
by way of their own character are taught to be interpretable meaning , and the  teaching 
through clearly differentiating the boundaries between what is and what is not established 
by way of their own character is taught to be definitive meaning. Following the former 
sutras, the Protector Nagarjuna effortlessly established that the second sutra as interpretable 
meaning throug h opening well the chariot tracks differentiating between the interpretable 
meaning and the definitive meaning.  
 With respect to that, Acarya Arya Asanga followed the two types of Differentiation  and 
the Ornament for the Great Vehicle Sutras (Mahayanasutra lamkara ), and relied upon the 
mode of differentiating between the interpretable and the definitive in the latter sutra set. Mainly he opened well the chariot tracks of Cognition -Only ( Vijñaptimatra ) and also 
commented upon the intention of the Hinayana  sutra sets. The Differentiation  of Phenomena 
and the Final Nature of Phenomena (Dharmadharmatavibhaga ) taught (i) phenomena —
truly existent other- powered natures where apprehendeds and their apprehenders
5 appear as 
dual, the basis establishing cyclic existence —and (ii) dharmata (the final nature of 
phenomena) —the support for attaining liberation through observing which and 
familiarization with it, the emptiness of apprehendeds and their apprehenders as being different substances. 
 Differentiation  of the Middle and the Extremes  (Madhyantavibhaga), having taken truly 
existent dualistic appearances as the basis, made differentiation of the three characters, and 
presented the basis, path and results of the common and uncommon vehicles. 
 The Ornament for the Great Ve hicle Sutras ( Mahayanasutralamkara), without refuting 
truly existent dualistic appearances, beginning from the method for awakening the Mahayana lineage, extensively determined the method for the bodhisattva himself 
proceeding specifically to higher and hi gher realizations and the method for taking care of 
other trainees. These three texts teach a mere ultimate relative to the mentalities of the trainees; they do not clarify the ultimate that is the emptiness of inherent existence of all 
phenomena.  
 Followi ng these three texts, Acarya [Asanga], in accordance with the modes in which the 
interpretable and the definitive have been differentiated in the Sutra Unraveling the Thought 
(Samdhinirmocanasutra), opened well the chariot tracks of Cognition -Only in 
[comp ositions] such as the five Treatises on the Grounds
6 and the two Summaries7. He also 
taught in his Hearers’ Grounds (Sravakabhumi ) the teaching regarding a section of the 
Hinayana  basket on the manner in which rhinoceros -like solitary realizers and Mahayan a 
lineage -bearers collect the accumulations for a hundred eons and three countless eons 
[respectively] on the path of accumulation and then pro gress  through  the heat level of the 
path of preparation and above in a single session.  
                                              
5 “Apprehendeds ” refers to objects while “apprehenders” refer to object -possessors, usually the minds 
apprehending the objects.  
6 (1) Grounds of Yogic Practice  (Yogacarabhumi ), (2)  Compendium of As certainments 
(Nirnayasamgraha), (3) Compendium of Bases  (Vastusamgraha), (4)  Compendium of Enumerations 
(Paryayasamgraha), and (5)  Compendium of Explanations (Vivaranasamgraha ). 
7 (1) Summary of Manifest Knowledge  (Abhidharmasamuccaya), and (2) Summary of the Great Vehicle 
(Mahayanasamgraha).  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
4  The Great Vehicle Treatis e on the Sublime Continuum ( Mahayanottaratantrasastra ) 
explained that (i) those who have ripened their continua  through familiarization with the 
modes of Cognition -Only should be taught later and those Mahayana lineage -bearers of 
supreme faculties should be taught right from the very start, and that (ii) the extensive, 
medium, and brief [Perfection of Wisdom ] Sutra s and the Matrix of the One -Gone- Thus8 
Sutra (Aryatathagatagarbhanama- mahayansutra ) clearly teach there is no difference in the 
object of observation of the path that must definitely be realized —the emptiness of true 
existence of all phenomena, the ultimat e truth free from all elaborations —even for those 
who attain the enlightenment of hearers and the enlightenment of the solitary realizers. Acarya Asanga clarified its intention exactly as it is in its commentary, whereby you should 
not think of him as divi ded from the Protector Nagarjuna, the opener of the chariot tracks 
who relied upon the first mode for differentiating between the interpretable and the definitive, because he is a follower of [Nagarjuna] himself. The assertion that Sublime 
Continuum was co mmentated upon in the manner of Cognition -Only by the Acarya is 
incorrect, because  it seriously contradicts (a) the proof that there is one final vehicle and (b) 
the extensive determination of subtle emptiness  in that commentary . 
 In this treatise Ornament for Clear Realization ( Abhisamayalamkara), the final view of 
emptiness is taught again and again. However, the main object to be determined is the stages of clear realization of the three lineage -bearers; it clearly reveals the way to practice 
by means of the three: definite entity, definite number and definite sequence —the hidden 
meaning of the three, the extensive, medium, and brief [Perfection of Wisdom ] Sutras  
abiding within.   Regarding this explanation of the Ornament for Clear Realization  along wit h its 
commentary, there are three meanings:  
 
1. Meaning of the title  
2. Meaning of the text  
3. Meaning of the conclusion  
1. Meaning of the title  
1A. Actual  
1B. Ancillaries  
1A. Actual  
1A1. Translation of the title   
1A2. Explanation of the title  
1A1. Transl ation of the title  
In the Indian language, regarding the name of this treatise:  
 
ROOT TEXT  
[Abhīsamaya alamkara nāma prajñaparamita upadhesha shāstra ]  
 
[In the Tibetan language: She rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa’i man ngag gi bstan bcos mngon 
par rtogs pa’i rgyan ces  bya ba  
                                              
8 “Matrix of the One-Gone -Thus, ” also rendered as “Tathagata Essence ,” refers to what is more commonly 
known as “buddha nature.”  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
5 In the English language: A Treatise of Quintessential Instructions of the Perfection of 
Wisdom: Ornament for Clear Realization ] 
 
COMMENTARY  
Abhīsamaya alamkara nāma prajñaparamita upadhesha shāstra vriti  
In the Tibetan language: She rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa’i man ngag gi bstan bcos mngon 
par rtogs pa’i rgyan ces bya ba’i ‘grel pa  
[In the English language: A Commentary on the Treatise of Quintessential Instructions of the Perfection of Wisdom: Ornament for Clear Realization ] 
 
EXPLANATIO N  
From Abhīsamaya until vriti. That in the Tibetan language is She rab  and so forth.  
 
Further, [the meaning of the individual words]:  
 
[Sanskrit]  [Tibetan]  [English]  
abhīsamaya  mngon par rtogs pa  clear realization  
alamkara  rgyan  ornament  
nāma  zhes  bya ba  called (rendered as a 
colon in the title)  
prajñaparamita  she phyin  [in full: she rab kyi pha rol tu phyin 
pa] perfection of wisdom  
upadhesha  man ngag  quintessential instructions  
shāstra  bstan bcos  treatise  
vriti  grel pa  commentary  
 
1A2. Explanation of the title  
“Perfection of wisdom ” is the root sutras, path , and result. It will be explained along with its 
divisions in the section on summarized meanings  [outline 2B2B below]. “ Quintessential 
instructions ” causes the meaning of the sutras to be easily understood. Since it possesses the 
two excellent qualities of cure and protection, it is a “ treatise .” Since it approaches (mngon 
du phyogs pa) or realizes directly (mngon sum du rtogs pa ), it is “ clear realization ” (mngon 
par rtogs pa ). Just as an excellent form —a natural ornament —decorated with bracelets and 
the like —beautifying ornaments —when seen appearing in a clarifying mirror and the like 
generates joy in beings; likewise, the excellent corpus of the Mothers  [the Perfection of 
Wisdom  Sutras]—a natural ornament —adorned with the seventy topics —the beautifying 
ornament —appears in this clarifying treatise, generating joy in the wise, therefore it is an 
“ornament .” Since it proclaims the name, it says “ called ” [which is rendered as a colon in 
the title]. Due to commentating on the meaning of the root [treatise ], it is a “ commentary .”  
1B. Ancillaries  
1B1. Enumeration of the bundles  
1B2. Translator’s homage 
1B1. Enumeration of the bundles   
COMMENTARY  
First bundle. 
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
6 EXPLANATION  
“Bundle ” is the name given to many parts of a text summed together.  
1B2 Translator’s homage 
ROOT TEXT  
I pay homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas. 
 
EXPLANATION  
“I pay homage to all buddhas and bodhisattvas ” is stated by the lotsāwa (translator) for 
the sake of being able to accomplish many temporal and final desired aims.  
2 Meaning of the text  
2A. Embarking on the explanation  
2B. Setting forth the explanation itself  
2C. The way of completing the explanation  
2A. Embarking on the explanation  
2A1. Expression of wo rship and promise to explain  
2A2. Proving that [Haribhadra] is suitable to compose the commentary  
2A3. Discarding arrogance , and the reason for generating enthusiasm  
2A1. Expression of worship and promise to explain  
COMMENTARY  
To the perfection of wisdom  Respectfully I pay homage  
In order to thoroughly reveal its versified Ornament   
As serving as an ornament of all.  
 
EXPLANATION   
Respectfully I pay homage . To what? To the textual, path, and resultant perfection of 
wisdoms . By mentioning the textual, the  other two will also be established. However, it 
should be taken to be all three here. For the sake of what purpose? In order to thoroughly 
reveal  by means of this commentary the versified ornament of the Mothers  as serving as 
an ornament of all  three Moth ers. 
 There is a purpose for making a promise to explain at the beginning of composing the 
commentary; it is because it is for the sake of completing the composition. There is a purpose for making an  expression of worship; it is because it is for the sake of being able to 
accomplish many temporal and final aims. Since the four, purpose and so forth, are indicated by implication, the subject —this commentary:  
• has a subject matter, because it reveals the meaning of the sutras and root treatise;  
• has a purpose, because it is for the sake of understanding, in dependence on it, that the root treatise serves as an ornament for the three Mothers;  
• has an essential purpose, because in dependence on that purpose, one will eventually attain omniscience; a nd 
• has a relationship, because the three properties are such that each latter one is related to the former one.
9 
                                              
9  Note that this is a statement expressed in typical syllogistic format, con sisting of subject, predicate, and 
sign.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
7  
To summarize the essence, this stanza teaches that the excellent door for entering the 
teachings is going for refuge. When the Buddha Jewel in cluded within the resultant 
perfection of wisdom and the Dharma Jewel included within the path perfection of wisdom are indicated as objects to which we go for refuge, we will also understand the arya Sangha 
who practice them properly as a refuge. Hence, from the causes —which are the two: (1) 
conviction that the Three Jewels have the ability to protect us, and (2) fear of the suffering of cyclic existence —generate a mind of going for refuge that is not merely words. 
 Understand that the composers of treatis es set forth an expression of worship at the 
beginning for the sake of making known that going for refuge should come first at the 
beginning of any Dharma activity that is performed, such as hearing, contemplation, and 
meditation. The ways of putting into practice the meaning of the treatise will be explained 
from time to time. Since I wish to compile them and compose a separate text , look there on 
how to practice.
10 
2A2. Proving that [Haribhadra] is suitable to compose the commentary  
2A2A. Proving that [Ha ribhadra] possesses the outer condition of quintessential instructions of the spiritual 
guide  
2A2B. Proving that [Haribhadra] possesses the inner condition of wisdom realizing all the meanings of the 
treatise  
2A2C. Thus [Haribhadra] is suitable to compose the commentary  
2A2A. Proving that [Haribhadra] possesses the outer condition of quintessential instructions of the spiritual 
guide  
There are four subsections.  
 
OPINION: Is there or is there not a commentary done by a previous acarya ? If there is, 
[Haribha dra’s commentary] would be a repetition. If there is not, he does not possess the 
quintessential instructions. Hence he is not suitable to compose it. 
RESPONSE: Quintessential instructions that are dependent on the commentaries of 
previous acarya s do exist. Since his is a commentary [composed] as an ornament of all 
Mothers , there is not the fault of repetition.  
2A2A- 1. The way Acarya Asanga composed an exposition  
COMMENTARY  
By having generated deep affection out of affection for migrating being s,  
Arya Asanga, himself a refuge,  
Having listened to the Invincible Protector,  
Composed an exposition of the great treatises. 
 
EXPLANATION  
Composed an exposition of what? Of the great treatises —the Sutras —since  they satisfy 
the etymology .11 By who? It w as by Arya Asanga . By his excellent qualities: (i) the perfect 
                                              
10 In the collected works of Gyeltsab, we find a text entitled “Opening the Door of the Supreme Vehicle: How 
to Practice the Stages of Clear Realization ” (mngon par rtogs pa’i rim pa nyams su len tshul theg mchog sgo  
’byed ces bya ba bzhugs so) and another entitled “ How to Practice the Commentaries on the Eight Clear 
Realizations as well as the Seventy Topics” ( mngon par rtogs pa brgyad don bdun cu dang bcas pa’i grel pa 
nyams su len tshul bzhugs so ). 
11 The etymology of “treatise” ( śāstra ) was explained under an earlier outline: 1A2. Explanation of the title . 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
8 attitude, compassion, having generated deep , that is, exceptional, affection out of 
affection for the  migrating beings  of the five continua, and (ii) perfect application, himself 
being a refuge  for others from suffering, he listened to the Invincible Protector .  
 It is suitable for Asanga to compose an exposition on the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras , 
because, having fully listened to the meaning of the words of the Mother Sutras  from the 
Venerable  [Maitreya] , he understood them. Those who propound that the two brothers 
[Asanga and Vasubandhu] are same in view simply should contemplate in detail the 
commentary [by Asanga] on  the Great Vehicle Treatise on the Sublime Continuum 
(Mahayanottaratantrasastra ). 
2A2A- 2. The way Vasubandhu  unraveled  
COMMENTARY  
Vasubandhu, a root and branch of the purpose of migrating beings,  By taking his belief as foremost,  
Thoroughly unraveled through correctly depending  
On objects of knowledge as being  the inner.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Thoroughly unraveled. What? It is as above. By who? It was by Vasubandhu , since he 
served as a root and branch of high status and definite goodness, the purpose of 
migrating beings . Where? In the text commentary on the Twenty  Thousand Stanza 
Perfection of Wisdom Sutra12. How? In the manner of the Mind -Only (Cittamatra), through 
correctly  depending on objects of knowledge, such as forms, as being the nature of the 
inner . 
 
QUALM: Did he explain it correctly?  
RESPONSE: [He explain ed it] by  taking his belief as foremost due to adherence to the 
emptiness of duality as truly existent. However, the essential meaning is to abide in the 
middle free from extremes, in variance with that. 
2A2A- 3. The way Arya [Vimukti] revealed  
COMMENTARY  
Also , he who is called Vimukti13,  
Who is included among the aryas,  
Having seen that taken as not being taken,  
Thoroughly revealed with a mind abiding in the middle.  
EXPLANATION   
Thoroughly revealed. What? The Mother Sutras  and the Ornament. Understand  it below. 
By who? He who is called Vimukti, who is included among the aryas, since he had 
attained the path of seeing. “ Also ” refers to the fact that the previous two [Asanga and 
Vasubandhu] were not exhaustive. Where? In a  commentary  on the Twenty Thousand 
                                              
12 This refers to the Twenty -Five  Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom Sutra.  
13 His full name is stated as “Vimuktisena” in texts such as Jetsun Chokyi Gyeltsen’s commentary, Ocean of 
Sport of The Fortunate Naga Lord, A Good Explanation Clarifying the Difficult Points of Two Explanations 
on [Maitreya’s] Treatise of Quintessential Instructions of the Perfection of Wisdom “Ornament For Clear 
Realization” as well as its Commentaries.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
9 Stanza Perfection of Wisdom Sutra.14 How? Abiding in the essential meaning, which is the 
middle free from extremes, in the  manner of the middle  due to being motivated by a mind  
understanding such.  
 The reason for his comment ating in this wa y is his having seen  the essential meaning 
taken by Vasubandhu in the manner of the Cognition -Only as not being taken exactly in 
accordance with what has been accepted. Know that the two —the master and his student —
agree on the enumeration, the sequence, th e mode of generation, and so forth regarding the 
general corpus of the stages of the Mahayana path.  
2A2A- 4. The way Honorable Vimuktisena expounded  
COMMENTARY  
After that, Vimuktisena,  
Who abided on the ground of faith,  
Not finding all the treatises,  
Expounded in accordance with himself.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Expounded. By who? Vimuktisena, who abided on the ground of faith, the path of 
accumulation. The time was after  that composed by Arya [Vimukti]. Where? In a  
commentary  on the Twenty Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom Sutra .15 How? Not 
finding  complete teachings on the stages of the eight clear realizations by means of all the  
extensive, medium, and brief treatises , he did it through correlating it only with the Twenty 
Thousand Stanza Perfection of W isdom Sutra  in accordance with  whatever he himself  
found.  
2A2B. Proving that [Haribhadra] possesses the inner condition of wisdom realizing all the meanings of the 
treatise   
COMMENTARY 
In that way, scholars illuminated  
All of these treatises  
Not found by just some;  
These which I found in that way  are amazing.  
 
EXPLANATION  
“In the way explained above, the four scholars illuminated  some of the meanings of the 
words. All of these extensive, medium, and brief treatises  (where the meaning of the 
intention has not been  found exactly by just some , such as Vasubandhu, who was 
renowned as being like the second Buddha ,) completely reveal the final essential meaning 
and the stages of clear realization. These which I found in that way commenta ted on  by 
the Ornament are amazing. ” This statement indicates that he is fortunate and possesses 
special wisdom. Understand that this also abandons the fault of repeating the previous 
commentaries.  
                                              
14 This refers to Arya Vimuktisena’s Commentary on the Twenty -five Thousand  (Abhisamayalamkara-vrtti ), 
also refered to as Illuminating the Twenty Thousand (Nyi khri snang ba).  
15 This refers to Honorable Vimuktisena’s Abhisamayalamkarakarikavarttika , also refered to as Commentary 
on the Twenty Thousand ( Nyi khri rnam ’grel ) 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
10 2A2C. Thus [Haribhadra] is suitable to compose the commentary   
COMMENTARY  
Very d ifficult to find by those like them,  
What this profound path is like,  
Found through the power of the Buddha,  
Is suitable to be analyzed by scholars.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Very difficult to find , since it is not found even by those like  the scholars explained abo ve, 
what this profound path—the stages of the eight clear realizations and the meaning of emptiness —is like, found through the power of the blessing of the Buddha, is suitable to 
be analyzed by other scholars  equal to me, due to possessing special fortune, for the sake 
of repaying kindness out of gratitude to the Buddha .  
 By way of the modes of explanation of the four acarya s, [Haribhadra] demonstrates that 
he possesses the quintessential instructions of uninterrupted excellence, beginning from the perfect ly complete Buddha. Furthermore, they were not found completely in dependence on 
a single commentary; rather, some parts were found by depending on other commentaries 
and from the strength of exalted compassion, where requests to the buddhas have been made  
for a long time. For the sake of making known that progression along the path in stages through having found all the stages of the Mahayana path is contingent upon pleasing the 
virtuous spiritual guide, the root of the path, Acarya [Haribhadra] set forth [the above 
stanzas]. Thereby, trainees of future generations should also make effort in properly relying 
upon the spiritual guide.   The four lines “In that way, …” [under outline 2A2B] indicate that [Haribhadra] 
understood [the Ornament] as the ornament o f all three Mothers in dependence on the 
blessings of the virtuous spiritual guide and, due to possessing the special wisdom realizing 
all the meanings of the words, Acarya [Haribhadra] himself generated great joy. The last 
four lines [under outline 2A2C] indicate the promise of being suitable to compose the 
commentary due to fulfilling, without exception, all the outer and inner conditions for 
composing the commentary. Hence, this Acarya is suitable to compose the commentary, 
“because of having accumulated  without exception all the outer and inner conditions for 
composing it.”  
 Therefore, if those who wish to listen to and explain the Dharma are not able to tame 
their minds by going for refuge to the Three Jewels and they do not rely upon their virtuous 
spiritual guides in a non -erroneous manner as explained above, then it will be as if the gods 
have descended as demons, and they will not be able deposit latencies of the path. Thus we 
should be careful about this topic.  
2A3. Discarding arrogance , and the r eason for generating enthusiasm   
COMMENTARY  
Although not my object of utilization in all ways,  
Because it accords with achieving merits,  
I generated enthusiasm, As I desire to benefit myself and others. 
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
11 EXPLANATION  
Although , except for that gained through the strength of the blessings of the virtuous 
spiritual guide, the meaning of the Perfection of Wisdom  [Sutras] is not freely my—
Haribhadra’s —mind’s object of utilization  in all ways, I generated enthusiasm  in 
composing a commentary to the Ornament. For what purpose? As I desire to benefit 
myself and others  by means of depositing latencies and serving as a reminder for myself, 
and also generating realizations in others who possess the Mahayana lineage. I am able to benefit myself and others in dependence on it, because composing such a commentary is an 
excellent method that accords with achieving the merits  of generosity and the like for the 
sake of an exalted knower of all aspects.  
 Like it has been said in [Dharmakirti's] Commentary on [Dignaga's] 'Compendium of 
Valid Cognition'  (Pramanavarttikakarika ) that “A method that accords with the relationship 
is speech that acts to express the aims of beings,” such a treatise that completely reveals the 
method for high status and definite goodness is an excellent method that accomplishes those 
aims.  
 The Acarya [Haribhadra] himself composed this commentary by drawing well from the 
paths of reasoning of the stages of the Mahayana path. Hence the words above are 
composed to discard arrogance; there has been no misdeed. 
2B. Setting forth the explanation itself   
2B1. Expression of worship  
2B2. Having revealed to persons with faith in the extensive, to explain  
2B3. Explaining other summarized meanings  
2B1. Expression of worship  
2B1A. Making a connection  
2B1B. Root text  
2B1C. Commentary  
2B1A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY  
Arya Maitreya clearly shows himself to accord with the excellent conduct, whereby the 
exalted wisdom of individual knowledge having definitely held tha t “Lucidity in the object-
possessor, the perfection of wisdom, is the principal cause of attaining all goodness,” for the 
sake of others to generate lucidity in order that they will by implication engage the 
Bhagavati —the source of matchless and unfathomab le precious qualities —for the moment, 
at first, he pays homage to the Mothers, preceded by expressing the excellent qualities as they are. 
 
EXPLANATION  
Arya Maitreya clearly shows himself to accord with the excellent conduct, whereby , 
from among the many procedures in the activity of composition, for the moment, at first, 
he pays homage to the Mothers —the  purpose of his own welfare. The purpose of others’ 
welfare is for the sake of other  trainees to generate  irreversible lucidity . The purpose of 
that is in  order that they will by implication engage in it due to having generated strong 
interest, even though they may not be urged directly, saying “Engage in it!” In what do they 
generate faith and engage? In the cause, the Bhagavati , which serves as the source  of many 
unsurpassable excellent qualities, the source  that accomplishes the goals of the four 
Children of matchless and unfathomable precious qualities . How? By means of being  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
12 preceded with expressing the excellent qualities as they are , such as leading to peace 
[see stanza 1 of the root text below].  
 
QUALM: What purpose is there in causing [the trainees] to engag e in dependence on faith?  
RESPONSE: Having established with valid cognition that  “Lucidity in the object-
possessor of the perfection of wisdom is the principal cause of attaining all goodness, 
temporal and final ,” he intended also other trainees to attain enlightenment in dependence 
on faith. Which valid cognizer established it? It was realized by the exalted wisdom of 
individual  knowledge  of Arya Maitreya’s meditative equipoise and definitely held  by the 
subsequent attainment induced by that.  
 Those who  assert that the Venerable [Maitreya] does not seek his own welfare and the 
like have not made  grueling detailed effort in the M ahayana texts. In terms of the Venerable 
being someone who has gained clear complete  buddhahood, [the assertor] failed to 
differentiate between the common and uncommon occasions. In terms of him as a 
bodhisattva, if he were  not to see the need for the trut h body (dharmakaya) in regard  to fully 
completing his own welfare, then, being satisfied with solitary peace in regard  to his own 
welfare, he would not be able to  reverse the grasping to it, and without reversing that, the 
definition of the Mahayana genera ted mind16 [of enlightenment] would not be complete ; 
this is because interest in one’s own welfare, the truth body, would not be needed on the 
occasion of a tenth -grounder [based on the assertion that Maitreya is a bodhisattva abiding 
on the tenth ground wh o does not seek his own welfare]17. The division of a buddha’s 
exalted body into the two —an exalted body of one’s own welfare and an exalted body of 
others’ welfare —would also be unnecessary. 
 To summarize the essence and indicate it, the purpose of Venerab le [Maitreya] 
composing the expression of worship here is that faith precedes all, like it has been said: 
“Generate the preliminary of faith like a mother…” [in the Jewel Lamp Sutra ] and “Firmly 
stabilize the root of faith” [in Santideva ’s Compendium of Trainings  (Siksasamuccaya )]. If 
one has strong faith in the Mahayana texts as well as their path and result, then, by means of the strong aspiration induced by it, one will engage in the three —hearing, contemplation, 
and meditation —and so forth. Having see n that if one does not have faith at the beginning , 
one will not generate a genuine mind practicing the Mahayana path for the sake of the next 
life and beyond, it is intended that, “Those who wish to engage the path should at the 
beginning generate irreversible faith in (i) the Buddha Jewel, which is the final result, (ii) 
the Dharma Jewel, which is included within the three exalted knowers, and (iii) the Sangha 
Jewel, who practices it properly.”  
 With respect to the qualm, “By what measure is one considered to be skilled in the 
practice of the stages of the path of clear realization?”, it is indicated below that one needs 
to be skilled in the five objects, faith and so forth. Also, the uncommon Mahayana going for 
refuge is taught by “Faith observin g the buddhas and so forth,” [4.33a below]. I do not take 
the explanation of the meaning of the words in the passages below as principal ; rather, I 
shall explain  how one should practice in dependence on the quintessential instructions of Je 
Rinpoche [Lama Tsongkhapa], the entity of all the buddhas of the three times.  
                                             
 
16 A more literal translation of sems bskyed  would be “mind generation” or “production of mind.” 
“Generated mind ” is used here as an attempt to convey the fact that t he expression refers to a consciousness, 
not a process.  
17  Annotated in accordance with page 43 of the Ganden Jangtse Library edition of Jetsun Chokyi 
Gyeltsen’s Ocean of Sport . 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
13 2B1B. Root text  
2B1B -1. Meaning of the words  
2B1B -2. Determining through disputes  
2B1B -1. Meaning of the words  
2B1B -1A. Praise  
2B1B -1B. Homage  
2B1B -1A. Praise  
2B1B -1A1. Praise by means of th e qualities of the three exalted knowers  
2B1B -1A2. Praise due to acting as Mothers of the four aryas  
2B1B -1A1. Praise by means of the qualities of the three exalted knowers  
ROOT TEXT  
0.1a That which through the knower of all leads hearers seeking pacification to 
peace ,  
 
EXPLANATION  
Praise by means of the knower of bases: Homage to that which leads . [Leads] w ho? 
Hearers  and solitary realizers seeking the pacification  of suffering and the origins [of 
suffering]. Through what? Through the knower of all18 which directly realizes the 
selflessness of persons. To where? It leads to  the result, peace . 
 
Praise by means of the knower of paths:   
ROOT TEXT  
0.1b That which through the knower of paths causes those benefiting migrating 
beings to accomplish  the aims of the world , 
 
EXPLANATION  
Homage to that which causes to accomplish . By what support? Those  bodhisattvas 
accomplishing  temporal and final benefit for migrating beings . Through what method? 
Through the knower of paths  which knows that the three paths are selfless. To accomplish  
what goal? To accomplish  the aims of the  three lineage -bearers of the world . 
 Praise by means of the exalted knower of all aspects:  
 
ROOT TEXT  
0.1c And through the perfect possession of which  the subduers teach these 
varieties having all aspects;  
 
EXPLANATION  
Homage to that which causes to  teach . By w hich persons? The subduer  buddha bhagavans. 
Through what method? Through the perfect possession of which —the exalted knower of 
all aspects,  whic h knows all aspects without exception to be selfless. The result? These 
                                              
18  It is important to distinguish between “a knower of all” and “a knower of all aspects,” for the former 
actually refers to a knower of bases, the latter to an omniscient mind.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
14 varieties  of precious sutra sets having all aspects  of the subject matter due to being fully 
complete in the paths of the three vehicles.  
 Although “which” [in the root text right abo ve] is a general term, it is to  be understood as 
referring only to the exalted knower of all aspects , since it occurs in the context of praising 
the three exalted knowers and the other two have already been praised, whereby it is 
implicit, and it is relate d to the word “subduers.”  
2B1B -1A2. Praise due to acting as Mothers of the four aryas  
ROOT TEXT  
0.1d To the Mothers of the buddhas as well as of the host of hearers and 
bodhisattvas, I pay homage.  
 
EXPLANATION  
To the Mothers of the buddhas as well as of the host of  arya hearers and arya 
bodhisattvas, I pay homage.  
2B1B -1B. Homage  
“I pay homage” indicates the manner of bowing respectfully. These meanings have already been explained above.  
2B1B -2. Determining through disputes   
2B1B -2A. Definiteness in sequence  
2B1B -2B. Definiteness in number  
2B1B -2C. Meaning of Mothers and Children  
2B1B -2D. Identifying the three exalted knowers which are the objects of praise  
2B1B -2A. Definiteness in sequence 
It is incorrect to claim that “This is explained in accordanc e with the sequence of the sutras’ 
setting ” as it has been said in the Treatise Precious Lamp , because the expression of 
worship and the setting are correlated by neither of the two —Acarya [Haribhadra] and Arya 
[Vimuktisena]19—and an explanation of the sett ing is given by the Acarya elsewhere. 
 
OPINION: The knower of bases is praised first for the sake of making hearer lineage -
bearers enter the three vehicles successively. RESPONSE: You do not realize who the intended trainees of this treatise are, because h ere 
it is for the sake of making solely the Mahayana lineage -bearers enter by means of hearing 
and so forth after having generat ed faith in the Mothers; if all three lineage -bearers are 
present in the intended trainees of this treatise, then it must become  a treatise common to the 
vehicles. 
 
OPINION: It is for the sake of making trainees enter the three vehicles successively.  
RESPONSE: This is also not the meaning, because, although such a trainee is a possibility in general, the time has arrived for reveal ing the stages of engaging in the path for a person 
definite in the Mahayana lineage here, and there is not the slightest need for indicating the 
                                             
 
19  Annotated in accordance with page 48 of the Ganden Jangtse Library edition of Jetsun Chokyi 
Gyeltsen’s Ocean of Sport . 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
15 way of entering through the hearers’ path at first by means of the very occasion of the 
expression of worship.   
 Thus in the context of indicating the stages of the eight clear realizations in the section on 
making a connection at the Truth Body [explanation] of [Haribhadra’s]  Great 
Commentary
20, it has been said that “engaging in by way of the knower of all itself…” As 
taught, [the expression of worship] is indicated in accordance with the stages for the 
intended trainees of the Ornament themselves to enter the path. Further, if your mentality 
has not been well -trained in the stages of the path of the being of middling capacity 
determined in the third chapter, then fully qualified great compassion cannot be produced, 
and in that case, a qualified Mahayana generated mind [of enlightenment] as well  as a 
knower of paths and the like will not be produced. Hence it is for the sake of making known 
that, in order to generate the stages of the path of the being of great capacity in one’s 
continuum, you must first train in the mentality of the being of mid dling capacity. There is 
plenty to be described regarding these points; I will explain them from time to time, and 
also explain how to practice the stages of the path of the Ornament separately [in another 
text].  
2B1B -2B. Definiteness in number  
Simply just  these stages of the path (that are to be practiced by a Mahayana person who 
wishes to take care of trainees who are  all three lineage -bearers) will be ideal, because they 
are neither too many nor too few. Those who wish to take care of hearer lineage -bearers and 
[also] wish to complete one’s own path should first cultivate the mentality in common with the being of middling capacity, as explained above.  
2B1B -2C. Meaning of Mothers and Children  
Since the exalted knowers existing earlier produce the aryas e xisting later and accomplish 
the goals of peace and so forth, understand that the Mothers and the Children are objects produced and producers [where, respectively, the Mothers are the producers and the 
Children the objects produced]. 
2B1B -2D. Identifying t he three exalted knowers which are the objects of praise  
As explained in the summary of the sutra question and answer section below, the knower of 
bases also bears the aspects of the sixteen [aspects of the four noble truths], impermanence 
and so forth. T hrough being illustrated  by that, the other two [the knower of paths and the 
knower of all aspects] should be understood. The explanation immediately below on how all three exalted knowers bear the aspect of not being produced is for the sake of identifyin g an 
isolate of the Mothers. A s it has been explained that “Mother is wisdom and father is 
method,” since it has been described that “The common cause which is the factor of wisdom 
is the m other, while the uncommon cause which is the factor of method is th e father,” 
having asserted the identification of an isolate of the Mothers, it indicates that the principal wisdom is that very wisdom realizing selflessness; it is not indicated that the Mothers and 
the exalted knowers are pervaded
21 by being it. 
                                              
20 This refers to Haribhadra’s comm entary on the Eight Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom Sutra  
(Abhisamayalamkaraloka Prajna-paramita -vyakhya ). 
21 “Pervaded” is a term frequently used in debate-style aruguments. “A is pervaded by B” means “A is 
necessarily B.” 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
16 2B1C. Com mentary  
2B1C -1. Summary  
2B1C -2. Meaning of the purpose  
2B1C -3. Dispelling arguments  
2B1C -4. Meaning of the words  
2B1C -1. Summary  
COMMENTARY  
So the root text is said. This stanza expresses the possession of the outstanding nature of the 
greatness of this.  
 
EXPLANATION  
This stanza  of the root text expresses the possession of the outstanding nature of the 
greatness of this  property -bearer,  the Mothers, because praise to the Mothers is expressed 
by means of the three exalted knowers.22 
2B1C -2. Meaning of the purpose  
2B1C -2A. Extensive explanation  
2B1C -2B. Summary  
2B1C -2A. Extensive explanation  
2B1C -2A1. How to generate faith  
2B1C -2A2. From that, generating the aspiration which seeks  
2B1C -2A3. From that, how to attain the result after having entered  
2B1C -2A1. H ow to generate faith  
2B1C -2A1A. How those of dull faculty generate faith  
2B1C -2A1B. How those of sharp faculty generate faith  
2B1C -2A1A. How those of dull faculty generate faith   
COMMENTARY  
In that time after having heard, followers of faith quickly generate lucidity free from doubt 
in these . 
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —in that time after having heard  that stanza , followers of faith  who are 
trainees of the Ornament— generate faith23 in these  Mothe rs, because , thinking, “They  
definitely have such excellent qualities ,” they quickly generate  strong faith  free from 
doubt .  
2B1C -2A1B. How those of sharp faculty generate faith  
COMMENTARY 
Also followers of Dharma —by means of a valid cognizer of “because o f being free of an 
entitiness of one or many” and so forth; not seeing damage to the Mothers  with the 
characteristic of the meaning of the stanza thoroughly understanding that bases, paths, and 
                                              
22 This sentence, with a slig htly different punctuation, can also read: The subject —this stanza  of the root 
text—expresses the possession of the outstanding nature of the greatness of th ese Mothers, because 
praise to the Mothers is expressed by means of the three exalted knowers.  
23  Rab tu dad pa (faith) should perhaps read rab tu dang ba (lucidity) to correspond with the root text, 
although various editions of the text agree with what has been printed here.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
17 aspects are not produced; having definitely apprehended that “ The perfection of wisdom, 
the nature of the three exalted knowers of all, that having  the three modes giving birth to the 
buddhas and so forth,  is without doubt” —generate lucidity in those . 
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —also followers of Dharma, sharp -faculty intended trainees of the Ornament —
generate lucidity in those  Mothers  by the hearing of that stanza acting as a condition , 
because, by that acting as a condition , at the time of examining well whether or not there is 
damage to the existence of the exalted wisdoms thoroughly understanding that bases, 
paths, and aspects are not produced,  the Mothers  with  the characteristic of the 
meaning of the subject matter of the stan za, not seeing damage to the existence of such, 
lucidity is generated.  The mention of “in these” [under outline 2B1C -2A1A] and “in those” 
[under outline 2B1C -2A1B]24 above is due to their being [respectively] near to and far from 
the expression of worship;  others’ explanations do not engage the meaning of the words. 
 
QUALM: How is lucidity generated?  
RESPONSE : [Having definitely apprehended that]25 “The perfection of wisdom, the 
nature of the three exalted knowers of all, that having the three modes  of the p ath, is 
without doubt,”  lucidity in their entity is generated, and having definitely apprehended 
that “Their giving birth to  the four aryas, the buddhas and so forth is without doubt ,” 
lucidity in their ability is generated.  
 Since those of sharp faculty g enerate faith relying upon reason, the not seeing of damage 
itself is the reason; it is inappropriate to cite the scriptural passage of the expression of 
worship as the reason, because those of sharp faculty accept [a scriptural passage] as proof 
through the meaning of the scriptural passage  being free [from the three contradictions]  by 
way of  analysis26, but that is untenable in this context. 
 
OPINION: This indicates how those of sharp faculty generate faith; it does not demonstrate 
even slightly the reason  for generating faith. 
RESPONSE: Your assertion is incorrect. By the hearing of that stanza acting as a condition, none of the possibilities —(i) those of sharp faculty do not generate lucidity, (ii) they 
generated it in the absence of causes and conditions , or (iii) although there are causes and 
conditions, they are not indicated here —are tenable. And it is very easy to understand that it 
contradicts the meaning of this text.  
In the context of those of sharp faculty, if we were to assert that it is establi shed by valid 
cognition that, having established well by means of valid cognition that the three —bases, 
paths, and aspects —are not produced, and by familiariz ing with their meanings, there exists  
the state of an arya who directly realizes the meaning of th e object of familiarization, what 
fault would there be?   
                                             
 
24  Annotated in accordance with page 52 of the Ganden Jangtse Library edition of Jetsun Chokyi 
Gyeltsen’s Ocean of Sport , volume 1.  
25  Annotated in accordance with page 52 of the Ganden Jangtse Library edition of Jetsun Chokyi 
Gyeltsen’s Ocean of Sport , volume 1.  
26  Dpyad pa dag emended to read dpyad pas dag in accordance with page 53 of the Ganden Jangtse Library 
edition of Jetsun Chokyi Gyeltsen’s Ocean of Sport . 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
18 OPINION: In that case, there would be contradiction with the explanation that, due to 
having generated faith, one engages progressively in the three —hearing, contemplation and 
meditation. RESPONSE: If, by way of the reason “being free of one or many,” one is able to prove the 
property of the subject and the pervasion s, and one is able to establish that clear appearance 
will occur from familiarizing with the meaning of the thesis, then [you] would have to assert 
that one has understood well the Ornament for Clear Realization .  
 
QUALM: Wh ich  valid cogni zer establishes that the three —bases, paths, and aspects —are 
not produced?  
RESPONSE: It is first established on the occasion of the path of accumulation by means of 
a valid cogni zer that is supported on signs, such as “because of being free of an 
entityness of one or many”  and the reason of the diamond fragments. By familiarizing  
with their meanings, one will attain the knower of paths and the exalted knower of all 
aspects (or omniscience).  
 Although the two later exalted knowers realize that the three types of phenomena are 
devoid of  truly existent production, a knower of bases that is distinguished by realizing 
subtle selflessness of phenomena is not explicitly indicated in this context
27. Nevertheless, 
the explanation that “it knows that bases are not produced” should be taken to mean that it knows [they] are not produced by a s elf of persons, for the sake of identifying an isolate of 
the Mothers.  
 Some people, having generated the basis of mistakes  through these , appear to also assert 
the perva sion of  the realization of selflessness with respect to the knower of bases and the 
knower of paths. They fail to understand that the very heavy burden of contradictions will 
weigh upon them for a long time. They assert that the knower of bases explicitly indicated 
by the early line [of the stanza]
28 exists only  among Hinayanists, and , while asserting that it 
does not differ in meaning  from the explanation here , explained that to mean ‘From the sign 
“being free of one or many,” it is established that bases are devoid of  truly existent 
production ;’ and r egarding t he assert ion that there are hearer aryas who realize subtle 
selflessness of phenomena , it appears  that they take it  like seeing a bad omen.  
 Although there are many reasons that are accepted by the Middle -Wayers, just the reason 
“being free of one or many”  shall be explained. Regarding this, there are:  
 
2B1C -2A1B -1. Identifying the predicate of the negandum that is asserted by Acarya [Haribhadra]  
2B1C -2A1B -2. The reason that refutes it in terms of other bases  
2B1C -2A1B -1. Identifying predicate of the negand um that is asserted by Acarya [Haribhadra]   
For example, suppose something such as a pebble or a twig  appears as a horse or an 
elephant at the time of emanation by an illusionist. If that very appearance were to exist from the side of the pebble, the twig , and the like without being posited through the force of 
a mistaken awareness, then, since it would be an imprint deposited by previous types similar 
to them, it would also have to be seen by those who eyes were unaffected. Likewise, if the 
person and the  aggregates were established from the side of the objects’ own uncommon 
mode of subsistence without being posited through the force of appearing to an awareness, 
                                             
 
27 The knower of bases explicitly indicated in this context belongs to the continua of learner h earers and is 
pervaded by not realizing the selflessness of phenomena.  
28 This refers to the root text 0 .1a. 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
19 then they would be able to withstand analysis by a reasoning that analyzes the ultimate, and 
would have to be seen by an arya’s meditative equipoise, and so forth. Therefore, that which 
is established from the side of the object’s uncommon mode of subsistence without being posited through the force of appearing to an awareness is the predicate of t he negandum (the 
property that is to be refuted). 
2B1C -2A1B -2. The reason that refutes it in terms of other bases  
2B1C -2A1B -2A. Stating the sign  
2B1C -2A1B -2B. Proving the modes  
2B1C -2A1B -2A. Stating the sign  
If it is not established as a truly existent one  or many, then it is pervaded by not being truly 
existent, as in the example of a reflection. “The three —bases, paths and aspects —are not 
established as truly existent one nor many” is a reason of non -observation of the pervader.  
2B1C -2A1B -2B. Proving the modes  
2B1C -2A1B -2B1. Proving the property of the subject  
2B1C -2A1B -2B2. Proving the pervasion  
2B1C -2A1B -2B1. Proving the property of the subject  
2B1C -2A1B -2B1A. Proving as free of being truly existent one  
2B1C -2A1B -2B1B. Proving as free of being truly existent many 
2B1C -2A1B -2B1A. Proving as free of being a  truly existent one  
The subject —it—is not established as truly existent one, because of having parts. The sign 
is established by way of direct  cognition in terms of a basis of dispute, such as a vase.  In  
terms of a basis of dispute that is not established by way of direct  cognition, it is established 
in dependence on the two: (1) a valid cognizer refuting the possibility of a partless object of 
knowledge, and (2) a valid cognizer ascertaining that having parts and not having parts are 
direct contradictions.  
 Although three valid cognizers are needed to prove its pervasion, [only the valid 
cognizer]  refuting  a common locus between the sign and the predicate of the negandum is 
difficult to realize. Therefore , to express it, if a common locus —between (i) having parts, 
and also (ii) being  established as truly existent one —were established, then, although the 
two—the parts and the whole —appear as different entities with respect to mode of 
appearance, they would have to exist as a single entity with respect to the mode of 
subsistence, because, otherwise, having parts would be impossible.  
 Although they appear as different entities with respect to the mode of appearance, they 
are established as a single entity with respect to the mode of subsistence; although the false mode of subsistence is not contradicted, the mode of subsistence that is established as true is 
contradicted. Also, the subject —the whole and the many parts —it follows that they do not 
exist differen tly, because, if they were to exist differently, that would have to be seen by an 
arya’s meditative equipoise, but they are not seen to be different by an arya’s meditative 
equipoise.  
 If you accept that, then: the subject —the whole —it follows that it is many, because it is 
established and it is not different from the many parts. If you accept that, it is damaged by 
the valid cognizer that comprehends it as one. 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
20  The subject —the many parts —it follows that it is one, because it is established and not 
different from the whole. The assertion is damaged by the valid cognizer of 
conventionalities that comprehends it as many.  
 In dependence on these, it has been  refuted that the many parts and the whole are not 
different. By refuting that, the sign of the consequence is refuted. Also, by refuting a 
component, the composite is refuted, whereby it is incorrect that  a later side of the sign  has 
been refuted ; we must assert that the s ign is refuted by refuting the earlier. I t has been 
refuted that i f the parts and the whole were to exist differently, that would be seen by an 
arya’s meditative equipoise, whereby a common locus between ‘having parts’ and ‘established as truly existent on e’ is refuted. 
2B1C -2A1B -2B1B. Proving as free of being truly existent many   
The subject —the three, bases, paths, and aspects —are not established as a truly existent 
many, because truly existent one does not exist.  
 QUALM: Since it has been proven above that a truly existent one is not established, why is 
the non-existence  of a truly existent one stated as a sign here?  
RESPONSE: It is a requisite to prove the pervasion of this sign. Its sign is established in dependence on the two: (1) refuting partlessness, and (2) it be ing necessarily established as 
a partless one if it were established as a truly existent one. 
2B1C -2A1B -2B2. Proving the pervasion  
Although three —(1) a valid cognizer ascertaining a basis of characteri zation  of the sign, (2) 
a valid cognizer ascertaining that the predicate of the probandum and the predicate of the 
negandum are directly contradictory, and (3) a valid cognizer refuting a common locus 
between the sign and the predicate of the negandum —are needed, since the first two are 
easy to realize, the last is as follows. When the valid cognizer (ascertaining one and many to be mutually exclusive direct contradictions in terms of a basis, a reflection) realizes the 
infeasibility of three possibilities
 between one and many, there is an ascertainment by way 
of realizing the infeasibility of three possibilities between truly existent one and many in 
terms of the basis, a reflection. 
 
OPINION of someone who has not trained in the presentation of reasoning: The 
ascertainment that an existent is either one or many eliminates the superimposition holding that something truly existent is not pervaded by being either truly existent one or many. 
RESPONSE: In that case, the valid cognizer ascertaining that product i s pervaded by being 
impermanent must eliminate the superimposition holding that the product sound is not 
pervaded by being impermanent sound, whereby the inferential cognizer supported on that 
sign would not newly eliminate the superimposition. There is pl enty to be said, but I will 
leave it for the time being.  
2B1C -2A2. From that, generating the aspiration which seeks  
COMMENTARY   
Also through lucidity in those, also both persons who strongly desire their excellent 
qualities develop great respect in that and the scriptures based upon that for the purpose of 
holding and so forth in all ways.  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
21 EXPLANATION  
There is special purpose in generating faith in the Mothers, because a lso through lucidity 
in those Mothers , also both sharp -faculty and dull -faculty trainees of the Ornament, 
persons who strongly desire their excellent qualities , to achieve the goals of the four 
aryas and so forth , (i) develop great respect in that perfection of wisdom  and the brief, 
medium, and extensive  scriptures based upon that  existin g as the  subject matter and (ii) 
generate the aspiration which seeks. For what purpose?  For the purpose of generating the 
wisdoms of the three —hearing, contemplation, and meditation —holding the words and so 
forth in all ways  regarding that which is together with the complete subject matter.  
2B1C -2A3. From that, how to attain the result after having entered  
COMMENTARY 
From that, through the stages of generating the knowers which arise from hearing and so 
forth, supreme goodnes s will be attained. 
 
EXPLANATION  
Generating great seeking is together with a special purpose, because from generating that,  
supreme goodness —unsurpassable enlightenment —will be attained  in dependence on 
that. It is not that it will be attained immediately  after having generated the seeking, because 
one must attain it  through the stages of generating the three knowers which arise from 
hearing and so forth. Through these explicitly indicating t he process of giving rise to  the 
stages of the path in the mental  continuum of Venerable [Maitreya], implicitly the reverse is 
implied.  
2B1C -2B. Summary  
COMMENTARY 
Therefore, lucidity in the Bhagavati is the principal cause of attaining all goodness.  
EXPLANATION   
The subject —faith of lucidity in the Bhagavati —is the principal cause of attaining all 
goodness, because it has already been shown to be so by means of a valid cognizer that 
ascertains cause and effect . 
2B1C -3. Dispelling arguments  
OPINION: Is the praise to the perfection of wisdom at the beginning of composing the treatise meant [as a praise] of all, or of only one portion? In the first case, the number [from 
among the eight clear realizations  that is actually praised] would have been too few, since 
the four applications and the truth body are not prai sed. In the second case, it would have 
been sufficient to praise any of the three, or the principal exalted knower of all aspects 
alone. So what is the purpose of mentioning the three together as objects of praise?  
RESPONSE: We do not assert the latter pos ition; we accept the former. Further, there is a 
special reason and purpose for explicitly mentioning the three themselves, whereby the 
number would not have been too few.  
 
COMMENTARY  
Regarding that, the three exalted knowers of all themselves include th e eight [clear 
realizations] ; those also are the perfection of wisdom, and also by them, all aims are 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
22 fulfilled in a manner that will be explained. Having kept the aforesaid in mind, [Maitreya] 
praised the perfection of wisdom by means of the three exalted  knowers of all themselves.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Regarding that, there is a reason for the praise by means of the three exalted knowers, because (i) Venerable [Maitreya] wished to praise all eight [clear realizations] , and (ii) 
having kept the  inclusion (where the three exalted knowers of all themselves include the 
eight categories ) in mind, he  praised the perfection of wisdom by means of the excellent 
qualities of the three exalted knowers of all themselves. 
 There is a purpose for praising the Mothers by means of the three exalted knowers, 
because it will be known that “ (i) those  eight categories which are included within the three 
exalted knowers also  are the complete  perfection of wisdom, and (ii) also by the three 
exalted knowers, all desired aims of the aryas are fulfilled in a manner that will be 
explained. ”  Since the eight are subsumed in the three, those eight are asserted also to be 
objects of praise.  
 The way in which three includes eight is as follows. Explanations such as ‘the more 
extensive includes t he smaller,’ ‘nature includes the occasions,’ and ‘the three exalted 
knowers that are the includers and the three exalted knowers that are the objects included 
are different’ cannot withstand analysis by reasoning, whereby they are left aside for the 
time being.  
 The meaning is that if one were to practice the three exalted knowers completely, then 
one would be practicing all the eight [clear realizations]. Therefore, having seen that the complete three exalted knowers bear the excellent qualities that are  the desired objects, it is 
impossible not to see all the eight [clear realizations]  in that way; having wished to praise 
the three exalted knowers, it is impossible not to wish to praise the eight clear realizations. 
The purpose of indicating overtly just  the three exalted knowers is so that it is made known 
that what are asserted to achieve the goals of the three lineage -bearers are individual 
unmixed paths of the three. 
 In summary, if it is one of the eight clear realizations, it is pervaded by being an  aspect 
that is an object of cultivation of one of the exalted knowers, and, through practicing in that manner, three includes eight.  
2B1C -4. Meaning of the words  
2B1C -4A. Praise by means of individual qualities 
2B1C -4B. Having summarized, paying homage  
2B1C -4A. Praise by means of individual qualities 
The first of the three is as follows. 
2B1C -4A1. The way in which the knower of bases leads to peace  
COMMENTARY   
Fully knowing that all bases are not produced is that which makes those desiring nirvana —
the hearers, and also the solitary realizers, placed in that class, whose life activities are 
superior by merely a little, indicated by a sequence —attain the two types of nirvana with the 
characteristic of being together with the aggregates and without the agg regates. 
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
23 EXPLANATION  
“Is that which makes… attain.”  By who? By those desiring the result of nirvana for their 
own welfare —the hearers, and, not only them, also the solitary realizers. How are the 
solitary realizers indicated —by what words? They are impli citly indicated by being placed 
in that class  of hearers. They are further indicated  by a sequence of words  that describe 
the excellent qualities of the knower of bases. Although indicated by being placed in the 
class of hearers, it is not that they do not  differ [from hearers], because their life -activities 
are superior by merely a little, such as revealing Dharma to others without sound, having 
abandoned the conception of apprehendeds, and not relying upon the quintessential 
instructions of a master in th e last existence. By what method? By fully knowing that all 
bases are not produced by a self of persons. 
 What is the result? T he two types : (1) nirvana that is  together with the aggregates of 
suffering, the result of past karma and afflictions, even thoug h afflictions have been 
exhaustively abandoned, and (2) nirvana with  the characteristic of being without the 
aggregates. It is incorrect to assert that here nirvana without remainder is a nirvana where 
the continuity of matter and cognition has been severe d, (i ) because that is only an 
imputation by those of the hearer schools, and (ii ) because the time has arrived for the 
Acarya himself to make a presentation of the lower nirvana drawing  from the paths of 
reasoning.  
2B1C -4A2. The way in which the knower of  paths achieves the aims of the world   
COMMENTARY  
The very entity realizing that all paths are not produced is that which causes bodhisattvas —
those enacting the welfare of migrating beings as long as samsara exists —to achieve the 
aims of all migrating beings.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The method, the very entity realizing that all paths are not  truly produced, is that which 
causes the persons who are the support, bodhisattvas —those enacting the welfare of 
migrating beings as long as samsara exists —to achieve  the result , the aims of all 
migrating beings  who are the three lineage -bearers.  
 
2B1C -4A3. The way in which the exalted knower of all aspects turns the wheels of Dharma  
COMMENTARY  
Possessing that which comprehends that all aspects are not produced, the b uddhas —bearers 
of exalted bodies which are perfectly restrained, principal of the lords who bear yoga —as 
antidotes to deeds, turn all the wheels of Dharma without exception in all aspects. 
 
EXPLANATION  
Turn.  By who? By the buddhas —bearers of exalted bodie s which are perfectly 
restrained  from discordant classes of the three doors , lords who bear the yoga of the union 
of calm abiding and special insight, and principal since they have gained mastery in being 
perfect lords of Dharma compared to the hearers and  solitary realizers and have gained 
mastery in exalted words . Through what method? Through possessing that exalted knower 
of all aspects  which comprehends  that all aspects that are the causes, results and entities 
of phenomena are not produced. What is the  result?  As antidotes to the  84,000 afflicted 
deeds  of the trainees , they turn all the wheels of Dharma that are in the nature of the 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
24 84,000 aggregates of Dharma without exception, all aspects that are the complete aspects 
of the subject matter, the method s.   
 QUALM: With respect to that, all of however much Dharma there is —(i) scriptures that 
have been taught by the Bhagavan for the sake of severing the discordant classes in the continuum of the trainees, and (ii) clear realizations —is the wheel of Dharma , but why is it 
called “wheel?”  
RESPONSE: The precious wheel of a wheel -turning king transfers progressively to this and 
that other place and becomes victorious over the discordant classes through the force of that. Likewise, [the wheel of Dharma] also tra nsfers to the continua of the trainees and becomes 
victorious over the discordant classes, such as attachment. Hence, because it is concordant with the wheel in terms of properties, it is called “wheel.”  
 
To summarize the meanings of those fragments of tea chings on the wheel of Dharma 
together for ease of understanding:  
 
2B1C -4A3A. Explicit teaching by way of the conventions of names of the three levels of the wheels of 
Dharma occurring in the Sutra Unraveling the Thought (Samdhinirmocanasutra)  
2B1C -4A3B. I ndication by means of the three levels of leading trainees occurring in the Questions of King 
Dharanishvara (Dharanishvararajapariprchchhasutra)29 although the conventions of names have not 
been taught explicitly  
2B1C -4A3A. Explicit teaching by way of the conventions of names of the three levels of the wheels of Dharma 
occurring in the Sutra Unraveling the Thought (Samdhinirmocanasutra ) 
In the Sutra, [Paramarthasamudgata says to the Buddha]30: 
 
Initially, in the are a of Varanasi in the Deer Park called “Sage’s Propounding,” 
the Supramundane Victor thoroughly turned a wheel of doctrine for those 
engaged in the Hearer Vehicle, fantastic and marvelous which none —god or 
human —had previously turned in a similar fashion in  the world, through 
teaching the aspects of the four noble truths. Furthermore, that wheel of doctrine 
thoroughly turned by the Supramundane Victor is surpassable, affords an 
occasion [for refutation], requires interpretation, and serves as a basis for 
controversy.   
 Based on just the naturelessness of all phenomena and based on just the absence 
of production, the absence of cessation, quiescence from the start, and naturally 
passed beyond sorrow, the Supramundane Victor turned a second wheel of 
doctrine f or those engaged in the Great Vehicle, very fantastic and marvelous, 
through the aspect of speaking on emptiness. Furthermore, that wheel of doctrine turned by the Supramundane Victor is surpassable, affords an occasion [for 
refutation], requires interpret ation, and serves as a basis for controversy. 
 However, based on just the naturelessness of phenomena and based on just the 
absence of production, the absence of cessation, quiescence from the start, and 
                                             
 
29  Its alternative title is:  de bzhin gshegs pa'i snying po chen po nges par bstan pa  
(Tathagatamahakarunanirdesa-nama-mahayanasutra ), Great Vehicle Sutra Teaching the Great Compassion 
of a Tathagata.  
30  Excerpted from pages 115-116 of Emptiness in the Mind -Only School of Buddhism  by Jeffrey Hopkins, 
University of California Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1999.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
25 naturally passed beyond sorrow, the Supramundane Vic tor turned a third wheel 
of doctrine for those engaged in all vehicles, possessed of good differentiation, 
fantastic and marvelous. This  wheel of doctrine turned by the Supramundane 
Victor is unsurpassable , does not afford an occasion [for refutation], is of 
definitive meaning, and does not serve as a basis for controversy.  
 
Many differing assertions of the great charioteers have arisen regarding the meaning of this 
sutra set. Acarya Arya Asanga, for the sake of taking care of the many Mahayana lineage -
bearers, opened the chariot tracks of Cognition -Only. According to that , he  thus 
differentiated between the interpretable and the definitive of the three wheels from this sutra 
set and accepted literally the teaching on three final vehicles. Further, he explained the three —extensive, medium, and brief Perfection of Wisdom Sutras —the basis of 
characterization  of the second wheel, as being of interpretable meaning in the following 
manner. In reply to a question on the interpretable and the definitive by the Bodhisattva Paramarthasamudgata, the Teacher says:  
 
Imputational natures are  not established by way of their own character and the 
two—other -powered natures and thoroughly established natures —are established 
by way of their own character. Also, thinking of these three modes —that (i) 
imputational natures are character- non-natures, (ii) other- powered natures are 
production -non-natures and ultimate -non-natures, and (iii) thoroughly established 
natures are ultimate -non-natures —all phenomena are explained to be natureless.  
 Like it has been said, taking as the basis of thought the three  types of modes of 
naturelessness of the three natures, it has been taught that “All phenomena are natureless.” Hence the Mother Sutras are not literally acceptable. Nevertheless, although being 
interpretable meaning, they are the principal sutra sets dete rmining extensively the 
emptiness that is included within thoroughly established natures, which are unchanging objects of observation of non -conceptual wisdom. Intended trainees of those [Mother 
Sutras] realize the complete thought without needing to rely on other sutra sets 
commentating on the thought, and do not hold them to be literally acceptable. Lineage -
bearers who need to be shown through a sutra such as the Sutra Unraveling the Thought (Samdhinirmocanasutra) by clearly discriminating their thought a re Mahayana lineage -
bearers, but they are of lower faculty than the former [trainees who realize the complete 
thought without needing to rely on other sutra sets]. Although the two great charioteers of 
the Middle Way and Cognition -Only are not alike with regard  to the differences between the 
interpretable and the definitive, they are similar in asserting that [the Mother Sutras] are the basis of characterization  of the second wheel explained here.  
 Just understand the first wheel explained here. A Tibetan a sserted that “Taking that 
which is the final wheel as definitive meaning, as its bases of  characterization, there are 
these very sutra sets, the Matrix of the One -Gone -Thus Sutra 
(Aryatathagatagarbhanamamahayansutra), and so forth.” Also, someone propounded that 
“Those sutras indicate that (i) established ultimate truth are self- powered permanents, and 
(ii) imputational natures and other- powered natures are clung to and posited by a mind that 
has made mistakes, and do not have the sli ghtest existence by way of their own nature.”  In 
particular, the assertions regarding the latter being indicated by the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras to be the principal subject matter lacked even the ability to discriminate the coarse 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
26 meaning of the sutras  and the commentaries on their thought. It is taught in th is very sutra 
set that other- powered natures and thoroughly established natures are truly existent, and that 
there are three final vehicles. The teaching that all phenomena are empty of true existen ce, 
that stains are adventitious and that there is one final vehicle in the Matrix of the One -Gone -
Thus Sutra, the Lion's Roar of Shrimaladevi Sutra (Shrimaladevisimhanadasutra ), and so 
forth, have been well established by the Great Vehicle  Treatise on the  Sublime Continuum 
(Mahayanottaratantrasastra ). Hence, if one were to reflect upon whether or not their 
meanings are the same, in the commentary on  the Great Vehicle  Treatise on the Sublime 
Continuum , the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras are also pointed to as reference regarding the 
way of realizing the meaning of the mode of abidance, and from that only self- emptiness is 
indicated. Also, know that the assertion —that the teachings on ultimate true existence in the 
Matrix of the One -Gone -Thus Sutra  are comment ated upon by the Great Vehicle  Treatise on 
the Sublime Continuum —is just a  contradiction. Since they appear to be topics of extremely 
coarse wrong conceptions, I will not elaborate more beyond just this. 
 Further, it is incorrect for someone to hold the Sutra Unraveling the Thought  in its 
entirety to be the basis of characterization  of the mentioned proximate word, “ This … is 
unsurpassable” [cited above], because the other questions and answers in which individual dissimilar questions were posted to the Teac her by ten bodhisattvas who are lords of the ten 
grounds in that [ Sutra ] have no relation to the basis of characterization  of “This.” Hence the 
answer in response to the question on interpretable meaning and definitive meaning asked 
by the Bodhisattva Para marthasamudgata is just those very words spoken by the Teacher. 
Summarizing the meaning of the answer spoken by the Teacher regarding this sutra cited 
above, Paramarthasamudgata said in brief, “I have understood thus.”  
  It is clear that those who have in verted  the bas es for characterization of the  sutras , 
having retained  the conventions of interpretable and the definitive of the middle and final 
wheels, depended only upon the words, without even slightly analyzing the meaning. 
According to the analysis of the meaning comment ated upon by Acarya Arya Asanga in the 
commentary of Great Vehicle  Treatise on the Sublime Continuum , and the commentaries on 
the thought of Acarya Nagarjuna by Acarya Buddhapalita and Acarya Chandrakirti, the 
Sutra Unraveling the Thought  was asserted not to be literally acceptable and to be of 
interpretable meaning, while the second wheel explained here, the Mother Sutras , was 
accepted to be of definitive meaning. The teachings on impermanence and so forth in the 
first wheel are also in terpretable meaning, but those teaching the subtle emptiness that are 
the selflessness es of persons and phenomena are definitive meaning. It is asserted that at the 
time when the first wheel of Dharma was turned, the group of five [former ascetic 
companions who became the first disciples of the Buddha], 80,000 gods, and so forth also 
directly  realized that very subtle selflessness. In [Nagarjuna’s] Sixty Stanzas of Reasoning 
(Yuktisastikakarika ) and Precious Garland of Advice for the King  (Rajaparikatharatnavali ), 
it is also proven that the teaching on this very subtle selflessness is a Hinaya na scriptural 
basket, and that even those trainees must realize just that in order to attain the result of foe -
destroyer.  
 Some —in dependence on having heard the mere repetition of that said of the great 
beings, that Acarya Bhavaviveka and so forth, having  at first familiarized with the methods 
of realizing the meaning of emptiness based upon the ways of the Autonomists (Svatantrikas) for a long time, would comprehend subtle emptiness as soon as their continua 
ripen —propound that “It is impossible for heare r aryas to realize subtle selflessness” . They 
are like a fox competing with an elephant in strength. Therefore, those who wish good for 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
27 themselves should be careful about this topic, because leisures and endowments will quickly 
disintegrate and also the fu lfillments of this life are insignificant in essence.   
 The bodhisattva Kamalashila said [in the extensive commentary to the Seven Hundred 
Stanza Perfection of Wisdom Sutra ] that very imputation by others that the person, 
aggregates, and so forth are trul y existent is an imputational nature; and its  absence  of even 
the slightest nature is taught in the Sutra Unraveling the Thought to be the meaning of 
imputational natures being character- non-natures. When refuting other- powered natures to 
be truly existent , as an auxiliary, thoroughly established natures are also refuted to be truly 
existent. Thus, he asserted that, for the sake of proving that the very teaching that all phenomena are not truly existent in the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras is definitive meani ng, 
the Sutra Unraveling the Thought  pointed to the texts of [the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras].  
[2B1C -4A3B. Indication by means of the three levels of leading trainees occurring in the Questions of King 
Dharanishvara (Dharanishvararajapariprchchhasutra) a lthough the conventions of names have not been 
taught explicitly]  
The Questions of King Dharanishvara ( Dharanishvararajapariprchchha- sutra ) does not 
speak of the conventions of the three wheels, but in the analogy of the way a jewel is 
cleaned by a skillfu l jeweler, it takes three levels of guiding trainees after they have been 
adopted: “(1) Having produced despondency towards cyclic existence through a disillusioning discussion of impermanence, suffering, selflessness and uncleanness at first, 
[the Tathaga ta] cause s sentient beings who bear the cause of various natures to be entered 
into the subduing dharma of the aryas. (2) And after that, make them realize the modes of 
the tathagatas through discussion of emptiness, signlessness and wishlessness. (3) And then 
cause them to be entered into the place of the tathagatas, through discussion of the wheels of 
irreversible Dharma, discussion of the completely pure three wheels.”  
QUALM: What is indicated by this?  
RESPONSE: It indicates the stages of proceeding on the path of both of those trainees : 
those who enter the three vehicles progressively and those who are definite in the Mahayana 
lineage. If it is someone definite in the Hinayana lineage, then, his continuum having been ripened with the first level, is fre ed from [cyclic] existence with the second level, and led to 
the Mahayana path by means of the third level. Also if it is  someone definite in the 
Mahayana lineage, his continuum is ripened with the first level, as before, and then he 
practices the meaning of the second level. Following that, the way of practicing by fully 
upholding that very wisdom realizing emptiness with the extensive factor of method is indicated by the third level.  
QUALM: The selflessness of the first level is a coarse selflessness, bu t that indicated by the 
second level is very subtle. It is incorrect to meditate  on that  at the second level, because the 
factor of method must precede the wisdom realizing emptiness.  
RESPONSE: There is no fault, (i) because, as taught in the commentary of Ornament of the 
Middle Way , sharp -faculty Mahayana lineage -bearers must proceed to the realization of 
emptiness prior to generating the mind [aspiring] towards supreme enlightenment, and (ii) because these levels are taught also in terms of the main train ees. According to these 
[levels], the Matrix of the One -Gone- Thus Sutra  should also be taken as a basis of 
characterization  of this third level, because that is very clearly the meaning of the passage 
that reveals the purpose at the conclusion of the first  chapter of the Great Vehicle  Treatise 
on the Sublime Continuum
31. Know their meanings from what has already been extensively 
                                              
31  The first chapter of this text is e ntitled the “Matrix of the One -Gone -Thus “or “Tathagatagarbha.” 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
28 explained in the exposition of that treatise. Just understand the measure of an aggregate of 
Dharma, the way of asserting of a hearer school follower, and so forth.  
2B1C -4B. Having summarized, paying homage   
COMMENTARY  
To the Mothers who act to accomplish the buddhas surrounded by hearers and so forth, I 
pay homage.  
 
EXPLANATION  
To the Mothers who act to accomplish  the goals of the buddhas surrounded by hearers , 
bodhisattvas, and so forth, I pay homage . 
2B2. Having revealed to persons with faith in the extensive, to explain  
2B2A. Meaning of the purpose  of the treatise  
2B2B. Summarized meanings  
2B2C. Meaning of the words  
2B2A. Meaning of the purpose of the treatise  
2B2A -1. Having individually rejected doubts concerni ng a lack of purpose in composing the treatise, 
explaining the general presentation of the subject matter, the three exalted knowers  
2B2A -2. Having rejected the fault of repeating the sutras, establishing that a purpose exists  
2B2A -1. Having individually rejected doubts concerning a lack of purpose in composing the treatise, explaining 
the g eneral presentation of the subject matter, the three exalted knowers 
2B2A -1A. Dispute  
2B2A -1B. Reply  
2B2A -1A. Dispute  
QUALM: Do assertors of these meanings of whatever is disputed actually exist? Even if 
they do not, [this dispute] anticipates someone  abiding within [such] doubts. In the first case 
[where their assertors actually exist], the dispute is either about the Mother Sutras or about 
the treatise. In the first case [where the dispute is about the Mother Sutras], since emptiness 
is extensively determ ined in the sutras by having held the three exalted knowers and so forth 
as the bases of attributes, there would not be doubt wondering, “ Are only the bases taught?” 
In the second case [where the dispute is about the treatise], has [the assertor] seen the 
complete treatise , or has he merely seen the expression of worship ? If he has not seen it 
even in the slightest, then [his claims  that] t he Acarya [explained  that homage]  is paid in 
that way would be irrelevant .  
 In the first case [where the assertor has seen the complete treatise ], why does the [assertor] 
dispute, despite knowing what subject matter has been taught? In the second case [where the assertor has merely seen the expression of worship ], who is the person who generates such a 
doubt as soon as Ve nerable [Maitreya] has finished writing the mere stanza of the 
expression of worship? When seeing praise to the Mothers by means of the three exalted 
knowers, there is not the slightest certainty that the complete corpus  of the treatise must 
accord with ho w the expression of worship has turned out. If there is, then, having already 
realized the three exalted knowers have been determined  [as the subject matter], wondering, 
“What has been taken as the subject matter?”  would be a question of an unintelligent 
person. Thus it is meaningless to create such an objection and reply in this treatise. Even if 
there is no one who makes such an assertion, if it is set forth by the Acarya for the sake of 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
29 eliminating possible doubts in other possibilities, since it contrad icts the Great 
Commentary,  what it is like must be described and, also, from where this objection ensued 
must be described.  
 
RESPONSE: True indeed, but saying that  “He composed a treatise that took the three 
exalted knowers as the subject matter” is an imp licit dispute regarding the promise [to 
compose the text ]can hardly be correct, because asking “What is the subject matter?” while 
ascertaining such is a childish question. For, even implicitly formulating the promise [to 
compose the text ] as “He composed a treatise in accordance with the excellent qualities of 
the objects of praise” is uncertain to be related.  
  Therefore, if there actually is a person who makes objection in this way, then, having 
ascertained by means of a correctly assuming consciousness what are determined with 
respect to  the three exalted knowers, he must at first determine their three objects of 
observation in order to determine them, since, without realizing their objects of 
observation —the three, bases, paths and aspects —there is no realization of three object -
possessors. Hence, the basis giving rise to the statement “there will be a fault that will be explained below,” as well as the doubt, is the expression of worship. Also in that case, the 
time has arrived to provide the answer to the question of those with probing minds; it is 
difficult to eliminate the arising of such doubts of those with probing minds in dependence 
on the statement of the expression of worship.  
 Hence the principal qualm —the dispute that it follows that there wo uld be no purpose in 
composing the Ornament for Clear Realization  when all the three exalted knowers are taken 
as the subject matter, since it repeats the Sutras —occurs just in making the connection of the 
[statement of] purpose -and-relationship. In order to eliminate its possibility, there is this 
very rejection of the dispute regarding taking the parts singly as the subject matter. Hence, 
this is clearly the meaning of the Acarya’s anticipation of those who abide in the previous 
position. Also, this does not contradict the Great Commentary ; it means the flinging of these 
repudiations that are indicated in the context of dispute here if an assertion like this were to 
arise. Those abiding in doubts thinking, “ Like it has be en explained here, there would be 
these faults if the parts were only indicated singly; if one were to assert in that way, that would be true, but I do not assert such,” are taken up by the Acarya.  
 Having reflected upon these objection and replies ensuing  from the expression of 
worship, he gathered them into a topic of dispute and answer regarding the expression of 
worship. It is clear that the “beings of low intelligence”
32 and so forth explained in the 
dispute and answer regarding the purpose -and-relation ship are manifestation s of not having 
realized the meaning well. For the sake of proving that there is a purpose for composing the 
Ornament for Clear Realization , having rejected the doubts of lack of purpose, it is very 
clear that he revealed the general presentation of the three exalted knowers, the subject matter of the treatise. It will also be explained that it is incorrect to take as individual the topics of (i) the expression of worship and (ii) the purpose -and-relationship in earlier and 
later dispu te and answer. 
 
COMMENTARY  
If the treatise Ornament for Clear Realization, preceded by homage and praise in that way, 
includes anything whatsoever from among the bases, antidotes, and aspects:  
                                              
32  See commentary under outline 2B2A-2 below.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
30  
EXPLANATION   
Therefore, if one were to investigate, when com posing the treatise Ornament for Clear 
Realization  preceded by homage and praise in that way,  whether it includes anything 
whatsoever —from among  (i) the bases  for the sake of generating the wisdom that discerns  
phenomena, (ii) antidotes  for the sake of aba ndoning the discordant classes, and  (iii) 
aspects  for the sake of knowing all objects of knowledge without exception —as the subject 
matter, [one would see that] all of these are inappropriate. 
 
COMMENTARY  
In the case of the first position, effort is meani ngless; in this Perfection of Wisdom, there is 
no occurrence of any basis not mentioned in the treatises with the characteristics.  
 
EXPLANATION  
In the case of the first position, effort to compose this treatise is meaningless , because it 
repeats the Abhidharma; for, in this Perfection of Wisdom  Ornament for Clear Realization  
like that, there is no occurrence of any basis not mentioned in the treatises with the  
characteristics  that determine the specific and general characteris tics of phenomena, the 
Abhidharma (Manifest Knowledge) treatises.  
 
COMMENTARY  
In the case of the second, also because of including merely the completely pure properties, 
by not including the thoroughly afflicted properties, that this is the antidote to wh at will not 
be understood.  
 
EXPLANATION  
In the case of the second  position, also because of including merely  the antidotes —the 
completely pure properties —as the subject matter, by not including the objects of 
abandonment —the thoroughly afflicted properties —as the subject matter, that this  
antidote is the antidote to what object of abandonment will not be understood  in 
dependence on this treatise.  
 
COMMENTARY   
In the case of the third, also because of including merely some aspects without bases, as the meaning is not realized because it does not explain even slightly, the meaning is not 
realized. Will the aforesaid not become the thought of others?   
EXPLANATION  
In the case of the third  position , are the aspects taught by being together with the bases, or 
are they taught without relating to the bases? In the first case, there will be just that fault of 
repeating the Abhidharma. In the latter case, also because of including merely some 
aspects without bases  as the subject matter, it follows that it does not e xplain even slightly 
the requisite meaning for beings seeking the object of engagement , as the meaning related 
to the bases that are aggregates characterized by impermanence, selflessness, and so forth is 
not even slightly realized  in dependence on this treatise. If you accept that, then it follows 
that composing this treatise is meaningless, because it does not explain the requisite 
meaning even slightly  to beings. Therefore, composing the treatise is without purpose . Will 
the aforesaid not become the thou ght of others  with probing minds ?  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
31 2B2A -1B. Reply  
2B2A -1B1. Actual reply 
2B2A -1B2. Stating passages of proof  
2B2A -1B3. Explaining the meaning of the passages  
2B2A -1B4. Summary  
2B2A -1B1. Actual reply 
COMMENTARY  
It is not that. Why? Since all clear realizations are included within the three exalted knowers 
of all, just according to the order of the hearers and solitary realizers, the bodhisattvas , and 
the unsurpassable buddhas, because they are being included also within the three positions together.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —Ornament for Clear Realization —it is not that there is fault by means of 
including only any one of the bases, antidotes, and aspects singly as the subject matter. 
Why? Because all the three —bases, antidotes, and aspects —are determ ined to be the 
subject matter by it; they are being included as its subject matter (by way of [their]  manner 
of characterizing the three exalted knowers) also within  the three positions of the bases, 
antidotes, and aspects  together. 
 There is a reason for determining the three exalted knowers; it is because of desiring to 
determine all the aryas’ clear realizations, since all clear realizations are included within  
the knower of bases, the knower of paths, the exalted knower of all aspects, and the three 
exalted knowers of all, just according to the order of all the clear realizations of the 
hearers and solitary realizers, the bodhisattvas , and the unsurpassable buddhas.  
 
OPINION: The clear realizations of the four aryas are included as the expressed  subject 
matter, because the three exalted knowers are included as the expressed  subject matter. 
There is pervasion, because the clear realizations of the four aryas are included within the 
three exalted knowers. 
RESPONSE: What is propounded above is posited by someone who does not understand 
the classification of engagement through exclusion of the expresser.  
 
Regarding (i) the three —bases, antidotes, and aspects —and (ii) the three exalted knowers, 
in this context, in dependence on one, the other exists as an ob ject to be characterized; if we 
combine the bases of attributes and the attributes, they would be called “the instances of the exalted wisdom realizing the two selflessnesses (as well as their retinues) upon the bases, 
the four noble truths,” and if they w ere separated into individuals, they would be known as 
“the three —bases, antidotes, and aspects.”  
 
OPINION:  Regarding that, also in this context, a past Tibetan scholar, without realizing the 
occurrence of the dispute (that it follows that composing the treatise will be without purpose if all the three were included as the subject matter), through making the connection of the 
purpose -and-relationship, having thought that the dispute and answer regarding that are 
implicitly indicated here, stated the dispute  as, “It follows that there are three bodies of the 
treatise if all the three were included”  and the reply as, “Since the circumstance of a single 
person attaining enlightenment is indicated, there would not be three bodies.” Well , the 
three exalted knowe rs would be the clear realizations of only one person.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
32 RESPONSE: Although they are determined as the circumstance of one person, it has been 
explained that, “The three exalted knowers are the clear realizations of individual persons; it 
is thus.” That [pos ited above] is very incorrect, (i) because the rejection of the dispute of the 
parts singly is an ordinary one, and (ii) because —that it follows that composing the treatise 
is without purpose if all the three are included —is the principal dispute, whereby it is 
inappropriate to explain it as the implicitly indicated meaning of this commentary.  
  
Therefore, these rejections of dispute are for the sake of (i) establishing a general 
presentation of the subject matter of the t reatise and (ii) proving that there is a purpose for 
composing the Ornament for Clear Realization .  
2B2A -1B2. Stating passages of proof  
2B2A -1B2A. Stating the proof from the medium Mother  
2B2A -1B2B. Stating the proof from the brief Mother  
2B2A -1B2C. Making  referral to the proof from the extensive Mother  
2B2A -1B2A. Stating the proof from the medium Mother  
2B2A -1B2A -1. Brief indication  
2B2A -1B2A -2. Extensive explanation  
2B2A -1B2A -1. Brief indication  
The reason why the clear realizations of the four aryas are included within the three exalted 
knowers: 
 
COMMENTARY  
Thus, from the medium Mother of the Victors : “Subhuti, the knowers of all are of hearers 
and solitary realizers; the knowers of paths are of bodhisattvas; the exalted knowers of all 
aspects are of Tat hagata Foe -destroyer Samyak Sambuddhas (the One -Gone- Thus, Foe -
Destroyer, Perfectly Complete Enlightened Ones).”  
 
EXPLANATION  
Thus, from the medium Mother of the Victors , having called out, “Subhuti,” [it is said 
that] the knowers of all , (from between (i) the support of presentation and (ii) the support 
of generation, in terms of the first ,) are clear realizations of hearers and solitary realizers; 
the knowers of the paths,  (as before, in terms of the support of presentation that 
individually discriminates the class of clear realization ,) are clear realizations  of 
bodhisattvas; the exalted knowers of all aspects , (according to both the supports of 
presentation and generation ,) are clear  realizations of Tathagata Foe -destroyer Samyak 
Sambuddhas (the one -gone -thus, foe -destroyer, perfectly complete enlightened ones). 
 OPINION: Knowers of bases exist in the continua of only hearers and solitary realizers, and 
knowers of paths in  the continua of only bodhisattvas.  
RESPONSE: This assertion is not at all the thought of the treatise because of the following. 
The Great Commentary says, “The subject matter that is explained, the meaning of sutras 
such as the Arya Eight Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom , the nature of accomplishing 
the mind of enlightenment, the instruction s, and so forth are all differentiations by way of  
divisions into eight chapters .”  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
33  Furthermore, this has been taught many times also in the commentary in the cont ext of 
saying “No basis ; no going;  no production” [4.30d] and also in the commentary on the truth 
body. Thus, taking the eight principal subject matters of the eight chapters, the ten topics 
which characterize the exalted knower of all aspects, as the basi s of the path, their occasions 
divided into eight, they should be practiced by Mahayana persons. And also in this small 
commentary [Haribhadra’s Clear Meaning ], the natures of the eight clear realizations are 
taught to be objects of experience by bodhisatt vas. According to you [who expressed the 
above opinion], one would have to assert that the knower of bases was not indicated as the 
principal subject matter of the third chapter. The commentary on the truth body also says, 
“The exalted knower of all aspect s and.”33 There is contradiction with the explanation that 
the term “and” indicates the knowers of paths and the knowers of bases and so forth.  
 OPINION by someone of the past: Although both a knower of bases and a knower of paths 
are generated in a bodhisattva’s continuum, they are of different entities , and all three 
exalted knowers in a buddha’s continuum are generated as different entities. Further, an 
exalted knower of all aspects directly knows all aspects without exception, but they are not 
known by the other two exalted knowers of a buddha. Even though a knower of paths 
directly knows the general characteristics of paths, they are not known by a knower of 
bases. Hence, a knower of bases (belonging to the divisions into three exalted knowers) solely knows bases, and a knower of paths [belonging to the divisions into three exalted 
knowers] solely knows bases and paths. Therefore, three exalted knowers are only of 
different entities.  
 
OPINION by someone else regarding that: If an exalted knower of all aspects does not 
realize bases, this contradicts that it realizes the aspects based upon them . If it does realize 
bases, then the position that it is not of one entity with a knower of bases will degenerate. 
 
RESPONSE: It is difficult for the [above]  repudiation to become correct, but a buddha 
never has conceptions or mistaken non -conceptual [minds], whereby we must assert that a 
knower of bases in the mental continuum of a buddha is an unmistaken non -conceptual 
[mind]. In that case, if a basis appears , the aspect must also appear to it. An awareness that 
does not see it (even though it appears directly) does not exist in a buddha, because he has 
exhaustively abandoned all seeds of mistakes. It must be asserted that even a buddha’s eye 
consciousness kno ws all objects of knowledge, as taught by Acarya Haribhadra, whereby it 
is difficult to posit that the three exalted knowers of a buddha are of different entities.   
 
QUALM: What is the explanation that knowers of bases are clear realizations of hearers and  
solitary realizers in this context like?   RESPONSE: It boils down to merely different supports of presentation (i) because knowers 
of bases are necessary in order for hearer and solitary realizer aryas to achieve mere peace, and they are able to achieve that merely by means of the knowers of bases; (ii) because 
bodhisattvas must know the three paths in order to generate the exalted knowers of all aspects, and they are able to achieve that merely by means of those [knowers that know the 
three paths]; and (iii) since the exalted knowers of all aspects are definitely needed in order 
                                             
 
33 See the commentary to point (21), the twenty -first  set of uncontaminated exalted wisdom, under the 
outline  2B2C -3B1B -2A1C -2. Positing those as t he exalted wisdom truth body.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
34 to turn all the wheels of Dharma without exception. Thus, there are different presentations 
of the dissimilar imprints of the individual exalted knowers.  
2B2A -1B2A -2. Extensive e xplanation  
First of the three subsections:  
2B2A -1B2A -2A. How the clear realizations of hearers and solitary realizers are included within the knowers of 
bases  
2B2A -1B2A -2A1. Question 
COMMENTARY 
"Bhagavan, on account of what are the knowers  of all ,34 [those] of hearers and solitary 
realizers ?" 
 
EXPLANATION  
"Bhagavan, on account of what  reason and purpose are the knowers  of all , the clear 
realizations of hearers and solitary realizers ?" 
2B2A -1B2A -2A2. Reply  
COMMENTARY 
"Subhuti, all are merely these: however ma ny outer and inner phenomena there are. Hearers 
and solitary realizers also know them; they are not, however, by all paths; they also do not 
in all aspects. Because of that, [those] of the hearers and solitary realizers are said to be the 
very knowers of a ll." 
 
EXPLANATION  
Having called out, “Subhuti,” all  bases are merely these: however many outer and inner 
phenomena , the twelve sources,35 there are. Hearers and solitary realizers also  directly 
know them  distinguished by the sixteen [aspects of the four no ble truths], impermanence 
and so forth, whereby they have the knowers of bases; they are not, however, definite 
emerging by all  three paths , whereby they do not have the knowers of paths; they also do 
not directly realize all aspects, whereby they do not have the exalted knowers of all aspects. 
Because of that, the clear realizations of the hearers and solitary realizers are said to be  
included within the very knowers of all.  
 This sutra shows that hearers and solitary realizers have knowers of bases, but not 
knowers of paths and exalted knowers of all aspects. However, this does not even slightly 
indicate that the other two persons36 do not have the knowers of bases. 
2B2A -1B2A -2B. How the clear realizations of bodhisattvas are included  within the knowers of paths  
2B2A -1B2A -2B1. Question  
COMMENTARY 
"Bhagavan, on account of what are the knowers37 of the aspects of the paths [those] of 
bodhisattvas?"  
                                              
34 While the Tibetan reads thams cad ’tshal ba  here, the Sanskrit text reveals sarvajñatā, which is usually 
rendered as thams cad mkhen pa (knowers of all). Compare with the similar cases below.  
35  These are the six outer sources—forms, odors, sounds, tastes, objects of touch, and phenomena —and the 
six inner sources— eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mental sources.  
36  The other two persons are bodhisattvas and buddhas.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
35  
EXPLANATION  
"Bhagavan, on account of what are the knowers  of the aspects of the  three paths , the 
clear realizations of bodhisattvas?"  
2B2A -1B2A -2B2. Reply 
2B2A -1B2A -2B2A. Meaning of the words  
2B2A -1B2A -2B2B. Decisive analysis  
2B2A -1B2A -2B2A. Meaning of the words  
Advice to those possessing pure wisdom: 
 
COMMENTARY  
"Subhuti, bodhisattvas sho uld generate all paths: (i) that which is the path of the hearers, (ii) 
that which is the path of the solitary realizers, and (iii) that which is the path of the buddhas; 
and they should know  all paths.”  
 
EXPLANATION  
"Subhuti, bodhisattvas should first generate  in their continua all the three: (i) that which 
is the path of the hearers, the exalted wisdom realizing the selflessness of persons; (ii) 
that which is the path of the solitary realizers, the exalted wisdom realizing apprehendeds 
and their appreh enders as empty of being different substances; and (iii) that which is the 
path of the buddhas,  the path realizing all phenomena as being devoid of  true existence; 
and then they should  directly know38 all paths.”  
 
COMMENTARY  
“They should also fully complet e those, and also perform the activities  of those paths.  But, 
without  having completed prayers, without  having ripened sentient beings, and without  
having purified the buddha land, they do not actualize the perfect end. Because of that, those of bodhisattv as are ‘the knowers of aspects of paths.’”  
 
EXPLANATION  
“They should also fully complete those  three paths by means of abandonment and 
realization , and also perform the activities of those three paths , the activities of ripening 
sentient beings in that wa y. Because of that, the clear realizations of bodhisattvas are 
called the very knowers of aspects of paths."  
 The subject —bodhisattva aryas —(i) possess pure wisdom, because they are skilled in 
generating in their continua the complete classes of abandonmen t and realization of the 
three paths, and (ii) with respect to the latter, possess pure method, because they are skilled 
regarding the proper and improper times for actualizing the perfect end.  
 QUALM: Should  they also perform all the activities of the three paths?  
RESPONSE: They do not actualize the perfect ends of those three paths.
 “By way of those 
three paths” [rather than “of those three paths”] having emerged, explanation that the text is 
corrupt does not seem to be taken as erroneous. 
                                                                                                                                                      
37 mārggajñatā  
38 jñātavyāḥ. The  Tibetan can be  read as “make known” instead of “should know”, but there is no ambiguity 
in the Sanskrit. 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
36  
QUALM: Is it [that they do not actualize the perfect end] at all times?  
RESPONSE: In terms of the emanation body (nirmanakaya ), one makes a promise for the 
sake of trainees of a special land of the emanation body, such as the Victor Amitabha 
(Infinite Light), who promi sed, “I will not attain enlightenment until there is no one who 
does not possess the five clairvoyances in the land where I become enlightened.” And in 
terms of the complete enjoyment body (sambhogakaya), a promise is made that until one 
has completed the ability for only Mahayana aryas to occur in one’s retinue, one will not 
attain enlightenment.  
 Not having completed prayers  wishing thus [as explained in the previous paragraph] , 
not having ripened sentient beings —who are like ripened boils ready to be la nced ,39 
having ripened as many sentient beings as there are countless sentient beings (in each retinue of as many displays of exalted bodies as there are in a billion lands simultaneously) 
who are placed on the arya path —or not having purified the buddha land  by means of 
fully completing roots of virtue that are the causes accomplishing the special lands of a 
complete enjoyment body and lands of an emanation body such as Sukhavati (Blissful Land 
of Amitabha Buddha), they do not actualize the perfect end  in a manner of abiding in 
absorption in the sphere of peace unless they are roused from it, and the like.   Explaining that the criterion for having completed one’s prayers is that one is able to 
effortlessly spontaneously accomplish others’ welfare while bein g set in meditative 
equipoise on dharmata (the final nature of phenomena) becomes [like] saying, “Do not 
actualize the truth body as long as you have not attained the truth body,” whereby a topic of 
doubt does not exist. Taking the criterion for ripening s entient beings to be completing 
trainees of the bodhisattva’s path is also similar to the former and is only a probandum (object to be proven).  
 Further, someone who claims that only a pure land is seen with respect to a buddha’s 
self-appearance and an imp ure land is posited from the trainees’ other- appearance does not 
know how to posit a faultless exalted wisdom knowing varieties
40 that is included within a 
buddha’s own continuum. Saying that is only a wrong conception that has failed to understand the pres entation of reasoning that “ By reversing  what is seen by an omniscient 
mind, one is caused  to understand that it does not exist at all.” [For,] if the appearance of an 
impure land does not dawn to a buddha’s self- appearance, then an impure land would not b e 
directly seen by a buddha and it must definitely become ascertained as non -existent, since 
an implicit realization is also untenable.  
 Hence, the earlier [regarding completed prayers] is as explained above. The middle one 
[regarding ripened sentient bein gs], being able to place the numberless sentient beings (in 
the retinue of each display of as many exalted bodies displayed in a billion lands) in the state of an arya with each stanza, (i) is also contingent upon doing so in a single time, 
simultaneously, becoming effortless and spontaneous (since one is unable to do that as long 
as there is conceptual motivation), and (ii) relies upon entering the absorption in the sphere of peace, in a manner of not arising again, after having abandoned the levels of lat encies of 
ignorance and uncontaminated karma. It is implicitly indicated that, when such trainees 
have already been placed in the ripening paths (from between the two —ripening paths and 
liberating paths), then one actualizes the perfect end. The criterion of purifying the land is to 
                                             
 
39  Btol should perhaps be emended to read gtol . 
40  “Varieties” refers to conventional truths, as opposed to “the modes,” which refers to ultimate trut hs. 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
37 have fully completed the potency  of the roots of virtue that will accomplish not just any 
land, but rather the special land of a complete enjoyment body and the land of an emanation 
body.  
2B2A -1B2A -2B2B. Decisive analysis  
2B2A -1B2A -2B2B -1. Identifying the modes of generality and exception  
2B2A -1B2A -2B2B -2. Explaining the meaning of the teaching that bodhisattvas complete the abandonments 
and realizations of hearers and solitary realizers  
2B2A -1B2A -2B2B -3. Having identified the p erfect end, explaining how it is actualized  
2B2A -1B2A -2B2B -1. Identifying the modes of generality and exception  
As terminologies of generality and exception are terminologies that are only  overt , it is 
incorrect to apply them to what is indicated implicitl y. In terms of what is indicated 
explicitly in this context, stemming from the generality, “They should also fully complete 
those, and also perform the activities  of those paths” [from the commentary under 2B2A -
1B2A -2B2A], if one wonders whether they compl ete all activities of the paths, then there 
comes the exception, “They should  not actualize the perfect ends of those three paths” [from 
the explanation under 2B2A -1B2A -2B2A]. Since this is a small topic of doubt, I will not 
elaborate more beyond just this . 
2B2A -1B2A -2B2B -2. Explaining the meaning of the teaching that bodhisattvas complete the abandonments and 
realizations of hearers and solitary realizers 
OPINION: The realizations of the hearers and solitary realizers are completed on the first ground, but  the abandonments are completed on the eighth ground. The abandonment of the 
abidance of the afflicted mentality
41 and all afflictive obscurations without exception is the 
reason for the latter [that abandonments are completed on the eighth ground].  
RESPONSE:  That is not th e assertion of the Acarya, for he made divisions of the objects of 
abandonment of the path of meditation of the three realms into the sixteen afflictions in the Great Commentary [on the Eight Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom ]. And the Great 
Commentary  says, “ By way of division of the completely purified phenomena on the paths 
of seeing and meditation, [ the paths of seeing and meditation ] are presented as the ten 
grounds, Very Joyous and so forth .” Hence, it is explained that affl ictive obscurations even 
exist on the occasion of the tenth ground.  
 SOMEONE, h aving refuted that system, propounds : Both realizations and abandonments 
are completed on the first ground. The meaning of having completed abandonment is that the afflictive ob scurations that bind one to cyclic existence are abando ned even from the 
first ground, but the dormant afflictive obscurations are not abandoned even by hearer and 
solitary realizer foe -destroyers, because they take a body of the nature of mental  
conscious ness from the cause that is the latencies of ignorance. Therefore, both realizations 
and abandonments are completed on the first ground.”  
RESPONSE: Someone who propounds that is only propounding an erroneous presentation 
of the objects of abandonment and a ntidotes, as well as the way of abandoning the objects 
of abandonment, (i) because that the hearer and solitary realizer foe -destroyers have not 
exhaustively abandoned the seeds of the afflictive obscurations has  not been taught  by any 
                                             
 
41  This is one of the eight collections of consciousnesses asserted by the Mind -Only School following 
Asanga.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
38 of the great chariot eers, and has been well refuted and (ii) because that is also incorrect by 
way of reasoning.  
 Thus, since the seeds of acquired afflictive obscurations would not have been 
exhaustively abandoned on the path of seeing of the hearers and solitary realizers, it would 
be inappropriate to posit learner arya persons to be the Sangha Jewel, because, according to 
you, immediately after the path of seeing has been attained, the seeds of doubt regarding the 
perfect objects of refuge would not have been exhaustively abandoned, through  the path of 
seeing. If you say that it [the reason] is not established, then it contradicts [your statement 
above] that afflictive obscurations have not been exhaustively abandoned by hearer and 
solitary realizer foe -destroyers, and [you r] stating it as the reason for the taking of a body  of 
the nature of mentality in dependence on the levels of latencies of ignorance is irrelevant, because the “levels of latencies of ignorance” that have been explained —which are present 
in the continua of hearer and solitary realizer foe -destroyers, as well as in bodhisattvas who 
have attained mastery —are taken to be knowledge obscurations, not afflictive obscurations, 
by the great charioteers. 
 
OPINION: We also assert that dormant afflictive obscurations  are knowledge obscurations. 
RESPONSE: This is even more greatly amazing, because knowledge obscurations are inappropriate in any way as objects of abandonment in the analysis of whether or not the 
abandonments of hearers and solitary realizers have been c ompleted on the first ground. 
Therefore, you should not, like enthroning a fox as the king, enter into the Buddha’s 
teachings and repudiate them. Hence, [Vimuktisena’s] Illuminating the Twenty Thousand
42 
teaches:  
 
Furthermore, it has been taught, “That which is a knower and an abandoning of 
someone —ranging from stream -enterers to solitary realizers —is a forbearance of 
a bodhisattva who has attained forbearance with regard  to the dharma that is not 
produced.” What is  forbearance? It is the forbearance of dharma knowledge with 
respect to sufferings43. From what is this known? If it is different from  another 
path, then it is because lineage, power and accumulation will be superior. For, the 
actions  of a forbearance of a bodhisattva subsume all actions  of the realizations44 
of others without exception. That which is a knower and an abandon ing of them 
is a forbearance of [such a bodhisattva]; with respect to the statement, ‘ The 
criterion of realization is not just this ,’ it is another enumeration .  
 
According to the meaning said above, the explanation has been taught to mean that, 
“Having intended that the actions  of a forbearance of dharma knowledge with respect to 
sufferings of a bodhisattva on the path of seeing subsume al l functions of the realizations of 
the selflessness of persons of hearers and solitary realizers without exception, it signifies 
that the abandonments and realizations of hearers and solitary realizers are subsumed in the 
forbearance of a bodhisattva; this  does not signify that all the ability of a realization of 
selflessness of persons without exception is complete on the path of seeing.” Hence, it is not 
                                              
42 This refers to Vimuktisena’s Commentary on the Twenty -five Thousand (Abhisamayalamkara -vrtti ). 
43  This is one of the sixteen instants of for bearance and knowledge of dharma and subsequent knowledge 
with respect to four noble truths.  
44  Rtog pa  emended to read rtogs pa in accordance with the explanation below.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
39 [Vimuktisena’s] assert ion that both the abandonments and realizations of hearers and 
solitary realizers, or either of them is complete on the first ground. Then what?  
 If [a bodhisattva]  wishes to exhaustively abandon those indicated to be the objects of 
abandonment —the afflictive obscurations in the case of the hearers and solitary realizers, 
and the uncommon knowledge obscurations of the conceptions of apprehendeds of the 
solitary realizers —, then, by intending that [a bodhisattva] ha s the ability that is able to 
abandon them on the path of seeing, it is explained that the actions  of a forbearance of a 
bodhisattva subsumes all actions  of the realization s of others. If the reason for the presence 
of such ability lies in another path mentioned  above [in Illuminating the Twenty Thousand  
cited above] —the  exalted wisdom  direct ly realiz ing all phenomena as being empty of tru e 
existence —being superior to that of hearers and solitary realizers, then the reason “because 
of being superior to the hearers and solitary realizers by means of possessing the Mahayana 
lineage, very sharp powers of fa ith and so forth, and the vast accumulation of merit, in 
addition to that” is stated.  In dependence on the teaching in the commentary on the Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum (Mahayanottaratantrasastra ) that the very knower of paths that is 
included within non -conceptual exalted wisdom arises naturally on the eighth ground, a 
great lama translator says that the paths of the hearers and solitary realizers are generated in a manner of reflections  on the eighth ground, not before, because there is the misgiving  of 
them falling into becoming hearers or solitary realizers [before the eighth ground].  
 QUALM: How is “What is forbearance? It is the forbearance of dharma knowledge with respect to sufferings” [in Illuminating the Twenty Thousand cited a bove] explained?  
RESPONSE  [from the great lama translator] : It indicates the object to be known —the 
forbearance that is included within the path of the hearers; it does not indicate the knower—
the uncommon forbearance of a bodhisattva. Thus, it is asserted that the abandonments and realizations of hearers and solitary realizers are completed on the eighth ground.  
 The meaning of this citation from Illuminating the Twenty Thousand is as follows: if 
someone, such as a bodhisattva abiding on the forbea rance level of the path of preparation, 
were to principally make effort in abandoning the seeds of the afflictive obscurations, then 
at the time  of having attained the path of seeing , he would have been  able to exhaustively 
abandon the afflictive obscurati ons and to attain the liberated path in which they have been 
abandoned. Hence, it indicates the ability and force of the path in a manner of examining a 
possibility of attain ing it  if someone abiding on the dharma forbearance of the Mahayana 
path of seeing  were to also make effort in that way, as explained before. Not like that , (i) the 
exhaustive abandonment of the seeds of afflictive obscurations (by a bodhisattva arya who 
has not previously traversed the Hinayana paths) and (ii) its liberated path  would not arise 
until he has attained buddhahood. This also is the assertion of the Acarya  [Haribhadra] .  
2B2A -1B2A -2B2B -3. Having identified the perfect end, explaining how it is actualized  
QUALM: With regard  to that, what is the perfect end? How is it actualiz ed?  
RESPONSE: It is assert ed that (i) b y taking the perfect end to be mere thusness, the 
meaning of actualizing it is taken to be placed in meditative equipoise in a manner of not 
rising again, and (ii) by taking the cessation that is a dharmata  free from  stains to be the 
perfect end, attaining that is to actualize it.  These assertions woul d mean “One should  not 
actualize buddhahood until buddhahood is attained,” whereas it is difficult for th em to be 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
40 correct. This is because, although referring to the nirvana of severance45, they contradict the 
implied teaching that one should actualize  it after having completed [prayers], ripened 
[sentient beings] and purified [one’s buddha land]. 
 Someone makes a distinction between being able or not being able to (i) place  in 
meditative equipoise on mere thusness in a manner of not rising, and (ii) set  in meditative 
equipoise on the thusness free from stains by way of not rising. This claim is suitable as an 
object of laughter.  
 Therefore, these instruction s are instr uctions mainly for persons definite in the Mahayana 
lineage; further, the instructions are to begin from generating the mind [aspiring] towards supreme enlightenment, with the exception, “Do not actualize the perfect end on any 
occasion where the three [properties]
46 have not been completed.” In terms of ordinary 
disciples, the hearer and solitary realizer foe -destroyers, having arisen from the sphere of 
peace, are  instructed  to begin from generating the mind [aspiring] towards the Mahayana, 
with the excepti on, “Do not actualize the perfect end from now onwards in any interval 
where the three [properties] have not been completed.” Understand that if it is impossible for anyone to be able to actualize the perfect end during that time, explaining such 
instructi ons on this occasion would be  without purpose.  
 QUALM: In that case, what is the perfect end? How is it actualized?  
RESPONSE: In general, even thusness is the perfect end. When arya bodhisattvas have 
actualized the perfect end, they must be in direct med itative equipoise on thusness. 
However, here it is the very sphere of pacification of pervasive compounded suffering. The 
setting in absorption in the sphere of peace by hearer and solitary realizer foe -destroyers (for 
up to an eon in a manner of not risin g again in reliance on attitude, due to having been 
captivated by the bliss of peace prior to entering absorption) is the meaning of having actualized the perfect end in terms of Hinayana lineage -bearers themselves. Such trainees 
definite in the Hinayana l ineage, even if given the previously explained instructions right 
from the start, will also degenerate from the lower lineage. Having risen from the sphere of peace, the person who has generated a mind [aspiring] towards supreme enlightenment will 
enter ab sorption on that again and again through the force of previous habituation. 
However, discerning people should understand that they lack even the mere stain of giving 
up the Mahayana generated mind [of enlightenment].  
 According to  the assertions of the gre at charioteers who accept that true cessations are 
ultimate truths, the perfect end indicated in this context of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras 
should only be explained to be solely thusness. The assertion of this Acarya who composed 
the commentary, as ex plained above, is also the assertion of Acarya Dharmamitra. In view 
of the expression “bearing the support of not actualizing suchness,”
47 those who identify 
“the end that is the absence of self in a person, peace itself” as the perfect end, and, as proof 
                                              
45 Ched pa is sometimes translated as “annihilation.” Under the outline  “2B2C -1C2A -1A2A. The path that 
stops the extremes of existence and peace which is explicitly shown,” it is explained that “The extreme of 
severance is a nirvana that is attained not only by severing rebirth through the force of karma and afflictions, 
but al so by severing rebirth through the force of compassion and prayers. ” 
46  Annotated in accordance with page 62 of this Tibetan text.  
47 This phrase appears in Haribhadra’s commentary on the knower of paths under the outline 2B2A -1B3. 
Explaining the meaning of  the passages.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
41 of that, cite the passage with the reason of not indicating the path of meditation48 have 
realized well the Acarya’s thought, but failed to examine the saying that Dharmamitra 
asserted the perfect end to be the nirvana of severance.  
 
QUALM: Are bodhisattvas  who have not previously traversed the Hinayana path able or not 
able to actualize the perfect end before completing the three properties? What is it like  if it 
is taken that  they actualize it?  
RESPONSE: In asserting that they actualize it, if they are abl e to do so immediately after 
having attained the Mahayana path of seeing, what need to mention about the eighth -
grounders? However, the misgivings regarding seventh -grounders and below actualizing it 
is smaller; the misgivings regarding eighth -grounders is great er, whereby, having attained 
the eighth ground, the v ictors rouse them from cessation. That also is merely examining a 
possibility ; having attained the eighth ground, how can it be possible to actualize the perfect 
end before completing the three pro perties? This means that, if they were to actualize it, 
then, the mind having been well induced by the bliss of pacification of pervaded compounded suffering upon thusness, they would enter absorption for an eon or more in the 
sphere of peace. How can there be the misgiving that, although the exception is to actualize the perfect end after having completed the three [properties], due to captivated by that 
peace , they will come under its influence?  
 Hearers and solitary realizers who have risen from the sph ere of peace and entered the 
Mahayana actualize the perfect end from time to time, nevertheless this is nothing but mere 
habituation; the impelling of the thought, “I shall place myself in meditative equipoise on 
this for a long time” does not even slightl y exist. Since these topics are very difficult to 
realize, it is only appropriate for discerning people , without being decisive in contexts 
where the generation of doubt is appropriate, to analyze them well.  
2B2A -1B2A -2C. How the clear realizations of buddhas are included within the exalted knower of all aspects  
2B2A -1B2A -2C1. Question  
COMMENTARY 
“Bhagavan, on account of what are the exalted knowers of all aspects49 [those] of Tathagata 
Foe-destroyer Samyak Sa mbuddhas (the one- gone -thus, foe -destroyer, perfectly complete 
enlightened ones)?”  
 
EXPLANATION  
“Bhagavan, on account of what are the exalted knowers of all aspects [those] of 
Tathagata Foe -destroyer Samyak Sambuddhas (the one -gone- thus, foe -destroyer, 
perfectly complete enlightened ones)?”  
2B2A -1B2A -2C2. Reply 
COMMENTARY  
“Subhuti, phenomena are strongly expressed by (i) whatever aspects there are, (ii) whatever 
marks there are, and (iii) whatever signs there are. The Tathagatas comprehend those 
                                              
48 For more information related to this phrase, refer to the following outline near the end of chapter three: 
2B2C -1C2A -3B2B -3B. Decisive analysis 
49 sarvvākārajñatā  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
42 aspects, those marks, and those signs ; because of that , [those] of the Tathagata Foe -
destroyer Samyak Sambuddhas are the exalted knowers of all aspects.”  
 
EXPLANATION  
Having called out, “ Subhuti,” phenomena —ranging from forms to the exalted knowers of 
all aspects —are strongly expressed by (i) whatever aspects there are , the entities, (ii) 
whatever marks there are , the results, and (iii) whatever signs there are , the causes. The 
Tathagatas comprehend those aspects designating conventions and so forth —because of 
that reason , [those] of the Tathagata Foe -destroyer Samyak Sambuddhas are the exalted 
knowers of all aspects .   
2B2A -1B2B. Stating the proof from the brief Mother  
COMMENTARY  
Similarly, also in the brief it is taught, “also those who wish to train in the ground s of 
hearers” and so forth. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The way the clear realizations of the four aryas are included within the three exalted 
knowers is taught in the medium Mother . Similarly, it is taught also in the brief, the Eight 
Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom Sutra , because  there it is taught that “also those 
who wish to train in  the grounds of hearers train in the Mothers ” and so forth.  
2B2A -1B2C. Making referral to the proof from the extensive Mother  
COMMENTARY 
It is extensively taught also in the exte nsive [ Mother ]. 
 
EXPLANATION  
It is taught also in the extensive , because it is extensively  taught, “also those who wish to 
train in the grounds of stream -enterers …” 
2B2A -1B3. Explaining the meaning of the passages  
COMMENTARY 
Regarding that, the  knower of a ll (i-ii) bears the support of impermanence and so forth, with 
respect to phenomena, forms and so forth ; and (iii) bears the abandonment of confusion as a 
self, the result.   
 
EXPLANATION   
Regarding that indication of the three exalted knowers, the  knower  of all  possesses three 
attributes, because it :  
(i-ii) bears the support of the sixteen aspects, the aspect of impermanence and so forth 
(with respect to phenomena that are the objects of observation, forms and so forth) ; and  
(iii) bears the abandonment of confusion as a self  of persons , the result that is a  
separation . 
  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
43 COMMENTARY  
The knower of paths (i) is definite emergence by way of all vehicles ; (ii) bears the support 
of not actualizing50 suchness ; and (iii) bears the function of gathering sentient beings not 
gathered and so forth, the result.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the  knower of paths —possesses special method and wisdom, because it :  
(i) is the wisdom of definite emergence by way of all  the three  vehicles ;  
(ii) is the method which bears the support of not actualizing suchness at an improper 
time; and  
(iii) bears the function of gathering sentient beings not gathered and so forth, by way of 
the result of function (action) of beings.  
 
COMMENTARY  
The exalted knower of all aspects (i -ii) bears the support of being devoid  of the production 
of all phenomena ; (iii) bears the result of: (1) not discontinuing the welfare of sentient 
beings reaching the limits of space; (2) (a) realizing the perfect end; and (b) abandoning the 
connection of latencies. 
 
EXPLANATION  
An exalted knower of all aspects  has culminated the two welfares, because it:  
(i-ii) bears the support  of the aspect of the lack of ultimate production of all phenomena  
that are the objects of observation;  
(iii) bears  the result of: (1) others' welfare , not discontinuing the welfare of sentient 
beings reaching the limits of space ; and (2) one's own welfare, (a)  directly realizing the 
perfect end  in a manner of not rising again, and  (b) abandoni ng connection to a later 
similar type of  latencies  of non- afflicted ignorance.  
 
2B2A -1B4. Summary   
COMMENTARY 
Therefore, this statement, “The Ornament for Clear Realization , since it includes all the 
bases, antidotes, and aspects, completely reveals the clear realizations” is correct.  
 
EXPLANATION  
All the clear realizations of the four aryas are included within the three exalted knowers.  
Therefore, this statement, “ The subject —the Ornament for Clear Realization —
completely reveals the clear realizations  of the four aryas in their entirety ” is correct, 
since it includes all the bases, antidotes, and aspects. 
2B2A -2. Having rejected the fault of repeating the sutras, establishing that a purpose exists  
2B2A -2A. Having set forth a qualm, making a connection  
2B2A -2B. Root text  
2B2A -2C. Commentary  
                                              
50  Gsum emended to read sum.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
44 2B2A -2A. Having set forth a qualm, making a connection  
QUALM: When determining all the bases, antidotes, and aspects, it is necessary to 
extensively determine the three exalted knowers. In that case, since the Perfect ion of 
Wisdom Sutras are repeated, there would be no purpose in composing the Ornament for 
Clear Realization .  
 
COMMENTARY 
In order to eliminate the qualm of beings of low intelligence: "Did not the Bhagavan, bearer 
of exalted compassion desiring to benefi t the sentient beings with faith in the extensive, 
medium, and brief, clarify all meanings of the Perfection of Wisdom, and the stages of the 
eight clear realizations in the various Mothers  of the victors ? What significance is there for 
the Bhagavan One Vi ctorious Over the Non -victorious Aryas  to show those again?", 
through generating doubt  tending towards the factual , the branches of engaging —the subject 
matter, the purpose, the purpose of even the purpose, and the internal relationship of his own treatise —are taught. 
 
EXPLANATION   
This is the branch of eliminating qualm  in order to prove that there is a special purpose for 
composing the Ornament for Clear Realization by explicitly setting forth here the rejection 
of the principal qualm. In order to elimin ate the qualm of those of low intelligence  who 
do not understand the feature of uncommon purpose s of the Sutras and the treatise, the 
subject matter, the purpose, and the purpose of even the purpose  are explicitly 
indicated , and the internal relationship of Maitreya’s own treatise is  taught.  What is the 
qualm like?  "What significance of purpose  is there  for the Bhagavan One Victorious 
Over the Non -victorious Aryas to show those stages of the eight clear realizations 
again? There is none."  
 The reason for the wrong conception is as follows. Whether in terms of those of sharp, 
middling or dull faculties, did not the Bhagavan, bearer of exalted compassion desiring 
to benefit the sentient beings with faith in the extensive, mediu m, and brief, clarify all 
meanings of the Perfection of Wisdom? He already did. Where? In the various  three 
Mothers  of the victors . What are the meanings? The stages of the eight clear realizations.   
Having eliminated the qualm, there is a need to set fort h a statement of the purpose -and-
relationship, because, it is a branch of the method of engaging in this treatise . By setting 
forth a statement of the purpose -and-relationship, one will engage, because , through 
generating doubt tending towards the factual  in dependence on this statement, thinking 
that there is probably a purpose, one engages.  
 The former qualm  is erroneous  and forceful , whereby one does not hold it to mean 
“Having  eliminat ed doubt,  generating doubt .” In brief, it indicates the branch of engaging, 
where doubt tending towards the factual is generated regarding the four, the purpose and so 
forth, which contradicts the doubts tending towards the non -factual: (1) thinking that there is 
probably no purpos e of accomplishing the temporal and final welfare of beings in 
composing this treatise, (2) even if there is a purpose, that is not the object of seeking of 
beings, (3) even if it is, that purpose cannot be accomplished, and (4) even if it can be 
accomplis hed in general, it is unrelated to the method shown here.  
2B2A -2B. Root text  
There is not the fault of repeating the Mother Sutras in composing this treatise…  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
45  
ROOT TEXT  
0.2 The path of the exalted knower of all aspects,  
That which is explained in thes e by the Teacher, 
Is not experienced by others.  
Because the intelligent see  
 
0.3 By placing in mindfulness the meaning of the sutras  
Of the nature of the ten Dharma practices,  
‘Realizing easily’  
Is the purpose of composing.  
 
…because ‘realizing easily’ the meaning of the Mother Sutras in dependence on this is the 
purpose of composing this treatise . There is a purpose for easily realizing the meaning of 
the Sutras, because, in dependence on it, the intelligent bodhisattvas will directly see the 
meaning o f the sutras of the nature of the ten Dharma practices , such as the generated 
mind [of enlightenment], which characterize an exalted knower of all aspects. It is not that there is no method to directly see the meaning of the sutras, because it  will become manifest 
through having cultivated  it by placing it in mindfulness with hearing and contemplation. 
This treatise possesses a special meaning that is to be realized, because it is directly seen by the exalted knower of all aspects, and  the path  which procee ds there, differentiated by 
way of the ten topics and eight sections , that which is explained in these  three Mothers  by 
the Teacher, is  determined as the subject matter.  The subject —the stages of the eight clear 
realizations —are not completely experienced by any person, because they are  not 
completely experienced by others , such as non -Buddhists, hearers and solitary realizers . 
By the first two lines indicating the entity of the subject matter, then one [line indicating] the distinction, then three [indicat ing] the essential purpose, and the last two [indicating] the 
purpose, the relationship is i mplied.  
2B2A -2C. Commentary  
COMMENTARY  
So the root text is said. The exalted knower of all aspects, the path of the buddhas 
themselves, is taken intent ly to close ly characterize all the clear realizations. The Bhagavan, 
through the three types of miracles, subsequently taught to all migrating beings, by he himself, whatever is shown as the very subject matter in the  three types of the Mothers  of 
the victors  togethe r. The expresser and the subject matter expressed are made related by 
way of manner of a method and the object to be achieved by that method. That not 
experienced through the levels with the knowers arisen from hearing and so forth by those 
who have  not fa miliarize d with the selflessness of all phenomena —non -Buddhists and the 
others, those separated from attachment and so forth; having placed well all the meanings of 
the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras without exception, the natures of the eight clear 
realizati ons—the mind of enlightenment and the deeds of achiev ings, generosity and so 
forth —in the consciousness of mindfulness that arose from the latencies which were 
deposited by very clear experiences by only the bodhisattvas who set out, without 
depending upon anyone, to achieve the fulfillment of their own and others' welfare; 
“through the levels of realizing the Very Joyous ground and so forth, the characteristic of 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
46 realizing the sphere of dharma progressing everywhere, they will be actualized in all 
aspects”  is strongly desired for the sake of the purpose of even the purpose .  
 That the meanings of the Perfection of Wisdom —the mind of enlightenment and the 
characteristics of the achieving s and so forth —will be easily realized by the trainees is the 
purpose of  composing the treatise.  
 
EXPLANATION  
2B2A -2C1. Purpose  
2B2A -2C2. Essential purpose  
2B2A -2C3. Subject matter  
2B2A -2C1. Purpose  
There is a purpose in composing this treatise; that the meanings of the Mothers will be 
easily realized by the intended traine es of the Ornament  is the purpose of composing the 
treatise. What will be easily realized?  The meanings of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras  
differentiated into the stages of eight clear realizations by taking the ten topics —the mind 
of enlightenment and the  characteristics of the achievings  and so forth—as the basis. 
2B2A -2C2. Essential purpose  
The aim that is  strongly desired for the sake of the purpose of even the purpose  is the 
essential purpose. It is not that there is no essential purpose because, in de pendence on this 
purpose [explained above], “ through the levels of realizing and attaining  the Very Joyous 
ground and so forth, the characteristic of realizing the sphere of dharma progressing 
everywhere  to all property -possessors, all the stages of clear realizations will be actualized 
in all aspects ” will be attained. 
 What is the method that will manifest the essential purpose? Having placed well in the 
consciousness of mindfulness , it will be actualized later. What is placed? All the meanings 
of the Per fection of Wisdom Sutras without exception —(i) the generated mind, the 
support of the deeds, the ten topics which characterize the exalted knower of all aspects,  
[which are]  the mind of enlightenment and generosity and so forth,  (ii) the deeds of 
achiev ings that practice the deeds, and (iii) the summarized result that is the object of 
attainment.  Further, in terms of the principal objects to be determined by the eight chapters, 
they are divided into the natures of the eight clear realizations .  
 What is the feature of the consciousness of mindfulness? Having contemplated well, 
through reasoning, the meaning of the stages of the clear realizations that has been heard, it 
is a mindfulness that arose from the latencies which were deposited by very cl ear 
experiences  that is able to induce an ascertaining consciousness in accordance with how it 
has been asserted. Who, having experienced it with hearing and contemplation at the 
beginning, will eventually actualize it?  It will be experienced by only the bodhisattvas 
who set out and begin without depending upon anyone , since they definitely engage in 
such a path to achieve the fulfillment of their own and others' welfare  and do not rely 
upon others. The assertion —that the principal object to be determined o f the third chapter is 
the knowers of bases in the continua of hearers and solitary realizers themselves —is well 
refuted by these [explanations].  
2B2A -2C3. Subject matter  
Whatever is shown as the very subject matter in the  three types of the Mothers  of th e 
victors  together is the subject matter of the treatise. Who showed it? The Bhagavan, 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
47 through the three types —the miracle  of magical emanation, the miracle  of expressing all 
[known by the] exalted minds, and the miracle  of subsequent demonstration—
subsequently taught  the paths of the three vehicles to all migrating beings by he himself. 
What is the subject matter? It possesses a special subject matter. An exalted knower of all 
aspects is, through direct realization of which [the subject matter], the path of the buddhas 
themselves  which engage in an exalted knower of all aspects, ranging from the generated 
mind to the achievings. Through division into eight sections , having taken that as the basis, 
the ten topics which closely characterize all the eight clear realizations are taken 
intently  by the Teacher. In brief, [the subject matter is] the eight clear realizations.   
 The distinction  of the subject matter is as follows:  that not experienced through the 
levels of the knowers arisen from hearing and so forth by those who have not 
familiarized with the selflessness of all phenomena  free from all extremes —non-
Buddhist  followers such as Simha, Vishnu, and Brahma, and the others , the hearers and 
solitary realizers sepa rated from attachment and so forth . There is a reason for it not 
being experienced by them, because the expresser —the Mother Sutras as well as the 
Ornament—and the subject matter expressed —the eight clear realizations —are made 
related by way of manner  of a method and  accomplisher of that method.  There is 
pervasion, because they [non -Buddhists, hearers and solitary realizers] do not perform any 
of the three —hearing, contemplation, and meditation, in regard  to the very extensive 
scriptural baskets and the tre atises that commentate  on their thought. The Mahayana is 
superior, due to its greater object of observation. It is also explained that the Acarya, in this 
passage, clarified the internal relationship . 
 Hence, the entity of the subject matter is as follows. The Great Commentary says that 
“With respect to that, by indicating the result, bodhisattvas who seek enlightenment are made to fully understand all aspects, such as the generated mind, whereby the exalted 
knower of all aspects is expressed first.” “The p ath of the exalted knower of all aspects” 
[0.2a] is taken to indicate that the path that proceeds to an exalted knower of all aspects is 
principal. Know that the expression of worship and the purpose -and-relationship must be 
correlated with the two other s ummarized meanings , which will be explained below.
51 
2B2B. Summarized meanings    
2B2B -1. Making a connection  
2B2B -2. Setting forth the statement  
2B2B -3. Summarized and explained  
2B2B -4. Reason for not unraveling them extensively  
2B2B -1. Making a connection  
Since the relationship was not explicitly indicated by the root text, having asserted the elimination of the qualm, the relationship was mentioned at the outset.  
 
COMMENTARY 
Thus, having indicated the relationship and so forth , in order to make trainees realize easily, 
and also having seen it as easy to explain by not mixing up the completely classified 
meaning of the treatise , the presentation of the corpus of the Perfection of Wisdom is taught, 
through indicating briefly and extensively by fifteen verses . 
 
                                              
51 See the outline near the end of the text: 2B3.  Indicating other summarized meanings . 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
48 EXPLANATION  
Thus, having indicated52 the relationship and so forth, the presentation of the corpus of 
the Perfection of Wisdom is taught; for the purpose in regard  to the listeners is in order to 
make  listener trainees realize easily  the levels of extens ive explanation of the branches, 
and in regard  to the explainers, [for them] to do it also having seen it as easy to explain by 
not mixing up the completely classified  concise meaning of the treatise  with the levels of 
extensive explanation of the branches . A summarized meaning  of the corpus has indicated 
it briefly and extensively by fifteen verses .  
2B2B -2. Setting forth the statement  
2B2B -2A. Brief indication of the corpus  
2B2B -2B. Extensive explanation [of the corpus ] 
2B2B -2A. Brief indication of the co rpus  
2B2B -2A1. Brief indication of the object s to be explained and th ose which explain  
2B2B -2A2. The  structure of those which explain  
2B2B -2A1. Brief indication of the objects to be explained and th ose which explain  
2B2B -2A1A. Meaning of the words  
2B2B -2A1B. Decisive analysis  
2B2B -2A1A. Meaning of the words   
ROOT TEXT  
0.4ab The Perfection of Wisdom  
Is perfectly explained by the eight categories. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The three —extensive, medium, and brief textual Perfection of Wisdom —are objects to be 
determined. By what? By this treatise. How? They are perfectly , completely and non -
erroneously explained by the divisions of the expresser into eight chapters, and also the 
divisions of the categories , which are the meaning of the subject matter expressed, in to 
eight clear realizations . 
2B2B -2A1B. Decisive analysis  
2B2B -2A1B -1. Stating the assertion of the Acarya 
2B2B -2A1B -2. Refuting the wrong explanations given by others  
2B2B -2A1B -1. Stating the assertion of the Acarya 
The Great Commentary  says:  
 
Thus, because of realizing the exalted wisdom of the exalted knower of all 
aspects through the stages of generating the knowers bearing the nature of 
hearing, contemplation and meditation at first, it goes to the other side —that is, 
the side of excellence —whereb y it is paramita [usually rendered as “perfection,” 
literally meaning  “that gone to the other side”]. 
 
Further, it has gone to the other side that is wisdom, the characteristic of discerning  
phenomena that is called “ prajña,” [usually rendered as “wisdom,”  literally meaning  
                                              
52  Bsnyad  emended to read bstad in accordance with the commentary above.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
49 “excellent knowing”] [whereby] it is prajñaparamita  [usually rendered as “perfection of 
wisdom,” literally meaning  “that gone to the other side that is wisdom”].  
 Although a buddha bhagavan’s illusion -like exalted wisdom of non -duality is the actual 
[perfection of wisdom], the texts that are the collections of words and statements and the 
paths that bear the characteristics of seeing and so forth, due to being concordant with the 
attainment of that [exalted wisdom], are imputed “perfecti on of wisdom.”  Acarya Dignaga 
also explained that:  
 
Due to the possessing the meaning  of the object to be achieved ,  
The perfection of wisdom ;  
That non-dual exalted wisdom [of] the Tathagatas ,  
 The paths and texts are termed that. 
 Therefore, [Acarya D ignaga ] definitely held
 that “ By way of being related to that, all three 
aspects  free from being reflections are also perfections of wisdom ”; it is in terms of that 
other than the principal . It is not just those , because that is in terms of all three 
enlig htenments, since [all  three enlightenments] would not occur if this [perfection of 
wisdom] were absent.53 In addition, [the Great Commentary ] explains that:  
 
“Also, those who wish to train in the grounds of hearers should listen to this Perfection of Wisdom ” and so forth will be explained.  
 It means that only a buddhas’ exalted wisdom distinguished by either the three or the four 
attributes
54 is the actual perfection of wisdom; the path perfection of wisdom and textual 
perfection of wisdom are imputations.  
 With regard to the differences between the actual and the imputed, Acarya Dignaga’s text 
was cited, but it is not identical in every way [to the explanation here], [because] “illusion -
like” is mentioned by asserting [an exalted wisdom] distinguished from a  truly existent 
knower of emptiness of duality. “By way of being related to a Mahayana  person who is the 
support, all three perfections of wisdom free from being the reflections of perfection of 
wisdom are also perfections of wisdom” is the meaning of “that definitely held” by Acarya Dignaga.  
 
QUALM: Why is it that only the three —Mahayana  texts, paths, and results —are indicated?  
RESPONSE: These are in terms of the principal objects to be determined
; they are not 
exhausted in just these, because if the p aths of the hearers and solitary realizers have not 
been determined, the Mahayana  texts and paths would also not occur, where by they are 
determined in terms of the paths of all three enlightenments.  
                                              
53 Annotated in accordance with a statement in the next outline: “Since all three enlightenments would not 
occur if this perfection of wisdom wer e absent, the paths of all three are indicated. ” 
54  These are alluded to in Dignaga’s explanation above. In accordance with page 118 of the Ganden Jangtse 
Library edition of Jetsun Chokyi Gyeltsen’s Ocean of Sport , the four attributes are (1) the attribute  of 
support: existing in the continua of only buddha aryas; (2) the attribute of aspect: being non -dual ; (3) the 
attribute of entity: being an exalted wisdom; and (4) the attribute of being free from the object of negation: 
being empty of true existence, l ike an illusion.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
50 2B2B -2A1B -2. Refuting the wrong explanations given by ot hers  
OPINION: Because of this statement, “in terms of that other than the principal,” that in 
terms of the resultant perfection of wisdom, the principal among the three perfections of 
wisdom , is indicated.  
RESPONSE: Your assertion is a wrong explanation. For this text by Acarya Dignaga explicitly indicated the three —Mahayana  texts, paths and results. The proof is indicated by 
the passage:  
 
The three Mahayana  dharmas —free  from being (i) a reflection of the path 
perfection of wisdom, an exalted wisdom realiz ing impermanence and so forth 
that is bound by the conception of true existence, (ii) a reflection of the resultant 
perfection of wisdom that is to be attained by merely that, and (iii) a reflection of 
the textual perfection of wisdom in which mainly those  are being determined —is 
the perfection of wisdom.  
 For this is also the meaning of the statement “It is the principal object to be determined;” 
there is no qualm regarding indicating the resultant perfection of wisdom as principal. Since all three enlight enments would not occur if this perfection of wisdom were absent , the paths 
of all three are indicated. Where? The statement “ Also those who wish to train in the 
grounds of hearers…’ will be explained  below ,” and also [it is indicated in the context of] 
“the cause of attaining the three vehicles together.”
55 
 The two —the textual and path perfections of wisdom —are imputed perfections of 
wisdom. The reasons for the imputation are (i) because [the textual perfection of wisdom] 
indicates the resultant perfection  of wisdom as the subject matter, and (ii) because [the path 
perfection of wisdom] is the method for attaining it. The purpose of the imputation is to 
make known that those who wish to attain the result must hear and contemplate upon the 
texts and practice  the paths. They are not the actual, because they lack the culmination of 
wisdom.  
 Someone’s assertion —that a perfection of wisdom is pervaded by being a wisdom —does 
not differentiate between etymology and engagement  of the term . Because , the perfection of  
generosity and so forth in the mental continuum of a bodhisattva are made by this [wisdom] 
to be gone to wisdom , whereby they satisfy the etymology “ gone to wisdom ” (“perfection 
of wisdom”) . 
 
Hence, the textual perfection of wisdom is  the collections of t exts, the expresser that mainly 
determine s the Mahayana  paths along with their results. The path perfection of wisdom is 
the paths in the mental continuum of a bodhisattva that are explicitly conjoined with the 
wisdom realizing emptiness  and the method of great compassion. The resultant perfection of 
wisdom is the culminated exalted wisdom distinguished by the four attributes, as explained above.  
2B2B -2A2. The structure of th ose which explain  
2B2B -2A2A. General presentation of the path  
2B2B-2A2B. Explanation of the individual entities  
                                              
55 See the explanation of stanza 1.10.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
51 2B2B -2A2A. General presentation of the path  
2B2B -2A2A -1. Positing the tradition of the previous acaryas  
2B2B -2A2A -2. Examining whether they are correct or incorrect  
2B2B -2A2A -3. Our own system  
r2B2B -2A2A -1. Positing the tradition of the previous acaryas  
OPINION 1: The three exalted knowers are determined to be the general ity clear 
realizations that are to be generated in the continua of all aryas of the three times. The four 
applications and the truth body are indicated to be mere paths that are to be generated in the 
continua of present intended trainees of the Ornament. Hence they are asserted to be 
generality and instances, and to be broadly and narrowly pervasive.  
 OPINION 2: It has been said that, “The th ree exalted knowers, like a sword placed on a 
plain, are devoid  of boundaries, whereas the four applications and the truth body, like a 
sword held in the hand, have boundaries posited.”   
However, this is not much different from the former [position].  
 
OPINION 3: It has been said that, “The chapters of the three exalted knowers principally 
indicate the objects to be determined by way of hearing and contemplation, whereas the four applications and the truth body indicate the stages of the path of practice by  way of the 
wisdom arisen from meditation.”  
 
OPINION 4: Someone deprived of anything to say asserts that the first three chapters 
indicate view; the middle four, cultivation and conduct; and the last, the result.  
 OPINION 5: Taken in the system of solely paths:  
• an exalted knower of all aspects is to be cultivated on the occasions of the paths of 
accumulation and preparation ;  
• a knower of paths from the first to the sixth grounds ; 
• a knower of bases on the seventh ground ; 
• the four applications are cultivated sequentially on the three pure grounds ; and  
• the truth body is generated on the buddha ground.  
 
ACARYA DHARMAMITRA: Having progressively generated the paths of the hearers and 
the paths of the solitary realizers indicated on the occasion of the second chapter, and the 
Hinayana  paths indicated in the third and fourth chapters, the result of foe -destroyer is 
actualized and one absorbs in the sphere of peace. Then, rising from that, one generates in the continuum the first and second generated minds indicated on the occasion of the first 
chapter, and the partial concordance with liberation indicated on the occasion of the fourth 
chapter; this is taken to be engaging in the Mahayana  path.  
2B2B -2A2A -2. Examining whether  they are correct or incorrect  
It is difficult to posit most of those  [as being correct]. It is impossible for aryas of the three 
times, who have generated in their continua a knower of paths and an exalted knower of all aspects, not to have generated in t heir continua the four applications and the truth body , 
(i) 
because, even though [the eight categories] have been determined here, this indicates paths 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
52 of all three times,  there does not exist even slightly a valid cognizer of definite 
discrimination that individually discriminates  that “this indicates paths of all three times ,” 
and “this indicates paths of only someone in the present,” and (ii) because even if others 
were to posit what is opposite in meaning to that, it would be extremely difficult to 
demo nstrate damage. 
 The second system is also incorrect because, no matter in which person’s continuum they 
are generated, one must posit definite boundaries with respect to the eight clear realizations; 
otherwise, the explainers and listeners of the path wou ld become totally confused, since 
they would not know the sequence of the paths in which first this is cultivated and afterwards that is cultivated.  
 The third system —[which asserts that] having determined something by way of hearing 
and contemplation, one  meditates on something else unrelated to that at the time of 
meditation —is extremely vile; it would become unrelated, just like consistently  showing a 
horse where to race, and then taking somewhere else to be the race tracks. Therefore, one 
must practice by meditating on just that which has been determined by way of hearing and 
contemplation, because, without having determined by way of hearing and contemplation that very meaning that is to be meditated upon, one’s meditation would become erroneous. 
 For, if it is necessary beyond doubt for the treatise to individually indicate those two [(1) 
the objects to be determined by way of hearing and contemplation, and (2) the stages of the 
path of practice by way of the wisdom arisen from meditation], then even if it is asserted 
that the remaining five chapters indicate the determination by way of hearing and contemplation, whereas the first three chapters indicate practice by way of meditation, there would not be even the slightest damage that can be demonstrated. For if the person who 
practices the four applications does not practice [the topics] ranging from the generated mind to the achievings and so forth, then this contradicts the practice of the four    
applications; and if he does practice them, then he must  practice them as indicated on the 
occasion of the first chapter, whereby it is very inappropriate to delineate as separate the 
passages for hearing and contemplation and the passages for practice.  
 This is because it seems that there are many followers w ho, as signs of not having gained 
a comprehensive understanding regarding these points, despite having learnt the scriptural 
baskets well their entire lives, at the time of generating a desire to henceforth perform 
practice , do not even know any of the nam es imputed to the practices . For it seems that even 
at the time when those who have formed a little understanding perform hearing and contemplation, as signs that they have taken the path only as an object of observation of 
awareness without generating it into the entity of awareness, even explainers become weary 
due to explaining and listeners also probably become weary due to listening.  
 It is easy to realize that the fourth system is incorrect; it obviously does not understand  
even the general presentati on of the treatise.  
 The fifth system appears to be that posited as our own system in the brief commentary
56 
composed by the Acarya, but [it is not], because a specific  refutation of it is made below in 
this commentary, Clear Meaning.  Without understanding the teaching on how 
misconceptions regarding the sequence are refuted, even the explanation called “ passage  
indicating the three paths  as imputation al [rather than fully qualified] ” can appear correct.  
                                              
56 This refers to the Commentary on the Difficult Points of the Verses Gathering the Precious Qualities of the 
Bhagavan composed by Haribhadra.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
53  The last system [posited by Acarya Dharmamitra] should be analyzed because, if one 
were to assert that “ Intended trainees of the Ornament must definitely engage the Mahayana  
path preceded by the Hinayana  path,” then, even though there may be some of dull faculty 
who discard the shortcut that proceeds to  omniscience and instead engage in the long path, 
this is impossible for the intended trainees of this treatise. If one were to consider the 
possibility of a person who engages progressively in the paths of the three vehicles, then 
[this should also be ana lyzed] because, in the context of indicating the stages of the path of a 
person who is definite in the Mahayana  lineage, it would be inappropriate to discard that 
and indicate something else that is unrelated.  
 Further, someone , while asserting  that the first three chapters indicate the objects of 
engagement of a Mahayana  person, the middle four the yogas that engage in them, and the 
last the result that has been engaged, also assert s that a knower of bases [exists] only in 
hearers and solitary realizers a nd that buddhas do not have a knower of paths ; this  is just 
something he should reflect upon.  
2B2B -2A2A -3. Our own system  
As indicated in the section on the purpose -and-relationship, easily realizing all the eight 
clear realizations by means of hearing and  contemplation is the purpose. I t has been taught 
that one traverses the ten grounds through practice by meditating on that which has been 
taken as the object of mindfulness by means of hearing and contemplation, therefore, since 
the meaning that is to be determined by a Mahayana  person by means of hearing and 
contemplation is indicated by all the eight chapters , [and]  since that very meaning that has 
been determined by means of hearing and contemplation is practiced by means of meditation, know that the mo de of practice is also indicated by all the eight chapters. 
 The Great Commentary says, “The nature of achieving the mind of enlightenment, the 
instruction s, and so forth are all differentiations due to divisions of the eight sections .” 
Taking those very t en topics that characterize an exalted knower of all aspects as the basis 
of the path, it is differentiated by means of the eight sections , the eight clear realizations. 
Further, one practices the path for the sake of achieving that very aim  of the promise  by 
means of the generated mind. The “practice of the achievings” is presented and great compassion must precede the generated mind. In order for that [to occur], one must first train in the attitude of a being of middling capacity, the path of the sixteen  [attributes of the 
four noble truths], impermanence and so forth, which has been determined in the third chapter. In dependence on that, [one generates] the generated mind [aspiring] towards 
supreme enlightenment. With respect to that very path directly realizing impermanence and so forth that is motivated by that [generated mind] and conjoined with the wisdom directly 
realizing emptiness, indicated on the occasion of the second chapter, one should also apply the modes of knowing hearers’ paths and, likewi se, knowing solitary realizers’ paths. When 
both paths that stop the extremes of cyclic existence and solitary peace are directly known 
by a bodhisattva, they are called “knowers of bodhisattvas’ paths,” and by means of being 
paths distinguished by diligen tly initiating  joyous effort in those, they receive the 
convention “achievings.”  
 Those very achievings cultivate the full complete aspects of the three exalted knowers. 
Furthermore, t hat very yoga that acts to destroy the afflictions and conceptualizations 
through a union of the two —calm abiding and special insight —is called “application.” That 
itself is divided into four applications by means of occasion and mode of cultivation. The 
achievings which are of the same entity as the applications are also divided into four. In 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
54 order to practice the Mahayana  path, one must first initiate joyous effort in the extensive 
attitude. In dependence on that, an extensive practice of the applications wi ll arise. In 
dependence on extensive attitude and application, one will be able to gather extensive 
accumulations of the causes of omniscience. Hence, the achievings are divided into four by 
way of their ability to undoubted ly give rise to  an exalted knowe r of all aspects . Also, with 
respect to that, for the sake of the three objects of intent,57 one must first observe the eleven 
objects of observation.58 
 Although lineage is explained in the context of the path of preparation, the Mahayana  
lineage must be aw akened prior to generating the generated mind in one’s continuum. In 
order for that [to occur], you must understand the methods for examining which lineage is possessed, like they have been explained in Hearers’ Grounds (Sravakabhumi ), and the 
signs of having awakened the lineage, like  they have been explained in the  Ornament for the 
Great Vehicle Sutras ( Mahayanasutralamkara) and the Bodhisattvas’ Grounds 
(Bodhisattvabhumi). Thus, in accordance with the stages of leading trainees, you must lead 
them by way of lineage before leading them to great compassion.  
 In the context of the instructions for the achievings, even though nothing other than the 
isolates of the ten topics
59 has been taught, you must receive instructions on all the paths of 
the three vehicl es as well as their results, without exception. Due to meditating upon the 
meaning of emptiness on the occasion of the path of accumulation, the initial boundary 
where it transforms into a wisdom arisen from meditation, the path of preparation, is 
indicate d. The presence of other special purposes regarding that will be explained. Since 
how one practices the stages of clear realizations will be explained separately [elsewhere], 
here I will not elaborate more beyond just that. 
2B2B -2A2B. Explanation of the in dividual entities  
2B2B -2A2B -1. The three exalted knowers 
2B2B -2A2B -2. The four applications  
2B2B -2A2B -3. The truth body  
2B2B -2A2B -1. The three exalted knowers 
The first of these:  
2B2B -2A2B -1A. Exalted knower of all aspects  
ROOT TEXT  
0.4c The e xalted knower of all aspects, …  
 
EXPLANATION   
The definition [of an exalted knower of all aspects ] is: a final exalted wisdom directly 
realizing the ten topics —generated mind and so forth.  
 That an exalted knower of all aspects of this [context] is posit ed by means of merely 
knowing the two truths is not an assertion of the Acarya; that the corpus of the general 
Mahayana  path dawn s as an object of awareness through indication  of the objects of 
realization of that exalted knower of all aspects that is one’s  object of attainment  is the 
purpose . 
                                              
57 See stanzas 1.25.  
58 See stanzas 1.41 & 1.42.  
59 See stanzas 1.4 and 1.5.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
55  The object of characterization  is: “ exalted knower of all aspects .” The basis of 
characterization  is: in general, in terms of divisions, from between the two exalted 
wisdoms —(1) knowing all aspects of objects of knowledge, and (2) directly knowing the 
ten topics of principal cause and result —here it is the latter. The boundaries are: it exists 
only on the buddha ground.  
2B2B -2A2B -1B. Knower of paths  
ROOT TEXT  
0.4c …the knower of paths, 
 
EXPLANATION  
The definition [of a knower of paths ] is: a Mahayana  person’s clear realization conjoined 
with a wisdom directly realizing emptiness in the continuum of the person who possesses it 
in his continuum.   
 Someone’s assertion of “an exalted wisdom directly realizing the empti ness of true 
existence of the three paths” as the definition of a knower of paths is incorrect. A knower of paths knowing hearers’ paths would not directly realize the sixteen [aspects of the four 
noble truths], impermanence and so forth, whereby it follow s that it would be inappropriate 
for a clear realization (that is to be passed through, having been viewed by knowing and 
seeing by a bodhisattva) to be generated at the time of the Mahayana  path of seeing; it 
follows that the first of the three knowers of paths would not be cultivated  for the sake of 
taking care of the hearer lineage -bearers ; if that very direct realization of impermanence and 
so forth directly realizes freedom from elaboration, then it follows that the stains of the conception of the two truths as different entities would be exhaustively abandoned on a 
learner’s path; it follows that meditative equipoise and subsequent attainment would be of 
one entity, and so forth.  
 Furthermore, with respect to a knower of paths, it follows that the grea t compassion that 
stops the extreme of peace would  not included within a knower of paths. And if even the 
compassion of non- observation in a bodhisattva’s mental continuum does not directly 
realize emptiness, then the assertion that a knower of paths is pe rvaded by it would only be 
incorrect. 
 The object of characterization  is: “knower of paths .” The bases of  characterization are: 
all clear realizations of Mahayana  aryas that are conjoined with a wisdom directly realizing 
emptiness, such as a knower of path s knowing hearers’ paths. The boundaries are: it exists 
from the Mahayana  path of seeing until the buddha ground.  
2B2B -2A2B -1C. Knower of bases  
ROOT TEXT  
0.4d  Then, knower of all, 
 
EXPLANATION  
The definition [of a knower of bases ] is: an exalted wisdom —conjoined with a wisdom 
directly realizing the selflessness of persons in the continuum of a person who possesses it 
in his continuum —that abides in a class of hearers’ clear realizations. The object of 
characterization  is: “then, knower of all.” The bases  of characterization are: all that directly 
realize the sixteen [aspects of the four noble truths], impermanence and so forth, and abide 
in that class. The imputation  of the convention “antidotal knower of bases”  to the exalted 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
56 wisdom directly realizing em ptiness of true existence free of elaborations is not present in 
either of the Acarya’s great or small commentaries. The boundaries are: it exists in all arya 
persons.  
2B2B -2A2B -2. The four applications   
The first of these:  
2B2B -2A2B -2A. Application in complete aspects  
ROOT TEXT  
0.5a Clear complete realization of all aspects, 
 
EXPLANATION  
The definition [of an application in complete aspects ] is: a bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined 
with a wisdom cultivating the aspects of the three exalted knowers. The object  of 
characterization  is: “ clear complete realization of all aspects .” Its divisions are: 173 
bodhisattva’s yogas cultivating the aspects of the three exalted knowers. The boundaries 
are: from the Mahayana  path of accumulation until  the end of the continuum . 
2B2B -2A2B -2B. Peak application  
ROOT TEXT  
0.5b Gone to the peak, …  
 
EXPLANATION  
The definition [of a peak application ] is: a highly transformed bodhisattva’s yoga cultivating 
the aspects of the exalted knowers by means of being conjoined with a wisdom ari sen from 
meditation observing emptiness. The object of characterization  is: “gone to the peak.” Its 
divisions are four when condensed, and 173 when extensively [enumerated]. The 
boundaries are: from the heat level of the Mahayana  path of preparation until  the end of the 
continuum of the ten grounds. 
2B2B -2A2B -2C. Serial application  
ROOT TEXT  
0.5b … the serial, 
 
EXPLANATION  
The definition [of a serial application ] is: a bodhisattva’s yoga that, in order to attain stable 
aspects of the three exalted knowers, cultivates them progressively. The object of 
characterization  is: “ serially.”  It has thirteen divisions. The boundaries are: from the 
Mahayana  path of accumulation until just prior to the end of the continuum.  
2B2B -2A2B -2D. Instantaneous application  
ROOT TEXT  
0.5c Clear complete enlightenment in a single  instant, 
 
EXPLANATION  
The definition [of an instantaneous application ] is: a bodhisattva’s final yoga arisen through 
the force of a serial application. The object of characterization  is: “ clear complete 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
57 enlightenment in a single  instant.”  It has  four divisions. The boundaries are: only at the 
end of the continuum.  
2B2B -2A2B -3. The truth body  
ROOT TEXT  
0.5d Truth body: …  
 
EXPLANATION  
The definition [of a truth body ] is: a final result attained by the strength of cultivating the 
aspects of the three exalted knowers. The object of characterization  is: “truth body.” When 
divided, there are four exalted bodies. The boundaries are: only on the buddha ground.  
 
Condensing the enumeration of these:  
 
ROOT TEXT  
0.5d … these are the eight. 
 
EXPLANATION  
“These are the eight.” With respect to that, the way in which the number of the three 
exalted knowers is definite should be known at the outset by all who seek mere liberation and who seek omniscience. Meditating on the bases that are objects to be determined by 
means of the sixteen aspects of the four noble truths, impermanence and so forth, is definitely necessary in order to attain the result of foe -destroyer of hearers and sol itary 
realizers; one is able to attain the result of foe -destroyer through merely that. Even a 
bodhisattva must first cultivate the sixteen aspects prior to cultivating a knower of paths; he 
too must know such bases in order to (i) take care of hearer line age-bearers and (ii) generate 
disillusionment for all of cyclic existence himself. Without that  [knowing of bases] , these 
will not arise. In order to attain the convention, “ a bodhisattva who knows well the path 
proceeding to omniscience,” and to accomplis h the welfare of the entire world, he must 
know the paths of the three vehicles. Without that, he will not be able to do so. An exalted 
knower of all aspects is definitely necessary in order to turn the complete wheels of Dharma 
for all three lineage -beare rs. Without that, he will not be able to do so. Hence, even from the 
point of view of accomplishing the goals of the four aryas, the exalted knowers are definite in number as three, because the exalted knowers that are objects to be practiced by 
mahayanists are definitely three, and nothing more than those is needed.  
 Acarya Arya [Vimuktisena] said, “[That] is explained to be the meaning of ‘a hearer’s 
path passed through, having been viewed by knowing and seeing by a bodhisattva, and is 
the cause of attain ing the three vehicles together…”
60 From that, it seems  that there is 
neither a knower of bases nor a knower of paths in ordinary beings.  
 The number of the four applications is definite. In order to destroy all the afflictive and 
knowledge obscurations wit hout exception, one must cultivate the complete aspects of the 
three exalted knowers. Since that is  subsumed under the two modes —(i) cultivation for the 
sake of attaining control over the familiarization , and (ii) cultivation that is the culmination 
of the  highest familiarization —there are the first two applications , and  in order to actually 
attain the truth body that is clearly  and completely enlightened with respect to all 
phenomena in one instant, when one takes to mind a single [aspect], such as impermanence, 
                                              
60 See the explanation of stanza 1.10.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
58 on the occasion of its application, without having to exert oneself in taking to mind the 
others, all aspects of the three exalted knowers must dawn as objects of the mind ; since one 
must act to sequentially familiarize with those [aspects] through exertion previously in order 
for that to occur, the branches of the attainment of stability are definite as the two later 
applications. Thus the applications are definite as four. The final result of these is called the 
“truth body.”  
 The sequence of the eight clear realizations is definite. It is explained in the section on 
making a connection at the Truth Body [explanation] of the Great Commentary [on the 
Eight Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom Sutra] : 
 
“At that time when those who take to mind the thorough abandonment of deceit 
and dissimulation, and so forth, through the stages that have been explained: (i) will subsequently co gnize with an exalted knower of all aspects that all 
phenomena are like illusions with respect to this perfection of wisdom; (ii) will 
thoroughly  analyze with a knower of the aspects of the paths; (iii) will engage 
with a knower of all; (iv) will realize w ith a complete clear realization of all 
aspects; (v) will intend with a clear realization of peak; (vi) will comprehend with a serial clear realization; (vii) will closely realize with an instantaneous 
clear realization; and (viii) will also cultivate with  a clear complete enlightened 
truth body, at that time it will not be difficult for these bodhisattvas to fully 
completely gain: (a) all excellent qualities of the nature of the truth body; (b) a 
buddha land with the characteristic of the complete enjoymen t body; (c) the 
unsurpassable quality of a buddha, the self- entity of the emanation body; along 
with (d) the exalted activities” —is the meaning of the words. 
 
Therefore, the three exalted knowers are in the order of explanation.  
 Since what is explained he re is an explanation of the stages of practice of a Mahayana  
person, at the beginning, he first meditates on the sixteen aspects, then generates a knower of paths, and after that, he will directly realize the ten topics [of an exalted knower of all 
aspects ]. The first two applications are in the order of generation; the later two applications 
are also in the order of generation. The first and third applications are in the order of generation  too. The three exalted knowers and the four applications are in th e order of 
explanation. The clear realizations are definite as eight, the objects to be cultivated by the four applications are definite as the aspects of the three exalted knowers, the way of 
cultivating them is definite as the four applications, and the result is definite as the truth 
body.  
2B2B -2B. Extensive explanation [of the corpus ] 
2B2B -2B1. Explaining the corpus of the three exalted knowers  
2B2B -2B2. Explaining the corpus of the four applications  
2B2B -2B3. Explaining the corpus of the truth body  
2B2B -2B1. Explaining the corpus of the three exalted knowers  
2B2B -2B1A. Explaining the corpus of the  exalted knower of all aspects 
2B2B -2B1B. Explaining the corpus of a knower of paths 
2B2B -2B1C. Explaining the corpus of a knower of bases 
2B2B -2B1A. Explai ning the corpus of the  exalted knower of all aspects 
2B2B -2B1A -1. Nature of the ten topics  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
59 2B2B -2B1A -2. How they characterize the  exalted knower of all aspects  
2B2B -2B1A -3. Ascertaining the sequence  
2B2B -2B1A -4. Joining the [brief] indication and the [extensive] explanation  
2B2B -2B1A -1. Nature of the ten topics  
2B2B -2B1A -1A. Promise in attitude  
2B2B -2B1A -1B. Instruction s showing the methods which achieve the aim of that  [promise]  
2B2B -2B1A -1C. Achievings that accomplish the aim of the promise  
2B2B -2B1A -1A. Promise in attitude  
ROOT TEXT  
0.6a Generated mind, …  
 
EXPLANATION  
The definition of a Mahayana  generated mind  will be explained. The object of 
characterization  is: “generated mind .” It has twenty -two divisions. Its boundaries are: from 
the small level  of the Mahayana  path of accumulation until the buddha ground.  
2B2B -2B1A -1B. Instruction s showing the methods which achieve the aim of that  [promise]  
ROOT TEXT  
0.6a … instruction s, 
 
EXPLANATION  
The definition [of a Mahayana  instruction ] is: an expresser that teaches an unerring method 
for attaining the object of striving of the Mahayana  generated mind. The object of 
characterization  is: “Mahayana  instruction s.” It has ten divisions. The boundaries are: it 
exists from even before one has entered the Mahaya na path of accumulation until the 
buddha ground, but what is mainly indicated here is a buddha’s speech. 
2B2B -2B1A -1C. Achievings that accomplish the aim of the promise  
2B2B -2B1A -1C1. Identifying the initial achieving of the wisdom arisen from meditation that realizes 
emptiness  
2B2B -2B1A -1C2. Presentation of the general achievings 
2B2B -2B1A -1C1. Identifying the initial achieving of the wisdom arisen from meditation that realizes emptiness  
ROOT TEXT  
0.6b Four types of branches of definite discrimination,  
 
EXPLANATION  
The definition of a Mahayana  branch  of definite discrimination  is: a Mahayana  clear 
realization generated subsequent to a partial concordance with liberation that is included 
within the level of utilizing belief61. When divided, there are four types .  
                                              
61  Generally, generated minds are divided into four levels. They are: (1) the level of engagement through 
belief, (2) the level of pure extraordinary thought, (3) the level of ripening, and (4) the level of the 
abandonment of obscurations. The level of engagement through belief covers the path of accumulation until 
the path of preparation; the second, the level of pure extraordinary thought, covers the first until the seventh 
grounds; the third, the level of ripening, covers the three pure grounds; and the fourth, the level of the 
abandonment of obstructions, the buddha ground.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
 
60 2B2B -2B1A -1C2. Presentation of the general achievings 
2B2B -2B1A -1C2A. Support of achievings  
2B2B -2B1A -1C2B. Supported achievings  
2B2B -2B1A -1C2A. Support of achievings  
ROOT TEXT  
0.6cd The nature of dharmadhatu  
That serves as the support of achievings, 
 
EXPLANATION   
The definition of a lineage abiding in the nature of dharmadhatu that serves as the support of 
the Mahayana  achievings  is: a dharmadhatu that acts as the supporting basis of Mahayana  
achievings. When divided by means of supporting phenomena, there are the thirteen 
mentioned in this context, and the Mahayana  path of accumulation. The boundaries are: 
from the heat level of the Mahayana  path of preparation for those explicitly indicated here, 
and in general from the path of accumulation, until the end of the continuum.  
2B2B -2B1A -1C2B. Supported achievings  
2B2B -2B1A -1C2B -1. Objects of observation of the achievings  
2B2B -2B1A -1C2B -2. Objects of intent  
2B2B -2B1A -1C2B -3. Divisions o f the achievings  
2B2B -2B1A -1C2B -1. Objects of observation of the achievings  
ROOT TEXT  
0.7a Objects of observation, …  
 
EXPLANATION 
Its definition [of an object of observation of an achieving ] is: a basis for the elimination of 
superimpositions by an achiev ing. The object of characterization  is: “objects of 
observation .” When divided, there are eleven.  
2B2B -2B1A -1C2B -2. Objects of intent  
ROOT TEXT  
0.7a … intent,  
 
EXPLANATION 
The definition [of an object of intent ] is: a final result intended  for which one engages in 
the achievings. When divided, there are the three great ones. The boundaries are: the buddha ground.  
2B2B -2B1A -1C2B -31. Divisions of the achievings  
The definition of a Mahayana  achieving  is: an activity that achieves the three great ones in 
dependence on a Mahayana  generated mind. 
 
ROOT TEXT   
0.7b Armor, …  
                                              
1  Gnyis pa  emended to read gsum pa. 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
61 EXPLANATION  
The definition of an achieving of armor  is: a bodhisattva’s activity that practices 
inclusively the six perfections in their entirety within each of the six perfec tions. When 
divided, there are six. The boundaries are: from the Mahayana  path of accumulation until 
the end of the continuum.  
 
ROOT TEXT  
0.7b … activities of engagement, 
 
EXPLANATION  
The definition of an achieving of activities of engagement  is: an activ ity that practices by 
means of any topic of Mahayana  cause and result serving as a principal application. When 
divided, there are nine. The boundaries are: from the level of utilizing belief until the end of 
the continuum.  
 
ROOT TEXT  
0.7c Accumulation, …  
 
EXPLANATION  
The definition of an achieving of accumulation  is: an activity that actually issues forth 
great enlightenment, its result. When divided, there are seventeen. The boundaries are: from 
the great level of the supreme mundane quality of the path of preparation until the end of the 
continuum.  
ROOT TEXT  
0.7c … definite emergence : these together 
 
EXPLANATION  
The definition of an achieving of definite emergance  is: a yoga of the pure grounds that 
undoubtedly issues forth an exalted knower of all aspects. When divided, there are eight. 
The boundaries are: the  three pure grounds. [The words] “ these together ” has the meaning 
of subsuming the ten in them.  
2B2B -2B1A -2. How they characterize an exalted knower of all aspects  
Although this is slightly explained in the modes in which the result is characterized by the  
cause, the Acarya’s assertion is as follows. The Great Commentary says:  
It is very clear that the object -possessor is characterized by the object; also the 
purpose of that is the direct realization of these ten topics —the nature of that 
exalted knower of all aspects that is the object of seeking.  
 When that is explained, it is indicated that the way of realizing them is to generate the mind 
[aspiring] towards supreme enlightenment at first, and then, through having experienced by 
way of the stages of the four achievings, to eventually manifest the three great ones. Hence, 
by merely indicating the ten topics that are to be directly realized [by] an exalted knower of all aspects, the corpus of the general Mahayana  path will dawn as an object of awareness, 
whereby it is for the sake of knowing the nature of the result that is the object to be attained. 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
62 2B2B -2B1A -3. Ascertaining the sequence  
Although the support of the achievings ha s been indicated  in the middle  from the point of 
view  of purpose, in terms of th e order of generation, first one awakens the lineage, generates 
the mind [aspiring] towards supreme enlightenment, hears instructions on the achievings, 
and produces  in the continuum the achieving of the wisdom arisen from meditation that 
observes emptines s by practicing the meaning of the instructions ; in order for that to occur, 
one observes the eleven objects of observation, and, for the sake of the three great objects of 
intent, through practic ing the stages of practice by way of the stages of the four achievings, 
one attains an exalted knower of all aspects directly realizing the ten topics. 
2B2B -2B1A -4. Joining the [brief] indication and the [extensive] explanation  
ROOT TEXT  
0.7d Are the exalted knower of all aspects of the s ubduers.  
 
EXPLANATION  
A cle ar realization of the Subduers , the persons who are the support s, is an exalted 
knower of all aspects. 
2B2B -2B1B. Explaining the corpus of a knower of paths 
2B2B -2B1B -1. Characterizing a knower of paths by the eleven topics 
2B2B -2B1B -2. Joining the [brief]  indication and the [extensive] explanation  
2B2B -2B1B -1. Characterizing a knower of paths by the eleven topics   
2B2B -2B1B -1A. Branches of a knower of paths 
2B2B -2B1B -1B. Knower of paths bearing branches  
2B2B -2B1B -1A. Branches of a knower of paths 
ROOT TEXT  
0.8a Eclipsing and so forth,  
 
EXPLANATION  
The cause, entity, and result of a knower of paths are explained by: (i) the support for 
producing a knower of paths being free from the obstacle; due to the natural light that is the 
tathagatas’ light eclipsi ng the light that is a ripened [result] of the gods of the desire and 
form realms, pride is dispelled; and, included within “ and so forth”: (ii) the cooperative 
condition, generated mind; (iii) lineage, the cause; (iv) nature; and (v) function.  
2B2B -2B1B -1B. Knower of paths bearing branches  
The first of three:  
2B2B -2B1B -1B1. Knower of paths knowing learner hearers’ paths  
ROOT TEXT  
0.8b Paths of learners, …  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
63 EXPLANATION  
The definition of a knower of paths knowing learner hearers’ paths  is: a direct realizat ion of 
impermanence and so forth (qualified by the three attributes63) that is a clear realization of 
what is to be known in order to take care of hearer lineage -bearers.  
2B2B -2B1B -1B2. Knower of paths knowing rhinoceroses’ paths, solitary realizers’ paths  
ROOT TEXT  
0.8b … and rhinoceroses  
 
EXPLANATION  
Other parts of the definition are similar [to that above]. It is “an exalted wisdom realizing 
that apprehendeds are devoid of being external objects,” and is “in order to take care of 
solitary realizer lineage -bearers.”  
 [The definition of a knower of paths knowing rhinoceroses’ paths, solitary realizers’ 
paths  is: an exalted wisdom (qualified by the three attributes and realizing that 
apprehendeds are devoid of being external objects) that is a clear re alization of what is to be 
known in order to take care of solitary realizer lineage -bearers.]   
2B2B -2B1B -1B3. Knower of bodhisattvas’ paths  
The first of two:  
2B2B -2B1B -1B3A. [Path of seeing]  
ROOT TEXT  
0.8cd Path of seeing —the great benefit  
Of excellent qualities of this and other [lives],  
 
EXPLANATION  
The definition of a Mahayana  path of seeing —the great benefit of excellent qualities of 
this and other [lives]  is: a clear realization of the truth that stops the extremes of both 
cyclic existence and solit ary peace.  
2B2B -2B1B -1B3B. [Path of meditation]  
The first of two:  
2B2B -2B1B -1B3B -1. [Function of a Mahayana path of meditation]  
ROOT TEXT  
0.9a Function, …  
 
EXPLANATION  
The definition of a function  of a Mahayana  path of meditation  is: a benefit attained th rough 
the force of cultivating that. 
2B2B -2B1B -1B3B -2. [Entity of a Mahayana path of meditation]  
2B2B -2B1B -1B3B -2A. Contaminated path of meditation  
2B2B -2B1B -1B3B -2B. Uncontaminated path of meditation  
                                              
63  These three attributes are: the  generated mind, dedication, and the  wisdom real izing emptiness.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
64 2B2B -2B1B -1B3B -2A. Contaminated path of meditation  
The first of three:  
2B2B -2B1B -1B3B -2A1. [Path of meditation of belief]  
ROOT TEXT  
0.9ab … belief, 
praise, veneration, and laudation, 
 
EXPLANATION  
The definition of a path of meditation of belief  is: a subsequent clear realization convinced 
that the Mothers are the source of the three welfares. The boundaries are: from the first 
ground  until the tenth ground. When divided, there are twenty -seven.   
 Its benefits, the three —praise, veneration, and laudation —are either (i) a factor of 
mental delight due to the factor of bodhisattvas meditating on the three levels of belief in 
buddhas and higher bodhisattvas, or (ii) a factor of expressing actual excellent qualities.  
2B2B -2B1B -1B3B -2A2. [Path of meditation of dedication]  
ROOT TEXT  
0.9c Dedication, …  
 
EXPLANATION  
The definition of a path of meditation of unsurpassable attention to dedication  is: a 
contaminated Mahayana  subsequent clear realization that acts to transform one’s own and 
others’ roots of virtue into a branch of complete enlightenment. When divided, th ere are 
twelve. The boundaries are as before: [from the first ground until the tenth ground].  
2B2B -2B1B -1B3B -2A3. [Path of meditation of rejoicing]  
ROOT TEXT  
0.9cd Rejoicing, …  
Unsurpassable attentions64,  
 
EXPLANATION  
The definition of a path of meditati on of unsurpassable attention to rejoicing  is: a 
contaminated Mahayana  subsequent clear realization that is very joyful regarding one’s own 
and others’ virtues. When divided, there are two. The boundaries are as before: [from the 
first ground  until the tenth ground].  
2B2B -2B1B -1B3B -2B. Uncontaminated path of meditation  
The first of two:  
2B2B -2B1B -1B3B -2B1. [Path of meditation of achieving]  
ROOT TEXT  
0.10a Achieving, …  
 
                                              
64  Bdag emended to read dag  in accordance with the several editions of the root text.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
65 EXPLANATION  
The definition of a path of meditation of achieving  is: an uncontaminated Mahayana  
subsequent clear realization that establishes the effect that is  the final realization. When 
divided, there are five.  
2B2B -2B1B -1B3B -2B2 [Path of meditation of purity]   
ROOT TEXT  
0.10ab … this called “very pure,”  
Is the path of meditation.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The definition of a path of meditation called “very pure”  is: an uncontaminated Mahayana  
subsequent clear realization that establishes the effect that is  the final abandonment. When 
divided, there are nine. The boundaries for both [a path of meditation of achieving and a 
path of meditation called “very pure”] are: from the first ground  until the tenth ground.  
2B2B -2B1B -2. Joining the [brief] indication and  the [extensive] explanation  
ROOT TEXT  
0.10cd The knower of paths  
Of skilled bodhisattvas is explained like that. 
 
EXPLANATION  
A knower of paths  that is a clear realization of skilled bodhisattva  aryas is explained like 
that. [The eleven topics] are taugh t to characterize a knower of paths from the point of view 
of object or from the point of view of entity. Further, “ know ing well the path proceeding to 
omniscience” is “knowing well the paths of all three vehicles,”  [whereby] if one knows  well 
the paths of all three vehicles , then one is included within the ranks of [those knowing well 
the path proceeding to omniscience] ; know that even though meditating on just a trifling 
path will also become a cause of omniscience, it is a long path.  
2B2B -2B1C. Explaining the corpus of a knower of bases  
2B2B -2B1C -1. Topics that characterize a knower of bases  
2B2B -2B1C -2. Joining the [brief] indication and the [extensive] explanation  
2B2B -2B1C -1. Topics that characterize a knower of bases   
2B2B -2B1C -1A. Reason fo r being distant from or near to the resultant Mother  
2B2B -2B1C -1B. Proving that very reason  
2B2B -2B1C -1C. Divisions of the discordant and antidotal classes  
2B2B -2B1C -1D. Application of a knower of bases  
2B2B -2B1C -1A. Reason for being distant from or near to the resultant Mother  
A path that does not abide in the extreme of cyclic existence:  
 
ROOT TEXT  
0.11a Through knowing, not abiding in cyclic existence;  
 
EXPLANATION  
That which stops the extreme of cyclic existence through being conjoined with the method  
of great compassion and directly knowing impermanence and so forth  is a knower of paths  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
66 not abiding in cyclic existence . Having eliminated the qualm wondering, “What are the 
paths that stop them?,” when the bodhisattvas ’ paths of seeing and meditation were 
indicated to stop the extremes of cyclic existence and solitary peace prior to these, saying “a 
knower of bases not abiding in solitary peace through compassion” is a wrong application of 
conventions, since (i) the meaning that is to be characterized and  (ii) the two meanings that 
act to characterize —are attributes of a knower of bases and a knower of paths 
[respectively].  
 
ROOT TEXT  
0.11b Through compassion, not abiding in solitary peace;  
 
EXPLANATION  
The definition of a knower of paths not abiding in solitary peace through compassion  is: 
a Mahayana  arya’s clear realization abiding in a class that stops the extreme of solitary 
peace relative to conventionalities.  
 Both of these exist from the first ground and above. It is incorrect to link “through 
know ing” [in the root text 0. 11a] only to a wisdom realizing emptiness, because its meaning 
is taught in the Great Commentary : “Seeing the faults of cyclic existence with wisdom.” 
The faults of cyclic existence are seen with a knower of conventionalities; it c annot be seen 
with a reasoning consciousness  observing the ultimate.  
2B2B -2B1C -1B. Proving that very reason   
ROOT TEXT  
0.11c Through lack of method, distant;  
 
EXPLANATION  
The definition of a knower of bases that is distant through lack of method  is: an exalted 
wisdom (directly realizing impermanence and so forth) that is devoid of great compassion and bound by the conception of true existence.  
 
ROOT TEXT  
0.11d Through method, not distant;  
 
EXPLANATION  
The definition of a knower of bases that is  not distant through method  is: an exalted 
wisdom (directly realizing impermanence and so forth) that is conjoined with great 
compassion and a wisdom realizing emptiness.  
 
That very exalted wisdom realizing impermanence and so forth is characterized by me ans of 
divisions of being devoid of or not being devoid of special method and wisdom. Doubts 
regarding these two characterizing qualities are also eliminated in the chapter on the knower 
of paths.  
2B2B -2B1C -1C. Divisions of the discordant and antidotal cla sses  
ROOT TEXT  
0.12a Discordant and antidotal classes;  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
67 EXPLANATION  
That very knower of bases is divided into (i) a knower of bases of the discordant class and  
(ii) a knower of bases of the antidotal class , by means of (i) being devoid of special method 
and wisdom and (ii) being conjoined with them. The assertion that the former is a 
conception of true existence should be discarded, since it does not know the presentation of 
reasoning and is not skilled in the stages of traversing the paths. The subject —a hearers’ 
path of seeing —it follows that is a conception because it is a knower that is a conception of 
true existence. If you accept that, then, since it lacks clear appearance, your assertion that it 
acts as a direct antidote to the seeds of afflictive o bscurations will degenerate. Furthermore, 
it follows that it is a wrong conception because it is the above [i.e., a conception of true existence ]. If you accept that, then, since it is mistaken with respect to its object of 
adherence, there would not be th e slightest difference between a conception of a self of 
persons and what is or is not to be practiced. That very knower of bases conjoined with 
special method and wisdom is explained to be “ a knower of bases of the antidotal class ,” but 
neither Arya [Vimu ktisena] nor Haribhadra used that convention “antidotal knower of 
bases” for an exalted wisdom directly realizing emptiness. 
2B2B -2B1C -1D. Application of a knower of bases  
2B2B -2B1C -1D1. Divisions of an application of a knower of bases  
2B2B -2B1C -1D2. Mode of apprehension of an application of a knower of bases  
2B2B -2B1C -1D3. Result of an application of a knower of bases  
2B2B -2B1C -1D1. Divisions of an application of a knower of bases  
ROOT TEXT  
0.12b Application; …  
 
EXPLANATION  
A bodhisattva’s yoga that culti vates an antidote to (i) erroneous adherence to the entity and 
attributes of the mode of subsistence of conventional bases, and (ii) erroneous adherence to mode of subsistence of the ultimate is an application  of a knower of bases
. When divided, 
there are ten. Although it is correlated with the path of preparation by means of the bases of  
characterization, it exists until the tenth ground.  
2B2B -2B1C -1D2. Mode of apprehension of an application of a knower of bases  
ROOT TEXT  
0.12b … the equality of th ose; 
 
EXPLANATION  
Stopping adherence to the divisions of the bases, definitions, definienda and object -
possessors as truly existent is the mode of apprehension that is  the equality of th ose 
application s. When divided by way of isolates, there are four.  
2B2B -2B1C -1D3. Result of an application of a knower of bases   
ROOT TEXT  
0.12c Hearers and so forth, path of seeing:  
 
EXPLANATION  
The definition of an explicitly indicated path of seeing  is: a clear realization of the truth that 
directly realizes freedom from elaboration. By way of those nine topics, that very knower of 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
68 bases bearing the aspects of impermanence and so forth is indicated through being 
characterized by means of both explicit indication and implicit indication. A clear 
realization to be passed  through, having been viewed by knowing and seeing, that is 
included within a bodhisattva’s path of seeing is implicitly indicated by the explicitly indicated path of seeing.  
 From between the two —(1) a clear realization that is an object to be known and (2) a 
clear realization that is an object to be actualized —in the continuum of a bodhisattva, the 
first, although existing on all three paths, is a clear realization (that is merely viewed by knowing and seeing, and is an object to be passed through, having  been viewed by knowing 
and seeing), like  it has been explained.  
 The latter need not be definitely cultivated in order to attain mere liberation  and are  paths 
that need to be definitely cultivated as antidotes to the knowledge obscurations , [because] 
they are special method and wisdom. Hence, when indicating a clear realization (that is 
merely viewed by knowing and seeing and is an object to be passed through, having been 
viewed), it is necessary to indicate the path of seeing; it is inappropriate to indic ate the path 
of meditation that  is of a similar type to it. If  the principal learner’s path that is  actualize d 
for the sake of the path that is to be actualized  is indicated , the path of meditation must be 
indicated, and the path of seeing must also be ind icated as its cause. Therefore, the path of 
seeing explicitly indicated here is [ the clear realization ] that acts to pass through , and that 
indicated implicitly is the clear realization that is an  object to be passed through.  
2B2B -2B1C -2. Joining the [brief] indication and the [extensive] explanation   
ROOT TEXT  
0.12d Such are asserted to be knowers of all.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Such clear realizations of hearers, solitary realizers, and so forth who are the support of the 
presentation are asserted to be knowers of all. These are explained in this way simply 
through the force of the metrics of composition; since the path of seeing is the last characterizing topic, its meaning is explained to be “Path of seeing, of hearers and so 
forth .”
65 It has also been applied in this manner in certain translations. 
2B2B -2B2. Explaining the corpus of the four applications  
2B2B -2B2A. Cause and effect with respect to gaining control  
2B2B -2B2B. Cause and effect with respect to gaining stability  
2B2B -2B2A. Cause and effect with respect to gaining control  
The first of two:  
2B2B -2B2A -1. Application in complete aspects  
2B2B -2B2A -1A. The characterizing topics  
2B2B -2B2A -1B. Joining the [brief] indication and the [extensive] explanation  
2B2B -2B2A -1A. The characterizing topics  
2B2B -2B2A -1A1. General presentation in terms of the support who gathers roots of virtue  
2B2B -2B2A -1A2. Explicitly showing the stages of generation in the continuum in terms of the support who 
ripens roots of virtue  
                                              
65 Compare this with verse 0.12c.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
69 2B2B -2B2A -1A1. General presentation in terms of the support who gathers roots of virtue  
2B2B -2B2A -1A1A. Divisions of the modes of apprehension of the yogas of the path perfection of wisdom 
being cultivated  
2B2B -2B2A -1A1B. Application of meditative equipoise  
2B2B -2B2A -1A1C. Excel lent qualities and faults of the applications being cultivated  
2B2B -2B2A -1A1D. Characteristics that characterize the yogas of the path perfection of wisdom  
2B2B -2B2A -1A1A. Divisions of the modes of apprehension of the yogas of the path perfection of wisdom  being 
cultivated  
ROOT TEXT  
0.13a Aspects …  
 
EXPLANATION   
When  the instances  of the modes of apprehension  of the aspects of the applications  are 
divided, there are 173. Taking the aspects  indicated here as objects to be characterized and 
supplementing them with their characteristics is a case of not having understood the 
meaning of “[Those] called  ‘aspects’ are the characteristics” [4.1b]. For, they are explained 
in the commentary of Arya [Vimuktisena] to indicate the antidotal characteristics; they are 
not explained to be the characteristics of the aspects. If that were to be the case, then the 
contextual meanings of all the three —bases, antidotes, and aspects —explained in the 
treatise wou ld become lost . 
2B2B -2B2A -1A1B. Application of meditative equipoise  
ROOT TEXT  
0.13a … along with applications;  
 
EXPLANATION  
The definition of a principal application  explicitly indicated here  is: a yoga that is a union 
of calm abiding and special insight realizing that the object, object -possessor, and the 
three —bases, paths, and aspects —are empty of true existence and free from the 
elaborations.  Having taken what is explicitly indicated here to be a yoga that is a union of calm abiding 
and special insight  realizing emptiness, the assertion that it exists from the path of 
accumulation is one which is unskilled in the stages of the path, because such a path must 
definitely be attained on the heat level of the path of preparation.  
 By way of the two -fold divi sion—into (1) objects to be cultivated, the aspects, and (2) 
that which acts to cultivate, the applications —having taken the 173 aspects as the objects of 
observation, the bases for eliminating the superimpositions of the applications, taking the 
cultivati on of all of them (by collecting  them together in the emptiness of true existence) as 
the way of cultivating an application in complete aspects is very incorrect. 
 This is because an application in complete aspects must cultivate all 173 aspects by way 
of a union of calm abiding and special insight, having caused them to dawn as modes of 
apprehension of its  aspects. Since these will be explained in the section on the meaning of 
the words, I will not elaborate more beyond just this. The words “ along with ” [in 0.13a] 
indicate the persons who are the supports cultivating the applications and gathering roots of 
virtue. The division of applications into twenty  is a division of the excellent qualities that 
are attained on that occasion; they are not divisions of the meditative equipoise alone.  
 With respect to that, the “applications” indicate a union of calm abiding and special 
insight, whereby a union of calm abiding and special insight observing varieties exists even 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
70 on the path of accumulation. However, th at which observe s modes is as explained above [to 
be attained on the heat level of the path of preparation]. 
2B2B -2B2A -1A1C. Excellent qualities and faults of the applications being cultivated  
ROOT TEXT  
0.13b Excellent qualities and faults…  
 
EXPLANATION  
The definition of an excellent quality  of an application  is: a benefit attained through the 
force of cultivating that [application]. When divided, there are fourteen. The definition of a 
fault of an application  is: that acting as a hindrance to the productio n or abidance of an 
application. When divided, there are forty -six. 
2B2B -2B2A -1A1D. Characteristics that characterize the yogas of the path perfection of wisdom  
ROOT TEXT  
0.13b … along with characteristics;  
 
EXPLANATION  
The definition of a yoga of the path  perfection of wisdom  is: a bodhisattva’s activity of a 
union [of calm abiding and special insight] that serves as the method for attaining a resultant 
perfection of wisdom. When divided, there are ninety -one. Its boundaries are: from the 
Mahayana  path of accumulation until the end of the continuum.  
2B2B -2B2A -1A2. Explicitly showing the stages of generation in the continuum in terms of the support who 
ripens roots of virtue  
2B2B -2B2A -1A2A. Occasion of generating an application  
2B2B -2B2A -1A2B. Occasion of ripening an application  
2B2B -2B2A -1A2C. Persons who are the support  
2B2B -2B2A -1A2D. A person’s stages of cultivation  
2B2B -2B2A -1A2A. Occasion of generating an application   
ROOT TEXT  
0.13c Partial concordance with liberation …  
 
EXPLANATION  
The definition of a Mahayana  partial concordance with liberation  is: a clear realization of 
the doctrine in the continuum of a bodhisattva skilled in achieving an exalted knower of all 
aspects in his continuum. When divided, there are five.  
2B2B -2B2A -1A2B. Occasion of ri pening an application  
ROOT TEXT  
0.13c … and definite discrimination;  
 
EXPLANATION  
The definition of a Mahayana  partial concordance with  definite discrimination  indicated 
here is: a bodhisattva’s clear realization of the meaning that is qualified by the fac tor of 
method. When divided, there are twelve.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
71 2B2B -2B2A -1A2C. Persons who are the support  
ROOT TEXT  
0.13d The assembly of irreversible learners;  
 
EXPLANATION  
The definition of a sangha included in the assembly of irreversible learners  is: a 
bodhisattva wh o has attained any of the signs, such as having turned away from the 
discrimination of forms and so forth. When divided, there are three. The boundaries are: the 
heat level of the path of preparation and above. 
2B2B -2B2A -1A2D. A person’s stages of cultivat ion 
The first of three:  
 
ROOT TEXT  
0.14a Equality of cyclic existence and peace;  
 
EXPLANATION  
The definition of an application of the equality of cyclic existence and peace  that deposits 
an imprint of the truth body  is: a bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom that has destroyed the 
opportunity for the generation of the manifest conception of true existence even on the occasions of subsequent attainment. 
 
The second:   
 
ROOT TEXT  
0.14b Unsurpassable pure land;  
 
EXPLANATION  
The definition of an application of an unsurpassable pure land  is: a bodhisattva’s exalted 
wisdom in which a root of virtue, such as a prayer to accomplish the special land where he 
will attain enlightenment, has become a powerful potency. 
 The third:  
 
ROO T TEXT  
0.14c Along with this, skillful means:  
 
EXPLANATION  
The definition of an application of skillful means  is: a bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom that 
spontaneously accomplishes exalted activities by means of having pacified coarse exertion. 
2B2B -2B2A -1B. J oining the [brief] indication and the [extensive] explanation  
ROOT TEXT  
0.14d Clear complete realization of all aspects.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Know that these eleven topics are the topics that characterize an application of clear 
complete realization of all aspects .  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
72  
Someone, having applied the expression “along with” of the three —beginning, middle and 
end—to all, divided “along with” into fourteen. This is a presentation whose confusion 
causes  amazement.  
2B2B -2B2A -2. Peak application  
[2B2B -2B2A -2A. The characterizing topics  
2B2B -2B2A -2B. Joining the [brief] indication and the [extensive] explanation  
2B2B -2B2A -2A. The characterizing topics]  
The first of four, the peak application of the path of preparation:  
 
ROOT TEXT  
0.15ab Signs of t hat; increases;  
Stability; always abiding mind;  
 
EXPLANATION  
• A first partial concordance with definite discrimination that has attained any of the 
twelve  signs of  attainment of peak application.  
• A second partial concordance with definite discrimination th at has completed the 
sixteen  increases, such as that exceeding the making  of offerings to buddhas equal in 
number to the sentient beings in the billionfold world systems.  
• A third partial concordance with definite discrimination that has attained stability  
in (i) the wisdom that is a complete similitude of the three exalted knowers and (ii) 
indivisibility from others’ welfare.  
• A fourth partial concordance with definite discrimination that has attained an 
always abiding mind  of infinite meditative stabilizati ons, due to having ripened the 
potency to generate the path of seeing.  
 
These four are respectively the definitions of a peak application of heat and so forth, [that is, 
of peak, forbearance, and supreme mundane quality].  
 
The second and third:  
 
ROOT TEXT  
0.15cd With respect to the individual paths of  
“Seeing” and “meditation,”  
 
0.16ab Four types of antidotes  
To the four types of conceptions, 
 
EXPLANATION  
The definitions of a “ peak application of the path of seeing”  and a peak application of the 
path “meditation”  are respectively:  
(i) a Mahayana  clear realization of the truth that acts as an antidote to the seeds of the 
conceptions that are objects to be abandoned by the path of seeing, and  
(ii) a Mahayana  subsequent clear realization that acts as an antidote to the seeds of the 
conceptions that are objects to be abandoned by the path of meditation.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
73  
When divided, with respect to the two individual paths, there are four types of 
antidotes to the four types of conceptions. 
 
The fourth, the uninterrupted peak application, as well as perverse achievings:  
 
ROOT TEXT  
0.16cd Uninterrupted meditative stabilization  
As well as perverse achievings:  
 
EXPLANATION   
The definition of a peak application of  uninterrupted meditative stabilization  is: a yoga 
(in which the collective cultivation of the aspects of the three exalted knowers has become 
excellent) that directly generates an exalted knower of all aspects.  
 
The definition of a perverse achieving that is an object to be eliminated (indicated in this  
context of “ as well as perverse achievings ” that are objects to be eliminated) is: either a 
seed of a conception or a manifest conception apprehending the two truths as not suitable to 
be subsumed as a single entity  indicated here. When divided, there are  sixteen. 
2B2B -2B2A -2B. Joining the [brief] indication and the [extensive] explanation  
ROOT TEXT  
0.17a Clear realizations of peak…  
 
EXPLANATION  
“Clear realizations of peak.”  
2B2B -2B2B. Cause and effect with respect to gaining stability  
2B2B -2B2B -1. Serial  [application]  
[2B2B -2B2B -2. Instantaneous application]  
2B2B -2B2B -1. Serial [application]  
ROOT TEXT  
0.17ab … the serial:  
Three types, ten types, …  
 
EXPLANATION  
Joining the [brief] indication and the [extensive] explanation, “ the serial:” is stated, and 
when divided, there are three types  and ten types , such as the serial [application] of the 
perfection of generosity.  
2B2B -2B2B -2. Instantaneous application  
ROOT TEXT  
0.17bcd … Clear complete  enlightenment  
In a single instant, 
By way of characteristics: fou r types. 
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
74 EXPLANATION  
Joining the [brief] indication and the [extensive] explanation, “ Clear complete  
enlightenment in a single instant,” is stated, and when divided, by way of the 
characteristics  of dissimilar isolate demarcations, there are four types  of different isolates 
with respect to a single entity.   
 I do not think that the assertion that it exists on the seventh ground and above  is the 
intention of the Acarya. Since even the end of the continuum cannot be a partless instant of time, [it exists fo r] the shortest instant in which an action is completed.  
 If we were to analyze the characteristics of the modes of cultivation of the last two 
applications, it seems they are as follows:  at the time of serial cultivation, on the occasion of 
the tenth gro und prior to the end of the continuum, if one were to directly realize a quality 
such as impermanence —through the force of previous familiarization, even without needing 
great exertion —all the aspects of the three exalted knowers, without exception, would 
become objects of direct perception in a single series without mix -up in sequence, by way of 
being with a little exertion. However, know that even at various points [during the process 
itself ], a little focused exertion is necessary. 
 I think that someone’s explanation that a serial application only progressively cultivates 
the thirteen topics [characterizing a serial application] has cast away the contextual 
meaning, because one needs to gain control over familiarization of the 173 aspects. 
Although one must cultivate the thirteen topics without mixing up the sequence in its 
appropriate mode, know that most of the thirteen are branches that act to stabilize the serial 
activities subsequent to the cultivation of the 173 aspects during meditative equi poise. 
 On the occasion of subsequent attainment, one recollects the Three Jewels, enhances the 
mind of giving, observes the intention of abandonment, and so forth.  
 On the occasion of cultivating an instantaneous application, as in the case of the analog y, 
“passing like a person’s watermill,” when an uncontaminated quality becomes manifest, 
without having to focus on the rest, they will manifest directly in a single series without 
mix-up in sequence.   
 That is the time of the path of application of the e nd of the continuum. As for the time of 
the uninterrupted path, know that from the state of being placed in meditative equipoise on emptiness, one transfers to the first instant of an exalted knower of all aspects, by means of 
that clear realization immedi ately becoming the nature of powerful potency. At that time, 
that very single entity of awareness places  in meditative equipoise on emptiness , in a 
manner of not rising as long as cyclic existence exists. At the time of that itself, one directly 
perceives all the varieties of phenomena as one would a amalaki  fruit placed upon one’s 
palm. Since the modes of the perfection of wisdom are difficult to realize at all times —and 
not simply on this occasion —they are only to be realized through having pleased the 
spiritual guide for a long time. 
2B2B -2B3. Explaining the corpus of the truth body  
ROOT TEXT  
0.18ab Nature along with complete enjoyment, Likewise the other, emanation,  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
75 EXPLANATION  
(i) A nature  body  that is a sphere possessing the two purities66, along with  (ii) a complete 
enjoyment body  distinguished by the five certainties and, likewise , that other  from the 
two—(iii) a supreme emanation  body , a final form body not distinguished by the five 
certainties —are the results that are objects to be obtained. Throug h that, know also their 
individual definitions. 
 
ROOT TEXT  
0.18cd Truth body along with the activities  
Are perfectly described as being of four types. 
 
EXPLANATION  
Joining the [brief] indication and the [extensive] explanation, “Truth body” is stated. An 
assertion of the Acarya took them to be the words joining the [brief] indication and the 
[extensive] explanation. However, it is asserted that there is not the fault of not having 
engaged the meaning of the words of the treatise, even though the fourth  exalted bod y has 
been indicated by this [0. 18cd ]. Hence, the definition of a realization exalted wisdom truth 
body  is: a knower that is final insight relative to the modes  and varieties. The phenomena 
that are a  truth body along with the activities are perfectly described as being of  four 
types. 
 Having refuted that the meaning of “in reliance on an exalted wisdom and so forth as the 
very objects of buddhas and so forth” (in the context of the summarized meaning s of this 
[category] below) is that exalted wisdom emerges from within exalted wisdom and so forth, 
there is the explanation that it means that “(i) the twenty -one sets of uncontaminated exalted 
wisdom are posited as the exalted wisdom truth body, and (ii) the final body adorned with 
the signs and exemplifications is posited as the complete enjoyment body.” Both these 
explanations are cases of not having seen the Acarya’s commentaries in detail, because, in 
relation to this, the Great Commentary taught that it means that the exalted wisdom truth 
body  and the two form bodies have arisen from the accumulation of exalted wisdom, have 
arisen from the accumulation of merit, and have arisen from factors of both. 
2B2B -3. Summarized and explained  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. By way of the first two stanzas, because of being summarized into 
the eight categories, it was indicated in brief. By way of thirteen stanzas, through being 
summarized into the topics of those, it was explained extensively. Thus, because o f having 
been summarized and extensively explained, it has been well explained.  
 
EXPLANATION  
With respect to the fifteen stanzas present, the subject —by way of the first two stanzas  
[0.4 and 0.5]—the corpus was indicated in brief, because the corpus was su mmarized  
merely into the structure  of the eight categories. The subject —by way of thirteen 
remaining stanzas  [0.6–0.18]—the corpus was explained extensively, because it was 
explained through being summarized merely into the structure  of the seventy topics of 
                                              
66 The two purities are the purity  with respect to inherent stains and the purity with respect to adventitious 
stains.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                     Introduction  
 
76 those  eight [categories]. Thus, it has been well explained by way of the fifteen [stanzas], 
because of having been summarized and extensively explained in the above manner.  
2B2B -4. Reason for not unraveling them extensively  
COMMENTARY  
Fearing it would become the fault of repetition, the stanzas of the summarized meanings  
were not unraveled; by the very composition of the treatise, all of the treatise that will be 
explained (such as “ The generated mind is [ desire for perfect complete enl ightenment ] for 
others’ welfare”) will explain it, whereby I thought to explain it by thoroughly explaining 
those.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the stanzas of the summarized meanings  —were not unraveled  in detail 
prior to the extensive explanation of the branc hes which will be explained. The reason is 
because if they were unraveled in that manner, I fear it would become a commentary on 
the extensive explanation of the branches and there would be the fault of repetition,  
whereby they were not unraveled. There wo uld be repetition [if the stanzas of the 
summarized meanings  were unraveled], because, by the very composition of the treatise, 
all the words of the root text of the extensive explanation of the treatise which will be 
explained (such as “The generated mind  is [desire for perfect complete enlightenment] 
for others’ welfare”  [1.1a b below]), will explain this corpus. There is pervasion, because, 
in order to explain all of the words of the root text of the extensive explanation, I thought to 
explain this corpus  by thoroughly explaining those ; they will be explained.  
 
OPINION: Since the consideration of the fault of repetition in the brief indication and the 
extensive explanation is unrelated, the rejection of the dispute of this context is incorrect. 
RESPONSE: This is a manifestation of not having realized the meaning.  
OPINION: A commentary on the extensive explanation of the branches will repeat the root 
text, because it will extensively explain the corpus.  
RESPONSE: Those who are able to completely comprehend the meaning in dependence on 
the mere words of the root text do not need it; it is composed for the sake of those who are 
not able to do so.   
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
77 2B2C. Meaning o f the words  
2B2C -1. Explaining the three exalted knowers extensively 
2B2C -2. Explaining the four applications extensively 
2B2C -3. Explaining the truth body extensively  
2B2C -1. Explaining the three exalted knowers extensively 
2B2C -1A. Explaining the object  of seeking, the exalted knower of all aspects  
2B2C -1B. Explaining the knower of paths which proceeds to the exalted knower of all aspects  
2B2C -1C. Explaining the branch that purifies the knower of paths, the knower of bases  
 
Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
2B2C -1A. Explaining the object of seeking, the exalted knower of all aspects  
2B2C -1A1. Making a connection  
2B2C -1A2. Explaining the ten topics extensively 
2B2C -1A3. Summarizing the chapter  
2B2C -1A1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY  
Having indicated all the summarized meanings  in that manner—since bodhisattvas desire to 
attain enlightenment accordingly, as it is necessary to attain the exalted knower of all 
aspects because it is the result —it is asserted that the exalted knower of all  aspects is 
explained first by means of thoroughly explaining the stanzas that summarize it. 
 
EXPLANATION  
Having indicated all the summarized meanings  in that manner, it is asserted that the 
exalted knower of all aspects is explained first, stating “genera ted mind and so forth 
taught…” There is a reason for first explaining an exalted knower of all aspects, as it is 
necessary  for trainees who desire to directly realize all the stages of clear realizations 
without exception to eventually attain the exalted k nower of all aspects . It is necessary, 
because it is the  principal result that is the object of seeking. That [an exalted knower of all 
aspects is the principal result that is the object of seeking] follows, since  the intended 
trainees of the Ornament, bodhisattvas, desire to attain  unsurpassable enlightenment in 
accordance with  the buddhas of the past and the present who have gone there.  
 
OPINION: Although it is appropriate to explain that at the beginning, why are merely [its 
topics ,] generated mind, instruction s, and so forth explained?  
RESPONSE: It is appropriate to explain those, because it is asserted that, by means of 
thoroughly explaining the stanzas that summarize the exalted knower of all aspects, the 
object -possessor is extensively characterized by the objects.  
 The explanation (by way of applying to all below what is similar to this [instance of] 
making of connection) is a presentation whose confusion generates amazement, whereby 
scholars should not make effort, because the need to explain that t he characteristics of an ox 
are conglomerated objects such as a dorsal hump, folds of flesh at the nape, drooping hide at the neck (dewlap), and so forth is inappropriate for trainees of this treatise for the time 
being. 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
78 2B2C -1A2. Explaining the ten topics  extensively 
2B2C -1A2A. Explaining the promise in attitude in which one makes a commitment for the sake of attaining an 
exalted knower of all aspects 
2B2C -1A2B. Explaining the instruction s that reveal the methods for accomplishing the aim of the promise  
2B2C -1A2C. Explaining the achievings that  accomplish the aim of the instructions accordingly  
2B2C -1A2A. Explaining the promise in attitude in which one makes a commitment for the sake of attaining an 
exalted knower of all aspects 
2B2C -1A2A -1. Meaning of th e general ity 
2B2C -1A2A -2. Meaning of the branches  
2B2C -1A2A -1 Meaning of the g eneral ity 
2B2C -1A2A -1A. Supports who generate the Mahayana generated mind  
2B2C -1A2A -1B. Cause  
2B2C -1A2A -1C. Entity  
2B2C -1A2A -1D. Benefits 
2B2C -1A2A -1A. Supports who generate the  Mahayana generated mind  
In regard to the support who generates the wishing mind [of enlightenment], even desire 
realm gods, nagas, and so forth who are inclined to the Mahayana  and desire to attain 
buddhahood generate it. As for the explanation in [Asanga ’s] Bodhisattvas’ Grounds  
(Bodhisattvabhumi) and [Atisa’s] Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment  (Bodhipathapradipa ) 
that the support of the engaging mind of enlightenment must be individual liberation (pratimoksa) vows
67, this is in terms of the special suppo rt, because it also exists in the 
continua of some bodhisattvas who bear the support of desire realm gods and the support of 
the upper realms [form and formless realms].  
2B2C -1A2A -1B. Cause   
[Santideva ’s] Compendium of Trainings  (Siksasamuccaya ) explains the four modes of 
generating the mind [of enlightenment]: (1) having seen the exalted body of a buddha, one wonders, “What if I were to attain such [a body]?”; (2) seeing and hearing about the 
inconceivable strength of buddhas and bodhisattvas, and so fort h; (3) not being able to bear 
the decline of the Mahayana  teachings; and (4) not being able to bear sentient beings 
tormented by suffering. The explanation that it is generated from the four causes, four 
conditions and four forces is a branch of settling u pon the causes and conditions. Although 
the other three are mere generated minds that seek buddhahood, what is explicitly indicated here is a fully qualified principal generated mind that acts as the support of deeds; hence it 
must definitely be motivated by a compassion that cannot bear sentient beings’ suffering 
and wishes to free them from it.  
2B2C -1A2A -1C. Entity  
2B2C -1A2A -1C1. Definition  
2B2C -1A2A -1C2. Divisions 
2B2C -1A2A -1C3. Differences between wishing and engaging  
                                              
67 According to Gendun Drup’s commentary to stanza 4.13cd of Vasubandhu’s Abdhidharmakosha (Treasury 
of Manifest Knowledge ), the definition of an individual liberation  vow is: a morality of definite emergence 
included within the desire realm.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
79 2B2C -1A2A -1C1. Definition  
The definition [of the Mahayana  generated mind ] is: a special mind that is concomitant with 
the aspiration seeking perfect complete enlightenment for others’ welfare. Know from the 
stages of the Ornament for Clear Realization, composed by Jetsun Losang Dragpa 
Palzangpo [Lama Tsongkhapa], how you should train in the attitudes seeking others’ welfare and seeking enlightenment, and so forth, in order to generate this.  
2B2C -1A2A -1C2. Divisions 
[The divisions are] wishing and engagi ng minds.  
 
2B2C -1A2A -1C3. Differences between wishing and engaging  
[Kamalashila’s] Stages of Meditation  (Bhavanakrama) says: 
 
The seeking at the beginning, “May I become a buddha in order to benefit those 
migrating beings” is the mind that wishes. From th en onwards, having upheld 
vows, that having engaged in the accumulations is the mind that has engaged. 
 
[Santideva ’s] Engaging in the Deeds of a Bodhisattva (Bodhisattva caryavatara , 1.16) gives 
analogies of the two:  
 
As is understood by the particularities  
Of desiring to go and going,  
So the wise should understand respectively  
The particularities of these two.  
 Having taken as the basis the thought, “I shall go to the city,” there are two [possibilities] of 
being and not being actually conjoined with activi ties of the body, such as striding onwards. 
Likewise, while the general definition of the generated mind does not have the attribute of 
engaging, the divisions into the two [possibilities] of being and not being actually conjoined 
with the activity of the practice of deeds is the meaning of the above  passage. The assertion 
that there is no wishing mind at the time of training in the deeds after taking the engaging vows is not the meaning of those [passages]. Moreover, even after having upheld the 
engaging v ows in that manner, there are two modes of engagement of the mind with respect 
to training in the deeds. The continuous  presence of a mindfulness and aspiration , that
 seeks 
omniscience (at a time when not only is one motivated merely by the generated mind, but an 
enhanced intention to give also dawns) is the meaning of being actually conjoined with the activity of the practice of deeds. When such is absent, then it is not actually conjoined [with 
the activity of the practice of deeds]. Therefore, it is obvi ous that there is no fault in 
asserting that a wishing mind exists from the path of accumulation —and even after having 
attained a ground —because even though one directly realizes the meaning of emptiness 
after having attained a ground, there will occur ple nty of occasions where the generated 
mind is not actually conjoined with [the activity of the practice of deeds].  
 Although the two —the engaging vows and the engaging mind —are contradictory [in the 
sense of being mutually exclusive], know that the generat ion of that [engaging mind comes 
about] through only the power of upholding the vows. The engaging mind exists from the path of accumulation until the buddha ground. What has been explained here are the 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
80 divisions of the conventional mind of enlightenment; they are not divisions of the ultimate 
mind of enlightenment. The difference between the two is as follows. An intention for the 
conventional exalted body (without intending for the mere ultimate mode of abidance of 
unsurpassable enlightenment) is the form er. An intention for only the ultimate mode of 
abidance of enlightenment, in a manner of water placed in water, is the latter; it exists having attained the path of seeing and onwards; it does not exist in ordinary beings.  
2B2C -1A2A -1D. Benefits 
There are the temporal benefits of (i) purifying causes of bad migrations accumulated 
previously and severing their future continuity, (ii) newly accumulating causes of good 
migrations and those accumulated previously not having a limit to their exhaustion, and (iii ) 
becoming worthy of being paid homage by the world, including gods. Eventually, one will 
attain unsurpassable enlightenment and so forth. 
2B2C -1A2A -2. Meaning of the branches  
2B2C -1A2A -2A. Explaining the common definition as well as the objects of observa tion 
2B2C -1A2A -2B. Explaining the divisions, a subsidiary topic  
2B2C -1A2A -2A. Explaining the common definition as well as the objects of observation  
2B2C -1A2A -2A1. Definition  
2B2C -1A2A -2A2. The branches of ascertaining that [definition], the objects of observation  
2B2C -1A2A -2A1. Definition  
2B2C -1A2A -2A1A. Making a general connection  
2B2C -1A2A -2A1B. Root text  
2B2C -1A2A -2A1C. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2A -2A1A. Making a general connection  
COMMENTARY 
The entity of the generated mind itself, as well as objects of obs ervation:  
 
EXPLANATION  
The entity of the generated mind itself, as well as its objects of observation:  
2B2C -1A2A -2A1B. Root text   
ROOT TEXT  
1.1ab  The generated mind is desire for Perfect complete enlightenment for others’ welfare.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The Mahaya na generated mind  indicated here  is the definiendum. The definition is : a 
special mind concomitant with the desire for perfect complete enlightenment for the sake 
of liberating other  sentient beings from all suffering. 
 Having explicitly indicated the meaning here to be the Mahayana  generated mind, 
indicating it with the expression “desire” is for the sake of a special purpose. The meaning s 
of the two —the desire  of others’ welfare implied by merely this name and the desire  of 
enlightenment —are implicitly indicated here. Further, that is for the sake of making known 
that the desire for others’ welfare is necessary as a cause of the generated mind, and the desire for enlightenment is necessary as a companion. These will be e xplained. Hence, 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
81 desire. For what? Unsurpassable enlightenment. For the sake of what? “For others’ 
welfare.” Hence, [from between] the two —enlightenment which is the object of seeking and 
others’ welfare —enlightenment will occur first, but know that the at titudes seeking those 
two must be generated in reverse sequence [i.e. the attitude seeking others’ welfare should 
be generated before the attitude seeking enlightenment].  
2B2C -1A2A -2A1C. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2A -2A1C -1. Meaning of the words  
2B2C -1A2A -2A1C -2. Dispelling objection  
2B2C -1A2A -2A1C -1. Meaning of the words  
COMMENTARY  
So the root text is said. The characteristic of the generated mind [thinking], “Having achieved buddhahood, for others’ welfare I shall make effort in accordance with their 
fortunes” which desires perfect complete enlightenment for others’ welfare is of two types: 
wishing and the very entity of engaging.  
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the generated mind thinking, “For  the sake of others’ welfare, having 
achieved buddhahood myself at the beg inning, I shall make effort in accordance with 
the fortunes  of the three lineage -bearers” —is of two, because the characteristic of desire  
for perfect complete enlightenment for others’ welfare is of two types : generated mind 
wishing  to engage and the very entity of engaging . 
2B2C -1A2A -2A1C -2. Dispelling objection  
2B2C -1A2A -2A1C -2A. Objection  
2B2C -1A2A -2A1C -2B. Reply  
2B2C -1A2A -2A1C -2A. Objection  
COMMENTARY  
OPINION: The very desire for perfect complete enlightenment —the aspiration for virtuous 
qualities seek ing that —is a mental factor68, but is not the generated mind a mind69 that 
arises bearing the appearance of superior objects? How will it be the generated mind?  
 
EXPLANATION  
OPINION: The subject—the aspiration which seeks (that is the desire for perfect 
comp lete enlightenment) —how will it be the generated mind? It follows that it will not, 
because it is a mental factor. There is pervasion, because the desire for enlightenment —the 
aspiration for virtuous qualities seeking that—is a division of the individually- object -
ascertaining [mental factors]70 included within the aggregate of compositional factors71, but 
                                              
68 What is usuall y translated as “m ental factor ” literally means “arisen from mind.” 
69 “Mind” in this context refers to a main mind or a primary consciousness.  
70 According to Asanga's Compendium of Knowledge (Abhidharmasamuchchaya), the 51 m ental f actors can 
be subsumed under the  six groups:  
(1-5) omnipresent mental factors, feeling and so forth  
(6-10) object -ascertaining mental factors, aspiration and so forth  
(11-21) virtuous mental factors, faith and so forth  
(22-27) root afflictions, attachment and so forth  
(28-47) se condary afflictions, belligerence and so forth  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
82 is not the generated mind a mind that arises bearing the appearance of superior  
objects , the two welfares , as objects ?  
 Regarding the meaning o f this objection, those who are mixed -up about just the words 
say, “ One posit s that the generated mind is a desire, but one  does not accept the 
consequence flung, that it follows that a desire is not the generated mind.” With respect to 
the thought of the objector, if he objects that a desire is posited as the definition of the 
generated mind, then, since the thought, “That desire —the basis of characterization  in 
which the definition has engaged —must be asserted as the generated mind,” would arise if 
one is an analytical person, how can there be an opportunity for one not accepting [that]? It 
is not that the Acarya composed the treatise after having stated the objection in which that 
was not accepted, but was deprived of a reply to that. Since the pervasion of that 
consequence was also accepted by the Acarya, the damage to fact in that reply is just that. With respect to the  claim  that “That indicates that minds and mental factors are different 
substances ,” the pervasion that those that are contradictory are necessarily different 
substances cannot be proven even by a pure  being .  
2B2C -1A2A -2A1C -2B. Reply  
2B2C -1A2A -2A1C -2B1. Designation by the name “desire for others’ welfare”  
2B2C -1A2A -2A1C -2B2. Designation by the name “desire for enlightenment”  
2B2C -1A2A -2A1C -2B1. Designation by the name “desire for others’ welfare”  
COMMENTARY 
It is true. However, in this [context] when there exists the characteristic of aspiration for virtuous qualities —seeking —the mind of enlightenment is generated, whereby the result is 
indicated by the cause. In order to make known that “all the virtuous qualities of 
bodhisattvas who seek in that manner will increase,” since it is based upon designation, 
there is no fault. 
 
EXPLANATION  
It is true  that whatever is a mental factor is not the generated mind . However, the subject —
in this context of indicating the definition of the generated mind —since the generated mind  
is based upon designation by the name “desire,”  there is not the fault of asserting a 
common locus [between a mental factor and  the generated mind], because it is a designation 
by way of the three attributes being complete.  There is a reason for the designation, because the result is indicated by designating it 
with the name of the cause. The aspiration seeking others’ welfare and the Mahayana  
generated mind will become cause and result, because when there exists the seeking of 
others’ welfare with the characteristic of aspiration for the  virtuous qualities  of 
separating all sentient being s from suffering , there is pervasion that the mind of 
enlightenment is definitely generated  after that ; if that does not come first, the fully 
qualified generated mind indicated here would not be produced.  
 There is a purpose for designating it by the name  “seeking others’ welfare,” because it is 
for the sake of making known that “all the virtuous qualities included within the 
generated mind (that is the support for deeds) and the deeds in the continua of bodhisattvas 
                                                                                                                                                     
 
(48-51) changeable ment al factors, regret and so forth  
71 The aggregate of compositional factors is one of the five aggregates which make up a person. It contains 
all the mental factors, with the exception of feeling and discrimination.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
83 who seek others’ welfare  in that manner  will increase.”  The damage to fact is just that 
explanation above. 
 Explaining that the aspiration which seeks in this context is the seeking of enlightenment 
is a case of (i) not understanding even slightly the presentation of the stages of the path of the Perfection [Vehicle], and, (ii) having determined the basis for designation and the 
designated phenomenon here, not understanding what to do.  
 Therefore, to give a little description here, that one must realize emptiness prior to 
generating the mind [aspiring] towards supreme enlightenment applies to those of sharp faculty, from among the two types of trainees; there is no such certainty for thos e of dull 
faculty, but even they must become bearers of the essence of compassion  from the very time 
of having initially generated the mind. 
 Hence, for the sake of making known that the generated mind indicated here must 
definitely be preceded by great co mpassion, it is designated by the name “seeking others’ 
welfare.” If the generated mind induced by that fully qualified compassion is present, the desire to train in the deeds will arise naturally, and if that is present, all the virtuous qualities 
that are the causes of omniscience will increase; it is so designated also for the sake of 
making that known.  
 QUALM: You would have in your palm all phenomena if you were to have in your palm 
one phenomenon; what is the one [phenomenon]?  
RESPONSE: “Compassion.” Like it has been taught, “since it is important at the three —
beginning, middle and end —for those who desire to engage in the Mahayana  path, you 
should cultivate compassion at the beginning, and, without letting it degenerate, if you increase it more and mo re to full qualification, the generated mind and the deeds will 
become fully complete.” Understand that, for the sake of making that known to those who 
are skilled in the sequence of the Mahayana  path, the generated mind here is designated by 
the name “asp iration that seeks others’ welfare.” There is much to be expressed in 
dependence on this, but I will not elaborate more. 
2B2C -1A2A -2A1C -2B2. Designation by the name “desire for enlightenment”  
COMMENTARY 
As one type, prayer seeks; it is the very desire for perfect complete enlightenment. 
Indicating the generated mind that acts together with it as that term is in order to make known that “in that manner, the mind possessing prayer is generated in bodhisattvas.”  
 
EXPLANATION  
In terms of the aspiration seeking enlightenment, as one type  of the two aspirations that 
seek, it is also designated by the name “aspiration,” whereby the fault of asserting a 
common locus does not exist. The prayer (in which one has produced hope for the result) 
seeks; further, here  it is the very desire for perfect complete enlightenment. The 
subject —the generated mind —there is a reason for designating it by the name “aspiration 
that seeks enlightenment,” because it acts together with it by means of the five 
concomitances72. Indicating it as that term is purposeful, because it is in order to make 
                                              
72 According to Asanga's Compendium of Knowledge (Abhidharmasamuchchaya), a mental factor is 
concomitant with its main mind by means  of the five similarities:  
(1) similar substance 
(2) similar object of observation and [ knower ] aspect  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
84 known that “in that manner,  the mind possessing the prayer  explained  is generated in 
bodhisattvas.” It is for the sake of making known that the entrance to the Mahayana  is the 
Mahayana  generated mi nd. Fearing wordiness, I will not elaborate more. The damage to fact 
is as above. 
2B2C -1A2A -2A2. The branches of ascertaining that [definition], the objects of observation  
2B2C -1A2A -2A2A. Questions  
2B2C -1A2A -2A2B. Reply  
2B2C -1A2A -2A2A. Questions  
COMMENTAR Y 
QUESTION: Also, what is that perfect complete enlightenment, and what is the welfare  of 
others —the nature that is desired, and the  welfare  of whom  the mind is generated?  
 
EXPLANATION  
QUESTION: In addition to the [above] question ensuing from the definition, also, what is 
that perfect complete enlightenment —the nature that is the result desired? What is the  
welfare  of others —the welfare of whom the mind is generated?  
2B2C -1A2A -2A2B. Reply 
2B2C -1A2A -2A2B -1. Root text  
2B2C -1A2A -2A2B -2. Commentary 
2B2C-1A2A -2A2B -1. Root text  
1.1cd  That and that are, just as in the Sutra ,  
Expressed briefly and extensively. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the observed objects, that  enlightenment and that  others’ welfare —know 
that they  are expressed briefly and extensively  in all the three —extensive, medium and 
brief [Mothers ], because, just as indicated in the middle Sutra, the complete meaning is 
also indicated in the other two.  
 The thought of the Acarya abides in accordance with only that, because in relation to this, 
the Great Commentary explained that:  
 
They are expressed just as in the Arya Twenty -Five Thousand Stanza  [Perfection 
of Wisdom ] Sutra.   
 
And on the occasion of indicating the divisions, it is only as explained previously:  
 
Why? This precious sutra set eng ages in closely condensing the meaning of the 
Twenty -Five Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom . 
 Also, the Acarya Dignaga explained: 
 
                                                                                                                                                     
 
(3) similar entity  
(4) similar time  
(5) similar realm and level  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
85 Thus, the meanings of the explanations said  
Are without incompleteness in this Eight Thousand.  
The text is asserted to b e condensed in this. 
The meaning is just that taught.  
 Thus, “just as in the Sutra” [in 1.1c] must definitely be explained to be the Twenty -five 
Thousand Stanza [Perfection of Wisdom] . [The thought of the Acarya abides in accordance 
with only that] also because the occurrence of the statement “ without contradicting the 
meaning  of the  Sutra ” in the commentary [see below] is the word commentary of this. If 
one wishes to explain the Acarya’s system, one should not in any way explain that  as 
“without contradi cting  Array of Tree Trunks  (Gandavyuha ) and so forth.”  
2B2C -1A2A -2A2B -2. Commentary 
2B2C -1A2A -2A2B -2A. Explaining the two observed objects  
2B2C -1A2A -2A2B -2B. Indicating that itself as already proven  
2B2C -1A2A -2A2B -2C. Reason for not citing other sources  
2B2C-1A2A -2A2B -2A. Explaining the two observed objects  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. Perfect complete enlightenment and others’ welfare are also briefly and extensively indicated in the three types of Mothers  of the Victors together, without 
contradic ting the meaning of the Sutra , by way of statements that earnestly /intent  indicate 
fully: “the Perfection of Wisdom” and “regarding all —generosity and so forth —the act of 
generosity, the giver, the recipient, and so forth are to be established as not observed,” bearing the meaning  that causes understanding; and “ [those who desire to set ] all sentient 
beings  [in] nirvana  in accordance with the fortunes” and “those who desire to set the miserly 
and so forth in generosity and so forth, should accomplish this very Perfection of Wisdom” 
and so forth.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Since the observed objects of the Mahayana  generated mind are also indicated in the 
extensive and the brief, as in the middle Mother , the observed objects of the generated 
mind —perfect complete enlightenment and others’ welfare —are also briefly and 
extensively indicated in the three types of Mothers  of the Victors together , because they 
are also indicated without incompleteness in the two —the extensive and the brief—without 
contradicting , that is, agreeing with , the Twenty -Five Thousand Stanza [Perfection of 
Wisdom] Sutra , exactly in accordance with the meaning of the Sutra . It is not that there is 
no statement indicating that exact accordance in the two —the extensive and the brief —
because it is  indicated by: (i) the statement in the middle Mother  bearing the meaning that 
causes understanding  by having taken as the subject matter the meaning of enlightenment 
that is indicated in the brief indication and extensive explanation; (ii) the statement i n the 
extensive Mother that earnestly indicate s fully the meaning of the brief indication and 
extensive explanation on others’ welfare that was indicated in the middle Mother ; and (iii) 
the statement in the  Eight Thousand Stanza [Perfection of Wisdom Sutra ] that “Subhuti, a 
bodhisattva mahasattva is based upon the Perfection of Wisdom; be confident!” Understand 
that it is wrong to say that “This would become saying ‘It is indicated that there is no 
contradiction with the three Mothers together also in the t hree types of Mothers  of the 
Victors  together.’”  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
86  
QUALM: How is the meaning of the middle Mother intent ly indicated?   
RESPONSE: The briefly indicated meaning of enlightenment is indicated by “ Sariputra , 
with respect to this, Bodhisattva Mahasattva, those who desire to attain clear complete  
enlightenment in all ways in regard to all phenomena should strive in the Perfection of Wisdom,” and the extensively explained meaning of enlightenment by “ Sariputra , with 
respect to this… regarding all the six perfectio ns—generosity and so forth —the act of 
generosity, the giver, the recipient, and so forth are to be established as not observed ” 
in the other two [ Mothers ]. Although this appears to be only appropriate as an explanation 
of the condensation of the varieties of words of the middle Mother , it suffices as a 
condensation of the varieties of meaning.  
 Clear complete  enlightenment in regard to all phenomena is the entity of enlightenment. 
The teachi ng that the method for [attaining] it is, in general, the training in the perfection of 
wisdom, is a brief indication by means of method; and teaching it to be training in all six perfections by means of being conjoined with the wisdom realizing emptiness is an 
extensive explanation by means of method.  
 Further, others’ welfare is briefly indicated by means of method in the middle Sutra,  by 
the passage: “Bodhisattva Mahasattva, all those sentient beings existing in the world 
systems numbering the grains of sand of the banks of the Ganges River of the lands of the 
ten directions, who desire to thoroughly  pass beyond sorrow in the sphere of nirvana that is 
without remainder of the aggregates, should train in the Perfection of Wisdom.” Condensing 
its meaning, i t is said, “ Those who desire [to set]  all sentient beings [in] nirvana  exactly 
in accordance with the fortunes of  the three lineage -bearers  [should accomplish  this very 
Perfection] of Wisdom.”   And others’ welfare is extensively explained by means of meth od with “Bodhisattvas 
[who desire to set] miserly sentient beings in generosity,” and so forth. Condensing its meaning, it is said, “Those who desire  to set the miserly and so forth in generosity and 
so forth should accomplish this very Perfection of Wisdo m” and so forth.  
 Someone, having taken the statement of intent  to refer to the treatise, explains that “they 
are briefly and extensively indicated by it.” These are words lacking relation, because it would become saying, “they are briefly and extensively indicated also in the treatise in the 
three Mothers together.” The explanation in the context of the classifications [of the 
generated mind] in the extensive explanation of others’ welfare and enlightenment is 
explained in that [treatise], but it is not th e meaning of this context. That the brief is 
explained in the words of the root text that indicate the definition, and the extensive in the words of the root text of the classification —is clearly a gibberish explanation. Others’ 
welfare is the nirvana in  others’ continua; the method for [attaining] that is indicated 
extensively and briefly.  
2B2C -1A2A -2A2B -2B. Indicating that itself as already proven  
COMMENTARY 
Thus, know that the generated mind is the nature of desiring perfect complete enlightenment 
for o thers’ welfare.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Having established above the two observed objects, thus know that the generated mind is the nature of desiring perfect complete enlightenment for others’ welfare.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
87 2B2C -1A2A -2A2B -2C. Reason for not citing other sources   
COMMENT ARY  
The intent  indication of the meaning of the context in the classic texts is indeed taught in all, 
but fearing wordiness, I have not written down those very sources. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The earnest indication  of the meaning of the context, the observed objects of the 
generated mind in the  scriptures that are classic texts , is indeed taught in all  the three 
Mothers , but I have not  explicitly written down those very sources  in this commentary, 
because I wish to give an explanation just briefly and, fearing wordiness , I have not written 
them down.  
2B2C -1A2A -2B. Explaining the divisions, a subsidiary topic  
2B2C -1A2A -2B1. Making a connection  
2B2C -1A2A -2B2. Root text  
2B2C -1A2A -2B3. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2A -2B1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
Thus, having expressed the observed objects of the generated mind as well as its entity, now 
its classifications —twenty -two types, interceding stanzas:  
 
EXPLANATION  
Thus,  having expressed the observed objects of the generated mind as well as its entity, 
now its classifications —twenty -two types, by compiling what is not the common topic of 
the presentation of the corpus into stanzas of a subsidiary topic , interceding stanzas: 
2B2C -1A2A -2B2. Root text  
1.2 Further, earth, gold, moon, fire,  
Treasure, jewel -mine, oce an,   
Vajra, mountain, medicine, spiritual guide,  
Wish -granting gem, sun, song,  
 
 1.3 King, treasury, highway,  
Mount, geyser,  
Pleasant sound, river, and cloud:  
These are the twenty -two types.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The twenty -two generated minds are explained by “ Further…,” because the twenty -two are 
meanings that are objects to be characterized by similes, and they are indicated through 
implication by means of the concordant property between simile and meaning.  
2B2C -1A2A -2B3. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2A -2B3A. How the tw enty-two meanings are characterized by the twenty -two similes  
2B2C -1A2A -2B3B. Boundaries  
2B2C -1A2A -2B3A. How the twenty -two meanings are characterized by the twenty -two similes  
2B2C -1A2A -2B3A -1. Extensive explanation  
2B2C -1A2A -2B3A -2. Summary 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
88 2B2C -1A2A -2B3A -1. Extensive explanation  
COMMENTARY 
Those explained by [the root text] to be concomitant with:  
(1) aspiration, (2) attitude, (3) exceptional resolve, (4) application, (5) generosity, (6) ethics, 
(7) patience, (8) joyous effort, (9) concent ration, (10) wisdom, (11) skillful means, (12) 
prayer, (13) power, (14) the perfection of exalted wisdom, (15) clairvoyance, (16) merit and exalted wisdom, (17) dharmas in harmony with the class of enlightenment, (18) compassion 
and special insight, (19) retention  and confidence, (20) a festival of dharma, (21) the one 
path traveled, and (22) the truth body, are respectively like:  
 
(1) the earth, (2) fine gold, (3) the new moon, (4) fire, (5) a great treasure, (6) a jewel -mine, 
(7) a great ocean, (8) a vaj ra, (9) the king of mountains, (10) medicine, (11) a virtuous 
spiritual guide, (12) a wish -granting gem, (13) the sun, (14) a pleasant Dharma melody, (15) 
a great king, (16) a treasury, (17) a highway, (18) a mount, (19) a geyser, (20) a pleasant 
sound, (21) the flow of a river, and (22) a cloud, respectively through:  
 
(1) being a property that is the basis of all wholesome qualities, (2) unchanging until 
enlightenment, (3) fully increasing all virtuous qualities, (4) burning the firewood of 
obscurations t o the three exalted knowers of all, (5) satisfying all sentient beings, (6) being a 
property that is the support of precious excellent qualities, (7) being undisturbed by the 
descending of all undesirables, (8) through firm conviction, being inseparable, (9) being 
unmoved by distracting objects, (10) thoroughly pacifying the diseases of afflictive and 
knowledge obscurations, (11) not forsaking the welfare of sentient beings on any occasion, 
(12) accomplishing the results of wishes accordingly, (13) fully ri pening trainees, (14) 
teaching the Dharma that makes trainees aspire, (15) accomplishing others’ welfare through unobstructed might, (16) being like a treasury of many collections of merit and exalted wisdom, (17) being that which all aryas traveled and wi ll travel, (18) through not falling 
into either samsara or nirvana, progressing easily, (19) through retaining heard and unheard dharmas, inexhaustible, (20) pleasantly proclaiming to trainees who desire liberation, (21) 
activities of others’ welfare being  not different, and (22) being suitable to always display 
abiding in the abode of Tushita and so forth.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Those twenty -two generated minds explained by [the root text]:  
 
(1) The subject —the generated mind concomitant with aspiration—is like the  earth , 
because, through inducing all paths, it is a property  that is the basis of all wholesome 
qualities . 
 
(2) That concomitant with attitude is like fine gold , because it will not degenerate in 
attitude until enlightenment. The sutra passages for these [first two] are as in the brief 
indication and the extensive explanation on enlightenment. 
 
(3) That concomitant with extraordinary resolve is like the new moon  because it will  
increase  all virtuous qualities, such as the close placements of mindfulness, w ithout 
degeneration. Sutra says, “ Sariputra , a great bodhisattva should abide in the Mother, fully 
completing the thirty -seven harmonies with enlightenment.”  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
89  
(4) That concomitant with application  that cultivates the similitudes of the three exalted 
knower s is like fire , because it burns  the manifest firewood of the obscurations to the 
three exalted knowers of all. Sutra says “Due to desiring to pass through having viewed by 
knowing and seeing a knower of all.”  
 
(5) That concomitant with generosity is like a great treasure , because it satisfies all 
sentient beings with resources. Sutra says, “Those who desire to set miserly sentient beings 
in generosity…”  
 
(6) That concomitant with ethics is like a jewel -mine , because it acts as a property that 
supports prec ious excellent qualities . Sutra says, “… the immoral…”  
 
(7) That concomitant with patience is like a great ocean  because it is unperturbed  by 
the descent of all undesirables  of harm and suffering. Sutra says, “… those bearing 
harmful intent…”  
 
(8) That con comitant with joyous effort is like a vajra because, through firm conviction 
in the path, it is inseparable73 from the Mahayana . Sutra says, “… the lazy…”  
 
(9) That concomitant with concentration is like the king of mountains  because, through 
firm meditative stabilization, it is unmoved by distracting objects. Sutra says, “… those 
whose minds are distracted…”  
 (10) That concomitant with the perfection of wisdom is like medicine  because it 
thoroughly pacifies the diseases of af flictive and knowledge obscurations . Sutra says, 
“… those with corrupt wisdom…”  
 (11) That concomitant with skillful means is like a virtuous spiritual guide  because, 
through the four immeasurables, the method for not discarding sentient beings, it does no t 
forsake the welfare of sentient beings on any occasion . Sutra says, “… those who are 
skillful in the means of even just one virtuous generated mind…”  
 (12) That concomitant with prayer is like a wish -granting gem  because, through the five 
clairvoyances, the method for having power over results, it accomplishes the result of 
wishes accordingly . Sutra says, “Accomplishing enlightenment, the exalted body of a 
buddha…”  
 
(13) That concomitant with power is like the sun  because, through the four means of 
gathe ring [disciples], it fully ripens trainees . Sutra says, “Through the food, drinks, 
clothing, and the like of a great bodhisattva, the wishes in the minds of sentient beings are 
fully completed…”  
 
                                             
 
73 Bskyod emended to read phyed in accordance the earlier commentary. Interestingly, the text reads skyed  on 
page 90 of the Drepung Loseling Library  Society’s 1996 edition  of Ornament of the Essence.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
90 (14) That concomitant with the perfection of exalted wisdom is like a pleasant Dharma 
melody  because, through the four individual correct knowledges, the method for attaining 
complete liberation, it teaches the Dharma that makes trainees aspire . Sutra says, “Great 
bodhisattva, train in the twenty emptinesses…”  
 
(15) That concomitant with clairvoyance is like a great king  because, through 
unobstructed might which does not allow realizations already attained to go to waste, it 
accomplishes others’ welfare . Sutra says, “Great bodhisattva, transcend all the worlds of 
the ten directions with a single generated mind…”  
 
(16) That concomitant with the collections of merit and exalted wisdom is like a 
treasury  because it is like a treasury of many collections of merit and exalted wisdom  
teaching unsurpassable enlightenment. S utra says, “Great bodhisattva, the tathagatas, along 
with the hearer and bodhisattva sangha of the ten directions…”   
 
(17) That concomitant with  the thirty -seven dharmas in harmony with the class of 
enlightenment is like a highway  because all aryas  of the three times traveled and will 
travel through that path. Sutra says, “Great bodhisattva, the desire to attain the excellent 
qualities of all the buddhas of the three times and so forth…”  
 
(18) That concomitant with compassion and special insight is like a mount because, 
through not falling into either samsara or nirvana, it progresses easily . Sutra says, 
“Great bodhisattva, the preliminaries of all hearers and solitary realizers…”  
 
(19) That concomitant with retention and confidence is like a geyser  that spouts water 
and is inexhaustible because, through retaining  previously heard and unheard dharmas,  
it is inexhaustible . Sutra says, “That which has been taught, is being taught , and is to be 
taught by all the buddhas of the ten directions…” Retention causes one to hold, and 
confidence causes one not to know exhaustion.   
 
(20) That concomitant with the festival of the four summations  of Dharma74 is like a 
pleasant sound because it pleasantly proclaims  [a sound] that causes liberation from 
cyclic existen ce to trainees  who desire liberation . Sutra says, “Having illuminated with 
light of the body darkness and what is dark among the worlds in the lands of each of the ten 
directions, sentient beings who are born there are caused to hear the sounds of the Thre e 
Jewels .” 
 
(21) That concomitant with the one path traveled is like the flow of a river  because, 
through having attained the ability that subdues all trainees in common, the activities of 
others’ welfare are not different. Sutra says, “In the realms of th e infinite worlds in each 
of the ten directions, sentient beings who are blind, deaf, insane, naked, thirsty, hungry, and 
so forth…”  
 
(22) The subject —the generated mind concomitant with the truth body  that enacts the 
welfare of sentient beings by emanatin g the twelve deeds —is like a cloud , because it is 
suitable to always display  the twelve deeds —abiding in the abode of Tushita,  continuing 
                                              
74 “The four summations  of Dharma ” are similar to “the four seals.”  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
91 from that to enter the womb of the mother, and so forth. Sutra says, “ Sariputra , 
furthermore, the great bodhisattva di splays the behavior of the tathagatas…”  
2B2C -1A2A -2B3A -2. Summary 
COMMENTARY  
In that way, through “Further, earth, gold, moon, fire,” and so forth, the twenty -two 
generated minds are explained.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Through the similes of “Further, earth, gold, moon, fire,” [1.2a]  and so forth, the 
twenty -two generated minds are explained  because, as explained above, [the twenty -two 
generated minds] are meanings that are objects to be characterized by similes and they are 
implied by means o f concordant property in that way.  
2B2C -1A2A -2B3B. Boundaries  
2B2C -1A2A -2B3B -1. Explaining the individual boundaries  
2B2C -1A2A -2B3B -2. Showing that all paths are included  
2B2C -1A2A -2B3B -1. Explaining the individual boundaries  
COMMENTARY 
Regarding those, (1 -3) the first three are included within the beginner's level, within the 
small, middling, and great themselves; (4) the one after those is included within the path 
that will enter into the first ground; (5 -14) the ten after that are included within the te n 
grounds, Very Joyous and so forth, and bear the objects of utilization of the paths of seeing and meditation; (15 -19) the five after those are included within the distinguished paths; and 
(20-22) the three generated minds after those are included within buddha ground by means 
of preparation, actual, and conclusion.  
 
EXPLANATION   
Regarding those, (1 -3) the first three  generated minds are included within the 
beginner's level , because they are respectively included within  the small, middling, and 
great path of accumulation themselves ; (4) the one  possessing preparation after those is 
included within the path that will enter into the first ground , because it is included 
within the Mahayana  path of preparation; (5 -14) the subject —the ten after that—are  
respect ively included within the ten grounds, Very Joyous and so forth , because they 
bear the objects of utilization of the paths of seeing and meditation  that are the entities 
of the ten grounds; (15 -19) the five —possessing the six clairvoyances and so forth —after 
those are included within the distinguished paths, because they are included within the 
three pure grounds; and (20- 22) the  last three generated minds after those are included 
within buddha ground,  because they are respectively included by means of the 
preparation, actual, and conclusion of buddha ground.  
2B2C -1A2A -2B3B -2. Showing that all paths are included  
COMMENTARY 
Like that, the classifications of the generated mind are included within the range —from the 
beginner's level until  the buddha ground.  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
92 EXPLANATION  
The classifications of the generated mind are included within the range —from the 
beginner's level until  the buddha ground, because the manner is like that explained 
above.  
2B2C -1A2B. Explaining the  instruction s that reveal the methods for accomplishing the aim of the promise  
2B2C -1A2B -1. Actual  
2B2C -1A2B -2. Explaining the beginning of generating the wisdom arisen from meditation observing 
emptiness through meditating on the meaning of the instructions  
2B2C -1A2B -1. Actual  
2B2C -1A2B -1A. Makin g a connection  
2B2C -1A2B -1B. Explaining the meaning  
2B2C -1A2B -1A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
Having expressed the divisions incidentally, instructing in order that the bodhisattvas who 
have generated the initial mind of enlightenment and so forth in that manner, who seek in 
exact accordance at the time, generate the mind of enlightenment and accom plish the 
qualities propelled by it; and in order to strongly increase the excellent qualities attained for 
the purpose of completely safeguarding them: the instructions.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Since the divisions of the generated mind are a subsidiary topic of the  common topic, 
having expressed them incidental to the definition and the object s of observation taught, 
after that : the instructions. The subject —the receivers [of instructions], the bodhisattvas 
who have generated the three, the initial mind of enlighten ment and so forth in that 
manner —instructing  Mahayana  instructions [to them] by a supreme emanation body is 
purposeful, because it is  in order to generate the mind of enlightenment not attained 
before  and to accomplish the qualities propelled by it, such a s calm abiding and special 
insight  included within perfect application , and in order to strongly increase the excellent 
qualities  previously  attained for the purpose of completely safeguarding them  without 
degeneration.  
 [The explanation above] is in terms  of those who have obtained the meditative 
stabilization of the stream of Dharma from the great level of the path of accumulation, who 
are pervaded by being able to directly hear instructions from a supreme emanation body 
because, in general, if even those  who have not entered a path can directly hear Mahayana  
instructions from [a supreme emanation body], what need is there to mention about [those who can directly hear Mahayana  instructions from a supreme emanation body] existing 
from the small level of the  path of accumulation? The special receivers [of instructions] are 
bodhisattvas who seek in exact accordance at the time  of hearing the instructions . 
 The cause of hearing instructions, the meditative stabilization of the stream of Dharma, is 
a meditative stabilization that is a union of calm abiding and special insight  that has 
generated a special ability to directly hear instructions from a supreme emanation body, due to having purified most of the coarse obscurations to directly seeing the buddhas and 
hearing the Dharma from them by those on lower paths. Its causes are having collected the 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
93 accumulations for many eons, pure view and ethics, possessing lineage , much hearing and 
having abandoned most of the four hindrances of lineage75. 
2B2C -1A2B -1B. Explaining the meaning  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1. General divisions  
2B2C -1A2B -1B2. Explaining the Sangha Jewel in particular  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1. General divisions  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1A. Root text  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1C. Summary  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1A. Root text  
ROOT TE XT  
1.4 The achievings, the truths, 
The Three Jewels, Buddha and so forth,  
Non-adherence, tirelessness, 
Thoroughly upholding the path,  
 
1.5 The five eyes, the six excellent qualities of 
Clairvoyances, and the path of seeing and  
That called “meditation”: instructions are to be  
Known as the nature of ten. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —Mahayana  instructions —are to be known as the nature of ten, because 
they range from the entity of the achievings themselves through the instructions on the path 
of meditation. From  between the two —the supports of the achievings and the supported —
the former is instructions on the Three Jewels, Buddha and so forth , while regarding the 
latter, the bases for the attributes and the attributes.  
 With respect to the first [the bases for th e attributes], the instructions on the aspects and 
the objects of observation are instructions on the achievings  and the truths . With respect to 
the attributes, there are instructions on eliminating discordant classes and instructions on 
achieving excellen t qualities. With respect to eliminating the manifest [discordant classes], 
the instructions on the causes of stabilizing, increasing and not degenerating the achievings are the instructions on non -adherence, tirelessness,  and thoroughly upholding the 
Maha yana  path. With respect to achieving [excellent qualities], the instructions on the 
causes of engaging independently and quickly completing the result are the instructions on 
the five eyes  and the six excellent qualities of clairvoyances . To eliminate the seeds that 
are objects of abandonment, there are instructions on the path of seeing  and path of  
meditation . 
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -1. Instructions on the supported achievings  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -2. Instructions on the supports of the achievin gs 
                                              
75 The four hindrances of lineage  are: predominance of afflictions, being held by negative companions, being 
deprived of necessities of life, and being under the control of other sentient beings.  See “2B2C -1A2C -1A3. 
Dispelling objection .” 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
94 2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -3. Instructions on the attributes of the achievings  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -1. Instructions on the supported achievings  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -1A. Instructions on the entity of the achievings themselves  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -1B. Instructions on the objects of ob servation of those [achievings]  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -1A. Instructions on the entity of the achievings themselves  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. Regarding achieving the divisions  of the mind of enlightenment 
which were explained, instructing on achieving training: "Through not passing beyond the 
conventional76 and ultimate truths, not in common with the hearers and so forth, one should 
engage in a manner of not observing."  
 
EXPLANATION   
Instructing on achieving.  Achieving what? Instructing on achieving the d ivisions  of the 
attitude, the mind of enlightenment, and the applications propelled by that, generosity and 
so forth, which were explained  previously.  
 How are they achieved?  Because of instructing by way of  training : "One should 
engage  through (i) the practice not passing beyond the stages of the path based upon the 
conventional  truth s, having established by valid cognition the achiever, the person who is 
the support, the objects to be practiced, the results, and so forth as they have been explained , 
and, (ii) the practice [not passing beyond] the stages of the path based upon the ultimate 
truth s, by realizing all of those to be empty of true existence, in a manner of not 
observing the four qualities of practice with respect to the Mothers , for the s ake of all 
sentient beings’ accomplishing nirvana and the truth body not in common with the hearers 
and so forth." If the meaning of not passing beyond the mode of realizing the conventional  
to be false and illusory is to be explained, you should know it t o be as before. 
 “Sariputra , at the time when a bodhisattva mahasattva practices the Perfection of 
Wisdom, while the bodhisattva himself exists, one does not perfectly subsequently see the 
bodhisattva …” indicates the instructions on the entity of the achie vings themselves, because 
they are  instructions to achieve without  passing beyond the stages of the path based upon 
the two truths with respect to the generated mind and the phenomena indicated on that 
occasion.  “Sariputra , if in77 this Jambudvipa, Bhiksu Sariputra …” indicates the 
instructions on the uncommonness of the entity of the achievings themselves, because they 
are instructions to not take to mind Hinayana  for the welfare of oneself alone. 
 
With respect to the two truths here, there are:  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B-1A1. Definitions  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -1A2. Meaning of the names  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -1A3. Divisions of the bases of  characterization  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -1A4. Investigating one and different  
                                              
76 Kun rdzob¸  which has the connotation of being obscurational.  
77 ‘di emended to read ‘dir  in accordance with page 166  of the Ganden Jangtse Library edition of Jetsun 
Chokyi Gyeltsen’s Ocean of Sport , Volume 1.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
95 2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -1A1. Definitions  
The definition of an ultimate truth  is: an object to be realized by way of vanished dualistic 
appearance  (by a direct valid cognizer explicitly realizing it) that is not to be realized in the 
aspect of an affirmative phenomenon.  
 The definition of an obscurational truth78 is: that which abid es in the class of objects to be 
realized by way of being together with dualistic appearance by a valid cognizer explicitly 
realizing it.  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -1A2. Meaning of the names  
Due to abiding in the perspective of an unmistaken, excellent object -possesso r, an arya’s 
meditative equipoise, it is called “ultimate truth” [literally, excellent -meaning truth].  
 Due to being a truth  in the perspective of an erroneous object -possessor, an awareness 
that is a mind79 of conventionalities, but a falsity with respect  to measure of abidance, it is 
called “obscurational truth.” Further, it abides in the perspective of this obscurational awareness that obscures the explicit seeing of suchness, such as a sense consciousness. 
Hence, the terms “an obscurational awareness” a nd “a truth in its perspective” are 
explained.  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -1A3. Divisions of the bases of  characterization  
Besides mere dissimilar ways of expressing an ultimate truth, divisions that are made by way of entity do not exist. Regarding the ultimate, categ orical  ultimates are inferential 
reasoning consciousnesses, w hile non -categorical ultimates are the aryas’ meditative 
equipoise which sees the ultimate.  Know that when obscurational truth is divided, also there are two real and unreal . 
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -1A4.  Investigating one and different  
If the two truths were to be one, there would be the four faults taught in Sutra Unraveling 
the Thought ( Samdhinirmocanasutra ), but even if they were to be different entities, there 
would be the four faults taught in that. Hence they are one entity but different isolates.80 
 Just understand the other explanations in the commentaries of the Acarya and the Arya in 
relation to this point. With respect to an eighth -grounder, if the meaning of “by stopping 
nirvana,” which bears an ulterior intention , is to be slightly explained: in relation to the 
generated mind, “with respect to a knower of all, passing through, having  viewed by seeing” 
was explain ed, and “due to desiring to pass beyond the levels of a youth” was taught.  
 Therefo re, from among the two —(1) passing through, having seen, and (2) passing 
beyond, having abided—the first is passing through the hearers’ and solitary realizers’ 
grounds by a bodhisattva on the occasion of the path of seeing, having viewed them by 
knowing and seeing. The second refers to an irreversible eighth -grounder; the meaning of 
passing beyond that is: in the manner of examining a possibility on the eighth ground, if one is not roused by the buddhas, due to immediately severing the continuity of migrat ing 
beings’ welfare, one will enter absorption in the uncontaminated sphere; but, due to being 
                                             
 
78 Although usually translated as “conventional truth,” here it is given a literal rendition so as to bring out its 
etymology.  
79 Bsam pa  
80 The Tibetan word " ldog pa" translated here as "isolate" literally means "reverse" and indicates a double 
reverse or dou ble negation. For more information on this topic, see Daniel E. Perdue's Debate in Tibetan 
Buddhism  (Snow Lion Publications, 1992).  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
96 roused by the buddhas, even if one enters absorption continuously on the eighth ground, one 
passes beyond actualizing it. 
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -1B. Instructions on the objects of observation of those [achievings]  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -1B1. Meaning of the g eneral ity  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -1B2. Meaning of the branches  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -1B1. Meaning of the g eneral ity 
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -1B1A. Definite number of the four truths  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -1B1 B. Definite sequence 
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -1B1C. Bases of  characterization  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -1B1D. Valid cognizers which ascertain those 
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -1B1A. Definite number of the four truths  
The principal objects to be determined by those seeking liberation are definite as the two 
classes which are included within samsara and nirvana. With respect to samsara, they are 
also definite as two: (1) the cause that binds, true origins, and (2) the result that is bondage, 
true sufferings. With respect to the completely p ure, they are also definite as two: (1) the 
cause that is the method liberating from samsara, true paths, and (2) the entity of the result that is liberation, true cessations. Hence, the causes and results of entering into and turning 
away from samsara are  definite as four.  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -1B1B. Definite sequence 
In terms of the order in reality, true origins and paths are objects to be indicated first, and 
sufferings and cessations are objects to be indicated later. Here they are to be indicated 
according t o another sequence corresponding to the order of the object -possessor clear 
realizations, in this manner, that is —true sufferings, origins, cessations and paths. You must 
at the outset generate an awareness that wishes to be separated from the general and 
particular drawbacks of samsara by means of having contemplated them well because, 
without being preceded by that, it will be impossible to generate the desire to abandon their causes.  
  Once the wish to be separated from sufferings has been generated, you  investigate the 
origins, asking: “Am I able or not able to separate from these? Do these have causes or not? 
Further, are the causes permanent or impermanent?” For, you see that you cannot abandon 
the entity of suffering itself in the way one pulls  out a thorn [embedded in one’s flesh]. If 
you were to investigate in this manner, then by comprehending that the two —karma and 
afflictions —are its causes, you will generate the mind wishing to abandon them. Thus the 
origins are indicated second. Once you see tha t you are able to abandon the origins, you will 
see that you can put a stop to suffering. Then, since you will see that you can actualize the 
cessations in which suffering has been stopped, the cessations are indicated third. Since you 
will see that actual izing those is contingent on having relied on and familiarized with the 
paths, the true paths are indicated fourth.  
 
QUALM: Since first seeing that one is able to stop suffering is pervaded by seeing that one 
is able to actualize the cessation of sufferin gs, cessations should be indicated next. Further, 
having seen that one is able to abandon origins, one must see that one is able to stop sufferings, whereby origins should be indicated before sufferings. Since seeing that one is 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
97 able to abandon origins is contingent upon realizing selflessness, that itself should be 
indicated at the beginning. Hence the sequence of the Four Truths explained is not definite. 
 
RESPONSE: I shall explain. In general, for any activity, embarking upon it is contingent 
upon seeing its benefits, and turning away from it upon seeing its drawbacks. Hence, by 
having contemplated the general and particular drawbacks of samsara, having see n that 
samsara is like a fire pit, one will generate at first a mere awareness that desires to separate from it; one does not understand that one is able to separate from it. Then, secondly, one 
sees with valid cognition that one is able to abandon origins . Once that is seen, one will see 
that one is able to actualize cessations, whereby it is appropriate for origins to be indicated second, and cessations third. That paths are to be indicated last is as [explained] above. 
Therefore when a path of seeing obs erving the Four Truths is generated in a yogi’s 
continuum, it is also generated in agreement with that sequence.  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -1B1C. Bases of  characterization  
Present feelings of pain in the kidneys and the like are suffering of suffering. Feelings relishing tastes due to excessive craving for pleasant food are suffering of change. That 
which is a contaminated aggregate that is an imprint deposited by karma and afflictions is 
all-compounded suffering. All of these are true sufferings. All contaminated ka rma and 
afflictions are true origins. A separation in which sufferings have been stopped is a true cessation. A wisdom directly realizing selflessness is a true path.  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -1B1D. Valid cognizers which ascertain those 
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -1B1D -1. Identif ying the sixteen wrong conceptions  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -1B1D -2. Identifying the sixteen aspects of the truths contradicting those  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -1B1D -1. Identifying the sixteen wrong conceptions  
• The wrong engagements with respect to sufferings are the four apprehensions of 
cleanness , happiness, permanence and self.  
• The wrong engagements with respect to origins are the two —the apprehension of 
sufferings as causeless, and the apprehension of the di scordant as causes. With respect to 
the latter, there are: the apprehension of [suffering] as being produced by only a single 
cause; the apprehension of [suffering] as being produced due to others, such as Isvara, 
first having an idea; and the apprehension  of the nature as permanent, but its states 
changeable.  
• The wrong engagements with respect to cessations are: the apprehension of liberation as 
utterly not existent, the apprehension of some contaminated attribute as liberation, the 
apprehension of some a ttribute of suffering as sublime liberation, and the apprehension 
of the exhaustion of suffering as existing, but reversible.  
• The wrong engagements with respect to paths are: the apprehension of the path to 
liberation as utterly not existent, the apprehen sion of the familiarization of selflessness 
as being unsuitable to be a path, the apprehension of merely some attribute of concentration as the path to liberation, and the apprehension of a path (that acts as a 
bearer of the quality of overcoming suffering ) as not existent. 
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -1B1D -2. Identifying the sixteen aspects of the truths contradicting those  
The subject —the suffering of suffering —is: 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
98 (1) impermanent, because it is produced intermittently;  
(2) suffering, because it is under the control  of karma and afflictions;  
(3) empty, because it is devoid of a supervisory self that is a different entity, and  
(4) selfless, because it is not established as an entity of independent self.   
 
The aspects of origins are as follows. The subject —contaminated  karma and craving —are:  
(1) the aspect of cause, because they are the root of suffering, its result;  
(2) origin, because they produce all types  of that [suffering] again and again; and  
(3) strong production, because they produce them forcefully.  
The subjec t—craving for [contaminated ] existence —is:  
(4) the aspect of condition, because it is the cooperative condition of suffering, its result.  
 The aspects of cessations are as follows. The subject —the separation that is an utter 
exhaustion of suffering throug h the force of antidotes —is:  
(1) the aspect of cessation, because it is a separation in which suffering has been abandoned;  
(2) the aspect of pacification, because it is a separation in which afflictions have been 
abandoned;  
(3) the aspect of sublimeness , because it is a liberation that is benefit and happiness; and  
(4) the aspect of definite emergence, because it is a liberation that bears the quality of 
irreversibility. 
 
The aspects of paths are as follows. The subject —the wisdom directly realizing 
selflessness —is: 
(1) the aspect of path, because it is a path that proceeds to liberation;  
(2) the aspect of suitability, because it acts as the direct antidote to afflictions;  
(3) the aspect of achievement, because it is an exalted wisdom  directly realizing the final 
mode of abidance of the mind;
81 and  
(4) the aspect of deliverance , because it is an antidote that  causes one to have the quality  of 
sufferin g being not returnable . 
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -1B2. Meaning of the branches  
The first of four:  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -1B2A . Instructions regarding true sufferings  
COMMENTARY 
Regarding suffering, “The emptiness of forms and so forth that are results and the 
Perfection of Wisdom are one nature in the entity of thusness.”  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —“Sariputra , with regard to this, when a bodhisattva mahasattva strives with 
respect to the emptiness of forms, he strives…” —are instructions for the sake of stopping 
adherence to objects to be known as truly existent regarding suffering, because they are 
instructions that make known tha t “The emptiness of contaminated forms and so forth 
that are results, and the Perfection of Wisdom directly realizing that  [emptiness]  are one 
nature in the entity of thusness , the emptiness of true existence.”  
                                              
81 Compare this with the presentation in “ 2B2C -1B2B -1A3A -3. The aspects of true paths.”  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
99 2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -1B2B. Instructions regarding t rue origins  
COMMENTARY 
Regarding origins, as emptiness and forms and so forth that are causes  are just not different, 
“Forms and so forth are not bearers of the qualities of origination, cessation, the thoroughly 
afflicted or the completely pure.”  
 
EXPLANA TION  
“Do not perfectly subsequently see forms as bearing the quality of production or bearing the 
quality of cessation…” are instructions regarding origins,  because they instruct that 
“Forms and so forth  included within  contaminated causes  do not newly  exist truly as 
bearers of the qualities of origination, cessation, the thoroughly afflicted or the 
completely pure.” They do not exist truly as those, as emptiness and forms and so forth 
that are causes are just not different ultimately. This is for the sake of refuting true 
existence with respect to origins, the objects to be  abandon ed.   
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -1B2C. Instructions regarding true cessations  
COMMENTARY 
Regarding cessations, “emptiness is free from production and cessation, the thoroughly 
afflicted and the completely pure, decrease and increase and so forth; from form does not 
exist, production of ignorance does not exist, cessation of ignorance does not exist, buddha 
does not exist, until enlightenment does not exist.”  
 
EXPLANATION  
“Sariputra , emptiness is not produced, not ceased, not thoroughly afflicted, and not 
completely pure,” are instructions regarding cessations, because they instruct that 
“emptiness , the freedom from adventitious stains, is free from truly existent characteristics 
of compounded phenomena, production and cessation, the thoroughly afflicted and the 
completely pure  objects of abandonment and antidotes , occasions of decrease an d 
increase , causes and results, and so forth; with respect to it, truly existent characterizing 
attributes are never established anywhere.”  It follows that true existence is never established 
anywhere because, from a generality of the thoroughly afflicted,  form , does not exist ; a 
particularity  [of the thoroughly afflicted ], production of ignorance, does not exist; a 
generality of the  completely pure, cessation of ignorance, does not exist; a particularity  [of 
the completely pure ], the realization buddha , does not exist; until the abandonment 
enlightenment does not exist ultimately. This is for the sake of refuting true existence with 
respect to cessations, the objects to be actualized. 
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -1B2D. Instructions regarding true paths  
COMMENTARY 
Regardi ng paths, “The perfection of generosity and so forth, oneself or inner emptiness and 
so forth, outer emptiness and so forth, the past limit and the future limit —mutually 
possessing all and established as just not being not possessed.” Indicating [all the a bove four 
statements] instructs about the truths.  
 
EXPLANATION  
“Sariputra , when a great bodhisattva practices the Perfection of Wisdom, he does not 
perfectly subsequently see himself ‘striving’ or ‘not striving’ in generosity…” are 
instructions regarding path,  because they instruct that “The perfection of generosity and 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
100 so forth, the bodhisattva himself, the object of cultivation and that which cultivates are not 
truly existent, whereby they are not possessed; the negation is not truly existent, whereby it  
is not that they are not possessed. Realize that.”  
 “Regarding emptiness, one does not practice by way of emptiness; it is a yoga path by 
way of emptiness…” are instructions regarding  suitability and achievement , because they 
instruct that “(i) The medita tive stabilizations that takes the three —inner emptiness and so 
forth —as objects, and (ii) the three —the emptiness of outer objects and so forth— do not 
exist truly as objects and object -possessors. That negation itself also does not exist truly.”  
 “With re spect to forms, one does not and will not practice the future  limit…” are  
instructions  regarding  deliverance , because they instruct that “mutually possessing the 
past limit, samsara  and the future  limit,  nirvana (where one definitely emerges from and  
where  one definitely emerges to) is not truly existent , and since that very absence  of true 
existence is also not truly existent, they are  established as just not being not possessed.  
These are instructions for the sake of stopping adherence to paths, the objects to be relied 
upon, as truly existent.  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -2. Instructions on the supports of the achievings  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -2A. Meaning of the general ity 
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -2B. Meaning  of the branches  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -2A. Meaning of the general ity 
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -2A1. Identifying the uncommon Three Jewels  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -2A2. General presentation of refuge  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -2A3. Difference between conventional and ultimate refuge 
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B-2A4. How to go for refuge  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -2A1. Identifying the uncommon Three Jewels  
[Maitreya’s] Mahayana Treatise on the Sublime Continuum  (Mahayanottaratantrasastra ) 
[1.5] says:  
 
Uncompounded, spontaneous,  Not realized by others’ conditions,  
Possessing knowledge, loving -kindness,  and ability  
Is the very Buddha possessing the two welfares.  
 
Like it has been said, that is the Buddha Jewel bearing the nature of the three exalted bodies, 
the fulfillment of the two welfares. Further [1.10]:  
 
That which is inconceivable, without the two, without conception, Pure, clear, and of the antidotal class,  
That which is and that by which there is separation from attachment;  
That bearer of the characteristics of the two truths is the Dharma. 
 
Like it has been said, that is the Dharma Jewel bearing the characteristics of the two truths 
of the completely pure [class]. Also [1.14]:  
 
Because of pure inner exalted wisdoms  
Seeing modes and varieties,  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
101 The assembly of irreversible intelligent ones  
Just possesses  unsurpassa ble excellent qualities.  
 
Like it has been said, that is the Sangha Jewel who are irreversible aryas possessing the 
excellent qualities of knowledge and liberation. I will not elaborate more beyond this. 
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -2A2. General presentation of refuge  
Furthermore, it is like it has been taught in that [Maitreya’s Mahayana Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum ( Mahayanottaratantrasastra ), 1.19]:  
 
Due to the teacher, the teaching and the disciples,   
In terms of the three vehicles and  
Those who believe in th e three takings,  
The three refuges are presented.  
 
Here, in general, the purpose of presentating the three refuges in the scriptures is indicated. 
In terms of: (i) the buddha that is an object to be attained in the continuum of Mahayana  
lineage -bearers who  have entered a path, which should be known as a resultant refuge, and 
the buddha that has already been accomplished, which should be known as a causal refuge; 
(ii) the causal refuges of the other two lineage -bearers; and (iii) those who believe in taking 
the buddhas to be supreme, such as making offerings to them and honoring them, even 
though they have not entered the path —the Buddha Jewel is presented as a refuge.  
 In terms of: (i) the resultant refuge of solitary realizer lineage -bearers  who have entered a 
path, those who seek in their continua nirvana without relying on others’ sounds, at the time 
of the last existence and , (ii) those who believe in taking the excellent Dharma to be 
supreme, even though they have not entered the path —the Dharma Je wel is presented as a 
refuge.  
 In terms of: (i) the resultant refuge of hearer lineage -bearers  who have entered a path , 
those who seek nirvana that is attained through following others’ sounds at the time of the last existence, and (ii) those who believe in taking the Sangha to be supreme, even though 
they have not entered the path —the Sangha Jewel is presented as a refuge.  
 Even though one may not seek them as objects to be attained in one’s continuum, 
understand that even the Dharma and Sangha Jewel for w hom they have become refuges are 
causal refuges upon which one relies. In dependence on the presentation of the three Mahayana  uncommon refuges above, the three causal refuges and the two resultant refuges 
of the other two lineage -bearers will also become understood. However, this indicates the 
purpose of the general presentation of the three refuges in the scriptures. 
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -2A3. Difference between conventional and ultimate refuge   
That [Maitreya’s Mahayana Treatise on the Sublime Continuum  
(Mahayanottaratantrasastra ), 1.20] says:  
 
Because it will be abandoned, because it bears the quality of being deceptive , 
Because of absence and because it is together with fear, The two types of Dharma and the assembly of aryas  
Are not supreme, everlasting refuges. 
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
102 Regarding that, the meanings of ultimate and conventional refuge are as follows. The 
refuge, as in the case of those definite in the hearer lineage, that —(i) in the perspective of its 
attitude, seeks merely the pacification of the suffering of cy clic existence, and holds that it 
is not necessary to proceed beyond that, and (ii) in actuality, does not complete the 
traversing of the path —is the meaning of a conventional refuge. That which —(i) in the 
perspective of attitude, holds to completing the t raversing [of the path], and (ii) in actuality 
completes it —is the meaning of an ultimate refuge; there is no person who wishes to know 
the proof of the scriptural Dharma and the like as not being the final truth body, whereby it is only inappropriate . Hen ce, even what is a Mahayana  scriptural Dharma is not a final 
refuge; it is merely an object to be relied upon as a method for clearly realizing the meaning. Once the final clear realization of the meaning has been attained, since it is not necessary as 
a method for attaining that which is not yet attained, it is only an object to be abandoned  
like a boat. Further, the general conclusion here is a branch of establishing the pervasion; it 
is not the principal meaning. 
 A wisdom directly realizing selflessness  in the continuum of a bodhisattva arya (i) has 
not exhausted all stains, even though it appears as though it has separated from all stains in the perspective of seeing, and (ii) has not exhausted all stains in entity, even though the 
pollution of stains h as not entered its entity, whereby it bears the quality of being 
deceptive , a falsity, the combination of appearing to be that and being empty of that. Hence, 
it is indicated to not be an ultimate refuge. Having said that, know that the assertion —that 
this indicates that a compounded phenomenon is pervaded by not being an ultimate 
refuge —is a vile wrong conception that denies that a buddha’s true paths and two types of 
form bodies are ultimate refuges; it should be cast faraway.    Also, with respect to the  modes of the hearers’ vehicle, a hearer’s nirvana without 
remainder is not an ultimate refuge, because it is strongly distinguished by a mere absence  
of suffering s and origins [of sufferings] . That implies that the fear that is  the obscurations to 
knowledge has not been exhausted ; some ignoramus, having discarded the timely occasion 
to state a proof for that not being an ultimate refuge in our system, formulated a 
consequence and explained that the sign and the predicate are assertions of those of hearer 
schools. Another explained that it means non -existence at the final time , stated a non -
affirming negative as the reason, and so forth. Their making presentations despite not 
having realized the meaning will cause the Buddha’s teachings to become stained. T hus, it 
will be marvelous to ignore them.   The mode of the hearers is a  mode of vehicle accepted  even in our system; it is not a  
mode of assertion of lower tenets. The analogy of a butter- lamp that has died out means that 
when a hearer has entered the sph ere of peace, even appearances in which dissimilar 
meanings are slightly observed have vanished; it does not mean that the continuity of matter and cognition has been severed, as is asserted by some Buddhist schools. Even the 
compounded signs of a hearer foe -destroyer is together with the fear that is the knowledge 
obscurations, as if the knife of a executioner has been raised. 
 Therefore, [Maitreya’s Mahayana Treatise on the Sublime Continuum  
(Mahayanottaratantrasastra ), 1.21] says:  
 
Ultimately, the refuge  of migrating beings  
Is solely the Buddha,  
Because the Muni bears the truth body;  
Because [He] is also the culmination of the assembly. 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
103  
Like it has been said, only the Buddha who bears the nature of the three exalted bodies is an 
ultimate refuge.  
2B2C -1A2B-1B1B -2A4. How to go for refuge   
Having understood well the excellent qualities of the Three Jewels and the stages to be trained in of one who has gone for refuge in them that have been taught in [Asanga's] 
Compendium of Ascertainments (Viniscaya -samgr ahani) and so forth, you yourself should 
contemplate well upon the shortcomings of samsara in general and the shortcomings of the bad migrations in particular, in dependence on the two causes —(1) recollecting the fear, and 
(2) knowing that the Three Jewels  have the ability to protect from the fear. Then tame your 
mind [by] going for refuge such that you entrust yourself in the Three Jewels from the 
bottom of your heart, after which train properly in the trainings of refuge.  
 In that manner, by having entere d into the exalted compassion of the v ictors, your 
excellent qualities will increase more and more, whereby you will achieve the essence with 
regard to the support of leisures and endowments; professing to make effort in hearing, 
contemplation and meditati on without being able to tame your mind [by] going for refuge 
will bring very little result. What is explicitly indicated here is a presentation of the three Mahayana  uncommon refuges. The objects of going for refuge will be indicated below with 
“Faith obs erving the buddhas and so forth” [4.33a].  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -2B. Meaning of the branches  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -2B1. Instructions on the Buddha Jewel  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -2B2. Instructions on the Dharma Jewel  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -2B3. Instructions on the Sangha Jewel  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B-2B1. Instructions on the Buddha Jewel  
COMMENTARY 
Concerning buddha, since buddha and enlightenment are just the same character, with 
regard to not observing the exalted knower of all aspects, a defining quality that acts to 
[characterize] buddha, by not  connecting forms and so forth, “know the equality between 
the object of observation and the observer,” and…  
 
EXPLANATION   
“A bodhisattva, at the time of practicing the Perfection of Wisdom, does not act to connect 
an exalted knower of all aspects to form ; he does not perfectly, subsequently see form 
itself…” are instructions for the sake of abandoning adherence to the Buddha as truly existent, because they instruct that “a final exalted wisdom knowing the equality between  
the object of observation and the observer in being empty of true existence is the 
Buddha Jewel .” That follows, because they instruct that “ with regard to not observing an 
exalted knower of all aspects as [existing] ultimately, there is no object to be adh ered to, 
by not connecting and  connecting  forms and so forth— object and object -possessor, 
definition and definiendum, and sphere and cognizer—ultimately.”  
 Instructions on an exalted knower of all aspects will serve as instructions on the buddha, 
because a n exalted knower of all aspects is a defining quality that acts to characterize 
buddha. Do not observe an exalted knower of all aspects as [existing] ultimately, since 
buddha and enlightenment possessing the two purities are just the same character  in 
being empty of true existence . 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
104 2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -2B2. Instructions on the Dharma Jewel  
COMMENTARY 
Concerning Dharma, “All phenomena which are included within those including all bases, 
antidotes, and aspects included within the three exalted knowers of all have n o entitiness,” 
and…  
 
EXPLANATION  
“Do not connect, saying ‘The thing form exists;’ do not connect, saying ‘Things do not 
exist’…” indicates instructions on the Dharma,  because it instructs that “All phenomena 
which are included and summed up within those including all instances82 that are bases, 
antidotes, and aspects included as objects within the three exalted knowers of all have 
no entitiness  ultimately.”  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -2B3. Instructions on the Sangha Jewel  
COMMENTARY 
Concerning sangha, excluding the foe -destroyer who is included within the Buddha Jewel, 
the eight: the seven great beings, through instances of abiders in the result and approachers, together with the solitary realizers; through instances of the dull -faculty and so forth, 
complete in number a s twenty. “Engage the irreversible bodhisattva arya learners as just not 
produced.” Imparting these passages are instructions on the Three Jewels. 
 
EXPLANATION  
Imparting these passages, “Engage the irreversible bodhisattva arya learners as just 
not produce d ultimately,” are instructions on the sangha, because they are instructions for 
the sake of stopping adherence to the Sangha Jewel as truly existent companions who 
practice the path . 
 
QUALM: Further, how many types of that Sangha are there?  
RESPONSE: The subject—the eight: the seven great beings , through  instances of three 
abiders in the result and  four approachers, together with the solitary realizers83—are 
suitable to be divided into many because, through instances of the dull -faculty and so 
forth , there are twenty in number  explained. 
 QUALM: Do [they] not become the eight approachers and abiders?  
RESPONSE: The Mahayana foe- destroyer  is excluded  from the Sangha Jewel of this 
context, since it is included within the Buddha Jewel . It is for the sake of stopping 
adherence to the Three Jewels as refuges ultimately.  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -3. Instructions on the attributes of the achievings  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -3A. Instructions on eliminating manifest discordant classes  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -3B. Instructions on achieving the special paths 
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -3C. Instructions on eliminating the seeds that are objects of abandonment  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -3A. Instructions on eliminating manifest discordant classes  
The first of three:  
                                              
82 gsal ba  
83 See “2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2B -3A. Explaining the nine grounds which are to be passed through.”  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
105 2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -3A1. Instructions on the causes of not dege nerating the achievings  
 COMMENTARY  
Since some will adhere to being diligent  towards the meaning of what was explained by just 
having initiated  joyous effort, due to a mere agreeable state of body and so forth, 
instructions on not adhering84 which indicate  that the body and so forth are devoid of  
entitiness, and…  
 
EXPLANATION  
“Great bodhisattva, the practice of the Perfection of Wisdom with body, speech and 
mind…” are instructions on not adhering  to negative activities of the three doors, because 
they are instructions  which  indicate  “Realize that the body and so forth are devoid of  
entitiness  ultimately.” It is appropriate to instruct in that manner because, since some of 
dull-faculty will adhere to diligently  practicing  the meaning of what was explained on 
the occasion of the generated mind previously  by just having initiated  joyous effort  
through application (if they ha ve not familiarized with the meaning of emptiness), it must be 
abandoned. Owing to what  cause [will they adhere]? It will be produced due t o a mere 
agreeable state of body and so forth attached to ordinary activities . 
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -3A2 . Instructions on the causes of increasing the achieving s 
COMMENTARY 
…although one has familiarized for a long time, if the desired aim is not accomplished, since those bearing fearful natures will become thoroughly upset, the instructions on the 
absence  of weariness
85 that indicate that clinging to form and so forth until perfect complete 
enlightenment is merely not existent, and…  
 
EXPLANATION  
 “Great bodhisattva, at the time of practicing the six perfections, do not cling to forms; do 
not cling to feelings…” are instructions on the absence  of weariness  at the time of 
pract icing, because they are instructions that  indicate  “Realize that clinging to form and 
so forth until  perfect complete enlightenment as  truly existent  is merely not existent.” It 
is appropriate to instruct in that manner, because although one has familiariz ed with the 
achievings for a long time, if the desired aim is not accomplished accordingly , since 
some of  dull- faculty  with fearful natures will become thoroughly upset, it must be 
eliminated.  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -3A3. Instructions on the causes of not falling i nto the Hinayana  
COMMENTARY 
…if one must receive transmissions of the paths for each meaning  from the buddhas who 
reside in the ten directions and so forth, since the mind will become discouraged, the 
instructions on the completely upheld path86 that teach that phenomena are merely not 
produced by nature, and…   
 
                                              
84 Unlike in the Tibetan, the key word in the Sanskrit commentary here is worded identically to the Sanskrit 
root text: asaktau . 
85 Unlike in the Tibetan, the key word in the Sanskrit commentary here is worded identically to the Sanskrit 
root text: apariśrān tau. 
86 Unlike in the Tibetan, the key word in the Sanskrit commentary here is worded identically to the Sanskrit 
root text: prati pat-samparigrahe . 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
106 EXPLANATION  
“Sariputra , a great bodhisattva possessing such exalted wisdom, as many grains of sand on 
the banks of the Ganges in the world systems in the eastern direction…” are instructions on 
the thoroughly upheld path in the Mahayana , because they are instructions that teach 
that phenomena are merely not produced by nature . It is appropriate to instruct in that 
manner because, if one must receive transmissions of the paths for each meaning from 
the buddhas who reside in the ten directions and so forth, since , thinking “How can I be 
able to do that?”, the mind will become discouraged , it must be eliminated. 
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -3B. Instructions on achieving the special paths 
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -3B1. Instruct ions on the five eyes: the causes of independently engaging in the achievings  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -3B2. Instructions on the six clairvoyances: the causes of quickly completing the 
achievings  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -3B1. Instructions on the five eyes: the causes of indep endently engaging in the achievings  
COMMENTARY 
…teaching that “(1) An eye of flesh, (2) a divine eye, which arose from maturation, (3) a wisdom eye, (4) a dharma eye, and (5) a buddha eye —respectively , the object -possessor 
that (1) ascertains things individually, (2) [knows] the death -transference and birth of all 
sentient beings, (3) does not conceptualize with respect to all phenomena, (4) realizes all 
arya persons, and (5) is clearly and  completely enlightened in all aspects of all 
phenomena —are established as merely one in thusness” instructs on the five eyes, and…  
 
EXPLANATION  
Based upon “Sariputra , a bodhisattva mahasattva sees a hundred yojanas87 with an eye of 
flesh…,” instructions on the five e yes are indicated, because they teach that “ The objects 
and object- possessors of the five eyes  are established as merely one  taste in thusness.”  
Having indicated the ability and power to see the objects of the five eyes conventionally, 
their absence  of nat ure ultimately is indicated. 
 With regard to them, respectively, (1) an eye of flesh is an object- possessor that 
ascertains things individually,  seeing subtle and coarse forms in the billionfold world 
systems ina hundred yojanas;  (2) a divine eye, which ar ose from maturation  of previous 
virtuous contaminated karma, is an object- possessor that knows exactly  the death -
transference and birth of all sentient beings; (3) a wisdom eye  is an object- possessor 
that does not conceptualize  true existence with respect to all phenomena, directly  
realizing the absence  of true existence;  (4) a dharma eye  is an object- possessor that 
realizes all arya persons  of sharp and dull faculties;  and (5) a buddha eye  is an object-
possessor that is manifestly, completely enlightened i n all aspects of all phenomena, 
respectively . 
 (1) An eye of flesh exists from the path of accumulation, (2) a divine eye from the path of 
preparation, (3) a wisdom eye from the path of seeing, (4) a dharma eye from the 
subsequent attainment of the path of seeing, and (5) a buddha eye from the buddha ground, 
its similitude existing from the eighth ground.  
 If you were to possess these five eyes:  
• with the eye of flesh, you would know exactly where the spiritual guides teaching 
Dharma, your disciples, and so forth are abiding within the billionfold world systems;  
                                              
87 An Indian measure of distance, the yojana is about 7  km. 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
107 • with the second, [you would know] where your disciples die, transfer and are reborn;  
• with the third, you would directly know the meaning of the mode of abidance, the method 
for subduing trainees. 
• with the fourth, you would know well the particularities of the faculties of the trainees 
who are objects to be assisted and taught the Dharma; and  
• even when having merely attained a similitude of the fifth, through knowing most of the 
varieties of objects of knowledge, you would be urged from within towards the 
achievings and would independently engage in the achievings without dependency upon 
others. 
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -3B2. Instructions on the six clairvoyances: the causes of quickly completing the achievings  
COMMENTARY 
… indicating that “The clairvoyances of (1) magical emanation, (2) divine ear, (3) knowing others’ minds, (4) recalling previous states, (5) divine eye that arises from manifest 
compositional action, and (6) knowing the extinction of contamination s: (1) moves the earth 
and so forth, (2) hears faint and other sounds abiding in all the world systems, (3) thoroughly knows others’ minds, such as those with attachment, (4) recalls many past lives 
of oneself and others, (5) sees all forms, and (6) abando ns afflictive and knowledge 
obscurations —are to be realized as merely pacified from the beginning,” instructs on the six 
clairvoyances, and…  
 
EXPLANATION  
“A great bodhisattva who practices the Perfection of Wisdom will attain the perfection of clairvoyance ; he experiences many types of magical emanation…” instructs on the six 
clairvoyances, because it instructs by way of indicating how the six clairvoyances arise in the continuum conventionally and that they “ are to be realized as merely pacified from 
the b eginning  ultimately .” 
 With regard to them:  
• the clairvoyance of magical emanation  possesses special power, because it is that 
concomitant with meditative stabilization and wisdom which is able to move the earth , 
transform into one, emanate into many, and so forth ; apply similarly to those below:  
 
• the clairvoyance of divine ear  possesses special power, because it is that 
concomitant with meditative stabilization and wisdom , which has as its empowering 
condition a transparent physical material ( included in t he level of equipoise arisen 
through the force of meditation ) that hears faint and other loud sounds abiding in all the 
world systems ; 
• the clairvoyance knowing others’ minds  [possesses special power, because] it is 
that concomitant with meditative stabiliz ation and wisdom which directly, thoroughly  
knows others’ minds, such as those  free from being with  attachment ; 
• the clairvoyance recalling previous states  [possesses special power, because it is 
that concomitant with meditative stabilization and wisdom] which recalls  many, such as 
a hundred or a thousand, past lives of oneself and others , through the force of 
experience;  
 
• the divine eye that arises from the  manifest compositional action  of cultivating a 
concentration in this life is a transparent physical material  (included within a level of 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
108 equipoise arisen from meditation ) which sees all  subtle and gross forms  that are remote 
or not remote ; the clairvoyanc e [of divine eye that arises from the manifest 
compositional action ] [possesses special power, because] it is a mental consciousness 
concomitant with the two qualities [meditative stabilization and wisdom] supported on its 
empowering condition;   
• the clair voyance of the exhaustion of contaminations  possesses special power, 
because it is that concomitant with the two qualities [meditative stabilization and 
wisdom] which is a method abandoning the afflictive and knowledge obscuration s, 
and directly knows the separations that are the abandonments.  
 If you were to possess these six clairvoyances, you would directly hear even the faint and 
loud sounds revealing the Dharma in the infinite world systems. You would directly know 
the teachers and disciples with whom you were related in past lives and also where they are 
in the present. Having caused trainees to excellently [appear] before you  through magical 
emanation, you examine well whether or not these vessels have attachment and so forth in 
their continua. By rev ealing the methods for attaining liberation that you directly know, you 
will quickly complete the achievings in your own continuum. Through completing those, you will swiftly complete omniscience. 
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -3C. Instructions on eliminating the seeds th at are objects of abandonment  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -3C1. Instructions on the antidotes to the acquired objects of abandonment  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -3C2. Instructions on the antidotes to the innate objects of abandonment  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -3C1. Instructions on the antidotes to the acquired objects of abandonment  
COMMENTARY 
…indicating that “With respect to the path of seeing, the very entity of the sixteen instants 
included within the four truths —the nature of forbearances and knowledges of dharma and 
of subsequent knowledge —a yogi realizing all phenomena to be devoid of entitiness, like an 
illusionist, he, bearing a body without adherence to all phenomena, performs thorough 
meditation on the very direct antidotes to the objects to be abandoned by that,” instructs on 
the path of seeing, and…  
 
EXPLANATION  
“Subhuti, the bodhisattva mahasattvas, based on the Perfection of Wisdom, generate confidence” instructs on the path of seeing, because it instructs by way of indicating 
“perform  thorough  meditation on the very direct antidote s to the  acquired that are the 
objects to be abandoned by that  path of seeing .” What is the path of seeing?  The very 
entity of the sixteen instants , the object -possessors  included within the four truths , the 
objects —the nature of forbearances and knowledges of dharma and of subsequent 
knowledge [dharma  forbearance , dharma  knowledge, subsequent  forbearance , and 
subsequent  knowledge ]. By which person? By a yogi realizing all phenomena to be 
devoid of  truly existent enti tiness. Further, like an illusionist, he, bearing a body without 
adherence to all phenomena as truly existent, meditates. 
 The path of seeing, as well as the way of generating it, will be explained below. In this 
context, just understand the explanation in  [Vimuktisena’s]  Illuminating the Twenty  
Thousand  on the reason spoken by Subhuti to indicate the path of seeing.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
109 2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -3C2. Instructions on the antidotes to the innate objects of abandonment  
COMMENTARY 
Because —just as, due to the compounded and t he uncompounded being merely the same  
entity, one is unable to realize them as mutually different —it observes non -differently from 
the property that was made direct by the path of seeing which was explained, since seeing 
and meditation do not have [types] that are different, presenting the fully -qualified path of 
meditation does not exist. However, that [abandons] by the nature of dependent -arising. 
“Perform thorough meditation as the direct antidote to the objects to be abandoned by that,” 
instructs on the  path of meditation, 
 
EXPLANATION  
“Subhuti, in the absence of compounded sphere, one is unable to impute uncompounded 
sphere …” instructs on the path of meditation by means of simile, because it instructs that 
“Perform thorough meditation  as the direct antidote to the innate objects of 
abandonment that are the objects to be abandoned by that path of meditation.”  
 
With respect to that, there are:  
 
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -3C2A. The nature of the path: the object to be meditated upon  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -3C2B. Dispelling objection  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -3C2A. The nature of the path: the object to be meditated upon  
Thoroughly presenting the uncontaminated fully -qualified  path of meditation that is a 
different type from the path of seeing which directly realizes dharmata does not ex ist, since 
seeing and meditation that are direct equipoise on dharmata do not have types  that are 
different. They do not have types that are different, due to the compounded—true paths 
directly realizing selflessness —and the uncompounded—their separation f rom seeds of 
stain —being  merely the same  entity , since, it would follow that they [the true paths] are 
not free from stains if they [the true paths and their separation from seeds of stain] were 
different entities; because —just as one is unable to impute  them as mutually different 
entities —also that path of meditation directly observes the property (that was made 
direct by the path of seeing ) that was explained  above to be non-different from 
dharmata. For, since dharmata has no differences that are dissimil ar types by means of 
entity, the earlier and later paths that are direct meditative equipoise upon it also have no 
differences that are dissimilar types from the point of view  of entity. This is in turn because 
both directly observe thusness, the negation of the object of adherence of the innate 
conception of true existence. However, know that the dissimilar superimpositions that are 
objects to be removed are removed individually.  
 
In this context:  
 
SOMEONE FROM THE PAST: Although the meditative equipoises  of the ten grounds do 
not differ with respect to the seeing of dharmata, there are differences in the seeing of the 
truth body .  
RESPONSE: If one were to assert that a true cessation were  an ultimate truth, then that 
would be appropriate, but if it were an obscurational truth, then the direct comprehension of 
an obscurational truth by that very exalted wisdom of someone on a learner’s path that 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
110 directly realizes dharmata would transgress the path of reasoning; it would follow t hat 
meditative equipoise and subsequent attainment would become one entity on a learner’s 
path, it would follow that the stains of apprehending the two truths as different entities 
would be exhaustively abandoned, and there would not be the slightest fault  in a 
bodhisattva’s having brought about the perfect end without having completed [prayers], ripened [sentient beings] and purified [his buddha land].  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1B -3C2B. Dispelling objection  
OPINION: If those two paths do not have different characteristi cs, then they would also not 
have difference with regard to the ability to abandon the objects of abandonment. 
RESPONSE: Indeed, the two are not different in type. However, it is not that they do not 
have difference with regard to the ability to abandon th e objects of abandonment because, 
even though the seeds of the innate [objects of abandonment] are not abandoned by the 
earlier path, that later path, through the force of having greatly advanced in familiarization 
compared to the former, by the nature of dependent -arising , is able to abandon the seeds 
of the innate [objects of abandonment]. For example, even though an inferential valid 
cognizer realizing that sound is impermanent realizes the non -existence of the object of 
adherence of the innate conceptio n of sound as permanent, it harms the manifest acquired 
[objects of abandonment]; it does not harm the innate [objects of abandonment].  
2B2C -1A2B -1B1C. Summary   
COMMENTARY 
Thus, concerning the Perfection of Wisdom that  is the mind of enlightenment and the  very 
entities of the phenomena entailed by that, all of these —(1) not observing, which are the 
aspects of achievings; (2) the four truths of the aryas, which are the objects of observation of those; (3) the three refuges, which are the support; (4) non-attachment , which is the cause 
of distinguished progress; (5) absence of weariness , which is the cause of irreversible 
progress; (6) thoroughly upholding the path, which is the cause of not progressing by way of other vehicles; (7) the five eyes, which are t he causes of progressing without dependency on 
others; (8) the six clairvoyances, which are the causes of thoroughly completing an exalted knower of all aspects; and (9 -10) the paths of seeing the truth and meditation, which are the 
causes  that complete —are indicated in the context of instructions. Since , by only just these , 
all aims will become fulfilled, the instructions are of ten types.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Thus, the Mahayana  instructions  indicated here are definite as ten types . All of these  ten 
are indicated in the context of instructions, since by only just these  ten, all desired aims  
of beings seeking omniscience will become fulfilled , that is, completed. 
 QUALM: The other paths that will be explained below would be unnecessary. 
RESPONSE: Do not hold that position because, while a Mahayana  path that is not 
subsumed under them is not possible, since not all the divisions that are instances are 
indicated in these, they must be realized from elsewhere. This is just like, while a thing
88 
that is not subsumed under product is not possible, the term expressing “product” does not 
necessarily indicate all things.   
                                              
88 A “thing” ( dngos po) here refers to “that which is able to perform a function,” which is mutually inclusive 
with an impermanent phenomenon.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
111  Concerning the practice of the Perfection of Wisdom in which  the ten paths  are 
included within the stages of the Mahayana  path, the mind of enlightenment a nd the very 
entities of the phenomena entailed by  and conjoined with that, the instructions that 
instruct on —(1) “not observing  what is not in common with the hearers , and, what does not 
pass beyond the two truths, which are the aspects of the modes of cultivation, (2) the 
objects of observation of those  achievings;”  (3) “the support  of achievings;”  (4) 
“distinguished  higher and higher achievings;”  (5) “irreversible from the practice of the 
achievings;”  (6) “having degenerated from the Mahay ana, by way of other vehicles  of the 
hearers and solitary realizers;”  (7) “due to independently engaging in the achievings, by way 
of others ; (8) “due to quickly  completing the accumulations, all aspects ;” and (9- 10) the 
paths of seeing and meditation whic h are the causes that complete the achievings by 
means of exhausting all of the two obscurations —are ten . 
 The instructions by way of having qualified each of the ten instructions by the realization 
of emptiness are for the sake of (i) indicating that, in general, all Mahayana  paths need to be 
conjoined with that wisdom, and (ii) making known that, in particular, by meditating upon 
most of the achievings bearing the aspect of conventionalities during subsequent attainment, 
and emptiness during meditative eq uipoise on the occasion of the path of accumulation, the 
partial concordances with definite discrimination that will be explained below —the 
wisdoms arisen from meditation that observe emptiness —will be generated. 
2B2C -1A2B -1B2. Explaining the Sangha Jewel in particular  
2B2C -1A2B -1B2A. Meaning of the g eneral ity 
2B2C -1A2B -1B2B. Meaning of the branches  
2B2C -1A2B -1B2A. Meaning of the g eneral ity 
2B2C -1A2B -1B2A -1. Examples that characterize  
2B2C -1A2B -1B2A -2. Meanings that are objects to be characterized  
2B2C -1A2B -1B2A -1. Examples that characterize  
2B2C -1A2B -1B2A -1A. Presentation of the results  
2B2C -1A2B -1B2A -1B. Presentation of the persons   
2B2C -1A2B -1B2A -1A. Presentation of the results  
Regarding the results of the mode of a trainee -in-virtue, the mode o f a trainee -in-virtue is a 
mode in which one is set in the ultimate training in virtue by way of having abandoned the 
afflictions; further, regarding an uninterrupted path , an abandonment is its  result that is a  
separation , and a liberated path is its  result concordant with its cause. Thus these are called 
“result s of the mode of a trainee -in-virtue.” Also, due to the particularities of occasion, four 
results have been  taught in the sutras. The reason for positing them is that there are three 
objects of  abandonment: (1) the three entwinements that are hindrances to embarking on 
liberation, (2) the five partial concordances with the bottom most , and (3) the five partial 
concordances with the upper. With respect to these:  
• the first result is presented by wa y of having abandoned the first;  
• the middle two results by way of having abandoned [respectively] most of the second and 
all of the second without exception; and  
• the result of foe -destroyer by way of having abandoned the last.  
In dependence on which leve ls are they attained?  
• The first two results are attained in dependence on the preparations of the first concentration;  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
112 • if one attains the third result serially or by way of having largely separated from 
attachment previously, the mind support is similar to  the above; if one has separated from 
attachment previously, it is supported on any of the actual concentrations;  
• with respect to the fourth result, if one attains it in the two lower realms [desire and form realms], it is supported on any of the six level s of concentrations; if it is attained in the 
formless realm, it is supported on any of the first three formless absorptions.  
In dependence on which—the path of seeing or the path of meditation —are they attained?  
• The first result is attained only by way of the path of seeing;  
• if the middle two are attained serially, then they are attained by way of the path of meditation; if one has largely separated from attachment previously, or one has separated 
from attachment with respect to the desire realm previousl y, then they are attained by 
way of the path of seeing; and  
• the last result is attained in dependence on the path of meditation, because it must be 
attained through having exhaustively abandoned the objects to be abandoned by the path 
of meditation of the  Peak of Existence.   
By which —a mundane path or a supramundane path —are they attained?  
• The first and the last results are attained only by way of a supramundane path;  
• the middle two are attained after [having attained] the path of seeing; if that person has 
familiarized with practice predominant in calm abiding , then they are attained by way of 
a mundane path bearing the aspects of peace and coarseness.  
In dependence on which support are they attained?  
• the first three are attained in dependence on a desi re realm support;  
• the fourth is attained on a support of all three realms.  
2B2C -1A2B -1B2A -1B. Presentation of the persons  
With respect to persons who are stream -enterers, the first of the four, the definition of the 
first from between the two, approacher and abider [i.e. the definition of an approacher to 
stream -enterer ] is: a person who strives for the sake of attaining the result distinguished by 
having abandoned the three entwinements. When divided, there are two:  
(1) followers of faith, and  
(2) followers of Dharma.  
 The boundaries are: from a single -session path of preparation onwards, as long as one has 
not attained the liberated path included within the result of stream -enterer. With respect to 
abiders in the result of stream -enterer, there are:  
(1) those who are serial, and  
(2) those who are simultaneous.  
 With respect to first, the definition [of a serial abider in the result of stream -enterer ] is: a 
person (abiding in the result distinguished by having abandoned the three entwinements ) 
who does not abandon simultaneously by way of aspects , the objects to be abandoned by the 
path of meditation of the three realms. The three entwinements are: (1) the view of the 
transitory collection, (2) the view holding bad modes of conduct as supreme, and (3) doubt.  
 When divided, differentiated by faculty, there are the two: believers -by-faith and 
attainers -by-seeing; differentiated by application, there are the two: mere and special abiders 
in the result —those who abide in that very result, who  do not strive and who strive for the 
sake of the special result. Know the two —differentiation through faculty and differentiation 
through application —similarly for the two middle results. When differentiated by way of 
the attribute of rebirth, there are two: m aximum -seven -timers and those born from class to 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
113 class.  The boundaries are: from the sixteenth instant of the path of seeing through abiding 
on the uninterrupted path that abandons the sixth affliction of the desire realm that is an 
object to be abandoned  by the path of meditation.  
 With respect to the second, those who are simultaneous, the definition [of a simultaneous 
abider in the result of stream -enterer ] is: a person [ abiding in the result distinguished by 
having abandoned the three entwinements ] who abandons simultaneously by way of 
aspects, the afflictions that are the objects to be abandoned by the path of meditation of the three realms. The afflictions are abandoned in dependence on the preparation of the first 
concentration, Not Unable, (i) becau se one is able to abandon all the afflictions of the three 
realms in dependence on this, and (ii) because the other levels are not appropriate as the mind support for abandoning the objects to be abandoned by the path of meditation of the 
desire realm. Further, they are abandoned by only a supramundane path, because a mundane path is unable to abandon the objects to be abandoned by the path of meditation of the Peak 
of Existence. 
 They are abandoned by way of simultaneously abandoning the nine great of the great 
objects to be abandoned by the path of meditation of the three realms [until] simultaneously abandoning the nine small of the small. The reason for such ability is that this [simultaneous 
abider] is of sharper faculty than the others, whereby without  having differentiated the 
aggregates —forms and so forth —of the three realms as being of individual realms and 
levels, he familiarized with them collectively , thinking, “All of these are impermanent, 
suffering and selfless.”  
 It is inappropriate to posit simultaneity with respect to the two middle results; at the time 
of abandoning the sixth affliction of the desire realm, it is impossible to abandon the sixth object to be abandoned by the path of meditation of the Peak of Existence; at the time of 
abandon ing the ninth affliction of the desire realm, it is impossible to abandon the ninth 
[object to be abandoned by the path of meditation] of the Peak of Existence. Hence it is posited only with respect to the first and the last results. When divided, there are:  
(i) the mere abiders in the result of stream -enterer and  
(ii) special abiders in the result of stream -enterer.  
 From between these two, the latter [special simultaneous abider in the result of stream -
enterer] is an approacher to the result of foe -destroyer. The boundaries [of a simultaneous 
abider in the result of stream -enterer] are: from the sixteenth instant of clear realization of 
the truth through abiding on the uninterrupted path that abandons the small of the small 
objects to be abandoned by the  path of meditation.  
 With respect to the second, the once -returners, the definition of the first from between the 
two, approacher and abider, [i.e. the definition of an approacher to once -returner
] is: a 
person who strives for the sake of attaining the re sult of the mode of a trainee -in-virtue 
distinguished by having largely separated from attachment.  When divided, there are two:  
(i) serial approacher to the result of once -returner, and  
(ii) leaper approacher to the result of once -returner.  
The boundaries are: from  a serial approacher striving in the application that abandons the 
first object to be abandoned by the path of meditation of the desire realm after ha ving 
attained the path of seeing, through abandoning the sixth. A leaper approacher is  like a 
stream -enterer; the difference is that he has abandoned either the sixth, seventh or eighth 
object to be abandoned by the path of meditation prior to the path of seeing. 
 The definition of the second, an abider in the result of once -returner , is: a  person who 
abides in the result of the mode of a trainee -in-virtue distinguished by having largely 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
114 separated from attachment. When divided, differentiated by the way of attaining the result, 
there are the two:  
(i) serialist and  
(ii) leaper.  
A one -obsta cle89 special abider in the result of once -returner has abandoned the seventh or 
eighth affliction of the desire realm, has not abandoned the ninth, and attains nirvana after 
having taken one rebirth. He has attained the powers that are uncontaminated antid otes to 
these objects of abandonment. The boundaries are: for a leaper, from the sixteenth instant of 
clear realization of the truth, and, for a serialist, from the liberated path (in which the sixth 
has been abandoned), until  the uninterrupted path that a bandons the ninth object to be 
abandoned by the path of meditation of the desire realm.  
 With respect to the third, the non -returners, the definition of the first from between the 
two, approacher and abider, [i.e. the definition of an approacher to non -returner ] is: a person 
who strives for the sake of attaining the result of the mode of a trainee -in-virtue 
distinguished by having abandoned the five partial concordances with the bottom. Its divisions are similar to those of a once -returner. The boundaries for an approacher to non -
returner who has separated from attachment previously are similar to those of a leaper 
approacher to once -returner; the difference is that he has abandoned some of the 
afflictions —ranging from the ninth of the desire realm until the ninth of Nothingness —prior 
to the path of seeing. As for a serial approacher, [the boundaries are:] from striving to 
abandon the seventh affliction of the desire realm, until  striving to abandon the ninth, after 
the path of seeing. 
 The definition of the second, an abider in the result of non -returner
 is: a person who 
abides in the result of the mode of a trainee -in-virtue distinguished by having abandoned the 
five partial concordances with the bottom.  The five partial concordances with the bottom 
are: (1 -3) the three entwinements, (4) aspiration for the desire realm, and (5) harmful intent. 
When divided, differentiated by the manner of attaining the result, there are the two:  
(i) serialist non -returner and  
(ii) non -returner who has separated from attach ment previously.  
When differentiated by the manner of relying upon arya qualities, there are the two:  
(i) non -returner who transforms over lives in the desire realm, and  
(ii) [non -returner] who does not transform in a life in the desire realm.  
The first  attains the state of non -returner by relying upon an arya path in continuous rebirths 
in the desire realm ; he attains nirvana in the life he attains [the state of] non -returner  
Pacifying in that present life means actualizing nirvana in the life where one  attains the path 
of seeing. The second attains the state of non -returner in that life where he attains the  path 
of seeing. With respect to that, there are :  
(i) one who proceeds to the form realm,  
(ii) one who proceeds to the formless realm,  
(iii) one who pacifies in that present life, and  
(iv) one who actualizes with a body.  
The definition of the first [ an abider in the result of non -returner who proceeds to the form 
realm ] is: a person who attains the state of non -returner in that life where he attains the path 
of seeing and takes rebirth in the form realm. With respect to its divisions, (1) the first of 
five—one who attains nirvana in the intermediate state —has abandoned the entwinement of 
                                              
89 This abider is also referred to as “one -life one -obstacle” ( tshe gcig bar chad gcig pa ba).  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
115 rebirth in the form realm and, due to not having ab andoned the entwinement of 
establishment, actualizes nirvana on the support of an intermediate existence of the form 
realm. (2) The second —one who attains nirvana upon rebirth —due to not having abandoned 
both entwinements, having actualized the path when j ust having established the birth 
existence of the form realm, attains nirvana. (3) The third —one who attains nirvana by 
being with compositional action —having actualized the path with great exertion in order to 
be like the others, attains nirvana. (4) The fourth —one who attains nirvana by being without 
compositional action —having actualized the path without great exertion through the force 
of familiarization, attains nirvana. 
 (5) With respect to the fifth —one who transfers to the upper—its definition is: a n abider 
in the result (distinguished by having abandoned the five partial concordances with the bottom) who bears the lineage of attaining nirvana on the support of either Akanistha  or the 
Peak of Existence, having passed through rebirth in the form realm . Its divisions are:  
(i) a lineage -bearer who proceeds finally to Akanistha and  
(ii) a lineage -bearer who proceeds finally to the Peak of Existence.   
With respect to the first [an abider in the result of non -returner who is a lineage -bearer who 
proceeds  finally to Akanistha ], there are three:  
(i) lineage -bearers who are leapers,  
(ii) [lineage -bearers] who are half- leapers, and  
(iii) [lineage -bearers] who die and transfer to all other abodes, excluding Great 
Brahma. 
The second [an abider in the result of non -returner who is a lineage -bearer who proceeds 
finally to the Peak of Existence] is not reborn in the pure places, due to not having 
meditated on the causal alternating concentrations. Persons who meditate on alternating 
concentrations are of two typ es: non -returners and foe -destroyers. With respect to the latter 
[foe-destroyers], those of dull faculty meditate [on alternating meditations] in order to 
distance themselves from the obscurations relishing the taste of meditative stabilization, 
while thos e of sharp faculty meditate in order to abide in the happiness of that present life. 
The first [non -returners] meditate also in order to be reborn in the pure places.  
 On what minds are they supported? They are initially meditated on by being supported on 
a mind of the fourth concentration, since it is the best serviceable mind; subsequently, they 
are also supported on other minds. Further, one enters absorption upon an uncontaminated 
fourth concentration by way of a single application, then a contaminated one, then an 
uncontaminated one —the small, alternating three [concentrations]. Through that mode, 
alternating six, nine, twelve and fifteen [concentrations] are the middling, great, very great, and tremendously great. That very karma that projects [a rebirth] into the fourth 
concentration that was accumulated at the time of an ordinary being previously, due to one 
having meditated on the pure fourth concentration, transforms into the cause for being 
reborn in a pure place. Hence there is no t the fault that it would follow that, despite having 
seen the truth, one newly accumulate s karma that projects one into cyclic existence. 
 The definition of the second [an abider in the result of non -returner who proceeds to the 
formless realm ] is: a person who attains no n-returner in that life where he attains the path of 
seeing and bears the lineage of actualizing nirvana on a support of the formless realm 
without taking rebirth in the form realm. When divided, there are four, excluding one who 
attains nirvana in the int ermediate state.   
 The third, a non -returner who pacifies in that present life, actualizes nirvana in that very 
life of attaining the path of seeing. The fourth, a non -returner who actualizes  with a body, is 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
116 an arya learner who possesses the eight liberat ions. The boundaries, for a serialist, are from 
the liberated path in which the ninth affliction of the desire realm has been abandoned, until 
abiding on the uninterrupted path that abandons the ninth [affliction] of the Peak of 
Existence, and for a leaper, from the sixteenth instant of the clear realization of the truth.  
 Regarding the fourth, a foe -destroyer, the definition of an approacher [to foe -destroyer ] 
is: an arya person who strives for the sake of attaining the result of the mode of a trainee -in-
virtue that is distinguished by having abandoned the five partial concordances with the 
upper. When divided, there are two:  
(i) serial and  
(ii) simultaneous approachers to foe -destroyer.  
If he is a non -returner, then [the boundaries] are: from striving i n the application that 
abandons the remaining objects to be abandoned by the path of meditation, until the 
uninterrupted path which abandons the ninth affliction of the Peak of Existence. If he is a 
stream -enterer, then the boundaries are posited to be sim ilar to those for a special 
simultaneous stream -enterer. 
 In regard to the second, the definition [of an abider in the result of foe -destroyer ] is: a 
person who abides in the result of the mode of a trainee -in-virtue that is distinguished by 
having abandon ed the five partial concordances with the upper. The five partial 
concordances with the upper are: (1 -2) attachment of the form and formless realms, (3) 
excitement, (4) pride, and (5) ignorance. Its divisions, when it is divided by way of the mode of aband oning the objects of abandonment, are the two:  
(i) serial foe -destroyers, and  
(ii) simultaneous foe -destroyers.  
And when divided by means of faculty, there are the six:  
(1) those who bear the property of degeneration,  
(2) those who bear the property of suicide, 
(3) those who bear the property of subsequent protection, 
(4) those who bear the property of unmoving from that state,  
(5) those who bear the property of worthy of thorough realization, and  
(6) those who bear the property of unwavering. 
The boundaries are: from the knowing of exhaustion and absence of production.  
2B2C -1A2B -1B2A -2. Meanings that are objects to be characterized  
The bases of the divisions are simply irreversible learner bodhisattva aryas. The way of dividing them into twent y is as follows: “Those who transfer to the upper, the  five, from 
proceeding to Akanistha  until proceeding finally to the Peak of Existence,” which are 
explicitly indicated by the texts of the Acarya  Arya [Vimuktisena], are counted as one of the 
twenty. Th us, by adding the four —the eighth, the two mere abiders in the two middle results 
and the approacher to foe -destroyer—to the sixteen explicitly mentioned by the text, twenty 
are explained. 
 According to Acarya  [Haribhadra]:  
• there are five related to stream -enterers: the four explicitly mentioned, supplemented by 
the mere abider in the result of stream -enterer;  
• there are three related to once -returners: the two explicitly mentioned, supplemented by 
the mere abider in the result of once -returner;  
• there are five related to non -returners: the explicitly mentioned approacher and four who 
attain nirvana;  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
117 • although those who proceed to Akanistha  were explicitly mentioned, having taken them 
as the bases of division, there are three who transfer to the upper who are differentiated 
from them; although a certain translator said that “there are two: one who destroys 
attachment of the form realm and proceeds to the Peak of Existence, and one who pacifies 
in that present life and actualizes with a body,” in the case of t his new translation, even 
though one who proceeds finally to the Peak of Existence  Akanisthaand one who destroys 
attachment of the form realm were explicitly mentioned, without counting them as 
divisions, they are subsumed into one meaning and taken as a b asis of division.  
 By differentiating one who pacifies in that present life and one who actualizes with a body 
into two, and supplementing it with an approacher to foe -destroyer, the text makes it up to 
twenty by way of the seventeen explicitly mentioned, supplemented by three. Without 
counting mere believers -by-faith and attainers -by-seeing in the enumeration, [the text] 
explicitly indicates those bearing the name of approachers to both middle results.  
 It seems that, some arrogant one, holding to the lat ter system (from between the two: the 
assertion that these are fully qualified stream -enterers and so forth, and the assertion that 
they are imputed), flung what is only a counterfeit repudiation, and laughed at the slightly wounded tradition of another wi thout sensing his own head splitting; I shall explain this 
slightly on the occasion of the meaning of the words.  
 A previous scholar said the following regarding the Acarya : If he had explained the 
modes of the Mahayana , then it would be incorrect to appl y them to one who is serial in the 
stages of abandoning the afflictions; if [he had explained] just the modes of hearers, then the 
presentation of proceeding to the Peak of Existence would be incorrect; the stages of 
abandonment of the afflictions would be  incorrect as reasons for making divisions of the 
Mahayana  sangha; and the names “stream -enterers” and so forth would be incorrect in 
meaning, because it is impossible for a bodhisattva of sharp faculty who is skilled in means 
to previously abandon only the afflictions of the desire realm, since he simultaneously 
abandons the small of the small objects of abandonment of the three realms. It would have been better if he  had not behaved like someone shooting an arrow without having seen what 
the target was. T here is plenty to be said about these; since those (with neither discernment 
nor diligent energy ) who desire to engage in th e stages of clear realization are asserted to 
have been cared for, I will not elaborate more. 
2B2C -1A2B -1B2B. Meaning of the branches  
2B2C -1A2B -1B2B -1. Making a connection  
2B2C -1A2B -1B2B -2. Root text  
2B2C -1A2B -1B2B -3. Commentary 
2B2C -1A2B -1B2B -1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
In the context of the Sangha Jewel, in order to realize easily, two interceding stanzas:   
EXPLANATION  
In the context of the Sangha Jewel, in order to realize easily  the divisions taught 
frequently in the sutras, two interceding stanzas :   
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
118 2B2C -1A2B -1B2B -2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
1.6 Dull and sharp faculties;  
The faithful and the attainers -by-seeing; from class to class;  
One obstacle; intermediate state and upon rebirth,  
Acting and not acting; pro ceeding to Akanistha , 
 
1.7 Three leapers; pro ceeding finally to the Peak of Existence, 
Destroying attachment of the form realm,  
Pacifying in that present life, ac tualizing with a body;  
And the rhinoceros are the twenty.  
 
EXPLANATION  
[Haribhadra’s] Eight Chapters90 states that the sum of the twenty explicitly mentioned by 
the text, the eighth, the first three abiders in the results, and the approacher to foe -destroy er 
is twenty -five. Further, in terms of the eighth , it is said [in sutra], “ Bhagavan, where did the 
bodhisattva abiding by way of the practice of the perfection of wisdom die and transfer from, and became reborn here? After dying and transferring from here , where will he be 
reborn?” Similarly, [passages] regarding the two followers [of faith and dharma] also appear 
in individual sutras. Fearing wordiness, I have not written them down.  
 The subject —the person abiding on the uninterrupted path of dharma forbe arance on the 
Mahayana  path of seeing —is divided into two types, because there are those of dull and 
sharp faculties ; similarly, there is one bearing the name “stream -enterer” who is supported 
implicitly. [Indicated] by “ the faithful and the attainers -by-seeing,” there are two bearing 
the name “approacher” by way of the two middle [results]. Indicated by “ from  class to 
class, ” there are two bearing the name “special abider in the result of stream -enterer” and 
one bearing the name “mere abider in the result of once -returner” implicitly indicated. 
Indicated by the name “special” is “ one obstacle .” And indicated by the name “non -
returner” are four bearing the names “attaining nirvana in the intermediate state, upon rebirth,
91 with compositional  action and with no compositional  action .” In regard to those 
who bear the name “ progressing to Akanistha ,” there are three leapers . Taking as the 
basis of division “ destroying attachment of the form realm”  that is imputed as 
“progressing finally to the Peak of Existence ,” there are the two —pacifying in that 
present life and actualizing with a body —and that bearing the name “ rhinoceros  solitary 
realizer.” Thus there are twenty . 
2B2C -1A2B -1B2B -3. Commentary 
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. (1 -2) In dependence on the sixt een instants of the path of seeing 
included within the knower of paths that will be explained, by way of particularities of followers of faith and dharma, there are two types of approachers to the first result. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —a bodhisattva who ab ides in dependence on the uninterrupted path of dharma 
forbearance, the entity of the eight forbearances  of the path of seeing , which is 
                                              
90 This refers to Haribhadra’s commentary on the Twenty -Five Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom  Sutra.  
91 Gnas  emended to read nas . 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
119 differentiated into the sixteen instants included within the knower of paths that will be 
explained in the second chapt er—is of two types, bearing the name “ approachers to the 
first result,” because bearers of that name , by way of particularities of followers of faith 
and dharma, are of  two types. 
 Some ignoramus asserted that in this context, these [two] are the approache r—abiding on 
the first fifteen instants —and the abider in the result —abiding on the sixteenth. This is an 
assertion of the Vaibhashikas and so forth; the assertion that a bodhisattva’s path of seeing is generated only in sixteen sequential instants is simp ly a case of talking nonsense, while 
not having realized even slightly the assertions of Arya [Vimuktisena] and Haribhadra regarding the mode of generating the path of seeing, because (i) acting to directly newly 
realize the dharmata of sufferings first an d then subsequently acting to directly newly 
realize the dharmata of origins transgresses the path of reasoning, and (ii) the Acarya  also 
specifically refutes it below.  
 Yet another ignoramus, while asserting to have demonstrated damage to these 
bodhisattv a sangha being stream -enterers and so forth, proved that bodhisattvas (who abide 
on the sixteenth instant) abide in the result of the mode of a trainee -in-virtue that is 
distinguished by having abandoned the objects to be abandoned by the path of seeing; he is disparaging himself, because he flings repudiation at the opponent, having himself asserted 
meanings of stream -enterer and so forth that are concordant with those of the opponent. 
 
COMMENTARY 
(3) After that are the stream -enterers. (4 -5) After that, b y way of birth from class to class of 
gods and humans, there are another two types. (6) After that, those of dull and sharp 
faculties, the faithful and the attainers -by-seeing are only one approacher to the second 
result. (7) After that are the once -return ers. (8) After that they are “another one obstacle.”  
 
EXPLANATION  
(3) After that are  the persons abiding on the liberated path of the Mahayana  path of seeing, 
the nature of the eight knowledges, the enterers into the stream, the path that acts to attain 
the nirvana in which the afflictive obscurations have been abandoned, since they are 
bodhisattvas who have exhaustively abandoned the three entwinements that are the objects 
to be abandoned by the path of seeing. Although afflicted doubt and the view holding bad 
ethics and modes of conduct as supreme are exhausted, the view of the transitory collection 
is not exhausted. Since even the innate view of the transitory collection is explained to be an 
entwinement, it should not be t aken that “the three entwinements are exhausted.” (4 -5) 
After that, there are another two types, by way of birth from class to class of desire 
realm gods and humans.  
 (6) After that, those bodhisattvas on the path of meditation who strive for the sake of 
attaining the liberated path in which the sixth affliction (that is an object to be abandoned by 
the path of meditation) has been abandoned —of dull and sharp faculties, the faithful and 
attainers -by-seeing —are only enumerated as one  of the twenty. This, fu rther, is the one 
bearing the name “ approacher to the second result.”  (7) After that, those abiding on the 
liberated path in which that [sixth affliction that is the object to be abandoned by the path of 
meditation] has been abandoned, are the once -returne rs to the desire realm . (8) After that 
they, bearing the name “once -returner” —since one remaining object to be abandoned by the 
path of meditation is left in order to attain the liberated path in which the afflictive 
obscurations have been abandoned —are “a nother one obstacle.”  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
120  
COMMENTARY 
(9) After that, as before, the faithful and attainers -by-seeing are approachers to the third 
result.  
 
EXPLANATION  
(9) After that, as before, bodhisattvas on the path of meditation  who strive for the sake of 
attaining the l iberated path in which the ninth affliction (that is an object to be abandoned by 
the path of meditation) of the desire realm  has been abandoned,  the faithful and the 
attainers -by-seeing are enumerated as one  of the twenty. They are one bearing the name 
“approachers to the third result.”  
 
COMMENTARY 
(10-13) After that, there are four types of non -returners called: completely attaining nirvana 
in the intermediate state, upon rebirth, with manifest compositional action, and without 
manifest compositional action.  
 
EXPLANATION  
(10-13) After that, there are  four types with respect to the presentation called  “non-
returners,”  because there are four types called: attaining nirvana in the intermediate 
state, in that they attain a liberated path in which any of the afflictive obscurations have 
been abandoned upon the support of the intermediate existence of the form realm ; attaining 
nirvana upon rebirth in the form realm ; completely attaining nirvana , in that they attain a 
liberated path in which any of the afflictive obscurations have been abandoned with 
manifest compositional action, and without manifest compositional action  of endeavor . 
 Someone propounds that, on these occasions of (i) having abandoned the entwinement of 
birth but not having abandoned the entwinemen t of establishment, and (ii) not having 
abandoned the entwinement of birth, even though the causes of being born into the 
intermediate existence and the birth existence of the form realm are retained, “bodhisattva 
aryas do not take rebirth through the forc e of karma and afflictions.” Know that this is 
simply contradiction.  
 Yet another person, having taken a bodhisattva (abiding on the liberated path in which 
the ninth affliction of the desire realm has been abandoned) as an imputed non -returner, 
asserts th at his abiding in the result of the mode of a trainee -in-virtue that is distinguished 
by having abandoned the five partial concordances with the bottom, is our system. This is an assertion that incurs all three circles
92 for the sake of disparaging himself.  Also, does 
“having abandoned the ninth affliction of the desire realm” refer to having abandoned 
merely the manifest afflictions or the seeds? In the first case, presenting those on the path of 
seeing (who have attained an actual concentration prior to th e Mahayana  path of seeing) as 
sangha bearing the name “non -returner” indicated here would not contain contradiction. If it 
were to refer to the seeds, then that would become an assertion outside of this system, since 
the Acarya  asserted that a bodhisattva arya who has not traversed the Hinayana  path 
exhaustively abandons the seeds of the ninth object to be abandoned by the path of 
meditation that are both [afflictive and knowledge] obscurations with the uninterrupted path 
of the end of the continuum  of a sentient being.  
                                              
92 This refers to a situation in debate where one can deny neither  the reason nor  the pervasion, and yet cannot  
accept the thesis.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
121  
COMMENTARY 
(14-16) After that, they proceed finally to Akanistha , three other types who transfer higher: 
by leaping, half- leaping, and death -transference in all abodes.   
 
EXPLANATION  
(14-16) After that, those very bodhisattva aryas, actua lizing a liberated path in which any 
of the afflictive obscurations has been abandoned upon the support of Akanistha , proceed 
finally to Akanistha ; there are three types other than the five held in the previous 
enumeration, because there are three who transfer higher: (1) by leaping —having taken 
rebirth in Brahma Type at first, discarding the others and taking rebirth in Akanistha  from 
there;  (2) half-leaping —from Brahma Type, having taken rebirth in any of the three lower 
levels of the pure places, taking rebirth in Akanistha  from there;  and (3) death -
transference in all abodes —from Brahma Type, having progressively passed through [the 
various levels] until Akanistha , attaining a liberated path in which any of the afflictive 
obscurations have been abandoned  upon the support of Akanistha . 
 Some ignoramus, adhering to merely what is overt in the sutras, asserted that if a 
bodhisattva arya who has attained the fourth concentration were to take rebirth in Brahma 
Type, he would degenerate from the three higher co ncentrations. This is extremely 
inappropriate, (i) because it is impossible for a bodhisattva arya to degenerate from a concentration, and (ii) because, since it has been explained that “the branches are 
thoroughly exhausted,” even though he has attained t he fourth concentration, due to having 
thoroughly exhausted the potency to take rebirth through the force of the karma of pure concentration, it will be impossible for him to be born in cyclic existence through the force 
of that.  
 Therefore, even those wh o take rebirth in the form realm do so through the force of 
compassion and prayers. Concurring the conventions with those of the hearer sangha that are overt in the sutras is: (i) for the sake of causing some who are not definite in the hearer 
lineage to e nter the Mahayana ; (ii) for the sake of stopping someone’s deprecation that “The 
Mahayana  sutra sets are not taught by the Buddha, since they do not have a presentation of 
the approachers and abiders;” and (iii) for the sake of leading hearers who have ari sen from 
the sphere of peace to the Mahayana , saying “With merely that nirvana, you have not fully 
completed what is to be attained; you must act to attain non -abiding nirvana.”  
 
COMMENTARY 
(17, 18) After that, those proceeding finally to the Peak of Existence, separating from 
attachment of the form realm are of two other types: those pacifying in that present life and 
those actualizing a body. (19) After that are the approachers to the result of foe -destroyer. 
(20) After that are the solitary realizers. These are the twenty.  
 
EXPLANATION  
(17, 18) After that, those  sixth -grounder bodhisattvas possessing afflictions of the Peak of 
Existence, those very bodhisattvas imputed with the name “ proceeding finally to the Peak 
of Existence ,” due to not seeking re birth in the formless realm, imputed to the one attribute 
of separating from attachment of the form realm  due to having abandoned any of the 
afflictions of the form realm, are of two types, other than the eight held in the enumeration 
of the twenty. 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
122  This is because there are two : those  pacifying in that present life  who have exhausted 
connecting to rebirth through the force of karma and afflictions, and those actualizing a 
body of meditative stabilization of the eight liberations . (19) After that are the t en-
grounders who strive for the sake of attaining a liberated path in which the afflictive 
obscurations have been exhaustively abandoned, called “ the approachers to the result of 
foe-destroyer,” enumerated as one. (20) After that are the bodhisattvas who b ear the name  
“solitary realizers.”  These are the twenty  in enumeration . 
2B2C -1A2B -2. Explaining the start of generating the wisdom arisen from meditation observing emptiness 
through meditating on the meaning of the instructions  
2B2C -1A2B -2A. Meaning of the  general ity 
2B2C -1A2B -2B. Meaning of the branches   
2B2C -1A2B -2A. Meaning of the g eneral ity 
2B2C -1A2B -2A1. Support  
2B2C -1A2B -2A2. Entity  
2B2C -1A2B -2A3. Analysis of the awareness and knower  
2B2C -1A2B -2A1. Support  
The body supports of men and women of three [human] continents as well as gods of the 
desire realm are the support of body [for generating a path of preparation]. Although not the 
support for actually generating the supreme mundane quality level, apparentl y some beings 
of the form realm also generate the heat and peak levels.  
2B2C -1A2B -2A2. Entity  
2B2C -1A2B -2A2A. Definition 
2B2C -1A2B -2A2B. Divisions  
2B2C -1A2B -2A2C. Mode of generation  
2B2C -1A2B -2A2D. Meaning of the individual divisions  
2B2C -1A2B -2A2A. Defin ition 
[The definition of a path of preparation  is:] a Mahayana  mundane path (subsequent to the 
completion of a partial concordance of liberation) that is concordant with  the clear 
realization of truth. It is not limited to solely being a wisdom arisen from  meditation, 
because there are many cases of wisdoms arisen from hearing or contemplation. 
2B2C -1A2B -2A2B. Divisions  
The divisions of occasions are the three: small, middle, and great. The divisions of entity are 
the four: heat, [peak, forbearance and supreme mundane quality].  
2B2C -1A2B -2A2C. Mode of generation  
On the occasion of the path of accumulation, although a fully qualified application in 
complete aspects that completely practices all the types of aspects of the three exalted 
knowers without excep tion exists, and a wisdom arisen from meditation that observes 
impermanence and suffering, as well as a wisdom arisen from meditation that has meditated on unattractiveness and so forth exist, there is no wisdom arisen from meditation that 
observes emptine ss because, when that [wisdom arisen from meditation that observes 
emptiness] is initially generated, one transfers to the path of preparation.  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
123 QUALM: What are the differences among the three types of wisdom observing emptiness?  
RESPONSE: At the time when a wisdom arisen from hearing or contemplation observes 
emptiness, which is a mere negation of elaborations of true existence, although a generality 
of the object dawns well, the object and the object -possessor appear as though un related due 
to being together with very coarse dualistic appearances. However, when a wisdom arisen from meditation observes it, although there are dualistic appearances, due to having 
overcome the coarse dualistic appearances as in the previous two cases, it appears as if one 
has penetrated the object. And since it seems to  approximat e the transform ation  in a manner 
of water placed in water, the dawning of the meaning generality of emptiness in such a 
manner is described as “dharmata appearing clearly.” Ne vertheless this is not a clear 
appearance that is free from conceptions.  Furthermore, through the force of analyzing well with reasoning the meaning of 
emptiness from within the state of meditative equipoise in calm abiding , from that juncture 
in which on e is able to induce the bliss of pliancy of the body and the mind, one attains the 
fully qualified special insight observing emptiness, and is said to have attained a union of 
those. In spite of that, you should know that the mere union of calm abiding and  special 
insight exists even in those who are on the path of accumulation, as well as in some non -
Buddhists. When one initially generates such a union of calm abiding and special insight 
realizing emptiness, one is said to have “generated the heat level of the path of preparation.” 
Even though one is able to ascertain the presence of dualistic appearances through the force 
of experience even while being in meditative equipoise at that time, since one is not able to 
ascertain it in such a manner at the time of attaining the forbearance level of the path of preparation, it has been explained in [Asanga’s] Hearers’ Grounds, “ Dualistic appearances 
seem to have vanished,  but it is not that  dualistic appearances have vanished.”  
2B2C -1A2B -2A2D. Meaning of the indiv idual divisions  
It is very difficult to differentiate among the four levels of path of preparation by means of (i) the apprehended -objects ’ absence  of nature being small, middling and great clear 
appearances, and (ii) their apprehender- subjects ’ absence  of nature being complete clear 
appearance, because one is placed in the meditative equipoise on their emptiness of true 
existence by simultaneously withdrawing all phenomena that are apprehended -objects and 
their apprehender- subjects during meditative equipo ise, and there is no difference with 
respect to their meaning -generalities of dharmata dawning clearly.  
 Therefore, the ability to abandon the conception of true existence of apprehended -objects 
becomes more and more outstanding on the occasions of the fir st two levels of the path of 
preparation. Hence, at the time of having generated the forbearance level of the path of preparation, due to having weakened the coarse potency of even the manifest innate 
conception of true existence of apprehended -objects, wh en arising from meditative 
equipoise , the generality of appearances of phenomena that are apprehended -objects, such 
as forms, dawns well, like a reflection in a mirror. And at the time of having generated the 
supreme mundane quality level, apprehender- subjects also appear in that manner through 
the strength of meditation. The stages unfold in this way through the force of the degree of difficulty and ease of abandoning the adherence to the apprehended -objects and 
apprehender -subjects as truly existent. 
 It is like it has been posited (from the side of what has been abandoned) in the Ornament 
for the Great Vehicle Sutras ( Mahayanasutralamkara): “At that time, the distractions to 
apprehended- objects will be abandoned,” and “In this way, at the end of that, the 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
124 distractions to apprehender- subjects will be abandoned.” The claim that “Differentiation is 
made on the basis of whether or not clear ap pearance of exalted wisdom is present” is one 
that is clearly deprived of anything to say.  
2B2C -1A2B -2A3. Analysis of the awareness and knower  
With respect to such a path of preparation, it is inappropriate to assert that, at the time of 
meditative equipoi se, it is free from conception that apprehends a sound -generality and a 
meaning -generality with respect to dharmata as being suitable to be mixed, because (i) 
dharmata is a hidden phenomenon for ordinary beings and (ii) such a non -conceptual mind 
cannot po ssibly comprehend a hidden phenomenon. If it were mistaken with respect to 
dharmata, then it would also be incorrect for it to eliminate manifest superimpositions, 
because it would be a non -conceptual wrong consciousness. And if it were not mistaken, 
then it follows that even the seeds that are the objects to be abandoned by the path of seeing 
would have been abandoned, because it would be non -conceptual and unmistaken with 
respect to dharmata. Therefore, such a meditative equipoise on the path of preparati on, 
having transformed into a wisdom arisen from meditation through the strength of having 
familiarized the continuum with a subsequent cognizer realizing emptiness, is of the entity 
analyzing the clearly appearing meaning -generality of emptiness. Some ign oramus asserted 
that the classifications of the three wisdoms are inferential cognizers based upon the sign of 
freedom from one and many.  
2B2C -1A2B -2B. Meaning of the branches  
2B2C -1A2B -2B1. Brief indication  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2. Extensive explanation  
2B2C -1A2B-2B1. Brief indication  
2B2C -1A2B -2B1A. Making a connection  
2B2C -1A2B -2B1B. Root text  
2B2C -1A2B -2B1C. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2B -2B1A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
Beginners, having obtained the instructions in that manner, since the branches of definite 
discrimination will arise, the branches of definite discrimination.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Beginners , those abiding on the path of accumulation, meditate on the meaning of the 
instructions by having obtained the instructions in that manner ; since the branches of 
defini te discrimination will arise, the branches of definite discrimination —the path that 
accords with the generation of the path of seeing after it —will be explained.  
2B2C -1A2B -2B1B. Root text  
1.8 By way of object of observation, aspect, 
Cause, and tutor,  
The heat level and so forth of bodhisattva protectors –  
In accordance with their nature  
 
1.9 Relying on possessing four conceptions,  
The small, middling and great — 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
125 Are superior 
To that of the hearers along with the rhinoceros -like. 
 
EXPLANATION  
Overtly, the middle four lines [1.8 cd—1.9ab] indicate the meaning of the bases for the 
attributes, the first two lines [1.8 ab] the attributes, and the last two [1.9 cd] those to whom 
they are superior. In addition, the distinction of being [ great,]  middling, and small is 
indicated by implication as an attribute in this commentary. This is also clearly taught in 
Acarya  Arya [Vimuktisena]’s commentary.  
 Thus, the subject —the heat level and so forth of bodhisattva protectors —are 
superior to  the paths of preparation of the hearers along with the rhinoceros -like because 
of being superior by way of object of observation, aspect, cause, and tutor,  and by way 
of being supported on possessing four conceptions in accordance with their nature and 
the small, middling, and great. The reason for the small , middling , [and great]  serving as 
an attribute is that enhancing and familiarizing more and more with the full complete corpus 
of the Mahayana  path is an unsurpassable attribute. According to what is overt in the 
commentary, the sixth  line [1.9 b] refers to the bases for the attributes. The remaining 
meanings of these will be explained below.  
2B2C -1A2B -2B1C. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2B -2B1C -1. Proving as superior to the Hinayana  path of preparation  
2B2C -1A2B -2B1C -2. The twelve modes of observation summarized into four  
2B2C -1A2B -2B1C -1. Proving as superior to the Hinayana  path of preparation  
2B2C -1A2B -2B1C -1A. How it is superior  
2B2C -1A2B -2B1C -1B. The reason for that  
2B2C -1A2B -2B1C -1A. How it is superior  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. To a ttain the culmination of the best hearing and so forth of 
bodhisattvas, the partial concordance with liberation; after the roots of virtue with the 
characteristics of faith and so forth, concordant with realizing the four truths, the four partial 
concordances with definite discrimination…  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the four partial concordances with definite discrimination  of 
bodhisattvas —are superior to the heat level and so forth of the hearers because of being 
superior to those by way of six or five attrib utes. The explanation of the bases for the 
attributes themselves are as follows. They possess superior cause because, due to being 
induced by the very force of the roots of virtue with the characteristics of faith and so 
forth that are skilled in the objec ts, faith and so forth, by attaining the partial concordance 
with liberation, the culmination of the best hearing, contemplation, and so forth with respect to the Mahayana  paths along with their results and the completi on of all the 
Mahayana  qualities, wit hout exception, in the objects of faith, they will arise after  that. 
They are together with special result because they are causes concordant with generating 
the path of seeing directly realizing the four truths . 
 
They possess their own special entity… [se ntence continues in Explanation below]  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
126  
COMMENTARY 
…arisen from mundane meditation, the root of virtue called “transformed into heat;” after 
that, “transformed into peak;” after that, “transformed into forbearance;” and after that, 
“supreme quality” —due to progressively generating “small” and so forth, or due to  the 
particularities of persons of dull faculties and so forth related  to bodhisattvas, the small, 
middling and great. 
 
EXPLANATION  
[continuing from Explanation above] …because they are paths o f the occasion where that 
arisen from mundane meditation  observing emptiness has become principal. With respect 
to that, the divisions of the entity are the four:  the root of virtue called “transformed into 
heat” observing emptiness ; after that, that stron gly transformed from that [heat] itself, 
“transformed into peak;” after that, due to initially attaining the forbearance that is 
unafraid of emptiness, “transformed into forbearance;” and after that, “supreme  
mundane quality.” And the divisions of the occasions (due to progressively generating 
“small” and so forth, generating the three —beginning, middle, and end —in a single 
continuum, or due to the particularities of persons of dull faculties and so forth related 
to bodhisattvas  of different continua)—t he small, middling, and great—are superior. 
Alternatively, they are correlated with the attributes and explained.   
 
COMMENTARY 
The very entity of the attribute of observation to be explained is the observation of the 
properties of the four truths; due to being the very antidote to viewing phenomena, engaging 
the aspects of absence  of adherence and so forth; the entities that are the causes of realizing 
the three vehicles together; through the very characteristics of skill in means of the spiritual 
guide, possessing the tutor; the four types of conceptualization of apprehendeds and apprehenders, which are the objects to be abandoned by the paths of seeing and 
meditation —arising in relation to the manner that will be explained.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Why are they supe rior? The very entity of the attribute of observation to be explained  
below  is the observation of the properties of the four truths  distinguished by the sixteen 
attributes, impermanence and so forth, because they are held as the bases for eliminating 
super impositions; that meditative equipoise of the path of preparation engages the aspects 
of absence of adherence  as truly existent  and so forth, due to  being the very direct 
antidote to viewing phenomena,  in which apprehended- objects and apprehender- subjects 
are adhered to as truly existent ; the causes of the special results are superior due to being 
powerful potency, because they are  the special entities that are the causes of the path of 
seeing that directly realizes the three vehicles together ; a bodhisattv a on the path of 
preparation possesses  the special tutor , because of being directly taken care of by the 
supreme emanation body , the special spiritual guide  through  the very characteristics of 
skill in the means of revealing  the complete Mahayana  path; they are  distinguished by the 
four types of conceptualization of apprehendeds and apprehenders, which are the 
objects to be abandoned by the paths of seeing and meditation  included within the peak, 
because the four are distinguished by  arising  in taking th orough affliction  in relation to the 
manner which will be explained  below. The Great Commentary  says: 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
127  
Thus these partial concordances with definite emergence  should be expressed 
based upon the thoroughly afflicted, exactly in respective order, by way of t he 
four types of conceptualization of apprehendeds and apprehenders, which are 
objects to be abandoned by the paths of seeing and meditation included within 
the clear realization of peak, which will be explained below.  
 Therefore, since the conceptions ind icated in this context are taught to be abandoned by the 
peak application, which will be explained below, the explanation that the paths of those occasions exist only on the occasions of the pure grounds is well refuted. Also, regarding 
the mode of possess ing conceptualization, since it has been taught that they possess in 
taking thorough affliction, the assertion that they possess the entity of meditative equipoise 
has transgressed the paths of reasoning. Does “the heat level and so forth possessing the 
four conceptions in respective order” mean that they possess seeds, or that they possess the 
manifest [conceptions] in respective order? It mean s abandonment in that order? The first is 
incorrect because the seeds of all four conceptions are possessed at the  time of the heat level 
of the path of preparation. In the case of the second, are [the heat level and so forth, and the 
manifest conceptions] simultaneous or not? If they are simultaneous, are they one [entity] or 
different entities? That they are one ent ity is incorrect, because the two —(1) the conception 
of apprehendeds and apprehenders as truly existent and (2) the realization of emptiness of 
true existence —have directly contradictory modes of apprehension in observing a single 
observed object. Simultan eous different entities is also inappropriate, because it is incorrect 
for two manifest conceptions of different entities to be produced together in one continuum. 
For it would follow that there are many continua [with respect to] a single person. Even if 
they are not simultaneous, [it is also inappropriate], because there is no reason for the four 
levels of the path of preparation to individually possess four conceptions. Further, it is inappropriate to make differentiations by way of whether or not the fo ur phenomena of 
apprehendeds and apprehenders are realized as being devoid of  true existence, because all 
phenomena are realized as being empty of true existence, even at the time of the heat level 
of the path of preparation.  
 OPINION: If one were to realize the emptiness of true existence of only apprehendeds, one 
would be observing a trifling [form of] emptiness. 
RESPONSE: That is a great fault, because whether or not one realizes pervasive emptiness 
is posited to whether or not one completely severs the  coarse and subtle elaborations of true 
existence; it is not posited by way of the extensiveness or narrowness of the property -
possessors. Otherwise, a bodhisattva on the path of seeing would not directly realize 
pervasive emptiness, because he has not directly realized all property -possessors. 
Furthermore, it is incorrect to differentiate the conceptions of apprehended -objects and 
apprehender -subjects by means of the object of observation, because “conceiving 
apprehended- objects” and “conceiving apprehende r-subjects” explain the modes of 
apprehension of the aspects; they do not explain the observed objects of the conceptions. 
 
OPINION: It is also incorrect that the four levels of the path of preparation abandon the four 
conceptions sequentially, because whe n the heat level of the path of preparation realizes that 
all phenomena that are apprehended -objects and apprehender- subjects are empty of true 
existence, it is incorrect that the superimpositions that are the conceptions of apprehended -
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
128 objects as truly ex istent are severed, but the conceptions of true existence of apprehender-
subjects are not severed.  
RESPONSE: With respect to this, someone’s assertion that the path of preparation and the 
manifest conceptions of this are one entity is inappropriate, becaus e one would need to 
assert that that there is a common locus between the two, direct benefit and harm to  the peak 
application of the path of seeing by the supreme mundane quality level of the path of 
preparation that realizes that apprehended -objects and a pprehender -subjects are devoid of  
true existence . And that [supreme mundane quality level] and the two adherences to 
apprehended- objects and apprehender- subjects as truly existent would not be the object 
directly harmed and the harmer that are based upon c ontradictories which do not abide 
together. In that case, if even the supreme mundane quality level of the path of preparation 
itself would need to  be specifically abandoned , then “Bodhisattvas must accomplish it with 
effort for many eons through being ornamented by infinite collections , but t hey should 
abandon it through effort” are senseless words.  
 OPINION: In the way  a swan separates milk that has been mixed in water, although they are 
one entity, they are to be differentiated into individuals. RESPONSE: Understand that no matter how great the potency of the cause that generates as 
a single entity may be, the cause for generating (i) a valid cognizer realizing sound is 
impermanent and (ii) the manifest superimposition that apprehends sound as permane nt as a 
single entity does not even exist slightly.  
 Hence, as in the meaning of the partial concordance with definite discrimination 
possessing the conceptualizations cited above, since that has been taught to be possession in 
taking thorough affliction, it is to possess [those conceptualizations] as objects of 
abandonment. If it were to refer to possessing seeds, then since all possesses all, the meaning of possessing sequentially would not be possible.  
 Regarding the meaning of “ possession in taking tho rough affliction,”  hearers seeking 
mere pacification act to abandon afflictive obscurations specifically
; since otherwise they 
would not attain the result that is desired, they make effort for the purpose of that. Likewise, bodhisattvas take the conceptual izations that apprehend apprehended -objects and 
apprehender -subjects as truly existent to be the main objects to be abandoned specifically
; 
since otherwise they would not attain omniscience, the desired result, they make effort for the sake of that. This i s the meaning of possession in taking thorough affliction, because it is 
said, “The afflictions of the bodhisattvas are the conceptualizations.”  
 For otherwise, it would be incorrect for their conceptualizations to be afflictions, and 
another meaning of ta king [those] as afflictions would also be incorrect. By way of the 
essential point of the degree of difficulty and ease of abandoning the four 
conceptualizations, on the occasion of the heat level, in merely weakening the conceptions 
of apprehended- objects  as truly existent in regard to the objects of abandonment, with 
respect to the antidotal class there is no degeneration of the conceptions of apprehended -
objects as truly existent. Thus, although there is no difference in all phenomena being 
realized as e mpty of true existence, due to the differences in the force of the length of time 
of familiarization and the increase of excellent qualities, since the four manifest 
conceptualizations will progressively become weaker on those four occasions, that is the 
meaning of possession by that manner of the manifest [conceptualizations] being the objects 
of abandonment. 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
129 2B2C -1A2B -2B1C -1B. The reason for that  
COMMENTARY  
They are superior to the heat levels and so forth of the hearers and so forth. Because it 
occurs in the tradition that the roots of virtue of “transformed into heat” and so forth of 
those: observes the four truths, the nature of the properties of the definitions “that suitable as form” and so forth; by way of just the antidotes to viewing self, engagi ng in the aspects of 
impermanence and so forth; for the purpose of realizing only their own vehicle; are separated from a tutor; and arise not possessing the four types of conceptualization.  
 
EXPLANATION  
That very Mahayana  path of preparation is  superior t o the Hinayana  path of preparation 
because  it occurs in the tradition  of the great trail -blazers who made the presentation of 
the hearers’ vehicle that  the roots of virtue of “transformed into heat” and so forth of 
those hearers and solitary realizers : obs erve the four truths, the nature of the properties 
of the definitions of purified suffering and origins, included [respectively] within “that 
suitable as form” and so forth  contained in the contaminated  and within actions and 
afflictions, and purified cess ations and paths; by way of  just acting as the mere antidotes 
to viewing a self of persons , engaging in the aspects of impermanence and so forth; and 
does not teach realizing selflessness with that very mind realizing impermanence; for the 
purpose of the c ause that is realizing only the  hearers’ own vehicle ; are separated from a 
tutor  by means of completely teaching method and wisdom; and arise not possessing the 
four types of conceptualization  of apprehended- objects and apprehender- subjects and the 
antidot es to the objects of abandonment. 
 QUALM: What are the purified cessations and paths in which the aspects of the attributes have been abandoned like?  
RESPONSE: When one initially comprehends the objects to be known and objects to be 
abandoned, the purified  bases of characterization of sufferings and origins, one will 
subsequently be able to comprehend the existence of merely true cessations (in which 
sufferings and origins are ceased) and true paths, which act to attain that. After that, one will 
comprehend  that one will be able to actualize the cessations in which sufferings are ceased 
and, in order to do that, true paths are to be relied on for a long time in the continuum, so having taken cessations and paths which have been previously realized as the bas es for the 
attributes, one meditates by way of making distinctions of the eight attributes.  
2B2C -1A2B -2B1C -2. The twelve modes of observation summarized into four  
2B2C -1A2B -2B1C -2A. Actual  
2B2C -1A2B -2B1C -2B. Observing by means of other aspects  
2B2C -1A2B -2B1C -2C. The reason for not actually showing that here  
2B2C -1A2B -2B1C -2D. Dispelling objection 
2B2C -1A2B -2B1C -2A. Actual  
COMMENTARY  
The bodhisattvas’ partial concordances with definite discrimination, through the strength of 
skillful means, obse rve the properties of the four truths, however possible: (1) by means of 
cause on some, (2) by means of result on some, (3) by means of the very entity on some, and (4) by means of the aspect of dharmata on some. 
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
130 EXPLANATION  
The subject —the bodhisattvas’ partial concordances with definite discrimination —
observe the properties of the four truths, however  possible  the modes of apprehension 
that are  their aspects are, because of observing the four truths through the strength of 
skillful means  in practicing th e complete path: (1) by means of cause on some  occasions 
of middling forbearance, (2) by means of result on some  occasions of small supreme 
mundane quality, (3) by means of the very entity  of the two truths on some occasions of 
small forbearance, and (4) by means of the aspect of dharmata on some  occasions that 
are the nine others. It is said that “For they observe by means of the aspect of dharmata 
during meditative equipoise, and by means of entity, cause, and result during subsequent 
attainment.”  This i s because the individual occasions are posited from the point of view  of 
the mentality of proximate  trainees; otherwi se, all would observe all.  
2B2C -1A2B -2B1C -2B. Observing by means of other aspects  
COMMENTARY 
Know that, like the former, they also always o bserve the four truths by way of other aspects.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Know that, like the former  path of preparation of the hearers , they also always observe 
the four truths by way of other aspects , impermanence and so forth . This is because they 
must train well in  the mentality of the beings of middling capacity for the sake of destroying 
the glory of afflictions, generating disillusionment regarding  cyclic existence, and taking 
care of Hinayana  lineage -bearers on that occasion.  
2B2C -1A2B -2B1C -2C. The reason for no t actually showing that here 
COMMENTARY  
Since I wished to briefly summarize and express merely in comment, I have not elaborated.  
EXPLANATION  
I have not  actually elaborated on the modes of observation here, s ince I wished to briefly 
summarize and express the meaning of the words of the root text merely in comment.  
2B2C -1A2B -2B1C -2D. Dispelling objection 
COMMENTARY 
Why? This is solely a dissimilar presentation; because of that, repudiations based on the 
other v ehicles should not be expressed at any time.  
 
EXPLANATION  
OPINION: If one were to observe the four truths by way of infinite aspects, this would contradict [Vasubandhu’s] Treasury of Manifest Knowledge ( Abhidharmakosa) [7.12c], 
which says “The stainless do  not have aspects other than the sixteen.”  
RESPONSE: Repudiations based on the other vehicles  that do not meditate on that other 
than the sixteen aspects of the four truths should not be expressed , not just on this 
occasion, but also  at any time , before or later. Why? Because this  practice of the complete 
aspects of the four truths  is solely a presentation  (dissimilar  from the former) that takes 
the Mahayana  scriptural baskets as valid with respect to Mahayana  lineage -bearers.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
131 2B2C -1A2B -2B2. Extensive exp lanation  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A. Explaining the three former types of attributes  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B. Attributes of the conceptions  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2C. Explaining the tutor  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A. Explaining the three former types of attributes  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -1. Making a connecti on for the general ity 
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2. Explaining the individual meanings  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -3. Dispelling objections about the mode of expression  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -1. Making a connection  for the general ity 
COMMENTARY 
QUALM: What  are the attributes of the object s of observation and aspects like?  
RESPONSE: Because of that, the objects of observation and aspects are explained by seven 
interceding stanzas.  
 
EXPLANATION  
QUALM: What  are the attributes of the objects of observation and aspects like?  
RESPONSE: Because of that, the objects of observation and aspects are explained by seven interceding stanzas. 
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2. Explaining the individual meanings  
The first of four:  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2A. Attributes of the objects of observation, aspects, and causes with respect to` the heat 
level  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2A1. Root text  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2A2. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2A1. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
1.10 The objects of observation are impermanence and so forth,  
Bearing the support of the truths.   
The aspect is stopping adherence of those and so forth.  
It is the cause of attaining the three vehicles together.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the sixteen bearing the support of the truths , impermanence and so forth —
are the objects of observation of the small heat level of the Mahayana  path o f preparation 
because they are the bases for eliminating the superimpositions of it . Apply [the sign] 
similarly to all the remaining objects of observation.  
 The subject—the exalted wisdom of the small heat level which stops adherence, 
exaggerated abidanc e, and so forth with respect to the sixteen attributes of those four truths  
as truly existent —is the aspect of the small heat level because it is an exalted wisdom of the 
small heat level that stops the superimpositions in the wrong class with respect to 
phenomena that are its objects of observation. Also apply this similarly to the remaining 
objec ts of observation.  
 Sutra says, “ Sariputra , when a great bodhisattva practices the perfection of wisdom, 
adherence, exaggerated abidance, and knowing all, with respect to the ‘impermanence, 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
132 suffering, emptiness, and selflessness of forms,’ are cravings th at are discordant with the 
qualities of great bodhisattvas, faults.”  
 The subject —that [exalted wisdom of the small heat level] —acts as the cause of a special 
result because it is the cause of the Mahayana  path of seeing that will attain the three 
vehicles  together . Apply this also to those below. Sutra says “Also those who wish to train 
in the grounds of hearers should listen to this very perfection of wisdom.”   
 
ROOT TEXT  
1.11ab Freedom from assembly and arrang ement  of forms and so forth, abidance 
and 
Abidance, imputation, and the absence  of expression, 
 
EXPLANATION  
The four truths distinguished by freedom from  truly existent assembly and arrang ement 
of forms and so forth are the objects of observation of the middling heat level, and the 
exalted wisdom re alizing (i) freedom from  abidance  of the continuity of name and (ii) the 
absence  of ultimate abidance  is the aspect. Forms and so forth distinguished by imputation 
of terminology are the objects of observation of the great heat level, and the exalted wisdo m 
realizing the absence  of expression  ultimately is the aspect. 
 Respectively, sutra says “Bhagavan, I do not confuse, do not observe, and do not 
perfectly subsequently see the assembly and arrangement  of forms and so forth;” “That 
name neither abides nor does not abide;” “Bhagavan, it is like that: the ‘bodhisattva’ is imputation of terminology to a phenomenon; whatever is the imputation of phenomena is 
also this;” and “ The aggregates and so forth  until the unmixed qualities of a buddha are not 
expressed by anything.”  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2A2. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2A2A. Explanation  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2A2B. Summary   
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2A2A. Explanation  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. With respect to tha t, the objects of observation of the small are the 
sixteen aspects, impermanence and so forth, based upon the four truths, sufferings and so forth. Its aspect is the stopping of adherence to, observation of, and so forth with respect to 
the truths, sufferi ngs and so forth.  
 
EXPLANATION  
With respect to that, the objects of observation of the small are the sixteen aspects, impermanence and so forth, based upon the four truths, sufferings and so forth.  
Regarding the aspect of that small  heat level, the exalted  wisdom of the small heat level  
stopping (i) adherence as truly existent initially, (ii) exaggerated observation  as truly 
existent, and (iii) knowing all by holding to erroneous reasons, with respect to the truths, 
sufferings and so forth, is its aspect. It respectively stops adherence to the three —bases, 
paths, and results.  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
133 COMMENTARY 
All, heat and so forth, should also be comprehended as being the entity of the cause which 
will attain the realizations of the three vehicles together.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The sub ject— all the  four levels of the Mahayana  path of preparation, heat and so forth —
should be comprehended as being the entity of the cause  of the path of seeing which will 
attain the realizations of the three vehicles together , because they are the excellen t 
method s that are concordant with  that [path of seeing].  
 
COMMENTARY 
The objects of observation of the middling are forms and so forth, affirmative and negative 
phenomena, respectively “not observed” and “not seen ” by the attention to the imagined  and 
to suchness.   
 
EXPLANATION  
Forms and so forth,  affirmative and negative phenomena, respectively “not observ ed,” 
by the attention to the imagined, and “not see n” by the attention to suchness, as 
existing ultimately are the objects of observation of the middling  heat level. 
 
COMMENTARY 
Regarding the aspect, due to the very absence of existence of all names, “the non -existence 
of characteristics engaging in dissimilar continuities and similar continuities.”  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject—the exalted wisdom of middling level realizing the non -existence of 
characteristics engaging in dissimilar continuity  of names and similar continuity  of 
types due to the very absence  of existence of all names ultimately —is the aspect. The 
reaso n is as in the root [explanation for the small level, i.e. because it is an exalted wisdom 
of the middling heat level that stops the superimpositions in the wrong class with respect to phenomena that are its objects of observation]. 
 
COMMENTARY 
The objects  of observation of the great are all phenomena, “from form until  buddha,” 
conventional phenomena that are imputed with terminology.  
 
EXPLANATION  
All phenomena, “from form until  buddha,” phenomena that are imputed with 
terminology  distinguished by mere con ventions  of names, are the objects of observation 
of the great [heat].  
 
COMMENTARY 
Regarding the aspect, “phenomena that are virtue and so forth themselves are devoid of  
expression in any way.”  
 
EXPLANATION  
The exalted wisdom of the great heat level real izing that phenomena that are virtue and 
so forth themselves are devoid of  expression ultimately in any way is the aspect, 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
134 [because it is an exalted wisdom of the great heat level that stops the superimpositions in the 
wrong class with respect to phenomena  that are its objects of observation ]. 
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2A2B. Summary  
COMMENTARY 
In that way, because of being an omen of the fire of non -conceptualizing exalted wisdom, 
transformed to heat, possessing objects of observation and aspects, is of three types.   
 
EXPLANATION  
In that way explained , because of being an omen of the fire of non -conceptualizing 
exalted wisdom , having  attain ed a special ability to burn up the discordant classes, since it 
is the start of the wisdom arisen from meditation that observes emptiness, [it is called] 
“transformed to heat.” Possessing objects of observation and aspects, [it] is of three 
types . 
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2B. Peak  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2B1. Root text  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2B2. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2B1. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
1.11cd  Those forms and so forth which do not abide,  
Their entity being devoid of  nature. 
 1.12a  They are the nature of one another. 
 
EXPLANATION  
From between the two, the truths not having been presented and having been presented by Acarya  Arya [Vimuktisena] with respect to the objects of observation and aspect of the 
small peak level, the first is as follows: those forms and so forth that do not abide  
ultimately, distinguished by their entity being devoid of  nature  ultimately, are the obje cts 
of observation, and the exalted wisdom realizing that they —forms and so forth and their 
dharmata —are the nature of one another  is the aspect. 
 Respectively, sutra says, “When a great bodhisattva practices the perfection of wisdom, 
he does not abide on forms,” and “That which is the emptiness of form is not form; form is 
also not other than emptiness.”   
 
ROOT TEXT  
1.12bcd  They do not abide as impermanent and so forth;  
Those are empty of those entities.  
They are the nature of one another. 
 
EXPLANATION  
In terms of the second [the truths having been presented by Acarya  Arya Vimuktisena], 
those  forms and so forth  distinguished by  not abiding as impermanent and so forth  
ultimately, due to their  being  empty of those entities  are the objects of observation, and the 
exalted wisdom realizing that they —impermanence and so forth and their dharmata —are 
the nature of one another  is the aspect. 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
135  Respectively, sutra says, “Bhagavan, furthermore, when a great bodhisattva practices the 
perfection of wisdom, he does not abide taking ‘forms are impermanent,’ … he should not 
abide taking ‘forms are pacified,’” and “Bhagavan, with respect to whatever emptiness of 
impermanence, that is not impermanent; there is no emptiness separate  from 
impe rmanence.”  
 
ROOT TEXT  
1.13ab Whatever not apprehend ing phenomena ,  
Because they are not seen as signs, 
 
EXPLANATION  
Whatever not apprehend ing phenomena as signs are the objects of observation, and the 
exalted wisdom realizing that they are not seen as sign s of true existence is the aspect of 
the middling [peak].  Respectively, sutra says, “Bhagavan, the exalted knower of all aspects is not apprehended 
as signs,” and “It does not fully apprehend phenomena which are empty of their 
characteristics .  In this wa y, with respect to that knower, inner attainments and clear 
realizations are not perfectly, subsequently seen by it.”  
 
ROOT TEXT  
1.13cd Being f ully investigat ed by wisdom,  
All are not observed.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The four truths, distinguished by being fully investigated  and having been investigated by 
the wisdom  analyzing the ultimate are the objects of observation, and the exalted wisdom of 
the great peak level which realizes that all  the three circles  are not observed to be truly 
existent, is its aspect.  
 Respectively, sutra says, “When a great bodhisattva practices the perfection of wisdom, 
he will fully investigate in this manner, ‘Whatever is the perfection of wisdom —of what is 
it? What is it? Why is it called “perfection of wisdom?”’” and “Venerable Sariputra , 
because of inner emptiness and so forth, there is no form and it is not observed.”  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2B2. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2B2A. Explanation  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2B2B. Summary  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2B2A. Explanation  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. R egarding the object of observation of the small level, since forms 
and so forth are the entitiness  of being free from their own entitinesses , due to emptiness of 
their own entities, “not abiding in forms and so forth.” Regarding the aspect, since all 
phenomena such as forms and emptinesses are mutually one entity ultimately, due to 
impermanence and so forth not existing in emptiness, “not abiding in those forms and so forth as permanent, impermanent, and so forth.”  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
136 EXPLANATION  
Not abiding in forms and so forth  ultimately is called “ the object of observation of the 
small peak level .” They are distinguished by being empty of their own entity  ultimately , 
since forms and so forth are the entitiness  of being free from their own entitiness es 
ultimately. The exal ted wisdom of the small peak level realizing not abiding ultimately in 
those forms and so forth as permanent, impermanent, and so forth is its aspect. 
 Impermanence and so forth  are pervaded by not existing in emptiness  ultimately, 
since all phenomena such  as forms and their emptinesses are mutually the same entity 
ultimately .  
 
COMMENTARY 
Regarding the objects of observation of the middling level, since, due to the entitiness  of 
dharmdhatu, impermanence and so forth and emptinesses do not have their own entitinesses , 
“impermanence and so forth and emptinesses are mutually one nature.” Regarding the 
aspect, that which is “not taking forms and so forth as one’s own” by negating the 
entitinesses  is that.  
EXPLANATION  
Those distinguished by impermanence and so forth and emptinesses being mutually one 
nature are the objects of observation of the middling [peak] level.  
 The subject —impermanence and so forth and their emptinesses —are pervaded by not 
having their own entitinesses  ultimately, due to the very entity of dharmdhatu, 
emptiness of true existence. That which is  the exalted wisdom of the middling [peak] level 
realizing not taking forms and so forth as one’s own ultimately by negating the truly 
existent entities  themselves, is the aspect.  
 
COMMENTARY  
Regard ing the objects of observation of the great level, due to the very absence  of 
entitinesses , “those forms and so forth not seen as signs that are blue and so forth.” 
Regarding the aspect, since wisdom thoroughly differentiates phenomena perfectly, 
“definite ly realizing all things as not observed.”  
 
EXPLANATION  
Due to the very absence of entitinesses  ultimately, those forms and so forth not seen  as 
ultimately established signs that are blue and so forth are the objects of observation of 
the great [peak] level . The exalted wisdom definitely realizing all things  by way of not 
observing the three circles to be truly existent is the aspect. The objects to be investigated 
do not exist truly, since  the wisdom  analyzing the ultimate thoroughly differentiates  
[them] perfectly  in that manner. 
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2B2B. Summary  
COMMENTARY 
Thus, transformed to the peak of fluctuating roots of virtue, possessing objects of 
observation and aspects, is of three types. 
 
EXPLANATION  
Thus,  since it is possible for roots of virtue to be severed by wrong views on the heat level 
and below, the roots of virtue are fluctuating; but since that is not possible upon attaining this [peak level], strongly transformed from that [heat] is the peak of fluctuation, thereby [it 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
137 is called]  “transform ed to the peak of fluctuating roots of virtue.” Possessing objects of 
observation and aspects, [it] is of three types.  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2C. Forbearance  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2C1. Root text  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2C2. Commentary   
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2C1. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
1.14ab Forms and so forth are devoid of entitinesses ; 
Their absence  of existence is the very entity.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Forms and so forth being devoid of  entitinesses  ultimately is the object of observation, 
and the realization that  their absence  of existence  ultimately is the very entity  of 
conventionalities is the aspect of the small [forbearance] level. 
 
ROOT TEXT  
1.14cd Those are devoid of  birth  and are devoid of definite emergence,  
Purity,…  
 
EXPLANATION  
Those  forms and so forth distinguished by being devoid of  birth  and being devoid of  
definite emergence  are the objects of observation and, by observing the four truths in that 
manner, realizing the purity  of the body and so forth through cultiva tion is the aspect of the 
middling [forbearance] level. 
 
ROOT TEXT  
1.14d …Those are devoid of signs, 
 1.15ab Due to not being based upon their signs,  
Does not imagine and absence  of discrimination.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Those [ forms and so forth ] distinguished by being being devoid of signs  are the objects of 
observation, and the exalted wisdom of the great forbearance level that, due to not being 
based upon their  signs  ultimately, does not imagine  and realizes the  absence  of 
discrimination with the two attentions  is its aspect. 
 Respectively, sutra says, “ Sariputra , ‘form is free from the nature of form’ until the 
unmixed [qualities of a buddha]; Sariputra , characteristic is also free from the very entity of 
characteristic. Entity is also free from the characteristic of entity;” “ Sariputra , ‘form is 
empty of the nat ure of form, one does not observe production or definite emergence with 
respect to it;’ it is close to omniscience; as much as one becomes close to omniscience, that 
much one does not generate the mind possessing attachment to that body, speech, mind, and 
name,” “When a great bodhisattva practices the perfection of wisdom, if he utilizes form 
due to not being skilled in means, he utilizes signs” and “When a great bodhisattva practices 
the perfection of wisdom, there is no abiding in forms, no exaggerated im agination, and no 
knowing -all.” 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
138 2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2C2. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2C2A. Explanation  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2C2B. Summary  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2C2A. Explanation  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. Regarding the object of observation of the small level, since  the 
entitiness of characteristics and the characteristics of the entitiness  are just same  in 
emptiness, “just being devoid of  the entitiness  of forms and so forth.” Regarding the aspect, 
in the perspective of a being bearing the object of observation, “fo rms and so forth, just 
without the thing , the entitiness .”   
 
EXPLANATION  
Forms and so forth distinguished by just being devoid of  the entitinesses  ultimately are 
the object s of observation of the small forbearance level. The entity does not exist 
ultimate ly, since the entitinesses  of characteristics , characterizing by th ese, and the 
characteristics of the entitinesses , these, the object s to be characterized  are just same  in 
emptiness  ultimately. The realization of “the entitiness of forms and so forth”  in the 
perspective of a being bearing  the object of observation  who adheres to true existence, 
even though  forms and so forth are just without the thing  ultimately, is the aspect of the 
small [forbearance].  
 
COMMENTARY 
Regarding the object of observation of the middling [forbearance] level, since just not 
produced  by nature, with respect to forms and so forth, “birth does not exist and nirvana 
does not exist.” Regarding the aspect, by only having realized the self- entity of all 
phenomena, “body and so fort h pure in all ways.”  
 
EXPLANATION  
With respect to forms and so forth , birth  in samsara does not exist [ultimately] and 
nirvana  does not exist ultimately is the object of observation of the middling . Samsara 
and nirvana do not exist ultimately, since they are just not produced  by nature  ultimately. 
The exalted wisdom of the middling forbearance level, by only having familiarized through 
having realized that the self- entity of all phenomena  is not established ultimately, 
realizing that three doors, body and so forth, the noble signs, land, and so forth will be 
attained pure in all ways , is its aspect.  
 
COMMENTARY 
Regarding the objects of observation of the great, since specific and general characterist ics 
are untenable, “all phenomena just being devoid of  signs.” Regarding the aspect, due to only 
the nature, since just separated from the support of signs of forms and so forth, “not 
believing  through attention to the believed , and not knowing through att ention to thusness.”   
 
EXPLANATION  
Since specific and general characteristics are untenable  ultimately, all phenomena just 
being devoid of  signs are the objects of observation of the great [forbearance] level. The 
exalted wisdom of the great forbearance —realizing (i) not believing  signs  through 
attention to the believed  that is realized by way of the meaning -generality of emptiness of 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
139 true existence, the support of signs, and (ii) not knowing  the signs through attention to 
thusness  that is directly realized —is its aspect, [because]  the support of specific and 
general signs of forms and so forth is pervaded by being just separated from  true 
existence , due to  only being the nature  of not existi ng ultimately.  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2C2B. Summary  
COMMENTARY 
In that way , because of forbearance toward the great phenomen on due to not going to bad 
migrations, “transformed to forbearance,” possessing objects of observation and aspects, is 
of three types.  
 
EXPL ANATION  
In that way,  because of forbearance by way of having separated  from manifest fear  
toward the great phenomen on, the phenomenon that is not produced  due to not going to 
bad migrations  through (i) having attained small forbearance towards the phenomen on 
that is not produced and (ii) having attained non -analytical cessation with respect to rebirth 
in bad migrations , it is explained in the Great Commentary in this [context], “one who has 
attained forbearance does not fall into the bad migrations.” Hence,  the teaching that is 
given by the Acarya  that “bodhisattvas do not act to generate forbearance”  is to be 
contemplated, because it has been taught that bodhisattvas realize forbearance.  
 This also does not contradict sutra, which says “one who has  attained forbearance does 
not go to the bad migrations,” because [that sutra passage is taught with] the intention that “[one who has attained forbearance does not go to the bad migrations] through the force of 
karma.” Know that this [explanation] is defi nite in this manner.  
  Regarding the meaning of “Thus, by the directive of the Bhagavan, Sariputra  and others, 
carrying Sundari, went to the hell realm is explained to be another position,” the Acarya  
says that such an explanation does not refute that of Acarya  Vasubandhu; it refutes the 
system of the hearers’ school set forth in the root text and [self- ]commentary of 
[Vasubandhu’s]  Treasury of Manifest Knowledge ( Abhidharmakosa). It refutes someone 
from that school who asserts that rhinoceros -like solitar y realizers and bodhisattvas generate 
the heat level of the path of preparation and beyond in a single session, whereby the taking of rebirth in the bad migrations through the force of the bodhisattvas’ compassion occurs on 
the occasion of the path of accu mulation, but it is impossible for them to go [to the bad 
migrations] beyond that [path of accumulation] and, in particular, upon attaining 
forbearance, not just Hinayana  persons, but also bodhisattvas do not take rebirth in bad 
migrations. This also does not contradict the Abhidharma Sutra: it means that one is not 
born in the bad migrations through the force of karma upon having attained forbearance; it is not that one does not go there for others’ welfare. This is because not only do 
bodhisattvas attain forbearance, it is taught in the Vinaya scriptural basket that “Arya 
Sariputra  and others, carrying Sundari, went to the hell realm.” Know that this attaining of 
the heat level and above in a single session was taught in the Hinayana  scriptural baskets by 
the Bhagavan himself for the very purpose of causing trainees to enter [the path].  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2D. Supreme mundane quality  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2D1. Root text  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2D2. Commentary  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
140 2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2D1. Root text  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2D1A. Explaining the objects of observation and aspects of the supreme mundane quality 
in particular  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2D1B. Summary of the meaning  of the  general ity 
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2D1A. Explaining the objects of observation and aspects of the supreme mundane quality in 
particular  
ROOT TEXT  
1.15cd Meditative stabilization, the very activity of that, 
Prediction and has extinguished clinging,   
 
1.16ab The three, mutually in the same entity,  
The m editative stabilization  that does not conceptualiz e— 
 
EXPLANATION  
The object of meditation transformed into the entity of meditative stabilization  is the 
object of observation of the small [supreme mundane quality] level; and spontaneous 
engagement in the activity of that meditative stabilization is the aspect. The speci al cause 
of hidden prediction , the middling supreme mundane quality,  forms and so forth that are 
devoid of  entitinesses  ultimately  are its objects of observation; the exalted wisdom that has  
extinguished  coarse  clinging  to the three circles as existing ult imately  is its aspect. The 
three  circles mutually in the same entity  in the nature of dharmata is the object of 
observation [of the great  supreme mundane quality];  the meditative stabilization  of the 
great supreme mundane quali ty that does not conceptualize  any limit is its aspect.  
 Respectively, sutra says, “Regarding this, the meditative stabilization of the great 
bodhisattvas, all phenomena are not produced;” “By which meditative stabilization will the objects of utilization of all meditative  stabilization be experienced? That is called the 
‘meditative stabilization going heroically;’” “ Sariputra , those great bodhisattvas abiding by 
way of these meditative stabilizations are also predicted to unsurpassable complete 
enlightenment by those previ ous tathagatas;” “I do not perfectly subsequently see 
meditative stabilization; I do not hav e a clinging mind thinking ‘I am in absorption; I shall 
set in meditative equipoise; I have set in meditative equipoise;’” “ Sariputra , there is no thing 
called ‘other perfection of wisdom,’  ‘other meditative stabilization,’  and also ‘ other 
bodhisattva; ’” and “Venerable Subhuti, does the son of the lineage discriminate in that 
meditative stabilization? I say, Venerable Sariputra , there is no discriminating.”  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2D1B. Summary of the meaning  of the general ity 
ROOT TEXT  
1.16cd Thus, the partial concordance with definite discrimination  
Has small, middling, and great. 
 
EXPLANATION  
“Thus, the partial concordance with definite discrimination has small, middling, an d 
great.”  This [explanation] indicated here should be applied also to the [explanations] above. 
Although the attribute of cause was indicated on the occasion of the heat level, it is for the sake of reducing verbosity [that it was  not indicated later]; und erstand that it must be 
applied to the [explanations] below.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
141 2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2D2. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2D2A. Explanation  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2D2B. Summary  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2D2A. Explanation  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. Regarding the object of observ ation of the small [supreme mundane 
quality] level, “Meditate on the absence  of production of all phenomena and on the 
meditative stabilization of going heroically and so forth.” Regarding the aspect, “By the 
power of one’s prayers, merit, exalted wisdom, and the dharma dhatu , spontaneously, 
exactly in accordance with the fortunes in all the world systems, the engag ement  in the 
activity of meditative stabilization.”   
 
EXPLANATION  
“Meditate on the absence of production of all phenomena and on the meditative 
stabilization of going heroically and so forth .” The explicitly indicated meditative 
stabilization and forms and so forth of inseparable entity in suchness are the objects of 
observation of the small  supreme mundane quality. The exalted wisdom of the small 
supreme mundane quality realizing the engag ement in the activity of meditative 
stabilization spontaneously, exactly in accordance with the fortunes  of trainees in all 
the world systems  when one has bec ome enlightened, is the aspect. One engages in exalted 
activities spontaneously by  (i) the force of one’s  previous prayers , the two collections of 
merit and exalted wisdom, and (ii) the power of the  pure and just inconceivable 
dharma dhatu . 
 
COMMENTARY 
Regarding the object of observation of the middling, the buddhas make prediction to the 
yogis who possess perfectly engaged meditative stabilization, “This is dharmata.” 
Regarding the aspect, since all conceptualizations are incorrect, in regard to realizi ng the 
self-entity of a bodhisattva’s meditative stabilization, “a consciousness thinking, ‘I am 
placed in equipoise’ and the like will not arise.”  
 
EXPLANATION  
The buddhas make prediction of unsurpassable enlightenment  to the yogis who possess 
meditative  stabilization perfectly engaged  upon meditation on the absence  of nature of 
apprehended- objects and apprehender -subjects, “This is dharmata.” Hence, the special 
cause of prediction and forms and so forth of inseparable entity ultimately are the objects of  
observation of the middling [supreme mundane quality] level. When a bodhisattva’s meditative stabilization  of middling supreme mundane quality places in equipoise in order 
to realize  and attain self- entity , “a consciousness that apprehends the three circl es as truly 
existent, thinking, ‘I am placed in  equipoise  now’ and the like  will not arise,”   since all 
manifest conceptualizations that are apprehensions of true existence are incorrect. The 
exalted wisdom of the middling supreme mundane quality that does  not conceive the three 
circles as truly existent is  the aspect. 
 
COMMENTARY 
Regarding the object of observation of the great, “meditative stabilization by way of dharmata, the bodhisattva, the perfection of wisdom, and the three meanings being mutually 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
142 one entity.” Regarding the aspect, since all phenomena just are not existent, “meditative 
stabilization that does not conceptualize is the excellent method.”  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —meditative stabilization by way of dharmata  which is empty of true 
existenc e, the bodhisattva, the perfection of wisdom  that is the object of meditation, and 
the four truths distinguished by the three meanings being mutually one entity —are the 
objects of observation of the great supreme mundane quality level because they are the 
bases for eliminating the superimpositions regarding those. The subject —the exalted 
wisdom of the great supreme mundane quality realizing that meditative stabilization  that 
does not conceptualize  ultimate  existence  is the excellent method  for attaining 
buddhahood —is its aspect because it is an exalted wisdom of the great supreme mundane 
quality that acts as the antidote to the wrong superimpositions regarding the attributes of its 
objects of observation. [T hey] are not established as an object of investigation in meditative 
stabilization on suchness, since all phenomena just are not existent ultimately.  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -2D2B. Summary  
COMMENTARY 
Thus, because of being the supreme of all mundane  qualities, “supreme quality,” possessing 
objects of observation and aspects, is of three types. 
 
EXPLANATION  
Thus,  because of being the supreme of all mundane  qualities  since an uncontaminated 
exalted wisdom will be directly produced , [it is called] “supreme quality.” Pos sessing 
objects of observation and aspects, [it] is of three types . 
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -3. Dispelling objection about the mode of expression  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -3A. Objection  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -3B. Reply  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -3A. Objection  
OBJECTION: Since these four paths are  concordant causes of the clear realization of the 
truth, through observing the four arya truths one must realize emptiness and so forth, 
qualities that are their attributes. Hence, even at the time of indicating these with terms, since one will not realiz e them if the objects of observation —the four truths —and the 
aspects —the qualities that are attributes in terms of the four truths —are not indicated, it is 
appropriate to indicate them explicitly in that manner. However, at the time of indicating the 
objec t of observation of the small heat level… [sentence continues in Explanation below]  
 
COMMENTARY 
Except for “The objects of observation are impermanence and so forth, bearing the support of the truths,” although the objects of observation and aspects are o bjects to be expressed by 
expressing the special quality -bearer and qualities, the objects of observation and aspects 
are expressed in all cases by expressing the special qualities…  
 
EXPLANATION  
[continuing from Explanation  above] … except for “The objects of observation are 
impermanence and so forth, bearing the  aspect of the truths ” [1.10ab, in the context of 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
143 the small heat level], when indicating the objects of observation and aspects  of the 
remaining ones, it is inappropriate that they are expressed in all cases by  only expressing 
the special qualities  because, it is appropriate for the  special objects of observation  and 
aspects  to be objects  whose qualities are to be expressed  in terms of that  quality -bearer . 
 
Although [the above paragraph] is not conne cted to an explicit passage of objection, there is 
no contradiction in explaining the meaning in this manner.  
In this context:  
OPINION: “The first two lines [1.10ab] that indicate the objects of observation of the small heat level explicitly indicate that  the objects of observation of the small heat level are the 
four truths, whereby the term that expresses the qualities —‘of that’—imply that the 
remaining objects of observation and aspects are different in entity from the four truths. 
Thus, one would not r ealize that the remaining ones are based upon the four truths.” When 
refuting such an explanation to be the meaning of the objection, it is extremely clear that the 
above  repudiation is irrelevant: “It follows that it is inappropriate for the statement ‘Th e 
remaining ones are expressed in all cases by expressing the qualities’ to occur, because the objection is about the remaining ones being expressed by both types of terms [expressing 
the quality -bearer and the qualities].”  
 
Further, it is appropriate tha t the terms that indicate the remaining objects of observation 
and aspects express that (i) the objects of observation are based upon the four truths, and (ii) 
all the objects of observation and aspects are qualities of those [four truths]. Without being 
expressed in this manner, how is the reply “There is not the fault of the quality -bearer not 
being understood by expressing the remaining ones with terms that express qualities” and 
answering in response, “Since the two types of terms do not have different objects to be 
expressed, the quality -bearer is understood,” not contradictory? Think about it! If the two 
types of terms do not have different objects to be expressed, then it is contradictory for the terms indicating the remaining objects of observation a nd aspects to express only the 
qualities, and not express the quality -bearer. 
 Also, if one asserts that, from among the many qualities with respect to sound that exist, 
only impermanence is known, then at the time of expressing “impermanence of
 sound,” 
saying that “Because impermanence is implied to be the quality of sound through having 
eliminated other isolates with the sixth case [genitive particle ‘of’], the other attributes have 
been removed and ‘the quality expressed,’” is clearly declaration that is  motivated by one of 
the three poisons, while one’s awareness has not even slightly turned towards the modes of 
the two types of terms, because it is erroneous declaration.  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -3B. Reply  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -3B1. There is not the fault of  not realizing that due to being based upon the quality -
bearers, the four truths not having been explicitly expressed  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -3B2. Although it was not explicitly expressed in that manner, it should be understood 
through implication  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
144 2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -3B1. There is not the fault of not realizing that due to being based upon the quality -bearers, 
the four truths not having been explicitly expressed  
Although the remaining objects of observation and aspects were not explicitly expressed to 
be based upon the four truths, i t follows that there is not the fault of not realizing that they 
are based upon them, [sentence continues in Explanation below]  
 
COMMENTARY 
… because “Except for removing and not removing other attributes, there is not any difference in meaning regarding t hese” occurs in the system.  
 
EXPLANATION  
[continuing from Explanation  above] … because “ Regarding the two types of terms 
expressing the qualities and the quality -bearer that rely on a single basis, except for 
removing  and not removing  other attributes, there is not any difference in meaning 
regarding these” occurs in the system  of the great trailblazer. 
 Further, when expressing “the body of an upper grinding stone” and “the head of 
Drajen,” one is made to understand that the body and the head are the base s for the 
attributes, and the upper grinding stone and Drajen are the qualities that are the attributes. 
Similarly, [Dharmakirti's] Commentary on [Dignaga's] 'Compendium of Valid Cognition'  
(Pramanavarttikakarika ) explains, “That taken as a branch of the general,” whereby when 
expressing “form of a vase,” one is made to understand that form is the basis for the 
attribute and vase the attribute; when expressing “beautiful form,” if one generates the doubt wondering “Of what?”, one is made to understand [tha t it is the beautiful form of a vase] 
through [the beautiful form] being attributed by the vase. 
 To express the terms of the quality and the quality -bearer that express a single isolate as 
an example, at the time of expressing “impermanent  sound ,” one is made to understand that 
the sound is the basis for the attribute and impermanence is the attribute, whereas  if one 
expresses 'impermanence of sound' one is made to understand that impermanence is the 
basis for the attribute and sound is the attribute, whereby although there is no difference in 
both the former and latter terms that express “sound” expressing the single isolate of sound, it is as though the quality and the quality -bearer which [respectively] removes and does not 
remove the other attributes are individually understood as objects of the awareness. Hence, at the time of expressing “impermanence of sound,” taking that to indicate that 
impermanence is the attribute is clearly a case of not having realized the meaning of any of 
the great textual sys tems.  
 It is clear that [the objection presented above] is an objection regarding whether or not 
the word “truths” is present in this [context], because it has been taught that the Acarya  
Arya [Vimuktisena] explicitly indicated the objects of observation and aspects that 
presented the truths even on the occasion of the objects of observation and aspects of the 
small peak level.
93 If, not being so, the objection concerns  whether or not suffering, 
impermanence, and so forth have been explicitly indicated, the n it would be appropriate for 
the reply, “It is incorrect not to explicitly indicate the aspects of the truths in the context of 
all the remaining objects of observation and aspects, because they were explicitly indicated 
in the context of the small peak l evel,” to occur, but it did not occur that way.  
                                              
93 See the explanation of the root text 1.29cd and 1.30a.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
145 2B2C -1A2B -2B2A -3B2. Although it was not explicitly expressed in that manner, it should be understood through 
implication  
COMMENTARY 
In one aspect, although  expressed differently in the perspective of the met ered stanzas, 
because the possession of the stopping of adherence and so forth will become separation 
from the affirmative and the negative in suchness, solely those included in the truths, 
sufferings and so forth are the objects to be observed and aspect. Also know those below 
similarly. 
 
EXPLANATION  
In one aspect  of the reply, only the realization with respect to  the truths, sufferings and so 
forth is the object to be understood as the aspect  of the small heat level, because the exalted 
wisdom of the small heat level realizing the possession of the stopping of adherence  as 
truly existent, exaggerated abiding, and so forth , with respect to the quality -bearers, the 
four truths is its aspect. Also know those aspects of middling heat and so forth below 
similarly.   Solely those  realized as the truths, sufferings and so forth are the objects to be 
observed of the middling heat level because the four truths distinguished by separation 
from the affirmative and the negative in suchnes s become  the objects of observation of 
the middling heat level. Also know those objects of observation of the great heat level and so forth  below similarly.   
 OPINION: This is not the meaning of “ preparation
94” in the path of preparation on the 
occasion below, because clear realizations will arise in a single continuity of similar type, 
whereby it is unsuitable that, when doubts have been eliminated with respect to the former, 
doubts will also be eliminated with  respect to the later in return, for that reason is similar 
also for the Mahayana  path of preparation indicated on the occasion below. Otherwise, the 
expresser will not be engaging through exclusion.  [RESPONSE:] This [explanation] explicitly indicated here summarized the meaning of 
“The aspect is stopping adherence of that and so forth” [1.10c] and “Freedom from 
assembly and establishment of forms and so forth” [1.11 a]. Although
 the remaining objects 
of observation and aspects are established to be based u pon the four truths —the support as 
well as quality -bearer—there is a reason for not explicitly expressing “bearing the support 
of the truths” with respect to the remaining ones, because it boils down to them just being 
expressed in a different manner of ex pression  in the perspective of the metered stanzas  
of the Ornament. “Although” is a word that summarizes the absence  of contradiction.  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B. Attributes of the conceptions  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -1. Meaning of the generality 
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2. Meaning of th e branches  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -1. Meaning of the generality 
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -1A. Identifying the generality  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -1B. Analyzing whether they bear the aspect of negative or affirmative phenomena  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -1C. The mode of becoming an attribute  
                                              
94 “Sbyor ba” can also be translated as “joining.”  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
146 2B2C -1A2B-2B2B -1A. Identifying the generality  
From among the three types of conceptions in general —an incorrect indicative conception, 
a mind bearing a rough aspect, and a conception apprehending [a sound -generality and a 
meaning -generality] as suitable to be mix ed—here it is the last.  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -1B. Analyzing whether they bear the aspect of negative or affirmative phenomena  
It is not correct to assert that [the conceptions] are solely conceptions of negative 
phenomena because conceptions of affirmative phenom ena are indicated both in this context 
and in the context of peak application.  
 It is not correct to assert that [the conceptions] are solely conceptions of affirmative 
phenomena, because  all the principal conceptualizations of apprehendeds and apprehenders 
included within the knowledge obscurations  in this and the later context must be indicated 
as being of two [possibilities]. Otherwise, one would not comprehend to what these are antidotes.   
 Someone who claims that “If the conceptions indicated here were conceptions of 
negative phenomena, there would be repetition of  the attributes that are the aspects” asserts 
that whatever is a conception of a negative phenomena indicated here is only a realization of 
apprehendeds and apprehenders as being devoid of  true existence, and does not know the 
classification of the objects of abandonment and antidotes. For, one must take even the adherence to the emptiness of true existence of apprehendeds and apprehenders as truly 
existent as a conception of a negative phe nomenon, and that is also a conceptualization 
included within the knowledge obscurations indicated in this context. The explanation of “conception of apprehendeds” and “conception of apprehenders” acts to characterize just a 
mere section; it is not that al l conceptions that are objects of abandonment are exhaustively 
similar with them in the mode of apprehension, because even adherence to the hearers’ 
paths and result as truly existent objects to be turned away  are conceptions that are objects 
of abandonment indicated here. Furthermore, they are merely indicated through summarizing them here. Know that they are mutually inclusive with those indicated in the 
context of peak application.  
 In addition, like  it has been taught that “Since the object of negation does not exist, it is 
clear that there is nothing to correctly negate,” know that both —(1) the apprehension of the 
aggregates as truly existent, and (2) the apprehension of the negation (in which the objects of adherence of that [apprehension of the aggreg ates as truly existent] are negated) as truly 
existent —are conceptualizations that are objects of abandonment. Through characterization 
by that, you should know that both [types of conceptions] bearing the aspects of negative 
and affirmative phenomena exis t. It is easy to realize that it is inappropriate to take the 
meditative equipoise of the path of preparation to be a conception that is an object of 
abandonment. 
 The meaning of the teaching given by the Acarya  Arya —that whatever is a first type of 
concep tualization of apprehendeds is the second —is as follows. He taught that if it is an 
adherence to apprehendeds as truly existent (through observing merely the thoroughly 
afflicted and completely pure apprehendeds), then it is pervaded by being a conception of 
completely pure apprehendeds. However, the assertion that he taught that a conception of thoroughly afflicted apprehendeds is pervaded by being a conception of completely pure 
apprehendeds is without relation. Hence, “general support bearer” and “suppor t bearer that 
is a mere thing” are explained.  
 Now it is explained in this manner:  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
147  
1. Identification of the generality, conceptions of apprehendeds and apprehenders  
2. Explanation in particular the conceptions of apprehenders  
1. Identification of the gene rality, conception of apprehendeds and apprehenders  
With regard  to apprehendeds and apprehenders, although there are many modes, here, like  
asserted by the great Lama Lotsawa, the objects of utilization have been taken to be the 
apprehendeds, and the utilizers to be the apprehenders; the former is subsumed under the 
thoroughly afflicted class and subsumed under the completely pure class, whil e the later is 
subsumed under persons and subsumed under knowers and cognizers. From among the two, each is further divided into nine each by means of the objects of observation. Hence, 
adherence to objects of utilization as truly existent and adherence to  utilizers as truly 
existent is the meaning of conception of apprehendeds and conception of apprehenders.  
2. Explanation in particular the conceptions of apprehenders  
QUALM: What is the meaning of a substantially existent person and an imputedly existent  
being? If they were taken to refer to a self- sufficient substantial existent and that imputed to 
the collection of aggregates as a being [respectively], since an apprehender observing the 
first is an afflictive obscuration, it would be incorrect for it to be a conception of 
apprehenders that is a knowledge obscuration, and since an apprehender of the latter 
apprehends the meaning established by valid cognition, it would be incorrect for it to be a 
conception that is an object of abandonment. 
  Further, if p ersons that are able and not able to perform a function are taken to be 
substantially existent  and imputedly existent , it would be unreasonable to refute an 
apprehender of the former, because if it were refuted, it would become deprecation. Since 
an appreh ender of the latter is refuted even by a valid cognizer of conventionalities, it need 
not be refuted by way of observing the meaning of the mode of abidance.   
 Also, with respect to taking a person that is truly existent and [a person] that is empty of 
true existence like an illusion [respectively] to be a substantial existent and an imputed 
existent, it would become impossible for a conception apprehending an imputed being 
indicated here to be an innate [object of abandonment ]. 
 Hence, what is the differe nce between the substantially existent  and the imputedly 
existent  like?  
 
RESPONSE: There are two types of apprehen ders of [persons] as substantial ly existen t: (i) 
the apprehension of a person as being able to perform a function, and (ii) the apprehension of [a person] as self- sufficient substantially existent . The object of adherence of the latter 
being  refuted through the force of experience exists in aryas, not in ordinary beings. Hence, 
it has been taught that the apprehension of substantial existence be ars the support of 
ordinary beings whereas the apprehension of imputed existence bears the support of aryas. 
However, know that in general both [the apprehension of substantial existence and the apprehension of imputed existence] bear the support of both [ ordinary beings and aryas].  
 A manifest innate apprehension of imputed existence, which is an apprehension in which 
the collection of aggregates is imputed as a being, exists even in ordinary beings who have 
not entered the path. It is permissible to take  either a person as being able to perform a 
function or as  self-sufficient substantially existent ; through obse rving [the apprehenders of] 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
148 both of those, adhering to them as truly existent utilizers are [the conceptions of] 
apprehenders of substantially ex istent persons .  
 And through observing [the apprehender of] that imputed to the collection of aggregates 
as a being, adhering to it  as before  [as a truly existent utilizer] is a conception of an 
apprehender of an imputed being . Through observing [the apprehender of] a being who  is 
empty of true existence like an illusion, apprehending it as a truly existent utilizer is a 
conception of an apprehender of a imputedly existent person . Know  that it is of two types, 
the acquired and the innate. If these  two were discriminated by means of the object of 
observation, ridiculous consequences would follow.  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -1C. The mode of becom ing an attribute  
The mode of becoming attributes is possession in taking [them as] thorough afflictions as 
explained ab ove95 . Further, if one is able to abandon these conceptions by taking them as 
principal objects of abandonment, that will become a superior attribute of the path.  
However, saying that “These conceptions, due to being possessed as objects of 
abandonment , have been taken as attributes, whereby it follows that it is  superior” is a case 
of being obscured by counterfeit reasoning; it follows that hell sentient beings would be superior due to their greater suffering, because that is their attribute.  
 Also, when  these conceptions are abandoned by the path of preparation, flinging the 
consequence that the objects of abandonment are not definite in number as two would bring 
about ridiculous consequences; does the meditative equipoise of the path of preparation 
aban don or not abandon the manifest conceptions indicated here? In the latter case, it 
follows that the superimposition that apprehends sound as permanent would not be damaged even slightly by the inferential valid cognizer realizing that sound is impermanent. In the 
first case, the [absurd] consequence that the objects of abandonment would not be definite in number as the two —objects of abandonment by the path of seeing and objects of 
abandonment by the path of meditation —would become one’s own.  
 
OPINION: Sinc e the antidotes that abandon the seeds are definite as two, in general, the 
objects of abandonment are definite as two.  RESPONSE: That “the seeds are abandoned by the path of preparation” is not propounded 
even by others. Hence, the principal hindrances t o achieving enlightenment which is the 
object that is desired are these [conceptions]. Their seeds are being abandoned on the occasions of the two later paths. On this occasion, [the path of preparation] has been taken 
as attributed by acting to achieve en lightenment by way of having abandoned with effort 
some of the manifest [conceptions]. 
 How many meanings are there? In terms of the general presentation that will be 
explained, “attribute of the conceptions” has been explained. However, the antidotes that  
abandon the seeds are induced by its  own power, and since even the manifest conceptions 
can be abandoned by itself, this is the attribute of ability that is the path’s own entity. Analyzing whether or not the seeds of the conceptions and the manifest conc eptions are 
possessed in the entity of the path of preparation is a small point of doubt. The meaning of the explanation that they are possessed in respective order has already been explained 
above. Saying that “If the attribute of the conceptions is like that, then there would be no 
difference with the attribute that is the aspect” would be similar to saying that “If sound is 
                                             
 
95 See 2B2C -1A2B -2B1C -1A above.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
149 impermanent, sound would become an attribute.” Someone, having differentiated the 
conceptions of this [context] into seeds [of the c onceptions] and manifest [conceptions], 
while asserting that seeds are possessed during meditative equipoise and the manifest are possessed during subsequent attainment , stated contradictory aspects as the reason for their 
not being mutually the same entit y with the path of preparation. Since the contradiction is 
very easy to realize, I have not made effort to refute it. 
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B2. Meaning of the branches  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2A. Making connection for the generality  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2B. Explaining the individ ual meanings  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2C. Summary  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2A. Making connection for the generality  
COMMENTARY 
Also possessing the four conceptualizations, because it clarifies  the meaning, an interceding 
stanza:  
 
EXPLANATION  
There is purpose for having taught through an interceding stanza  that the four levels of the 
path of preparation also possess the four conceptualizations, because it clarifies the meaning of the entity and divisions of the conceptions.  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2B. Explaining the individual meanings  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2B1. [Brief] indication  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2B2. [Extensive] explanation  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2B1. [Brief] indication  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2B1A. Explaining the conceptions of apprehendeds  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2B1B. Explaining the conceptions of apprehenders  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2B1A. Explaining the conceptions of apprehendeds  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2B1A -1. Root text  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2B1A -2. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2B1A -1. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
1.17  By way of basis and antidotes to that, 
The c onceptions of apprehendeds are of two types.  
By way of particularities of confusion and aggregates and so forth, 
They have individually nine types.   
 
EXPLANATION  
The basis of division of the  conceptions of apprehendeds is of two types, by way of the 
divis ions into that bearing the support of the thoroughly afflicted basis  and that bearing the 
support of  the antidotes to that. The two have individually nine types  of bas es of division, 
by way of particularities  that observe confusion that is ignorance and that observe 
aggregates and so forth.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
150 2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2B1A -2. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. The conceptualizations of apprehendeds, by way of just bearing the 
support of the basis of the thoroughly afflicted and bearing the support of antido tes, two 
types. By way of classifications of ignorance and the completely purified aggregates and so forth, nine types.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the conceptualizations of apprehendeds —are of two types, by way of just 
bearing the support of the basis of the  thoroughly afflicted and bearing the support of 
antidotes . Each is further of nine types, by way of classifications of  the objects of 
observation of ignorance and the completely purified aggregates and so forth .  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2B1B. Explaining the conceptions of apprehenders  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2B1B -1. Root text  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2B1B -2. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2B1B -1. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
1.18 By way of bearing the support of the substantial and the imputed,  
Apprehenders are also asserted to be of two typ es. 
Due to entity, an independent self and so forth,  And support, the aggregates and so forth, they are similar. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the conceptions of apprehenders —are asserted to be of two types , by way 
of bearing the support of the substantial and the imputed person and being 
[respectively]. Similarly , the two are of nine types each, due to  there being nine —
observing entity, an independent self and so forth, and support, the aggregates and so 
forth . 
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2B1B -2. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. Conceptualizations of apprehenders observing substantially -existing 
persons and imputedly- existing beings are also of two types. By just the observation of an 
independent self and the aggregates and so forth, individually nine types in that manner.  
EXPLANATION  
The subject —conceptualizations of apprehenders —their divisions are also of two types , 
by way of observing substantially existing persons and imputedly- existing beings . 
Extensively, there are individually nine types in the manne r of the conceptions of 
apprehendeds, by just the observation of an independent self and the aggregates and so 
forth . 
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2B2. [Extensive] explanation  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2B2A. Making a connection  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2B2B. Individual meanings  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
151 2B2C -1A2B -2B2B-2B2A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
Regarding those, the summarized meaning is this:  
 
EXPLANATION  
Regarding those  thirty -six types of conceptions that exist , the summarized meaning, 
when explained, is this: 
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2B2B. Individual meanings  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2B2B -1. Conceptions of apprehendeds  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2B2B -2. Conceptions of apprehenders  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2B2B -1. Conceptions of apprehendeds  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2B2B -1A. Conceptions of thoroughly afflicted apprehendeds  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2B2B -1B. [Conceptions of completely pure apprehendeds]  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2B2B -1A. Conceptions of thoroughly afflicted apprehendeds  
COMMENTARY 
Bearing the support of the thoroughly afflicted basis, (1) ignorance, (2) the aggregates of 
form s and so forth, (3) adherence to na me and form, (4) attachment to the two extremes, (5) 
not knowing the thoroughly afflicted and the completely pure, (6) not abiding on the arya path, (7) the objects of observation, (8) the self and so forth, (9) generation of purity and so 
forth: conceptua lizations of apprehendeds, and  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —[regarding] conceptualizations of apprehendeds bearing the support of the 
thoroughly afflicted basis —there are nine conceptualizations of truly existent 
apprehendeds that are objects of utilization —be cause there are [nine] in that way by means 
of the objects of observation, objects of observation with respect to the generalities and 
particularities of true sufferings and true origins. There are divisions into two by means of 
observing generalities, bec ause there are the two adherences:  
(1) to the generality of afflictions, afflicted ignorance , and  
(2) to the generality of suffering s, the contaminated aggregates of form s and so forth  
– as truly existent objects of utilization.  
 
Sutra says :  
(1) “Sariput ra, these phenomena do not exist in such a way as strongly attached  to by 
childish  ordinary beings ,” and   
(2) “Sariputra , because of inner emptiness [and so forth] until the entit iness  of non-things,  
form does not exist.”  
 With regard  to the  particularities of afflictions, there are four objects of observation, 
because there is adherence to truly existent objects of utilization by way of:  
(3) having observed adherence to name and form , craving for a n erroneous  result ,  
(4) attachment to the two extremes  of permanence and severance , craving for a n 
erroneous  object of knowledge,   
(5) observing non- faith, not knowing the thoroughly afflicted and the completely pure  as 
objects to be discarded and to be adopted [respectively], and  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
152 (6) having obs erved laziness, not abiding in a manner of strong enthusiasm on the arya 
path.  
 
Sutra says:  
(3) “Having investigated those phenomena which do not exist in that way, they adhere to name and form.”  
(4) “Those adherences to phenomena conceive the two extremes which do not exist.”  
(5) “Do not know and do not see ‘thoroughly afflicted form’; do not know and do not see 
‘completely pure form’.”  
(6) “They do not abide; how do they not abide?” “They do not abide in the perfection of generosity.”  
 
With regard  to the particularities of suffering s, there are three objects of observation, 
because there is adherence to truly existent objects of utilization by way of having observed:  (7) the objects of observation  that are contaminated feelings, the three fruitions of comfort, 
discomfort, and neutrality,  
(8) the supports of feelings, the self, others, and so forth, and  
(9) generation of purity  and so forth when the nature of suffering feelings is understood, 
by way of disillusionment due to it; this is because when one is disillusioned due to feelings, 
the cessation which is the separation from suffering feelings, as well as the path that 
proceeds to that, are induced.   
 Sutra says:  
(7) “When a great b odhisattva practices the perfection of wisdom, he does not observe and 
does not perfectly subsequently see the perfection of wisdom. Train in that way.”  
(8) “Because of being the very pure, one does not observe and does not see the self.”  
(9) Sariputra , the very pure is without generation, does not arise, and  is without manifest 
application.”  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2B2B -1B. [Conceptions of completely pure apprehendeds]  
COMMENTARY 
Bearing the support of antidotes, (1) the aggregates, (2) entrances of generating, (3) classes, 
(4) birth, (5) emptiness, (6) the meaning of the Perfections, (7 -9) the paths of seeing, 
meditation, and no -more -learning: conceptualizations of apprehendeds, and  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —conceptualizations of apprehendeds  bearing the support  of antidotes —are 
of nine types, because there are five observing completely pure objects of knowledge, one observing deeds, and three observing entity. The first sign [that there are five observing completely pure objects of knowledge] is established beca use there is adherence as before 
by way of observing: four included within objects of knowledge that are varieties —(1) the 
completely pure aggregates, (2) entrances of generating  included within the sources, the 
empowering condition , (3) classes  included w ithin the constituents, the substantial cause , 
and (4) completely pure birth  of the reverse process of [the twelve links of] dependent -
arising —and (5) the mode, emptiness. 
 
Sutra says:  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
153 (1) “One who is not skilled in means conceptualizes form and adheres to  it.” 
(2) “One conceptualizes the eye and adheres to it.”   
(3) “One conceptualizes the constituents of the eye, form, and eye primary consciousness 
and adheres to them.”  
(4) “One conceptualizes ignorance and adheres to it.”  
(5) “One conceptualizes emptine sses, from inner emptiness until  the emptiness of the 
entitiness  of non-things , and adheres to them.”  
 
The middle sign [that there is one observing deeds] is established, because, having observed 
(6) the meaning of the Perfections  that are deeds, one adheres to them as being like that. 
Sutra says, (6) “One conceptualizes the six perfections and adheres to them.”  
 The last sign [that there are three observing entity] is established because, having observed 
the completely pure entiti es—(7-9) the paths of seeing, meditation, and no -more -
learning —one adheres to them as truly existing objects of utilization. Sutra says:  
(7) “One conceptualizes the thirty -seven harmonies with enlightenment and adheres to 
them.”  
(8) “One conceptualizes the  four concentrations, the clairvoyances, the immeasurables, and 
the formless absorptions and adheres to them.”  
(9) “One conceptualizes the ten powers of the tathagatas, [and so forth] until omniscience and adheres to them.”  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2B2B -2. Conceptio ns of apprehenders  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2B2B -2A. Conceptions of apprehenders of substantial existen ce 
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2B2B -2B. Conceptions of apprehenders of imputed existen ce   
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2B2B -2A. Conceptions of apprehenders of substantial existen ce  
COMMENTARY 
Bearing the support of substantially exist ent persons, (1) an independent self, (2 -4) a self 
that is unitary, a cause, a viewer and so forth, (5) the thoroughly  affliction ed, (6) separation 
from attachment, (7) seeing, (8) meditation, and (9) th e support which enacted the welfare: 
conceptualizations of apprehenders, and  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —conceptualizations of apprehenders bearing the support of substantially 
existent persons  that adhere to apprehenders as truly existent utilizers —are of ni ne types , 
because there are : (1) one object of observation, an apprehender of substantial existence that 
is its object of adherence, and (7 -9) eight divided by way of object of adherence. 
 
The first [that there is one object of observation, an apprehender of substantial existence that 
is its object of adherence] is established, because, having observed (1) an apprehender of an 
independent self, it adheres to it as a truly existent utilizer. Independence is the mode of 
apprehension of that apprehender of substantial existence, the observed object; it is not the 
mode of apprehension of a conception that is a knowledge obscuration, because [otherwise,] 
it follows that [the conceptualization of apprehenders] would be an afflictive obscuration. 
Sutra says, “ Sarip utra, do not closely observe the self; likewise, the sentient being, the life 
force...” The latter sign [that there are eight divided by way of object of adherence] is 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
154 established, because there are three in terms of the generalities, the objects of observ ation, 
the apprehenders of substantial existents, and five divisions in terms of the particularities.  
 The first [that there are three in terms of the generalities, the objects of observation, the 
apprehenders of substantial existents] is established, beca use, having observed the 
apprehenders of an independent self as  (2-4) a self that is  unitary, a cause, a viewer , a 
knower , and so forth,  they adhere to them as truly existent utilizers. Respectively, the 
apprehenders of the aggregates, sources, and constit uents as an independent self are the 
three observed.   
 Respectively, sutra says:  
(2) “ Sariputra , do not closely observe form [and so forth] until do not closely observe the 
primary consciousness.”  
(3) “Do not observe the eye; likewise, until mentality.”  
(4) “Do not observe the eye consciousness with respect to the eye and form.”  
 
The latter [that there are five divisions in terms of the particularities] is established, because, 
having observed (5) an apprehender of the thoroughly  affliction ed such as ignorance as an 
independent self and  (6-9) an apprehender of separation from mundane attachment, 
seeing, meditation, the powerful support which enacted the welfare  as an independent 
self, and so forth, they adhere to them as truly existent utilize rs. 
 Respectively, sutra says:  
(5) “Do not observe dependent -arising.”  
(6) “Do not observe the first concentration [and so forth] until  the formless absorptions.”  
(7) “Do not observe the noble truths.”  
(8) “Do not observe the eight types of liberation and the nine final absorptions.”  
(9) “Do not observe the ten powers [and so forth] until  do not observe omniscience.”  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2B2B -2B. Conceptions of apprehenders of imputed existen ce 
COMMENTARY 
Bearing the support of imputedly -existing beings, (1) the aggregates, (2) the sources, (3) the 
constituents, (4) dependent -arising, (5) the completely pure, (6 -9) paths of seeing, 
meditation, distinction, and no -more -learning: conceptualizations of apprehenders.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —conceptualizations of appr ehenders  that, having observed apprehenders  
bearing the support of imputedly -existing beings,  adhere to them as truly existent 
utilizers —are of nine types, because there are (1 -3) three divisions in terms of the 
generalities, the objects of observation, th e apprehenders that are their object of adherence, 
and (4- 9) six divisions in terms of particularities.  
 The first [there are three divisions in terms of the generalities, the objects of observation, 
the apprehenders that are their object of adherence] is established because they observe (1 -
3) the apprehenders of the aggregates, the sources and the constituents as beings. 
Respectively, sutra says:  
(1) “Subhuti, what do you think of that? Even form is other. Do you think illusion is also 
other?”  
(2) “Even t he eye is other. Do you think illusion is also other?”  
(3) “Even the eye, form, and eye consciousness are other. Do you think illusion is also other?”  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
155  
The latter [there are six divisions in terms of particularities] is established because they, 
having observed the apprehenders of:  
(4) [the twelve links of] dependent -arising, ignorance and so forth,  
(5) the completely pure  thirty -seven harmonies with enlightenment  
(6-9) paths of seeing, meditation, distinction, and no -more -learning as beings, adhere 
to the m as truly existent utilizers. 
 Respectively, sutra says:  
(4) “Even illusions are other. Do you think dependent -arisings are also other?”   
(5) “Even those until the harmonies with enlightenment are other. Do you think illusions are 
also other?”  
(6) “Even emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness are other. Do you think illusions are 
also other?”  
(7) “Even illusions are other. Do you think the concentrations and formless absorptions are 
also other?”  
(8) “Even illusions are other. Do you think all emptiness es are also other?”  
(9) “Even the ten powers of the tathagatas and so forth until the eighteen unmixed qualities 
of the buddhas are other. Do you think illusions are also other?”  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2B -2C. Summary  
COMMENTARY 
The four conceptualizations and the four partial concordances of definite discrimination as 
such, as enumerated, are possessed.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The four conceptualizations and the four partial concordances of definite 
discrimination as such, as enumerated, are possessed  as objects of abandonment and 
antidotes that are abilities and destroyers. 
2B2C -1A2B -2B2C. Explaining the tutor  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2C -1. Making a connection by showing the purpose of other sequences  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2C -2. Root text  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2C -3. Commentary 
2B2C -1A2B-2B2C -1. Making a connection by showing the purpose of other sequences  
OPINION: It is inappropriate to explain the tutor later in the extensive explanation, because 
this is discordant with the sequence in the brief indication [2B2C -1A2B -2B1].  
 
COMMENTAR Y 
In accordance with the joining of the stanza, even though the tutor has been taught earlier, in order to indicate “What was explained will become distinguished by the force of that,” 
again at the end, an interceding stanza:   
 
EXPLANATION  
There is a purp ose for having taught the tutor  in the brief indication prior to the 
conceptions, because it was indicated in accordance with the easy joining of the stanza.  
Even though it has been taught earlier in the brief indication, there is a purpose for 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
156 having taught it with  an interceding stanza again at the end of the conceptions in the 
extensive explanation , in order to indicate “ All four explained will become distinguished 
by the force of that taught later.”  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2C -2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
1.19 Undaunted minds and so forth,  
Teaches the absence  of entitiness and so forth,  
Discards the discordant classes of that, 
Is in all ways the tutor. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the exalted wisdom in the continuum of a bodhisattva on the path of 
preparation that is not separated from the attention to an exalted knower of all aspects, that 
is skilled in the means of undaunted and unafraid minds and so forth  regarding the 
meaning of profound emptiness , and discards the discordant classes of that [exalted 
wisdom ], the attention of hearers and solitary realizers and any adherence to true 
existence —is in all ways the inner tutor  of the bodhisattva on the path of preparation, 
because it is a clear realization of that [bodhisattva] that acts to stop the extremes of cyclic 
existence and solitary peace. 
 Sutra says, “When a great bodhisattva practices the perfection of wisdom, although he 
individually conceptualizes with a mind possessing an  exalted knower of all aspects, 
thinking, ‘Form is impermanent,’ he does not observe it,” and “Subhuti, when a great bodhisattva practices the perfection of wisdom he meditates on the perfection of wisdom 
and observes it by way of  being separated from the attention possessing an exalted knower 
of all aspects.”  
 The subject —a buddha’s supreme emanation body who teaches all Dharmas, the 
absence  of entitiness ultimately and so forth  to that [bodhisattva on the path of 
preparation] and also reveals the path in which one discards  the discordant class of that  
virtuous spiritual guide, maras, negative companions, and the like —is the  outer tutor , 
because he is a virtuous spiritual guide who is the empowering condition that acts to instruct that [bodhisattva on the path of preparation] on the fully complete method and wisdom.  
 [Sutra says,] “Subhuti, furthermore, who is a virtuous spiritual guide  of a great 
bodhisattva? He teaches Dharma to that [great bodhisattva] by way of observing ‘form is impermanent’ and, except for omniscience, does not allow the bodhisattva to dedicate all 
the roots of virtue to the grounds of hearers and solitary realizers,” and “A negative 
companion of a great bodhisattva is one who separates him from the Perfection of 
Wisdom.”  
2B2C -1A2B -2B2C -3. Commentary 
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. With  the skillful means of undaunted and unafraid minds and so 
forth, in accorda nce with the mentality , teaching  the selflessness of all things and so forth, 
not possessing qualities of the discordant class, miserliness and so forth, since he is  the 
virtuous spiritual guide, is the tutor. 
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
157 EXPLANATION  
An emanation body —with the skillful means leading on the gradual path of undaunted 
and unafraid minds and so forth regarding the meaning of profound in a manner of gentle 
terminology as when  the king’s beautiful wife has died , in accordance with the mentality  
of the trainees , teaching the  selflessness  of persons and phenomena of all things and so 
forth , teaching the generated mind [of enlighten ment] and the deeds of the six perfections, 
revealing those who cause one to abandon the Mahayana text and path as negative 
companions, teaching not  possessing qualities of the class discordant  to the six 
perfections , miserliness and so forth —is the tutor  of a bodhisattva on the path of 
preparation, since he is the virtuous spiritual guide teaching the complete Mahayana path 
to him . 
2B2C -1A2C. Explaining the achievings that accomplish the aim of the instructions accordingly  
2B2C -1A2C -1. Supports of the achievings  
2B2C -1A2C -2. Objects of observation  
2B2C -1A2C -3. Objects of intent  
2B2C -1A2C -4. Entity of the achievings  
2B2C -1A2C -1. Supports of the achievings  
2B2C -1A2C -1A. Meaning of the generality  
2B2C -1A2C -1B. Meaning of the branches  
2B2C -1A2C -1A. Meaning of the generality  
2B2C -1A2C -1A1. Entity  
2B2C -1A2C -1A2. Divisions  
2B2C -1A2C -1A3. Dispelling objection  
2B2C -1A2C -1A4. The manner of leading accordi ngly by way of lineage  
2B2C -1A2C -1A1. Entity  
2B2C -1A2C -1A1A. Stating the Mind -Only  position and analyzing whether it is correct or incorrect  
2B2C -1A2C -1A1B. Our own system 
2B2C -1A2C -1A1A. Stating the Mind -Only  position and analyzing whether it is correct o r incorrect  
Sutra says, “That lineage of the bodhisattvas  is that which , having passed  down from 
beginningless time, has come , is obtained naturally , and is the attribute of the six sources .” 
Interpreting  the meaning of that passage, the Proponents of Mind -Only  say that  if a basis -of-
all is not posited, [lineage] is the potency that is suitable to produce the realizations of any 
of the three vehicles  when the uncontaminated seed that exists upon the six inner sources 
meet with conditions. However, if a basis -of-all is posited, when those very uncontaminated 
seeds existing on the basis -of-all are not nourished by co nditions, they are called ‘lineage 
abiding in the nature .’  They,  nourished by the conditions of hearing, will become special, 
called the ‘dev elopmental lineage.’ 
 
• That which is nourished by the condition of hearing profound and extensive Dharma is called the Mahayana lineage;  
• that which is nourished by the condition of hearing the hearers’ Dharma is called the hearers’ lineage;  
• that which is nourished by the condition of hearing merely the Dharma that apprehendeds 
are devoid of  nature, and below, is called the solitary realizers’ lineage;  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
158 • that which is definite in the cause of the realizations of the individual vehicles by way of 
entitiness is  called the definite lineage;  
• that which is suitable to be transformed into the cause of any of the vehicles by conditions is called the indefinite lineage;  
• that which is unsuitable to be nourished by the condition of hearing is called the severed lineage. 
 OPINION: Regarding this, the Acarya Arya [Vimuktisena] says, “[The subject] —such an 
uncontaminated seed —it follows that it is not a lineage abiding in the nature, because the 
meaning of that is not complete.” The reason is not established; it has the mea ning of acting 
as the cause of aryas’ realizations.  RESPONSE: Well, you cannot counter the consequence that it follows that even that perfect 
adoption due to conditions is a lineage abiding in the nature. 
 
Alternatively, it has been taught, “The lineages of those are imputed as lineage abiding in 
the nature, whereby it does not ha ve the same meaning as taking dharmata as the lineage.” 
The meaning of that, is that the presentation of lineage [above] is a presentation of merely the system of the Cognition -Only in [Maitreya’s]  Ornament for the Great Vehicle Sutras 
(Mahayanasutralamkara ); the teaching of that very pure nature, the dharmata of sentient 
beings’ minds in this treatise is explained to be the Middle Way system. Hence the 
convention of the actual nam e of ‘lineage abiding in the nature’ with respect to that 
uncontaminated seed included within compounded phenomena is incorrect. If one were to 
assert that as the lineage here, since it is the lineage that arose from perfect adoption, one 
should know that when it is imputed the convention ‘lineage abiding in the nature,’ it is the 
convention of an imputed name.  
2B2C -1A2C -1A1B. Our own system 
From between the two, l ineage abiding in the nature in our own Middle Way system  and 
lineage arising  from correct  adoption due to conditions , the first is that which is suitable to 
transform into a truth body; it also is the dharmata that is the emptiness of true existence of sentient beings’ minds. The truth body which it transforms into is the very pure nature that 
is devoid of all stains. However it is not taught that the pure nature of sentient beings, 
having transformed, change into a buddha’s meditative equipoise.   The existence of a potential upon sentient beings’ minds such that it is suitable for one to 
separate  from stains and suitable for one to generate aryas’ realizations is established by 
reasoning. That [potential] itself is deposited by the condition of hearing and is to be 
nourished by the condition of hearing. Therefore, the “lineage arising  from correct  
adoption” is just that which is suitable to transform into a form body when its transformation is culminated. It is what is posited to be the lineage abiding in the nature by 
the Proponents of Mind -Only . Acarya Arya [Vimuktisena] asserts that it is the imputed 
lineage abiding in the nature, and the fully qualified developmental lineage.   
 That very lineage abiding in the nature which was previously explained acts as the 
support for the realizations of the individual vehicles, and, since it is suitable to transform 
into the support for the realizations of any vehicle, temporally there are three lineages and 
one applies the convention “ indefinite lineage.”  However, we do not assert a lineage that is 
severed forever, because, in the commentary on the Mahayana Treatise on the Sublime 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
159 Continuum (Mahayanottaratantrasastra), sutra was cited and the severed lineage was 
proven to be an explanation bearing an intention.  
 Further, that very [commentary by Asanga on the Mahayana Treatise on the Sublime 
Continuum  (Maha yanottaratantrasastra )] says:  
 
Because hatred for the Mahayana Dharma is the cause of those bearing wrong 
view and craving [not attaining enlightenment for a long time], the teaching that 
“Those bearing wrong view and craving bear the property of never att aining 
nirvana” is taught with the intention with respect to other times for the sake of overcoming hatred for the Mahayana Dharma. Never ever becoming pure is not 
fitting, because, with the intention that that which is suitable to be pure exists in 
all se ntient beings without distinction, the Bhagavan taught that:  
 
Although beginningless, possessing an end,  
The bearer of the property of permanent purity by nature, Is not seen, concealed by a cover on the outside since beginningless time,  
Just like a conce aled golden statue. 
 Its meaning is as follows:  
 
A. Basis in [Buddha’s] thought  for the explanation of a severed lineage 
B. Purpose for the explanation of a severed lineage 
C. Damage to the literal   
A. Basis in [Buddha’s] thought  for the explanation of a severed lineage 
The basis in [Buddha’s] thought  is that the path to liberation will not be generated in the 
continuum for a long time —innumerable eons. 
B. Purpose for the explanation of a severed lineage 
Since hatred for the Mahay ana Dharma is the cause for those bearing wrong view and 
craving not attaining enlightenment for a long time, [the explanation of a severed lineage] 
was taught for the sake of overcoming hatred for the Mahayana Dharma. 
C. Damage to the literal  
It is unreas onable that sentient beings will never purify stains, (i) because the lineage that is 
pure by nature exists in all sentient beings, and (ii) because the buddhas’ exalted activities engage all sentient beings. For, with even rebirth as a fortunate one who a ttains the state of 
high status being the buddhas’ exalted activity, it is impossible for there to be a sentient 
being who has never attained high status even once. 
 There are other extreme positions:  
• because even though the stains will be purified, the st ains in the continu a of some sentient 
beings are permanent, 
• because even though they are impermanent, the method for destroying them is not 
possible,  
• because even though it is possible, nobody knows the method, 
• because even though someone knows it, there i s some sentient being for whom it is not 
possible to generate [a mind] seeking it,  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
160 • because even though someone knows it, a person who cares for [sentient beings] with 
loving- kindness is not possible,  
• because it is not possible for some inferior sentient be ings to generate disillusionment due 
to suffering, 
• even though it may be generated, [sentient beings]  will not become an object of exalted 
compassion of the buddhas, and so forth.  
You should know that there is no sentient being for whom (i) stains are not suitable to be abandoned, and (ii) antidotes are not suitable to be generated, from among the reasonings 
refuting these extremes. 
 With respect to that very potential —for which the obscurations of sentient beings are 
suitable to be abandoned and supramunda ne paths are suitable to be generated —imputed 
with the convention “developmental lineage,” there are divisions into the three lineages, an 
indefinite lineage, and so forth. Further, you should know that this is in terms of temporal 
occasions; relative to t he final, all sentient beings bear the buddha lineage.  
 Explaining that [Asanga’s] commentary on the Mahayana Treatise on the Sublime 
Continuum (Mahayanottaratantrasastra) taught merely the Mind -Only  system is inapt; that 
has already been extensively expla ined in its Explanation . In that commentary, as proof for 
the buddha lineage existing in all sentient beings, the Abhidharma Sutra is cited:  
 
The sphere of beginningless time  
Is the state of all phenomena. 
Because it exists, all migrations and  
Even nirvana  will be attained. 
 In other texts that commentate on the Mind -Only  system, Acarya Asanga takes that as proof 
for the existence of the basis -of-all which is different in entity from the six collections [of 
primary consciousnesses]. Therefore, if that were  the proof for demonstrating the lineage 
abiding in the nature, it would be inappropriate to posit it as the proof for the other.  
 
OPINION: Although [you] assert that all sentient beings are bearers of the tathagata 
essence, lineage -bearers of that [tathag ata essence] are not asserted by the Proponents of 
Mind -Only . 
RESPONSE: Propounding that is simply proceeding to just what one has indicated. For those who lack the power to  discern  the texts that are assertions of the great trailblazers  
clearly without mi xing them up, it will be wonderful for them to be neutral with respect to 
discriminating the supreme texts.  
2B2C -1A2C -1A2. Divisions  
The general divisions of lineage have already been explained. The lineage that is explicitly 
taught here is of thirteen ty pes by way of divisions of the occasion. The conventional 
support of the achievings is bodhisattvas. That also is of thirteen types by way of divisions 
of the occasion. Through observing and meditating on that very emptiness of true existence 
of the six in ner sources, aryas’ realizations will be generated, hence it is called “lineage.” 
When familiarization with that becomes more and more outstanding, also the potential of 
the developmental lineage explained above will become more and more outstanding, hence  
it is called “lineage that transforms from development.”  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
161 2B2C -1A2C -1A3. Dispelling objection  
[Haribhadra’s] Great Commentary  says:  
 
QUALM: What precedes the generated mind [of enlightenment], the partial 
concordances with liberation and definite discrimi nation, and so forth is that 
[lineage]. Hence, is lineage not to be explained only first? Why is it explained in 
this manner?  
 RESPONSE: That is true. However, that is the sequence in reality . Having 
explained the result first, the cause is indicated later, whereby this is the sequence of explanation. Hence there is no fault.  
 The meaning of that is as follows. Having first awakened the lineage, after that, one 
generates the mind [of enlightenment]; that is the sequence of the cause and result in reality . 
When the generated mind [of enlightenment], the partial concordance with liberation, and so 
forth are generated in one’s continuum, one will be able to realize the existence of lineage in 
one’s continuum, whereby the explanation here is made by means of th at sequence. 
 [Vimuktisena’s] Illuminating the Twenty Thousand says:  
 
QUALM: If the lineage abiding in the nature exists in all sentient beings, why is 
it that there are still infinite creatures possessing lineage who have not attained 
nirvana, even thoug h infinite buddhas have come?  
RESPONSE: It is because of possessing the four hindrances of lineage: predominance of afflictions, being held by negative companions, being deprived 
of necessities of life, and being under the control of other sentient beings . The 
teaching here is that one separates from the four hindrances of lineage in dependence on the Mahayana path of preparation, and, through observing and 
familiarizing with the lineage abiding in the nature by way of the wisdom arisen 
from meditation, on e will become empowered to attain the aryas’ qualities, hence 
it is presented from the path of preparation.  
2B2C -1A2C -1A4. The manner of leading accordingly  by way of lineage 
The method for examining the interests of the trainees at the beginning is as follows. Like it 
has been explained in Hearer’s Grounds, having caused them to hear the scriptural baskets 
of the Hinayana and Mahayana, when leading them to their goals , one wil l realize the level 
of their faculty. Since lineage  is distinguished by the accumulations [of merit and exalted 
wisdom] and the purification [of negativities and obscurations], one leads them by way of 
the stages of the path of the three —the beings of smal l, middling and great capacities. 
When, for the sake of generating Mahayana realizations, they have engaged in gathering 
great causes of accumulation and have purified well the faults that hinder the generation of 
the path by way of many avenues, prior to generating the mind [aspiring] for the Mahayana, 
at the time of initially gaining firm interest in the extensive dharma —joy in meditating on 
great compassion, engaging in extensive generosity, guarding extensive  ethics , joy in 
cultivating patience, and so forth —they are said to be “abiding in the Mahayana lineage,” 
and those persons are even explained to be “bodhisattvas who have not generated the mind 
[of enlightenment].”  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
162  From there, if they have generated the foundational attitudes of the beings of smal l and 
middling capacity, when at the beginning they have trained well in the attitudes seeking 
others’ welfare and seeking unsurpassable enlightenment and made these firm, cause them 
to generate the mind [aspiring for] supreme enlightenment. After that, ha ving examined 
whether or not they are able to train in the infinite deeds of the bodhisattvas, when one sees that they will be able to guard the bodhisattva vows without becoming sullied by the root 
downfalls which contravene them, cause them to uphold the  engaging vows.  
 Due to having been persistent in the paths of hearers and solitary realizers for many 
lifetimes in the past, they [may] initially generate disillusionment that cannot bear the 
suffering of cyclic existence, and produce strong [aspiration]  seeking pacification of that at 
the beginning. When it seems unsuitable for the time being to lead them to the practice of the extensive dharma, lead them through those very paths [of hearers and solitary realizers].  
 Since it is necessary to indicate th e method for initially awakening the lineage of that 
path regardless of which path they enter, you should understand the manner of leading them by way of lineage at the beginning. Intending that, Acarya [Haribhadra] explained in [his] 
Great Commentary, “Th at is the sequence of meaning.” Know the two paths by way of the 
beings of small and middling capacities also as branches of both (i) the method for awakening the lineage and (ii) engagement by way of the stages of the path once the lineage 
has been awaken ed.  
2B2C -1A2C -1B. Meaning of the branches  
2B2C -1A2C -1B1. Divisions of lineage 
2B2C -1A2C -1B2. Dispelling objection  
2B2C -1A2C -1B1. Divisions of lineage 
2B2C -1A2C -1B1A. Making a connection  
2B2C -1A2C -1B1B. Root text  
2B2C -1A2C -1B1C. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2C -1B1A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
In one who possesses the achievings, the partial concordance of definite discrimination which has been explained, the path of seeing, and so forth, furthermore, will arise. Thus, 
what serves as the support of the achievings:  
 
EXPLANATION  
Without awakening the Mahayana lineage, one will not engage in the generated mind [of 
enlightenment], and even if one were to engage in it, it would not be firm. Hence, it is 
necessary to awaken the lineage. In one who possesses lineage that i s suitable to give rise 
to the achievings, the partial concordance of definite discrimination which has been  
explained, the path of seeing which will be explained, and so forth, furthermore, will 
arise. Indeed the Mahayana path of accumulation is also supp orted on the lineage, but it is 
not indicated, because (1) the context of nourishing the lineage continually is the main one 
and (2) [the Mahayana path of accumulation] is not separated from all hindrances of 
lineage. Thus, I shall explain the lineage that  serves as the support of the achievings:  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
163 2B2C -1A2C -1B1B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
1.20 The six qualities of realization,  
Antidotes, abandoning,  
Fully reaching  those,  
Wisdom along with compassion,   
 1.21 That not in common with the learners, 
The stages  of others’ welfare,  
And exalted wisdom engaging without exertion – 
Know their support as lineage. 
 
EXPLANATION  
(1-6) The dharmata that is  the support of the six qualities of realization that are with stains 
is called “lineage.” Indicating the support of:  
• heat, sutra says, “Subhuti, the tracks of a bird in the sky do not exist and are not 
observed. Likewise, the meaning of the word ‘bodhisattva’ does not exist and is not 
observed.”  
• peak, sutra says, “Abiding in the perfect end does not exist and is not observed.”  
• forbearance, sutra says, “Abiding in the form of a being who is an illusion does not 
exist and is not observed.”  
• supreme mundane quality, sutra says, “The meaning of the words ‘Practicing the 
inner emptiness of a being who is an illusion’ does n ot exist and is not observed.”  
• path of seeing, sutra says, “The meaning of the words with respect to the form of a 
tathagata foe -destroyer perfectly complete buddha does not exist and is not observed.”  
• path of meditation, sutra says, “The meaning of the w ords ‘no generation’ does not 
exist and is not observed.”   
 
(7-8) Abandoning  by way of approaching the generation of the antidotes , the uninterrupted 
paths , and approaching the cessation of the seeds that are the objects of abandonment , (9) 
the liberated paths , which fully reach  those  objects of abandonment , (10) wisdom along 
with compassion  which stop the extremes of cyclic existence and solitary peace , (11) that 
not in common with the learners , the hearers and so forth , (12) the achievings of the 
stages  of others’ welfare, and (13) exalted wisdom engaging  in the two types of objects 
of knowledge, modes and varieties, without exertion —know their support as lineage.  
 Respectively, sutra says:  
• “When the sun shines brightly, abodes of darkness do not exist and are not 
observed.”  
• “When the fire of the eon blazes, abodes of all types of compositional factors do 
not exist and are not observed.”  
• “With respect to the ethics of a tathagata foe -destroyer perfectly complete buddha, 
abidance of bad ethics do not exist and are not observed.”  
• “Abidance in the light of the sun and the moon does not exist and is not observed.”  
• “Abidance in the light of hearers, solitary realizers, constellations, stars, precious 
gems, and lightning does not exist and is not observed.”  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
164 • “Abid ance in the light of the gods of the lineage of the Four Great Kings does not 
exist and is not observed.”  
• “Abidance in the light of a tathagata foe -destroyer perfectly complete buddha does 
not exist and is not observed.”   
2B2C -1A2C -1B1C. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2C-1B1C -1. Explanation  
2B2C -1A2C -1B1C -2. Summary 
2B2C -1A2C -1B1C -1. Explanation  
2B2C -1A2C -1B1C -1A. Individual entities  
2B2C -1A2C -1B1C -1B. Sequence  
2B2C -1A2C -1B1C -1C. Definiteness in number  
2B2C -1A2C -1B1C -1A. Individual entities  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. (1 -4) For the time being, at the beginning, the mundane partial 
concordances of definite discrimination. (5 -6) After that, the supramundane path of seeing 
and path of meditation. (7 -8) After that, by the force of generating those, like throwing ou t 
of a thief and shutt ing of the door —the simultaneous generation and the cessation of the 
antidote and the discordant class. 
 
EXPLANATION  
(1-4) The subject —for the time being  by way of serial indication , at the beginning, the 
dharmata of the mundane partial concordances of definite discrimination —is their 
support, because it is the dharmata of those which will be enhanced more and more through 
observing and meditating on it . (5-6) After that, the dharmata that is the support of the 
supramundane path of seeing  which newly realizes emptiness by way of direct cognition  
and path of meditation which familiarizes with that already realized is called “lineage .” 
Do not think that it indicates only the path of meditation of the seventh ground and below; 
the mere path of meditation is indicated.  
 (7-8) After that, the way in which the objects of abandonment are abandoned by the 
uninterrupted path of those paths are indicated as follows. By the force of generating the uninterrupted paths included within those  paths of seeing and meditation, the exhaustion of 
the seeds that are the corresponding objects of abandonment occurs simultaneously, like the 
simultaneous  throwing out of a thief and shutting of the door —the simultaneous  
approach to the generation of the anti dote, the uninterrupted path, and the approach to the 
cessation of the discordant class, the seeds that are the corresponding objects of 
abandonment  [occur] . This indicates the mode of abandoning the objects of abandonment 
by the uninterrupted paths of bot h paths; do not think that it is correct to apply it only to the 
uninterrupted path of the eighth ground. 
 If we were to express the way in which an uninterrupted path destroys the objects of 
abandonment in an example , when the uninterrupted path, the dharma forbearance of [true] 
sufferings of the Mahayana path of seeing is generated, the direct objects to be damaged, the 
seeds that are the objects to be abandoned by the path of seeing , are ceased. The two —
approach to the generation [of the uninterrupted pa th] and approach to the cessation [of the 
seeds that are the objects of abandonment] —are simultaneous. That very uninterrupted 
arisal of what is similar to a previous type acts as a bearer of the property of [the object of 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
165 abandonment] being unsuitable to be generated henceforth, by the force of the uninterrupted 
path. The start of that path in which a true cessation (which has come to be the bearer of the property of [the object of abandonment] being unsuitable to be generated by way of the imprint of the antidote) has been attained is called a “liberated path.” It is generated by the uninterrupted path.  
 At the time of the uninterrupted path, the corresponding object of abandonment does not 
exist and bears the property of [the object of abandonment] being  unsuitable to be 
generated. However, this is due to incomplete conditions and is not the attainment of an analytical cessation. Inferring from this, even though there is not even a mere particle of subtle stains of negative states at the time of the uninterrupted path at the end of the continuum of a sentient being of the tenth ground, do not take it that “they have been exhaustively abandoned.” For, the path (that has come to bear the property of [the object of abandonment] being unsuitable to be generate d on account of the imprints being deposited 
by the direct antidote) has not been attained. If you respond that the sign is not established, then it follows that cause and result would be simultaneous.  Someone, having accepted that the direct object to be  damaged does not exist at the time 
of the uninterrupted path of the path of seeing, asserted that subtle stains of negative states exist at the time of the uninterrupted path at the end of the continuum of a sentient being; this brings together the tenets  propounding abandonment by that which will be generated 
and propounding abandonment by that which will cease. Know that those who assert also 
that the first instant of an exalted knower of all aspects acts to directly damage [the subtle 
stains of negative  states] are not skillful  in the modes of the objects of abandonment and the 
antidotes.  
 Another person, without determining the meaning of the teaching from the [Asanga's] 
Compendium of Knowledge (Abhidharmasamuchchaya) which says: ‘It is not because the  
past has ceased…,’ asserts that, although the three modes of abandonment of the manifest [afflictions] are incorrect, the seeds that are the objects of abandonment and their direct 
antidote, the uninterrupted path are simultaneous. This is also inconclusive, because, in that 
case, one would have to assert that also illumination and darkness that are the direct object to be damaged and the damager would be simultaneous, since that [illumination and darkness] acts as an analogy for that [assertion].  
 Therefo re, it is not that the uninterrupted path abandons the direct object to be damaged, 
the seeds that are the objects of abandonment, (i) like a vase that has been destroyed by a hammer, which is a past [phenomenon] at the present time. It is also not abandoned (ii) like 
making an offering of what has not been generated at the present time. It is also not 
abandoned (iii) in a manner of ceasing simultaneously what exists at the present time, like dzos
96 bound together that are thrown down into a precipice. 
 Well, how is it then? In dependence on having familiarized with the antidotal class in the 
past, by means of (i) simultaneous approach to the generation of the antidote and approach to the cessation of the final similar class of the seeds that are the obje cts of abandonment, 
and (ii) simultaneous generation of the antidote and the cessation of that, having come to 
bear that property of the objects of abandonment being unsuitable to be generated is the 
meaning of having caused damage [to the objects of aband onment].  
 Hence, I do not see this passage  explained as  the modes of abandoning the objects of 
abandonment by both the uninterrupted path and liberated path as the meaning. You should 
                                             
 
96 A dzo ( mdzo ) is the offspring of a bull and a fem ale counterpart of a yak.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
166 know that, having thought that throwing out a thief and shutting the do or are not 
simultaneous, claiming that it explains the intention of this [passage] is inappropriate. 
 
COMMENTARY 
(9) After that, by way of not observing those, conceptualizations which possess generating and ceasing those have been abandoned. (10) After that, by the force of previous prayers and skillful means, generosity and so forth, wisdom and method with the characteristic of not abiding in samsara or nirvana. (11) After that, by generating those, qualities  not in 
common with those of hearers and so forth. (12) After that, in accordance with the 
mentality , by means of ulterior intention toward causing them to enter and so forth, the 
characteristic of setting in the paths of the three vehicles: the stages  of the others’ welfare.  
 
EXPLANATION 
(9) After th at, the dharmata which is the support of the liberated path  in which 
conceptualizations (that are conceptions of true existence which possess as their objects 
the existence of the generating and ceasing of those objects of abandonment and antidotes)  
have been abandoned ( by way of familiarizing with not observing those  
conceptualizations of objects of abandonment and antidotes as truly existent) is called 
“lineage.” (10) After that, the support of wisdom and method with the characteristic of 
not abiding in the extreme of samsara or the extreme of nirvana (by the force of 
previous prayers , thinking, “May I enact others’ welfare effortlessly,”  and skillful means 
of having trained in the six perfections , generosity and so forth ) is called “lineage,” and is 
attained from the eighth ground.   
 (11) After that, by generating those  method and wisdom, dharmas not in common 
with  those of  hearers and so forth,  the method for ripening sentient beings —the four 
individual correct knowledges —are attained from the ninth ground. (12) After that, the 
subject —a tenth -grounder —possesses the achieving of the stages of others’ welfare , 
because he is a bodhisattva who has attained  equality with a buddha, spontaneously 
accomplishing others’ welfare with the  characteristic of setting in the paths of the three 
vehicles in accordance with the mentality  of trainees, by means of ulterior intention 
toward causing them to enter  and so forth,  and by means of the definitive meaning .  
 With respect to that, there are:  
 
1. The difference between interpretable97 [meaning  sutras] and definitive  [meaning  sutras] 
2. The difference between [sutras] bearing intention and [sutras of] ulterior intention  
1. The difference between interpretable [meaning sutras] and definitive [meaning sutras]  
Like it has been taught in the King of Meditative Stabilizations Sutra ( Samadhirajasutra) 
and the Teachings of Akshayamati Sutra  (Akshayamatinirdeshasutra), sutra sets that 
explicitly indicate the meaning of emptiness, where the  meaning of the mode of abidance 
does not need to be explained through having been interpreted over and above them, are definitive in meaning; and (i) the sutras that indicate that compounded phenomena are impermanent and so forth, although literally acceptable, where the meaning of the mode of abidance needs to be explained through having been interpreted over and above them, and 
(ii) the sutras that are not suitable to be held literally are interpretable in meaning. With 
respect to the latter, there are four ulterior intentions.  
                                             
 
97 grangs  emended to drang according to page 372 of Sera Jhe’s edition of General Meaning .  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
167  (1) Regarding the ulterior intention with respect to the characters , for instance, whether 
the three natures have the attribute of being established or not established as truly existent 
has been taught in the Sutra Unraveling the Thought (Samdhinirmocanasutra ). (2) The 
ulterior intention regarding causing to enter, is such as the teaching that a self of persons exists for the sake of other [non -Buddhist] schools and some of our own [Buddhist] schools. 
(3) Concerning  the ulterior in tention regarding antidote , there are  four bearers of intention s. 
(3a) For example, with the intention of the three samenesses, the Teacher [Buddha] taught “I, at that time, was the Buddha Vipashvin.” (3b) The intention regarding other meaning  is 
[such as that in the teaching] “The father and the mother are to be killed.” (3c) The intention regarding other time  is [such as that in the teaching] in which it has been taught that one will 
be reborn in Sukhavati [Amitabha Buddha’s pure land] by simply making prayers to be reborn there as an antidote for those who are lazy. (3d) The intention regarding the mentality of persons  is [such as that in the teaching] that deprecates generosity and praises 
ethics as an antidote to complacency with merely generosity. (4) The ulterior intention regarding conversion  is [such as that in the teaching] “Know the essence in that which is 
devoid of essence,”  which converts poor syllables that are widely renowned into those 
which reveal an unrenowned profound meaning.  
2. The difference between [sutras] bearing intention and [sutras of] ulterior intention  
Although similar in being not being literally acceptable, that in which the basis of [Buddha’s] thought is taken as principal is that which bears intention , while that  in which 
the intention
98 is taken as principal is the ulterior intention . 
 If you wish to extensively know the distinctions between that definitive in meaning and 
that interpretable in meaning, understand them from [Lama Tsongkhapa] Je Rinpoche Losang Dragpa’s Treatise Differentiating Interpretable and Definitive Meanings: Essenc e 
of Eloquence . 
 
COMMENTARY 
(13) After that, because there is no sign as long as samsara exists, and the exalted wisdom of others’ welfare arises spontaneously.   
 
EXPLANATION 
(13) After that, because  in that tenth -grounder there is no sign  of striving as long as 
samsara exists, and the culminated exalted wisdom of others’ welfare arises 
spontaneously, the support of that is called “lineage.”  
2B2C -1A2C -1B1C -1B. Sequence  
COMMENTARY 
This is the sequence.  
 
EXPLANATION 
This is the sequence on the occasions of the achievings . 
2B2C -1A2C -1B1C -1C. Definiteness in number  
COMMENTARY 
Also, by these, all aims of beings are fulfilled. 
                                              
98 dgos  emended to dgongs  according to page 373 of Sera Jhe’s edition of General Meaning . 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
168  
EXPLANATION  
Also, by these  thirteen , all aims of beings who seek omniscience will be completely  
fulfilled. The number is definite with re spect to the m. 
2B2C -1A2C -1B1C -2. Summary 
COMMENTARY 
Only the entitiness99 that is the sphere of qualities (dharmadhatu) of the thirteen kinds of 
bodhisattvas due to the particularities of different occasions of the qualities of the 
achievings, that serves as the basis of the qualities which have been explained is indicated as 
“lineage.”  
 
EXPLANATION  
Only the entitiness that is  the sphere of qualities  (dharmadhatu)  in the continua of the 
thirteen kinds of bodhisattvas is indicated as “lineage”  in this context, because only that 
is the sphere  that serves as the basis of  the qualities  of the achievings  which have been 
explained. It is appropriate to divide bodhisattvas into thirteen, due to the particularities of the thirteen different occasions of the qualities of the achievings . Although the thirteen 
are posited by means of dissim ilar functions and so forth, it is not that the thirteen are solely 
of different entities.  
2B2C -1A2C -1B2. Dispelling objection  
2B2C -1A2C -1B2A. Objection 
2B2C -1A2C -1B2B. Reply  
2B2C -1A2C -1B2A. Objection 
2B2C -1A2C -1B2A -1. Previous commentary 
2B2C -1A2C -1B2A -2. Root text  
2B2C -1A2C -1B2A -1. Previous commentary 
2B2C -1A2C -1B2A -1A. Expressing the assertion  
2B2C -1A2C -1B2A -1B. Stating the consequence  
2B2C -1A2C -1B2A -1A. Expressing the assertion  
COMMENTARY 
ASSERTION: Because only dharmadhatu is the caus e which will transform into realizing 
the qualities of the aryas, the bodhisattvas who bear the nature of that are the lineage 
abiding in the nature of the qualities of the unsurpassable buddhas.  
 
EXPLANATION  
ASSERTION: Because only the dharmadhatu  of sen tient beings is  the object of 
observation that is the cause which will transform into realizing the qualities of the 
aryas, the bodhisattvas who bear the nature of that dharmadhatu are bearers of the 
Mahayana lineage, and the dharmata of [sentient beings] is the lineage abiding in the nature , the source of the qualities of the unsurpassable buddhas .  
                                             
 
99 The word “entit iness” (Tibetan: ngo bo nyid), which basically refers to the nature, has various meanings 
depending on the context. Sometimes it refers to true existence. At other times it can refer to the 
conventional entity of an object or even its emptiness of true exi stence.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
169 2B2C -1A2C -1B2A -1B. Stating the consequence  
COMMENTARY 
Through anticipating doubts in the perspective of beings of inferior intelligence who think, 
“Well, at th at time, because it abides in general, it is not only bodhisattvas,”  
 
EXPLANATION  
Through anticipating doubts in the perspective of b eings of inferior intelligence  who 
think, “ The dharmadhatu is lineage. Well, at that time, (i) because it abides in all sen tient 
beings, it follows that [all sentient beings] abide in the lineage of buddhas, and (ii) because 
it abides in general  in persons who are all three lineage -bearers, since we must assert that 
the persons who are all three lineage -bearers abide in the li neage of the occasion of the path , 
it follows that  it is not that only bodhisattvas are bearers of the lineage of buddhas ,”   
2B2C -1A2C -1B2A -2. Root text  
COMMENTARY 
An interceding stanza:  
 
ROOT TEXT  
1.22ab Because of being indivisible in dharmadhatu,  The lineages are not suitable to be different. 
 
EXPLANATION  
It follows that the lineages of the three vehicles are not suitable to be different, and all 
those on the learning paths who are all three lineage -bearers abide in the lineage of the path 
of the occas ion of Mahayana,  because [the lineages are]  indivisible in their dharmadhatu.  
2B2C -1A2C -1B2B. Reply  
2B2C -1A2C -1B2B -1. The reply obtained through implication  
2B2C -1A2C -1B2B -2. The reply explicitly indicated  
2B2C -1A2C -1B2B -1. The reply obtained through impl ication  
2B2C -1A2C -1B2B -1A. Decisive analysis  
2B2C -1A2C -1B2B -1B. Meaning of the words  
2B2C -1A2C -1B2B -1A. Decisive analysis  
With respect to that, in general in this Ornament for Clear Realization, three vehicles are 
posited by way of faculty in relation to t he view. (1) The best view in the great vehicle, the 
view of the Middle Way (Madhyamaka), (2) the middling view in the middling vehicle, the view of the Mind -Only ( Cittamatra), and (3) the last view in the small vehicle, the common 
view of the selflessness  of persons, are posited. However, they are not definite; even in the 
case of suchness being present in all three views, there is no contradiction that there are 
three levels of faculties by means of whether or not suchness is quickly penetrated. Because 
the inability to abandon adherence to consciousness as truly existent has been indicated as 
an attribute of the inferior, one is able to realize the existence of a view higher than that, therefore it is inappropriate to explain the Ornament for Clear Realiz ation  as Mind -Only . 
 Furthermore, the Acarya Arya Vimuktisena also made the presentation that hearers and 
solitary realizers in this context also have the realization of the selflessness of phenomena. 
His Illuminating the Twenty Thousand  says : 
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
170 With regard to that, the conceptions and the conceptualizations adhere to things 
and their signs. Because they are not existent, know them without attachment. 
Not being existent is the very nature of all phenomena. Hence, on account of this, 
dharmadhatu itself is th e cause of the aryas’ qualities. Thus it is indicated that 
“The lineage abiding in the nature is the support of the achievings.”  
 
It explains [that dharmadhatu is] the emptiness of true existence which is the absence of 
existence in the way apprehended by the attachment that adheres to things and their signs as 
truly existent. 
 With respect to that, the objection is stated: If dharmadhatu were  the lineage, then all 
sentient beings would abide in the lineage, because in general dharmadhatu abides in all. [The objector] thinks that abiding in the lineage refers to the lineage of the occasion of the 
path.  
 In reply to that, it has been taught that —since, whatever, when observed, will become the 
cause of the aryas’ qualities is expressed thus as the lineage —there is no ridiculous 
consequence with respect to it. The meaning is that one does not abide in the lineage of the occasion of the path by way of the mere presence of dharmata; if one observes dharmata and 
meditates on it by way of the path, at the time when it becomes the special cause of the 
aryas’ qualities, then it is posited as the special lineage. 
 “Even in that case, since dharmadhatu has no divisions, it is inappropriate for the lineages 
of the three vehicles to be different.” In reply to that, it is i ndicated that “Lineage is 
expressed as different by way of divisions of the supported qualities , the path that acts to 
observe.”  
 The support refers to the object of observation here, and the supported the [path] that acts 
to observe . The [path] that acts  to observe exist s even [in] the two vehicles of hearers and 
solitary realizers. In order to observe dharmata, it must be established in the perspective of 
the awareness; without severing true existence in the perspective of the awareness, 
emptiness of tru e existence will not be established in the perspective of the awareness; and 
if that is not established, dharmata will not be established in the perspective of the 
awareness. Furthermore, initially it must be ascertained in terms of one property -possessor 
basis, whereby it is indicated that, through observing the outer and inner property -
possessors, observation of their dharmata, the absence  of true existence, exists even in 
hearers and solitary realizers.  
 If taken like that, since even a realization of th e meaning of suchness exists in solitary 
realizers, solitary realizers are not pervaded by being unable to abandon adherence to the consciousness as truly existent. Hearers too must be divided into two [types], those who 
realize suchness and those who do n ot. 
 Even if one thinks, “We are not disputing different lineages of the three vehicles being 
inappropriate; we are arguing that the divisions of the thirteen lineages are inappropriate,”  
this is incorrect. [Vimuktisena’s] Illuminating the Twenty Thousand  says: 
 
OPINION: It is as said [in sutra], “Manjushri, if dharmadhatu is only one, thusness is just one, and the perfect end is just one, then how does one impute 
vessel and non -vessel to it?”  
 
It is taught in the other sutras that “Since dharmadhatu has no divisions, how should one examine whether someone is a vessel or non -vessel for the Mahayana Dharma?” Through 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
171 such, one makes objections as before; it is inappropriate to argue about whether o ne is a 
vessel or non -vessel for the Mahayana Dharma if lineage is taken to be thirteen [types]. 
What is explained in the commentary also accords with that explained by the Arya in this 
context. This passage of the reply also condenses that very meaning of the reply taught in 
[Vimuktisena’s] Illuminating the Twenty Thousand that there is not the fault of a ridiculous 
consequence.   
 In both [Vimuktisena’s] Illuminating the Twenty Thousand  and [Haribhadra’s] Great 
Commentary , as the reason for positing dharmadhatu as the lineage of all three vehicles, 
“All persons who are aryas are thoroughly distinguished by the uncompounded” is cited. It proves the statement from the Vajra Cutter Sutra ( Vajracchedika ), “The buddhas and all the 
dharmas revealed by them do not exist.” The meaning is that all persons who are aryas of the great and small vehicles are posited by way of directly realizing the uncompounded ultimate in which phenomena are not established in suchness.  
  The presenta tion of the hearers’ path has been made in terms of the coarse selflessness of 
persons on most of the occasions at the beginning and the end. Even having done so, with 
respect to the Hinayana [trainees] which are to be cared for, there are two —those who 
become and those who do not become a vessel for the profound. With respect to that, the 
latter [those who do not become a vessel for the profound] is by far the majority, and when 
one has familiarized with the common realization of selflessness, through quic kly ripening 
the continuum, one will become a vessel of the profound path. Hence mostly that path is 
frequently taught. The presentation of the both of them is also abundant in other texts. For 
example, it is just as the Mind -Only  view is taught as a means  to ripen the continuum of the 
Middle -Way view.  
 Although it is not asserted that it is necessary to directly realize emptiness definitely in 
order to attain the hearers’ path of seeing in the way  asserted by the Middle -Way 
Consequentialists, there are man y Middle -Way Autonomists who assert that there are hearer 
aryas who also directly realize the meaning of emptiness. 
 While teaching that a path that realizes the profound meaning exists in hearers in all the 
earlier and later portions of this treatise may not have been agreeable, I have arranged it. For 
those who  have not pleased their spiritual guide over a prolong ed period , the various 
assertion of the great trailblazers abiding unmixed like lotus petals ; separated from the 
mental strength of discriminati on, they  have been diligent in achieving just gain, honor and 
reputation of this life. Regarding the assertions that the realization of the profound meaning 
exists in Hinayana aryas, it appears that there have been many cases of taking them like 
seeing som e bad omen. Those who wish good for themselves should possess 
conscientiousness with respect to this topic even later.  
2B2C -1A2C -1B2B -1B. Meaning of the words  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. In the way  observed by way of the stages of realization of t he 
hearers’ vehicle and so forth, accordingly, for the sake of realizing the aryas’ qualities, by 
means of presenting dharmadhatu as the entity of the cause, the convention as being just the 
lineages is imputed.   
 
EXPLANATION  
The thusness that is together with stains is the buddha lineage. It follows that there is no 
fault that the classification of the three lineages is inappropriate; in the way  thusness that is 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
172 dharmadhatu is  observed by way of the stages of realization of dissimilar attributes of the 
accumulations and faculty of the hearers’ vehicle, the solitary realizers’ vehicles, the 
bodhisattvas’ vehicle  and so forth, accordingly, due to observation for the sake of 
realizing their respective  aryas’ qualities  in just the manner observed , by means of 
presenting dharmadhatu as the entity of the object of observation that is the cause, the 
convention of the three persons as abiding in their respective lineage, and of their dharmata 
as being just the lineages  of the three vehicles  is imputed. 
 The meaning of the statement is as follows. With respect to positing that persons of all 
three vehicles observe thusness and that the thusness that is together with stains is the lineage, it follows that there is no t the fault that the three individual lineage -bearers and the 
classification of the three individual lineages are  inappropriate, because even though all 
three vehicles observe thusness, due to difference in the accumulations and faculty, it becomes the object of observation that is the cause of dissimilar realizations of the greater 
and smaller vehicles, whereby the divisions of the three lineage -bearers and the three 
lineages are correct. Differentiating by way of differences in observing subtle and coarse 
selflessness on this occasion degenerates from the  contextual meaning of the reply to the 
objection.  
2B2C -1A2C -1B2B -2. The reply explicitly indicated  
2B2C -1A2C -1B2B -2A. Making a connection  
2B2C -1A2C -1B2B -2B. Root text  
2B2C -1A2C -1B2B -2C. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2C -1B2B -2A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
Although  such a reply is seen, for the mere quality of ease, another reply through worldly 
reputation.    
EXPLANATION  
Although such a reply is seen, for the mere quality of ease, another reply through 
worldly reputation.  Reputation refers to worldly renown.  
2B2C -1A2C-1B2B -2B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
1.22cd By way of the particularities of the qualities supported100,  
The divisions of that are fully described.  
 
EXPLANATION  
It follows that there is no fault that the classification of the three lineages is inappropriate if 
there is no difference in the observation of thusness by the three vehicles, because, by way 
of the particularities  of the qualities supported, the division s of that support are correct  
divisions by way of the qualities of the supported101 as fully described  and renowned in the 
world.  
                                              
100 Rten emended to read brten  in accordance with the explanation below.  
101 Rten emended to read brten . 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
173 2B2C -1A2C -1B2B -2C. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. For example, pots and so forth —supports that are manufactured  
from the same clay and baked in the same flames —are different by way of being just the 
vessels of supported honey, molasses, and so forth. Likewise, by way of supported102 
qualities —the different objects to be realized included within the three vehicles —“ju st 
different supports103” were indicated. 
 
EXPLANATION  
For example , just the same vessels, pots and so forth —supports  that are manufactured 
from the same clay , the substantial cause, baked in the same flames, the condition, and so 
forth —are applied the conve ntion of different vessels by way of being just the vessels  of 
different dissimilar contents of supported honey, molasses, and so forth. Likewise, by 
way of supported qualities —the different paths that are objects to be realized  and 
attained included withi n the three vehicles —“just different support lineages” were 
indicated . The claim that “If the vessels are the same, it is contradictory that they are 
vessels of dissimilar contents” is only a wrong conception of some one who does not know 
how to posit composite and continuity; it is obvious that, through the force of that, only 
wrong conceptions regarding also the presentation of the groun ds and paths will be 
produced.   
2B2C -1A2C -2. Objects of observation [of the achievings]  
2B2C -1A2C -2A. Making a connectio n 
2B2C -1A2C -2B. Root text  
2B2C -1A2C -2C. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2C -2A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
QUESTION: What are the objects of observation of the previously explained supports of achievings?  
 
EXPLANATION  
QUESTION: What are the objects of observation  of the achieving s, the supported 
qualities of the previously explained supports of achievings ? 
2B2C -1A2C -2B. Root text  
2B2C -1A2C -2B1. Meaning of the words  
2B2C -1A2C -2B2. Decisive analysis  
2B2C -1A2C -2B1. Meaning of the words  
ROOT TEXT  
1.23 The objects of obse rvation are all phenomena.  
Moreover, they are virtue and so forth,  
Mundane realizations,  
Those asserted to be supramundane,  
 
                                              
102 Rten emended to read brten  in accordance with the explanation below.  
103 Nyid do emended to read Nyid kyis rten tha dad pa nyid do.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
174 1.24 Contaminated and uncontaminated phenomena,  
Those that are compounded and uncompounded,  
Qualities in common with the learners, and  
Those uncommon [qualities] of the subduers. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The “objects of observation of achievings” are indicated in general by way of:  (1-3) objects 
to be adopted, objects to be discarded , and neutral objects, and are of eight divisions by w ay 
of (4-5) path s, (6-7) objects of abandonment and antidotes, (8 -9) truths, and  (10-11) results.  
They are the objects of observation of the Mahayana achievings, because they are the bases 
for eliminating the superimpositions of those [ achievings ].  
2B2C -1A2C-2B2. Decisive analysis  
[Haribhadra’s] Great Commentary in this context says:  
 
OPINION:  By way of those intentions thinking, “The constant purity 
dharmadhatu is the object of observation  of the very exalted wisdom of non -
duality ,” since it is the very c onstant purity, how is it to be expressed as 
proceeding higher and higher to distinguished purity? It has been said that “ In the 
way the water constituent, gold, and space are pure, it is asserted to be pure.”  
RESPONSE: In that case, because [thinking] “ Purity  is the exalted wisdom of 
suchness” is adherence to the antidotal class, adherence to the discordant class is 
implied. Hence, since the conceptualizations of the discordant and antidotal 
classes have not been abandoned, the consequence of partial purit y would follow.  
QUALM: According to your position, since it has been said, “Subhuti, the object 
of observation of an exalted knower of all aspects is non -thing,” what is the final 
object of observation like?  RESPONSE: There is no fault, because a thing th at accompanies reasoning does 
not exist, thus non- thing is expressed as being a real conventionality; the very 
realization gradually of th at which obscures the nature of suchness as illusory is 
purity.  
 
A. Incorrect meaning of this  [passage from the Great Commentary] as posited by others  
B. Our system   
A. Incorrect meaning of this [passage from the Great Commentary] as posited by others  
A1. The stated assertion of others is not the assertion of the other party 
A2.Incorrect presentation of our system  
A1. The stated assertion of others is not the assertion of the other party 
QUALM: It has been said that “Since the Proponents of Mind- Only  have asserted that only 
the thusness that is the emptiness of apprehended -objects and their apprehender- subjects 
being different substances is the object of observation of an arya’s meditative equipoise, that 
is refuted.” What is the meaning of that?  
RESPONSE: [It means that] “It is not asserted by the Proponents of Mind -Only  that—
having taken other -powered natures as the object of observation, and the emptiness of 
apprehended- objects and their apprehender- subjects being different substances as the 
aspect —other- powered natures’ emptiness of the apprehended -objects and their 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
175 apprehender -subjects being different substances is directly seen by104 an arya’s meditative 
equipoise.” If you say that, then you have not understood well their system, because there is 
no great charioteer of the Mind -Only  who ha s made such an assertion, and because if I were 
to explain the assertion of Cognition -Only in the Seven Treatises , it has been established not 
[just] once that the two —the direct damager and the superimposition that is to be 
damaged —are identical in the object of observation that is the basis; you would be asserting 
that “It is not possible to directly realize that, to an other- powered nature, apprehended -
objects and their apprehender- subjects appear to be of differe nt substances but are not 
established in the way they appear,” and even if it were to exist, you would be asserting that 
it is realized by a direct cognizer of an ordinary being.  
 
OPINION: Although the objects  of a conceptual reasoning consciousness  appear in that 
manner as the basis of characterization  and the attributes, since other- powered natures do 
not appear to a  seer that is an arya’s meditative equipoise, other- powered natures are not 
realized by a direct cognizer to not be established in the way th ey appear, and only thusness 
is observed. 
RESPONSE: Also in our system, does sprout appear to the seer that is a meditative 
equipoise directly realizing that a sprout does not exist truly? It follows that only the 
emptiness of true existence would be direc tly realized, without the sprout being realized by 
a direct cognizer to not exist truly.   
QUALM: Sprout appear s to it.  
RESPONSE: It follows that there would be even superimpositions to the seer that directly 
sees the apprehender of true existence as empt y of true existence; there will be refutation 
below. 
A2. Incorrect presentation of our system  
If you were to think, “Since, in our system, it is asserted that the property -possessor, such as 
a sprout, appears to the seer that is a meditative equipoise, we do not have a similar fault of 
refuting the  assertion  of the Proponents of Mind -Only ,” then this is seriously inappropriate 
as an assertion of the Middle -Wayers; when that property -possessor appears to a seer that is 
the path of seeing directly realizing suffering as empty of true existence, does it appear in a 
manner of water placed in water, or does it appear dualistically?  
 In the first case, the consequence that it follows that [suffering] is an ultimate truth 
cannot be countered. In the second case, s ince an arya’s meditative equipoise must also 
appear in that manner to [a seers] that sees it  as empty of true existence, you cannot counter 
the consequence that the meditative equipoise itself is a different substance from itself.  
 QUALM: Further, to that path of seeing, does suffering appear differently [from its 
emptiness of true existence], and does ultimate truth appear in a manner of water placed in 
water, or is ultimate truth realized implicitly ? 
RESPONSE: In the first case [wh ere suffering appears differently  and ultimate truth appears 
in a manner of water placed in water], to a seer that is a bodhisattva arya’s meditative 
equipoise, the modes of appearance of the two  types of objects of knowledge —modes and 
varieties —appearing dissimilarly transgresses the path of reasoning, because, otherwise, one 
must assert that meditative equipoise and subsequent attainment are one entity on that 
                                             
 
104 Gi emended to read gis in accordance with the explanation below.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
176 occasion. In the second case [where ultimate truth is realized implicitly ], what is that 
explici tly realized [by the realization which] realizes ultimate truth implicitly?  
 
OPINION: It explicitly realizes that very property -possessor, suffering.  
RESPONSE: The consequence that it follows that [suffering] would be an ultimate truth cannot be countered even more so. This is because there is no Middle -Way Consequentialist 
or Autonomist who asserts that compounded property -possessors appear to a seer that is a 
meditative equipoise of a arya learner. 
 
QUALM: What is the explanation of “an awareness to which  an illusory nature appears” 
below like?  RESPONSE: It is very clear that it is indicated to be the illusory meditative equipoise itself, because it has been taught in that way on many occasions in [Haribhadra’s] Great 
Commentary .  
B. Our system  
We accept that all consciousnesses in the continua  of ordinary beings, such as sense 
consciousnesses that are apprehenders of apprehendeds, are other- powered natures. We 
assert that , to sense consciousnesses, even though apprehended -objects and their 
apprehender -subjects appear to be different substances, they are seen by an arya’s 
meditative equipoise to not be established in the way they appear. It is asserted that its  
objects do not appear [to] sense consciousnesses , and unchanging thoroughly established 
natures a ppear in a manner of water placed in water. Nevertheless we assert that they  are 
directly seen  to not be established in the way they appear [to] sense consciousnesses, and we 
do not assert that they are not seen  [to not be established in the way they appea r to sense 
consciousnesses ]. Hence, the meaning of the assertion that the constant purity that is 
dharmadhatu is the object of observation of the non -conceptual exalted wisdom is that.  
 With respect to that, the assertion that (i) other- powered natures whi ch are the bases that 
are objects of observation, and (ii) the unchanging thoroughly established property -
possessors are truly existent is refuted by the Middle -Wayers , [because] a lso at the time 
when other -powered natures are observed during the occasions  of subsequent [attainment] 
by the aryas, it follows that purity would not become enhanced (in the manner of mistaken appearances and the conceptualizations that apprehend apprehended -objects and their 
apprehender -subjects as different substances becoming weaker), because the mistaken 
appearances and the conceptualizations have previously entered into the nature of other-
powered natures, and that state of entry is truly existent, and with respect to the truly 
existent, enhancement does not exist. It follows  that purity would not become distinguished 
in meditative equipoise, that is, the seeds would not be purified more and more.   
 
PROPONENTS OF COGNITION -ONLY : Even though water, gold, and space are pure by 
nature, they can be gradually purified of dirt, rus t, and so forth. Likewise, stains are also 
gradually purified by antidotes. 
RESPONSE: That is incorrect in  your system. The purity suchness is the emptiness of 
apprehended- objects and their apprehender- subjects being different substances. Since it  is 
truly existent, it is inappropriate for it to abandon the discordant classes , [because] i t is 
asserted that it  has entered into the nature of other- powered natures in which apprehended -
objects and their apprehender- subjects appear as different substanc es, and other- powered 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
177 natures themselves are also truly existent. Hence in that case: the subject —other- powered 
natures —it follows that apprehended -objects and their apprehender- subjects appearing to 
you as different substances are  established in the way t hey appear, because they appear in 
that manner and they are truly existent. There is pervasion, because there is no occasion in 
which that which is embraced by falsity abides as truly existent. If you accept that, then it 
follows that you would not abandon the conception that apprehends apprehended -objects 
and their apprehender -subjects as different substances which is asserted to be a knowledge 
obscuration, because an awareness that is unmistaken with respect to its object of adherence 
is faultless. Therefore, if you assert that the object of comprehension of the exalted wisdom 
of meditative equipoise is truly existent, then it follows that utmost purity cannot be 
asserted, since you must assert by implication that it is inappropriate to abandon the 
discord ant classes that are the objects of abandonment. 
 
OPINION: Since you assert that “The object of observation of an exalted knower of all 
aspects is a non -thing,” the subject —the emptiness of true existence of a sprout —it follows 
that it is truly existent, b ecause it exists for a reasoning  [consciousness ] that analyzes 
finality. You asserted the sign. If you accept that, then it follows that you will incur the fault 
that was explained earlier. There is pervasion, because if something were to exist for that 
ultimate awareness, then it must exist with respect to that ultimate, in which case it must 
exist ultimately.  
RESPONSE: We do not incur fault; even though the emptiness of true existence of a sprout 
exists for a reasoning  [consciousness ], we do not assert t hat it is truly existent, because even 
that negation is empty of true existence and false, abiding like an illusion. Thus it is as it has 
been explained in [Jnanagarbha’s Two Truths ], “Since the object to be negated does not 
exist, it is clear that there i s no correct negation.”  
 It is very clear that  it means that “Even though conceptual and non -conceptual reasoning  
consciousnesses are asserted to be ultimates, they are asserted to be real conventionalities; 
they are not asserted to be truly existent”. What follows from these will be explained on the 
occasion of the achieving of accumulation. Following from that, [Haribhadra’s] Great  
Commentary  says, “Therefore, what serves as the principal nature is the lineage; what 
serves as the principal transformation is the object of observation, thus that both are both is 
not refuted.” The meaning of the passage boils down to understanding whic h is the great 
principal or the small principal. The meaning of the latter [“that both are both is not refuted”] is that it becomes the lineage abiding in the nature by means of observing the six 
inner sources as being empty of true existence, without bein g separated from the property - 
possessor; it is inappropriate for the property -possessor to be abandoned. It means that the 
basis upon which superimpositions are to be eliminated in the context of the objects of 
observation is principally a conventionality ; even thusness serves as an object of 
observation. 
2B2C -1A2C -2C. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2C -2C1. General indication  
2B2C -1A2C -2C2. Individual explanations  
2B2C -1A2C -2C3. Indicating observation of the eleven objects of observation through stages  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
178 2B2C -1A2C -2C1. G eneral indication  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. For the time being at the beginning, in general, (1 -3) virtue, non -
virtue and the unspecified, respectively the mere manner of the trainee -in-virtue, killing and 
so forth, and the unspecified actions o f body and so forth.  
 
EXPLANATION  
A bodhisattva, for the time being at the beginning, analyzes initially: (1 -3) “In general, 
from among these phenomena, what are the three —virtue that is to be adopted, non -virtue  
that is to be discarded, and the unspecifi ed that are to be set aside in neutrality?” When he 
analyzes in this manner, he will realize respectively the mere manner of the trainee -in-
virtue, killing and so forth, and the unspecified actions of body and so forth are objects 
to be adopted, objects to  be discarded and neutral objects . The subject —those three —are the 
objects of observation of the achievings, because they are bases for eliminating the 
superimpositions of those [ achievings ].  
2B2C -1A2C -2C2. Individual explanations  
COMMENTARY 
After that, with regard to just those, by just four divisions of the two aspects, mundane and 
so forth, the remaining, respectively: (4) the five aggregates related to all childish beings, 
(5) the four concentrations included within all arya beings,  
 
EXPL ANATION  
After that  realization of the three phenomena in general, he analyzes the remaining  objects 
of observation, “How many are there?”  Having taken  just those three as the bases of 
division , by just four pairs of divisions of the two aspects, mundane an d so forth, 
respectively , he thinks : (4) the subject —the five aggregates  included within mundane 
paths which are  related to  all childish beings —are mundane, because they are qualities 
that are familiar with respect to cyclic existence since beginningless t ime; (5) the subject —
the four  uncontaminated concentrations included within the continua  of all arya 
beings —are supramundane, because they are antidotes to craving, qualities that are 
unfamiliar with respect to cyclic existence.  
 
COMMENTARY 
(6) the five a ppropriated aggregates which are not antidotes to the view of a self, (7) the four 
close placements of mindfulness, antidotes to viewing that, (8) the desire realm and so forth, 
which are contingent upon causes and conditions, (9) thusness not relying upon  causes,  
 
EXPLANATION  
Then, he examines, “For the sake of abandoning the discordant classes, what are the objects 
of abandonment? What are the uncontaminated antidotes?” When he has examined them, he 
thinks: (6) the subject —the five appropriated aggregate s—are contaminated, because they 
are produced from the root that is the view of the transitory collection, and they are not a 
class of antidote  to the view of a self;  (7) the subject —the four uncontaminated close 
placements of mindfulness, antidotes to vie wing that  self—are  uncontaminated, because 
they are  the direct antidote s to the seeds that are the objects of abandonment. With respect 
to the analysis by way of dividing the uncontaminated itself into the two factors of cause and result, when he has analy zed in this manner, he thinks:  (8) the subject —true paths based 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
179 upon the desire realm and so forth, which are  contingent upon causes and conditions —
is a causal factor, because it is the method for attaining true cessations;  (9) the subject —
separation from the seeds that are the objects of abandonment, thusness not relying upon 
causes —is a resultant factor, because it is a result of separation of a true path.  
 
COMMENTARY  
(10) the four concentrations which arise in the continua  of all arya b eings, and (11) the ten 
strengths, property -possessors  which arise in the continua  of perfect complete buddhas. 
 
EXPLANATION  
Then, when he analyzes, “What are the results to be attained?” [he thinks]: (10) the 
subject —the four concentrations which arise in the continua  of aryas of all three 
vehicles —are common excellent qualities, because they are excellent qualities which arise 
in the continua  of all arya beings  of all three vehicles;  and (11) the subject —the ten 
strengths —are uncommon excell ent qualities, because they are excellent qualities  which 
arise  only in the continua  of perfect complete buddhas. Stating “ property -possessors” is 
for the sake of making known that they are the support of all the excellent qualities of the 
buddhas without exception.  
2B2C -1A2C -2C3. Indicating observation of the eleven objects of observation through stages  
COMMENTARY 
Through stages of realization exactly in accordance with like that and so forth, all phenomena are observed; therefore there are eleven types of objects of observation.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Through stages of realization exactly in accordance with the stages  like that and so 
forth, all phenomena are observed; therefore there are eleven types of objects of 
observation. The great Lama Lotsawa did not take th e modes of observation to be 
sequential and explained them another way .   
2B2C -1A2C -3. Objects of intent [of the achievings]  
2B2C -1A2C -3A. Making a connection  
2B2C -1A2C -3B. Root text  
2B2C -1A2C -3C. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2C -3A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
QUE STION: What are the objects of intent of the achievings with respect to objects of 
observation like those?  
RESPONSE: Objects of intent:  
 
EXPLANATION  
QUESTION: What are the objects of intent of the achievings that know through having 
observed objects of observation like those?  
RESPONSE: Objects of intent: 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
180 2B2C -1A2C -3B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
1.25 The three —the mind, supremacy of all sentient beings,  
The abandonment, and the realization — 
By105 three greatnesses,  
Know that the objects of intent of the self- arisen are these.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Know that the objects of intent are these. Of whom are they? They are of  bodhisattvas 
imputed with the name  “self-arisen ” since they will transform in a self- arisen manner. By 
means of what? By three greatnesses. Wh at are they ? The three —(1) the great mind that 
enacts the  supremacy of all sentient beings, and (2 -3) the abandonment and the great 
realization  which are one’s own welfare . 
2B2C -1A2C -3C. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. By means of fully kno wing the exalted knower of all aspects in all 
ways, because they engage in the achievings  in that manner—that is, in terms of (1) the 
great mind of the supremacy of every sentient being, all sentient beings, (2) the great 
abandonment, and (3) the great rea lization —due to possession of three greatnesses, know 
that the objects of intent of the buddhas who will arise, the bodhisattvas themselves as three.  
EXPLANATION  
Know that the subject—those of the buddhas who will arise, the bodhisattvas 
themselves —the objects of intent as being of three  types, because there are three objects 
of intent due to possession of three greatnesses . There are three because they engage in 
the achievings in that manner, that is, in terms of the three final objects to be attained. 
What are the three? (1) The great mind , the great exalted compassion of the buddhas, the 
desire that “ sentient beings ,” all of them are caused to become buddhas, (2) final 
abandonment, the great abandonment , and (3)  final realization, the great realization . 
 By means of what will they become buddhas? They will arise by means of fully 
knowing the exalted knower of all aspects in all ways  which is characterized by the ten 
topics that act to characterize an exalted knower of all aspects. The bodhisattvas’ enga ging 
in the achievings , similar in terms of properties to a king engaging in battle, has the purpose 
of the three objects of intent: abandonment of all the discordant classes without exception, attainment of all the objects to be attained without exception , and enactment of the  
supremacy of  one and all. 
2B2C -1A2C -4. Entity of the achievings  
2B2C -1A2C -4A. Presentation of the generality, the achievings 
2B2C -1A2C -4B. Explaining the individual natures  
2B2C -1A2C -4A. Presentation of the generality, the achievings 
2B2C -1A2C -4A1. Division into two by means of the mode of demonstration  
2B2C -1A2C -4A2. Division into four by means of the bases of  characterization  
                                              
105 Gyi emended to read gyis in accordance with the explanation below.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
181 2B2C -1A2C -4A1. Division into two by means of the mode of demonstration  
OPINION: Having taken the three exalt ed knowers as objects, achievings in which hearing 
and contemplation are principal  are the achievings by way of the object, the three exalted 
knowers; and achievings that are principally deeds of generosity and so forth are the 
achievings that are particul ar applications. 
RESPONSE: This is inappropriate. If we take the meaning of “ hearing and contemplation 
being principal ” to refer to the occasions in which objects of knowledge are determined 
without practice by way of the applications in generosity and so forth being principal, then, 
since [the deeds of generosity and so forth] exist even previously prior to entering the path, 
the answer to this question is inopportune; even if one were to describe it as the occasions of familiarization again and again thro ugh contemplating the very meaning that has been 
determined, there is not even the slightest reason for the practice of the deeds of generosity 
and so forth not being principal then.  
 Further, it is very clear that [claiming that] (i) the activities of practice of the three 
exalted knowers are applications in the practice of view and also (ii) the practice of the four applications [are applications in] the practice of deeds is a case of being deprived of 
anything to say. This is because there is not even t he slightest reason for the view and the 
deeds with respect to the two [the activities of practice of the three exalted knowers and the 
practice of the four applications] to be principal or not, and because there is not the slightest 
activity of practice o f the bodhisattvas (that has taken the three exalted knowers as object s) 
that is not an activity of practice of any of the four applications. 
 Further, even if you were to assert that “The four applications are the practice of view, 
and the activities of p ractice of the three exalted knowers are the practice of deeds,” what is 
the point of propounding anything to you? As to whether there is difference in indicating or 
not indicating the view as principal (in the first three chapters and the four chapters  that 
indicate the four applications), wipe your eyes well and realize it! You simply have not seen even slightly the divisions of the very practices of the three exalted knowers into six also on  
the occasion of summarizing  the meaning  of the Ornament into six below
106. 
 OPINION OF A PAST SCHOLAR: [The activities of practice of the three exalted knowers 
and the practice of the four applications] refer to (i) whether or not one is focused on the 
beginning of the six perfections, generosity and so forth, a nd (ii) whether or not the six 
perfections are conjoined with the characteristics of individual ascertainment.  
RESPONSE: Even taking them as those cannot bear analysis. If that refers to whether or not 
there is activity of contemplation of the practice of the six perfections, then it follows that 
this first achieving would be an achieving prior to entering the path of accumulation, because, having initially attained the achieving of armor, there is activity of the practice of 
contemplation which observes t he six perfections. If that is accepted, then with respect to 
the question regarding what the entity of the achievings is, there would be contradiction with the division of it into two. If it refers to whether or not the six perfections, generosity 
and so forth are attained in the continuum, then this would contradict the four applications 
posited on a later achieving, because a bodhisattva attains the application in complete 
aspects from the very beginning of having entered the path.   Hence, most people h ave presented the meaning of the commentary erroneously through 
having taken the contradictory mode of expression of the terms to be a contradiction in fact. 
                                             
 
106 See 2B3A. Summarizing into six meanings . 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
182 Therefore, in terms of fact, if it is an achieving which is a particular application, it is a 
pervading generality since it is an achieving that has taken the exalted knowers as object, 
and a particularity; applying the convention of generality and particular achievings and asserting that the two are contradictory is a mistake due to not understanding the actuality 
and the classifications of engagement through an eliminative express er. 
 Well, what is it like then? In the first three chapters, having taken the three exalted 
knowers as object, the achievings of practice are indicated. However, they should  be 
practiced on every occasion of practice of the three exalted knowers, in possession of the six perfections. Except in the achieving of armor, this point has not been clearly indicated 
elsewhere. Even those applications that are indicated in the four re maining chapters are 
applications that have taken the exalted knowers as object. However, it has been clearly indicated that “One should practice every application, in possession of the six perfections.”  
 How [has it been clearly indicated]? “ The conduct o f generosity, ethics, and so forth,  
[4.7b]” “ In each of generosity and so forth, [5.22 c]” “Those with generosity until  wisdom,  
[6.1a]” and “ Included within each of generosity and so forth, [7.1b]” Know that both 
achievings [the achieving of the three exalt ed knowers and the achieving of the 
applications] are indicated on the occasion of the achieving of armor.  
 
From between the two, question and reply, the question is as follows:  
 
COMMENTARY 
QUESTION: Thus, having expressed what serves as the support of th e achievings and so 
forth, what is the self- entity of those?  
 
EXPLANATION  
QUESTION: Thus, having expressed what serves as the support of the achievings , the 
objects of observation, the objects of intent, and so forth, what is the self- entity of those  
achie vings?  
The reply is as follows. 
 
COMMENTARY 
Regarding (i) those bearing the support of virtuous qualities in general with respect to the 
objects that are the three exalted knowers of all, and (ii) the four types of clear realizations, 
manifestly and compl etely realizing all aspects and so forth, the activities which bear the 
support of each clear realization and the six perfections are the achievings.   
 
EXPLANATION  
On the occasions of indicating (i) the achievings which were indicated as object -possessors,  
those bearing the support of virtuous qualities in general with respect to the aspects of 
the three exalted knowers of all  with the nature that individually ascertain the three  
aspects of the three exalted knowers in the first three chap ters through attributes of 
dissimilar expressers , [the aspects] taken as the objects, by being included within the 
exalted knowers , without being clearly indicated by means of possessing the six perfections, 
except armor, and (ii) the four types of clear r ealizations, manifestly and completely 
realizing all aspects and so forth, the activities of practice which  were indicated as  
bearing the support of each clear realization and the six perfections, are the two 
achievings.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
183  With respect to the entity of ach ievings, there are two, because, by means of dissimilar 
modes of demonstration, there are: (1) the achievings in which the three exalted knowers 
have been taken as objects in general, and (2) the achievings that have been indicated as 
possessing the six perfections. When taken in accordance with fact, the subject —the 
Mahayana path of accumulation —is an achieving of the objects, the exalted knowers, 
because it is an activity of practice of meditation having taken some aspect of the three 
knowers as its objec t. 
 That subject [—the Mahayana path of accumulation —] is an achieving of the 
applications, because it is an activity of practice that is conjoined with either attitude or 
application possessing the six perfections. 
2B2C -1A2C -4A2. Division into four by mea ns of the bases of  characterization  
2B2C -1A2C -4A2A. Meaning of positing the achievings as the entity of joyous effort  
2B2C -1A2C -4A2B. Differences among the four achievings  
2B2C -1A2C -4A2A. Meaning of positing the achievings as the entity of joyous effort  
It has been explained that:  
 
At the beginning, from the joyous effort of armor,  The joyous effort of applications, strongly engaging properly, and  
The joyous effort that is undiscouraged, undisturbed, and not complacent.  
 
Hence, there are: (i) the joyous effort of armor, (ii) the joyous effort of engaging in the 
practice of the applications, (iii) the joyous effort that is undiscouraged regarding all of the 
Mahayana qualities, and is undisturbed by discordant classes, and (iv) the joyous effort that 
is not complacent.  
 It is taught that in this manner, [the achievings] are distinguished by joyous effort. Even 
though one may have generated the mind aspiring for supreme enlightenment, if one does 
not diligently initiate joyou s effort through effort in the practice of the achievings, it will 
merely be a noble thought; one will not be able to attain unsurpassable enlightenment. 
However, it is inappropriate to assert that if something is the entity of the achievings, it is 
pervad ed by being joyous effort, because the dissimilar patterns of the awareness abide 
unmixed like the petals of the lotus.  
2B2C -1A2C -4A2B. Differences among the four achievings  
At first one must have the extensive attitude of practicing all the causal and re sultant 
Mahayana qualities. Without being preceded by that, there will be no real practice of the extensive achievings, so bad systems [asserting that] at the time when two persons —one 
who has done much learning of the scriptural baskets and one does not k now it at all —later 
generate a desire to perform the achievings, neither much or little practice will arise  
[respectively for those two persons] will occur.  
 From having been preceded by the extensive attitude, extensive practice by way of the 
application s will arise. From having been preceded by the extensive attitude and 
applications, extensive accumulations will become complete. In dependence on that, 
omniscience will arise definitely without doubt. Hence, with respect to the practice of the 
achievings that act to attain omniscience, four are necessary; since more are not needed, the 
achievings are definite as four. 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
184  The purpose of being skilled in the practice through condensing the meaning of those 
occurs in the context of “Joyous effort in the objects  of utilization, generosity and so forth,” 
[4.33 c]. The sequence of initial generation is definite in that way; since the activities of 
extensive attitude exist even at the end of the continuum, know that the achieving of armor 
exists from the path of accu mulation until that [end of the continuum].   
 The explanation that this passage [above] only indicates the boundaries of the four 
achievings is incorrect, because the boundaries are not easily realized, since by indicating 
“It exists there,” its existing elsewhere is not negated. Even though it is ass erted that the 
boundary of the end of a sentient being’s continuum  has been indicated, one must explain 
that the sequence of generation has been indicated; it is incorrect to relate it to the 
boundaries. In [Haribhadra’s] Great Commentary  it is related to the citation from Acarya 
Asanga, because, although one can provide a little explanation if it were to be explained, it 
is difficult for the phrase “ Exactly in that manner ” [see commentary below] to be correct.  
 Regarding the meaning of that, it is indicat ed by implication that: (i) the indirect 
application with respect to the Mahayana path of seeing, the very entity of the path of accumulation is [the achieving of] armor, (ii) the actual generation and the actual 
application, the very entity of the path of preparation is [the achieving of] engagement, (iii) 
the direct application with respect to the path of seeing, the achievings from loving -kindness  
until retention included within the supreme mundane quality level, and the achievings 
included within the fi rst ground, and so forth, is the achieving of accumulation, and (iv) the 
achievings of the three pure grounds is the achieving of definite emergence. Hence you 
should explain that it indicates the divisions and the bases of  characterization of the four 
achievings. 
 
COMMENTARY 
Exactly in that manner , the characteristics of the achievings of the very entities of the paths 
of preparation, seeing, meditation, and distinction —armor, engagement, accumulation, and 
definite emergence.    
EXPLANATION  
Exactly in tha t sequence,  the subject —the achieving on the path of preparation —is the 
achieving of armor , because it is an achieving bearing the extensive attitude of practice 
possessing the six perfections. The achieving included within the path of seeing  is the 
achiev ing of engagement , because it is an achieving distinguished by joyous effort that 
directly engages the Mahayana , which destroys the discordant classes of the six perfections. 
The Mahayana path of meditation  of the seventh ground and below is the achieving of 
accumulation because it is an achieving distinguished by joyous effort which completes the 
extensive army of the two accumulations.  
 The characteristic of the achieving of the very entity of the path of distinction  of the 
eighth ground and above is the  achieving of definite emergence , because it is a yoga of the 
pure grounds that issues forth omniscience without doubt.  
2B2C -1A2C -4B. Explaining the individual natures  
2B2C -1A2C -4B1. The extensive attitude : the achieving of armor  
2B2C -1A2C -4B2. The exten sive application: the achieving of engagement  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3. The extensive two accumulations: the achieving of accumulation  
2B2C -1A2C -4B4. That which u ndoubtedly issu es forth omniscience: the achieving of definite emergence  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
185 2B2C -1A2C -4B1. The extensive att itude : the achieving of armor  
2B2C -1A2C -4B1A. Making a connection  
2B2C -1A2C -4B1B. Root text  
2B2C -1A2C -4B1C. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2C -4B1A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
From among [these], through the very entity of joyous effort, the first, the achieving of 
armor, is taught.  
 
EXPLANATION  
From among these achievings, through the very entity of joyous effort, the first, the 
achieving of armor, is taught. 
2B2C -1A2C -4B1B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
1.26 Because those individually include  
The six types, generosity and so  forth,   
That which is the achieving of armor 
Is explained exactly by way of six sets of six.  
 
EXPLANATION  
That which is the achieving of armor is explained . How? Exactly  as in sutra by way of 
six sets of six . The division into six sets of six is appropriate, because  each of those  six 
achievings of armor individually include the six types, generosity and so forth.  
 Sutra says, “When a great bodhisattva practices the perfection of wisdom, he fully 
performs thos e full performances of generosity  with the attention to omniscience . The roots 
of virtue are further shared with all sentient beings and dedicated to unsurpassable complete enlightenment. This is a great bodhisattva’s  practice of the Perfection of Wisdom a nd the 
armor of the perfection of generosity which fully performs generosity.”  
2B2C -1A2C -4B1C. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2C -4B1C -1. Divisions  
2B2C -1A2C -4B1C -2. Summary 
2B2C -1A2C -4B1C -1. Divisions  
2B2C -1A2C -4B1C -1A. Applying it to generosity  
2B2C -1A2C -4B1C -1B. Appl ying it in that manner also to others  
2B2C -1A2C -4B1C -1A. Applying it to generosity  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. One acts  by the very armor that (1) when performing generosity, 
such as the generosity of D harma, (2) abandon s the attention of hearers and so forth, (3) is 
patience regarding unpleasant speech of all beings, (4) generate s aspiration, and (5) is 
single -pointedness which is unmixed with other vehicles  and dedicate s to unsurpassable 
perfect complete enlightenment , and (6) does not observe the objects to be given and so 
forth  respectively , and   
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
186 EXPLANATION  
The activities of practice of generosity by means of being pervaded by the very armor of 
(1) the mind of giving that performs generosity, such as the generosity of D harma,  the 
generosity of fearlessness and material generosity is the entity of generosity , (2) at that time, 
ethics, the mind of abandoning the attention of hearers and so forth  which seeks 
liberation for the  sake of oneself alone , (3) the three types of patience, such as the patience 
regarding unpleasant speech of all beings, (4) joyous effort that generates aspiration for 
all Mahayana qualities , and (5) concentrations that act to dedicate  virtues  to 
unsurpas sable perfect complete enlightenment with single -pointedness which is 
unmixed with other vehicles, and (6) wisdom that does not observe the three sphere s of 
the objects to be given and so forth  to be truly existent  respectively  is the achieving of 
armor of generosity;  
2B2C -1A2C -4B1C -1B. Applying it in that manner also to others  
COMMENTARY  
similarly, safeguards ethics , completes patience, initiates joyous effort, achieves 
concentration, and cultivates wisdom. 
 
EXPLANATION  
similarly , the other five are also to be practiced, because, by means of possessing the six 
perfections, safeguarding ethics , and so forth are appropriate. 
2B2C -1A2C -4B1C -2. Summary 
COMMENTARY 
Since in that way generosity and so forth individually are included within the perfections of 
gene rosity and so forth, there are thirty -six types through six sets of six. Nevertheless, 
because the six, generosity and so forth are concordant in property, the achieving of armor is of six types.   
 
EXPLANATION  
In that way there are thirty -six types of arm or through six sets of six when divided by 
way of isolates, since generosity and so forth individually are included within each of 
the perfections of generosity and so forth; the divisions by way of isolates are  like that.  
Nevertheless, the achieving of armor is of six types, because the six, generosity and so 
forth subsumed under the achieving of armor of generosity are concordant in property  in 
being  the armor of generosity .   
 Someone takes that to mean that the six wisd oms are concordant in property in being  
wisdom , due to the six generosities being concordant in property in being  generosity . This is 
the proof that there are thirty -six; it is a mistaken way of proving that the achieving of armor 
is definite as six, becau se otherwise one must assert that practice by way of condensing the 
six generosities is the achieving of armor of generosity. That is thinking of the two —(1) the 
armor that is included within the achieving of armor of generosity and (2) generosity —as 
being  one. 
 In the context of the ethics of bodhisattva vows, know that the intention of abandonment 
that stops even the seeking of liberation for the sake of oneself alone is an uncommon 
branch. With respect to the pratimoksa (individual liberation) vows, the intention to 
abandon harming others as well as the bases is an uncommon branch. Know the way in 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
187 which beginners should practice the six perfections from the presentation on the trainings in 
general deeds composed by Je Rinpoche [Lama Tsongkhapa].  
2B2C -1A2C -4B2. The extensive application: the achieving of engagement  
2B2C -1A2C -4B2A. Making a connection  
2B2C -1A2C -4B2B. Root text  
2B2C -1A2C -4B2C. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2C -4B2A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
Second bundle.  
 Having donned the armor in that manner, si nce engagement will arise, second, the achieving 
of engagement:    
EXPLANATION  
Having donned the armor in that manner, since engagement in the practice by way of application of the entire Mahayana path will arise, second, the achieving of engagement:  
2B2C -1A2C -4B2B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
1.27 The concentrations and formless absorptions, generosity and so forth,  
Paths, love and so forth,  
Possessing non -observability, 
The purity of the three spheres, 
 
1.28 Objects of intent, six clairvoyances, 
An exalted k nower of all aspects – 
The achievings that engage in that manner  
Are to be known as ascending in the Mahayana. 
 
EXPLANATION  
This very engagement in the cause is engaging in the result. Nevertheless, [the achievings] 
are divided into nine types by way of o bject. The subject —the activities that  engage  and 
practice  in the manner  of (1-8) the eight included within paths: the  concentrations and 
formless absorptions, generosity and so forth,  included within the Mahayana paths, and  
(9) an exalted knower of all as pects included within the result —are to be known as 
ascending in the Mahayana, because they are achievings that engage higher and higher in 
the Mahayana included within cause and result.  Sutra says, “ Sariputra  asked, “Venerable Pourna, by just what does a great bodhisattva 
correctly engage and ascend the vehicle?” Pourna replied, “Venerable Sariputra , with regard 
to this, a great bodhisattva practices the perfection of generosity and is devoid of desire. He is devoid of non -virtuous qualities, negativities. He closely accomplishes and abides in the 
first concentration bearing joy and bliss which is generated from being with investigation, 
being with analysis, and isolation.”  
2B2C -1A2C -4B2C. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2C -4B2C -1. Individual meanings  
2B2C -1A2C -4B2C -2. Particular explanation of that which is difficult to realize  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
188 2B2C -1A2C -4B2C -1. Individual meanings  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. The concentrations and formless absorptions, the six perfections, 
generos ity and so forth, the paths of seeing, meditation, no -more -learning, and distinction, 
the four immeasurables, the possession of non -observation, the characteristic of perfectly 
abiding in the three pure spheres regarding all things, the objects of intent, and the six 
clairvoyances , and the exalted knowers of all aspects themselves —since all the qualities of 
the Mahayana are the very entities which subdue: the achieving of engagement, nine types. 
 
EXPLANATION  
Since all the causal and resultant qualities of the Mahayana are the nine achievings of the 
very entities which subdue  by way of practice of the applications, the nine types of  
achieving of engagement are further subsumed into two, because they are definite as the 
two—(i) engagement in the causes, the Mahayana paths and (ii) engagement in their results . 
 The first [engagement in the causes, the Mahayana paths] is of three, because there are:  
(a) one activity of practice —engagement in the concentrations and formless 
absorptions —the mundane p aths included within the Mahayana support,  
(b) engagement in the supramundane paths, and  
(c) qualities that differentiate both of them [the mundane and supramundane paths] from the Hinayana.  
 The middle one [engagement in the supramundane paths] is of four, because there are:  
(a-b) the six perfections, generosity and so forth, which act to attain the fulfillment of 
realization, and the paths of seeing  and so forth , which act to attain the fulfillment of 
abandonment: one’s welfare,  
(c) the four immeasurable s, love and so forth, the method to accomplish others’ welfare, 
and 
(d) the possession of non- observation that realizes emptiness, which purifies others’ 
welfare.  
 There are three qualities that differentiate them from the Hinayana, because there are  the 
activity of practice with the characteristic of perfectly abiding through observing 
engagement in : 
(a) the three completely pure spheres in which the action, object and doer are realized to 
be empty of true existence regarding all things  of the six perfecti ons, 
(b) transformation into the purpose of the three objects of intent in which one dedicates 
roots of virtue to unsurpassable enlightenment, and  
(c) the six clairvoyances, the method for quickly completing the accumulations .  
 And [there is] engagement in the results , the exalted knowers of all aspects themselves. 
2B2C -1A2C -4B2C -2. Particular explanation of that which is difficult to realize  
Regarding the explanation of the concentrations and formless absorptions, there are:  
 
2B2C -1A2C -4B2C -2A. Cause  
2B2C -1A2C -4B2C -2B. Entity  
2B2C -1A2C -4B2C -2C. Result  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
189 2B2C -1A2C -4B2C -2A. Cause  
If one has not become skilled in the sequence and entity of calm abiding and special insight  
that are included within the preparations of the first concentration at the start, one  will not 
understand the general presentation of the mundane path. Therefore one should analyze 
these at the beginning, because, one must cultivate special insight  after having achieved a 
fully qualified calm abiding ; except for a mere similitude of specia l insight, it is impossible 
to attain a fully qualified [special insight ] prior to [achieving a fully qualified calm abiding ]. 
For, it has been explained in Bodhisattvacarya vatara  [Santideva ’s] Engaging in the Deeds 
of a Bodhisattva  (Bodhisattvacarya vatara, 8.4abc) that:  
 
Having understood that afflictions are completely destroyed  
By special insight  strongly endowed with calm abiding , 
First of all I should search for calm abiding . 
 
And Heap of Jewels Sutra (Ratnakutasutra) says:  
Abiding in pure ethics , attain meditative stabilization  
Having attained meditative stabilization, cultivate wisdom.  
 
And [Kamalashila’s] Stages of Meditation (Bhavanakrama ) says:  
 
Therefore, those who wish for the arising of a thoroughly pure exalted wisdom 
through having abandoned all obscurations should cultivate wisdom by abiding in calm abiding .  
 
The sequence for attaining [special insight ] at the beginning is definite in that way; 
afterwards, having already attained it, then there is no certainty [that calm abiding precedes  
special insight ], since having cultivated special insight  previously, subsequently one also 
cultivates calm abiding . Know that the assertion —that special insight  is attained prior to 
attaining a fully qualified calm abiding at the time of newly accomplishing it at the 
beginning —is motivated only by ignorance.  
 QUALM: [Asanga's]  Compendium of Knowledge (Abhidharmasamuchchaya) says: ‘Some 
attain special insight ; they do not attain calm abiding . They strive for calm abiding in 
dependence on special insight .’ Why is it taught in that manner?  
RESPONSE: It is not that they do not attain the calm abiding included within the 
preparations of the first concentration; they do not attain the calm abiding of the actual first 
concentration and above. Further, h aving directly realized the four truths in dependence on 
the special insight  included within the preparations of the first concentration, they achieve 
the calm abiding included within the actual first concentration. For, [Asanga’s] Actuality of 
Grounds (Bhumivastu ) says: 
 
Furthermore, one strongly understands sufferings and so forth until  paths 
perfectly as they are. The first concentration and so forth have not been attained. As soon as that [understanding] is present, the mind is set and one does not 
discriminate phenomena. In dependence on that very superior wisdom, one 
connects to a superior mind. 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
190  
A certain person who has not learnt well the presentation of the path of Abhidharma does 
not understand  the sequence of the two —with respect to the  preparatio ns of the first 
concentration , after having initially achieved a fully qualified calm abiding , the attention of 
a beginner  and the beginner that purifies  afflictions . He holds that the initial preparation 
[starts] from the attention of individual knowledge  of character. He has not turned his mind 
to the two existing sequences of achieving calm abiding and special insight  with respect to 
what is included within a preparation of the first concentration. For, he has not even 
understood the meaning taught in [M aitreya’s]  Ornament for the Great Vehicle Sutras 
(Mahayanasutralamkara ) which says:  
 
 
Through familiarization with those [nine metal abidings that are included within 
the level of the Desire Realm] 
One does not engage in application [of the antidotes].  
Then, when one has attained great pliancy of body and mind  of that , 
It should be known that one has a n attention  [that is, calm abiding]. 
 
 “That” [mentioned above], the fully qualified calm abiding achieved by way of the nine 
steps of mental abidings is that taught in [Asanga’s] Hearers’ Grounds; the attention of 
individual knowledge of character must be achieved after it. For, in that way, [Asanga’s] Hearers’ Grounds says:  
  
A beginner at attention  is a beginner while not having attained an attention  with 
respect to making one -pointed [that is, while not having attained calm abiding] 
and until reaching the one -pointedness of mind  [that one has with calm abiding]. 
A beginner at purifying afflictions is undertaken with the attention of individual 
knowledge of the character of one who has attained a n attention [that is, calm 
abiding] and who wishes to purif y the mind of all afflictions , and is a 
familiarization with [that understanding]. 
 
And:  
 
Further, with respect to that, a yogi who strongly strives in order to separate from 
attachment of the desire realm subsequently attains the separation from the attachment to the desire realm by way of the seven types of attention.  
 
QUESTION: What are those seven?  
RESPONSE: The attentions of:  
(1) individual knowledge of character  
(2) arisen from belief (3) thorough isolation  
(4) joy -withdrawal 
(5) analysis  
(6) final application  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
191 (7) result of final application  
 
Hence, having generated the bliss of pliancy of the bo dy and mind by having initially 
achieved a single -pointed mind by way of the nine steps of mental abidings, a fully qualified 
calm abiding is achieved. After that, for the sake of abandoning the afflictions of the desire 
realm, one cultivates (1) the atten tion of individual knowledge of character and so forth.  
  The first attention, having viewed the desire realm in the aspect of coarseness and the 
first concentration in the aspect of peace, undertakes analysis by way of hearing and 
contemplation. Through the force of having performed analysis in this manner, by inducing 
the bliss of pliancy of body and mind, special insight  is initially attained; this is (2) the 
attention arisen from belief, which is a wisdom arisen from meditation.  
 Then, due to having f amiliarized with the meditative stabilization that is a union of calm 
abiding and special insight , the antidotes that abandon the three great and three middling 
afflictions of the desire realm are respectively (3 -4) the attention arisen from thorough 
isola tion and the attention of joy-withdrawal.  
 By having abandoned most of the afflictions in that way, when seeing that the manifest 
afflictions of the desire realm do not occur, one wonders, “Have I abandoned all the 
afflictions without exception?” Hence, for the sake of investigating whether or not the 
afflictions have been abandoned, one pays attention and individually investigates the signs 
of easy occurrence of the afflictions; this is (5) the attention of analysis.  
 By way of having familiarized with t he antidotes when one understands that a little 
[amount of those afflictions] has not yet been abandoned, the direct antidote that abandons 
the three small afflictions is (6) the attention of final application; (7) the attention of the 
result of final appl ication is the attainment of the actual first concentration.  
 Similarly understand the remaining levels by means of the eight attentions. Also, know 
that the first attention —a fully qualified calm abiding —is a branch of abiding that acts to 
separate from t he attachment to the lower levels.  
 This Acarya who composed the commentary does not accept a basis -of-all that is a 
different entity from the six collections [of primary consciousness es]. According to those 
who assert  it, the manifest afflictions of the desire realm (excluding the afflicted mentality) 
are destroyed by the preparations of the first concentration ; the other one  is not . 
[Vasubandhu’s] Thirty Stanzas  (Trimsikakarika ) explains: 
 
It is of that, wherever one is born,  
 Therefore, [the afflicted mentality ] is included in whichever level the support is. It has been 
explained that, with the exception of three occasions, the manifest [afflicted mentality ] is 
not ceased.  
2B2C -1A2C -4B2C -2B. Entity  
2B2C -1A2C -4B2C -2B1. Actual meaning  
2B2C -1A2C -4B2C -2B2. Divisions  
2B2C -1A2C -4B2C -2B3. Meanings of the individual divisions  
2B2C -1A2C -4B2C -2B1. Actual meaning  
There are two: concentrations and formless absorptions. With respect to the first, 
concentrations, there are two types by way of the particularities of ca usal absorption and 
resultant rebirth.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
192  The first [a concentration that is a causal absorption] is concomitant with a single -pointed 
mind that has transcended the lower levels by means of branches. 
 The second [a concentration that is a resultant rebirth]  is a fruition of having cultivated 
the concentration that is a causal absorption in another rebirth, and is a result concordant with the cause. It is a  propert y attained from birth in the continuum of sentient beings of 
Brahma Type
107 and so forth until Akanistha108. 
 Also, with respect to the formless absorptions, a formless absorption that is a causal 
absorption is concomitant with a single -pointed mind that has transcended the lower levels 
by means of the object of observation. A formless absorption that is  a resultant rebirth is 
either a fruition of having cultivated that in another rebirth, or a result concordant with the 
cause. It is a  propert y attained from birth in the continuum of sentient beings who are born 
in the four types of formless [realms].  
 Because the concentrations definitely arise from the purification of the coarse branches of 
the lower levels by the higher levels, there are the particularities of dissimilar branches, whereby they are said to “transcend by way of branches.” The formless [ab sorptions] do not 
have dissimilar branches; because they definitely arise from the lower levels by means of 
dissimilar objects of observation, they are said to “transcend by way of objects of 
observation.”  
2B2C -1A2C -4B2C -2B2. Divisions 
With regard  to the c oncentrations, there are four —from the first to the fourth. With respect 
to the formless absorptions, there are four— the source Infinite Space and so forth. Further, 
the four concentrations and the first three formless absorptions are each of three types —
afflicted, pure and uncontaminated. The Peak of Existence has the two former [types]; 
according to the common [ vehicles ], there are no uncontaminated ones, because since its 
object of observation and aspect are unclear, it is unsuitable as a support of supramundane 
paths which are very clear.   
 That bodhisattvas  are supported on a desire realm mind and the Peak of Existence by way 
of skillful  means has also been explained by the Acarya. A preparation of the first 
concentration is of two —pure and uncontamina ted. The rest are only of pure ones. There are 
no afflicted [preparations], because they would be  unable to act to separate from the 
attachment to the lower levels.  
 There are uncontaminated ones with respect to a preparation of the first concentration, 
because stream -enterers and so forth who have not attained an actual concentration generate 
a supramundane path only in dependence on a preparation of the first concentration; an 
uncontaminated path does not need to be supported on the remaining preparations . 
 It is unnecessary to act to separate from the attachment to the lower levels by way of 
actual [concentrations], because they have already been separated from by way of the 
preparations. Contaminated actual [concentrations] do not act as antidotes for th eir own 
level and higher levels. The uncontaminated ones act as antidotes for their own level and higher levels, whereby they are paths that separate from attachment, manifestly achieve 
excellent qualities and are also paths of  abiding happily in the present life.  
                                             
 
107 Brahma Type is the first of seventeen levels of the form realm.  
108 Akanistha is the last of  seventeen levels of the form realm.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
193 2B2C -1A2C -4B2C -2B3. Meanings of the individual divisions  
The first concentration is of two types:  
(1) a mere actual concentration  
(2) a special actual concentration  
 
The first [a mere first actual concentration] is (i) that concomitant with a single -pointed 
mind distinguished by having separated from the attachment to the desire realm through the antidotal branches of investigation and analysis, (ii) which possesses the benefit branch of 
joy and happiness generated from isola tion.  
 The second [a special first actual concentration] is (i) that concomitant with a single -
pointed mind distinguished by having separated even from the attachment to investigation 
through the antidotal branch of analysis, (ii) which possesses equanimi ty feeling. The 
second concentration and above do not have the two, mere and special, because, without 
separating from the attachment to their own level, they are unable to act to separate from the 
attachment to some  branch of their own level. 
 The second concentration acts to separate from the attachment to investigation and 
analysis through the antidotal branch of internal clarity, and possesses the benefit branch of 
joy and happiness generated from meditative stabilization.  
 The third concentration is distinguished by having separated from attachment to joy 
through the antidotal branches of mindfulness, introspection, and equanimity, and possesses 
the benefit branch of happiness that  is isolated from joy.  
 The fourth concentration is distinguished by having separated from attachment to 
happiness through the antidotal branch es of completely pure mindfulness and equanimity, 
and possesses the benefit branch of equanimity feeling.  
 With respect to the four formless absorptions, t he source Infinite Space, having seen the 
discrimination of form s and obstruct ivenes s as coarse, repeatedly destroys this 
discrimination and repeatedly familiarizes with the discrimination that thinks “Space is 
infinite,” whereby it is concomitant with a s ingle -pointed mind in which that is manifest at 
the time of the actual [absorption].  
 The source Infinite Consciousness, having viewed that very attention thinking “Space is 
infinite” as an object to be ceased, by taking to mind the thought, “That very attention is 
infinite,” manifests it.   
 The source Nothingness, by taking to mind the thought, “There is no object to be 
apprehended below that,” manifests it.  
 With respect to the source Not Without Discrimination, discrimination refers to disease, 
boils, and pain. Without discrimination refers to thorough confusion. 
 Without Discrimination Not Without Discrimination, by taking to mind the thought, 
“Peace is sublime,” is that concomitant with a single -pointed mind that is able to set in 
equipoise on that. 
 Regarding the afflicted concentrations:  
• there is a predominance of craving that relishes the taste of happiness;  
• there is a predominance of view that acts to generate bad views such as the view of a limit to the past  
• there is a predominance of pride that i s a mind that is puffed up due to [awareness of 
having achieved] a concentration;  
• there is a predominance of doubt thinking, “Is that which has been attained by me a path to liberation or not?”  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
194  
A pure one is that concomitant with a single -pointed mind t hat is not polluted by the 
afflictions of its own level. It is of four types:  (1) partial concordance with degeneration  
(2) partial concordance with abidance  
(3) partial concordance with enhancement  
(4) partial concordance with definite discrimination  
 
Further, these are [respectively]  pure concentrations which:  
(1) is concordant with the generation of afflictions of its own or a lower level [immediately] 
afterwards  
(2) induces another pure level of the same level as itself [immediately] afterwards  
(3) in duces a pure one of a higher level [immediately] afterwards  
(4) induces a supramundane path [immediately] afterwards  
 Know the others similarly. The Peak of Existence has no partial concordance with 
enhancement, because there is no other level higher than  it. According to the common 
[presentation ], it also has no partial concordance with definite discrimination, because an 
arya who has attained a mind of the Peak of Existence generates an uncontaminated path by 
actualizing the mind of Nothingness.  
 
The fi rst concentration has five branches:  
(1) investigation  
(2) analysis  
(3-4) happiness and joy generated from isolation  
(5) single -pointed mind  
 
The second concentration has four branches:  
(1) internal clarity  
(2-3) joy and happiness generated from meditative  stabilization  
(4) single -pointed mind  
 
The third concentration has five branches:  
(1) mindfulness  
(2) introspection  
(3) equanimity  
(4) happiness  
(5) single -pointed mind  
  
The fourth concentration has four branches:  
(1-2) completely pure mindfulness and equanimity  
(3) equanimity feeling  
(4) single -pointed mind  
 
The branches are presented as four, five, and so forth in terms of:  
• the antidotal branches which abandon harm, 
• the benefit branches which achieve benefit, and  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
195 • the branches of abidance which are bo th of them.  
 
Special insight  exists in the formless absorptions, but calm abiding is predominant and they 
are of the same taste in the state of that, thereby the branches are not presented differently.  
 Those who have attained a concentration seek definite  emergence  from coarse and subtle  
manifest feelings  of happiness and suffering ; they do not seek definite emergence  from  
equanimity, because it is difficult for heedless ordinary beings to realize that compositional 
suffering is in the nature of suffering . 
 The four concentrations are presented [respectively] by way of the stages of acting to 
separate from attachment to:  
• mental unhappiness  that are coarse sufferin g feelings ;  
• negative  states that are  subtle suffering feeling s;  
• mental happiness that are coarse happy feelings ; and  
• the power of subtle happiness .   
 
The four formless absorptions are presented [respectively] by way of the stages of definite 
emergenc e from the four:  
• with respect to the first of the two —the discrimination of outer forms and th e 
apprehension of inner primary consciousnesses as beautiful (from among the four coarse 
and subtle [objects] with respect to manifest contaminated discriminations)—[the 
discrimination of outer forms]:  
(1) the discrimination of forms and obstructi veness , the object of abandonment  
(2) the discrimination of Infinite Space, the antidote, and  
• with respect to [the second of the two,] the apprehension of primary consciousnesses as 
beautiful:  
(3) adherence to primary consciousnesses, the discordant class and  
(4) the discrimination of Nothingness, the antidote  
2B2C -1A2C -4B2C -2C. Result  
Know that from cultivating the small, middl ing, and great levels of the first concentration, 
one will accomplish the rebirths of the concentrations of the three other abodes  of th e first 
concentration; by cultivating the small, middle, and great levels of the second concentration, 
third concentration and fourth concentration, one will accomplish the rebirths of the 
concentrations of Little Light, and so forth. By cultivating the fo rmless absorptions one will 
accomplish the aggregates of the four names [feeling, discrimination, compositional factors and consciousness es] at that location where one dies and transmigrates.  
 Know that although [the formless realms] do not have divisions  of higher or lower levels  
that are “other abodes ,” due to cultivating small, middle, and great levels, one will 
accomplish high or low rebirths, and bad or good rebirths
 of the formless [realms].  
 The small level is such that neither of the two, continuou s application and respectful 
application is strong. The middle level is strong in either one. The great level is strong in 
both. “High or low rebirths, and bad or good rebirths ” [of the formless realms] refer to long 
or short life span, many or few afflict ions, and so forth.  
 The four immeasurables are easy to understand, and the divisions of great compassion 
will be explained. If you wish to generate them in the continuum by means of the stages of these concentrations, you should know them from explanatio ns elsewhere.   
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
196 2B2C -1A2C -4B3. The extensive two accumulations: the achieving of accumulation  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3A. General indication  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B. Particular explanations of three of the accumulations  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3A. General indication  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3A -1. Making a connection  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3A -2. Root text  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3A -3. Commentary 
2B2C -1A2C -4B3A -1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY  
Having engaged in that manner, since accumulations are generated, third, the achieving of 
accumulation:  
 
EXPLANATION  
Having engaged in that manner  of subduing in the continuum by means of application of 
all the Mahayana qualities , since the extensive two accumulations are generated, third, 
the achieving of accumulation:  
 
ROOT TEXT  
1.29 Loving -kindness , the six, generosity and so forth,  
Those paths of  calm abiding together with special insight , 
Union,  
Those skillful means, 
 
1.30 Exalted wisdom, merit,  
Paths, retentions, the ten grounds, and  
Antidotes; know that as the stages of 
The achievings of accum ulation.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Know that as the stages of the achievings of accumulation. What are they ? The y are the 
seventeen, loving- kindness  and so forth , bearing the characteristics  of: 
(1-7) behavior together with support ;  
(8-11) meditative equipoise and sub sequent attainment ;  
(12-13) the divisions of the two accumulations ;  
(14-15) achieving the result and holding the object of observation ; and   
(16-17) acting as a support for excellent qualities and abandoning obscurations . 
 
2B2C -1A2C -4B3A -3. Commentary 
2B2C -1A2C -4B3A -3A. Individual entities  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3A -3B. Reason for positing them as accumulations  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3A -3C. Definite enumeration  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3A -3A. Individual entities  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. By not observing (1) great compassion, (2) generosity, (3) ethics, (4) 
patience, (5) joyous effort, (6) concentration, (7) wisdom, (8 -10) the paths of calm abiding , 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
197 special insight , and the union, (11) skillful  means, (12) exalted  wisdom, (13) merit, (14) the 
paths of seeing and so forth, (15) the retentions (dharanis) of words and so forth, (16) the 
grounds, and (17) the antidotes, since one achieves  all the aims of the Mahayana without 
passing beyond the conventional truth, these , compassion and so forth, by way of entities of 
perfect achievement, because of issuing forth great enlightenment, since great compassion 
and so forth are the accumulations, the achieving of accumulation is of seventeen types.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Following the a chieving of armor, s utra says: “With respect to the ten, beginning from 
loving- kindness until union [1- 10], ‘donning of the great armor’ is expressed. With just 
what is a great bodhisattva said to ‘don the great armor?’” The repl ies were indicated by 
means  of the reason for engaging the term “armor.”   
 With respect to the seven, skillful  means and below [11- 17], following the achieving of 
engagement, [sutra says], “Bhagavan, what is the great vehicle of a great bodhisattva? With 
just what is one considered  to have correctly entered the great vehicle of a great 
bodhisattva? What gave rise to the vehicle? Where will one abide by way of the vehicle? What will arise by way of the vehicle?” The repl ies were indicated by means of closely 
indicating the answer s to the five questions in terms of the training in wisdom and 
compassion, the two not being mutually different, transcending the discordant classes, the 
occasion being definite, pliancy in the application of the antidotal classes, and the realizer.  
 Regarding  those [11 -17], the five from skillful  means until the retentions [11 -15] are 
taught by indicating the entity of the Mahayana in the reply to the first question. The 
accumulation of grounds [16] is taught by way of the reply to the second question. The 
accumulation of antidotes [17] is taught by way of the reply to the questions at the end.  
 The seven accumulations included within the accumulations of perfect attitude and 
application are as follows . A bodhisattva —who has donned the armor in the practice 
possessing the six perfections —cultivates (1) the great compassion  which wishes to free all 
trainees from suffering at the beginning.  
 Further, that which, by observing mere sentient beings, bears the aspect of wishing them 
to be separated from suffering is the compassion observing sentient beings. The attribute  of 
aspect is similar; that which observes sentient beings qualified by the dawning of emptiness 
of coarse selflessness, and that which observes sentient beings qualified by the dawning of 
freedom from  elaboration are [respectively] the compassion observing phenomena and the 
compassion of non- observation.  
 Someone who asserts that the last compassion [the compassion of non -observation] 
realizes emptiness is unskilled in the object of observation and asp ect of compassion. Those 
who are anguished due to compassion take care of others —through accomplishing the 
happiness of this life by way of (2) generosity , accomplishing the happiness of high status 
of the next rebirth by way of (3) ethics , accomplishing p recise definite happiness by means 
of setting them in the happiness of meditative stabilization by way of (4)  patience , (5) 
joyous effort and (6) concentration , and accomplishing everlasting happiness by setting 
them in nirvana by way of (7) wisdom .  
 Rega rding the four included within meditative equipoise and subsequent attainment, 
meditative equipoise is indicate d as (8-10) the accumulation of the paths of calm abiding , 
special insight and the union of calm abiding and special insight . Its meaning, according to 
the explanation in [Haribhadra’s] Great Commentary, is as follows:  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
198 QUALM: The  Compendium of Doctrine Sutra  (Dharmasamgitisutra) says, “By 
setting the mind in meditative equipoise  one will excellently know  exactly  and 
perfectly .” The meditative equipoise taught is calm abiding , and knowing exactly 
is special insight . Calm abiding is abidance without movement. Special insight  is 
the awareness analyzing the meaning. Therefore, are the two not discordant? 
How will there be a union?  
 At the time when the mind has become firm with respect to the object of observation of 
calm abiding , stemming from analysis with wisdom, one will generate the illumination of 
the exalted wisdom realizing the perfect meaning. Like the dispelling of darkne ss by the 
illumination generated, the obscurations are abandoned; if it were not of one entity with 
calm abiding , it would not be able to abandon all the manifest objects of abandonment 
without exception. Hence, calm abiding and special insight  engage the object like the eye 
and illumination. In order to generate the perfect exalted wisdom, they abide concordantly; it is not that they are discordant like illumination and darkness. 
 Possessing the accumulation of the union [of calm abiding and special insigh t], one will 
come to possess (11) the accumulation of skillful means  that enacts others’ welfare through 
the attention to omniscience, and (12-13) the accumulation of exalted wisdom  and merit 
from having familiarized with such paths of meditative equipoise  and subsequent 
attainment. Through having familiarized with the two accumulations, one will come to 
possess (14) the accumulation of the paths of seeing and so forth . By possessing the 
accumulation of paths, one will attain (15) the accumulation of the retention of words and 
so forth  in which one is able to remember without limit words and meanings for many eons 
without forgetting them. What is the entity of retention? It is mindfulness and wisdom 
concomitant with calm abiding . In regard  to secret mantra , this is a case of the name of a 
result imputed to its cause. When divided, there are the retention of forbearance, the retention of secret mantra, and the retention s of words and meanings. 
 The first [the retention of forbearance] is as follows. Having a nalyzed the meaning of the 
forty -two syllables, A RA PA TSA NA and so forth. One meditates on the meaning of 
emptiness, the mode of abidance of the syllables, thinking, “The letter A is the door to all phenomena, because it is not produced,” whereby one ge nerates a meditative stabilization 
and wisdom which is not afraid of it; this is the attainment of the retention of forbearance. It exists from the forbearance level of the path of preparation.  
 The second [the retention of secret mantra] is as follows. On e attains the retention of 
secret mantra through being able  to compose secret mantras that are able to protect others, 
such as those that pacify negativities through their power. It exists from the forbearance level of the path of preparation , and the spec ial, from having attained the path of seeing.   
 The last , the two retentions [of words and meanings] are the ability to retain the words 
and meanings of phenomena for eons without forgetting them, and exist from having attained the forbearance level of th e path of preparation and above.  
 There are (16)  the accumulation of the  grounds , by way of acting as the support of 
excellent qualities, and (17)  the accumulation of the antidotes , for the sake of abandoning 
the discordant classes.  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3A -3B. Rea son for positing them as accumulations  
The subject —the seventeen, great compassion and so forth—are the accumulation of 
causes issuing forth great enlightenment, because  they hold the result of great 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
199 enlightenment by way of entities of perfect quick achiev ement through these seventeen 
accumulations , compassion and so forth. They hold the result of final great enlightenment, 
since, by realizing them without observing them  to be truly existent, without passing 
beyond ultimate truth, one achieves all the aims of  the stages of the Mahayana path that is 
included within the extensive, without passing beyond the conventional truth.109 In brief, 
these seventeen include all the stages of the profound and extensive paths that are objects to 
be practiced by bodhisattvas.  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3A -3C. Definite enumeration  
The achieving of accumulation is of seventeen types. These seventeen achievings of 
accumulation are the accumulations of causes that are free from the faults of being too many 
or too few for producing omniscience.  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B. Particular explanations of three of the accumulations  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -1. Particular explanation of the accumulation of exalted wisdom  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2. Particular explanation of the accumulation of grounds  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -3. Particular exp lanation of the accumulation of antidotes  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -1. Particular explanation of the accumulation of exalted wisdom  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -1A. The twenty emptinesses by way of division s of the bas es of negation  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -1B. The object -possessor s, the twenty exalted wisdoms that  realize those  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -1C. Analyzing what the objects of observation of the exalted wisdoms are   
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -1A. The twenty emptinesses by division s of the bases of negation  
COMMENTARY 
With regard to that, the accum ulation of exalted wisdom: (1) the inner, (2) the outer, (3) 
both, (4) the empty, (5) the great , (6) the ultimate, (7) the compounded, (8) the 
uncompounded, (9) that passed beyond extremes, (10) that without beginning or end, (11) 
that not discarded, (12) nature, (13) all phenomena, (14) the specifically -characterized, (15) 
that not observed, (16) the entitiness of non -things, (17) things, (18) non -things, (19) self - 
entity, and (20) others ’ entity —by particularities of emptiness, twenty types.  
 I declare  here:  
 
Inner and outer,  
Both and things that  are empty,  
Directions, paths of nirvana,  
Produced from conditions and the other,  
Passed beyond extremes, without beginning, not discarded,  
Nature, all phenomena,  
Phenomena that are  produced and so forth, the past and so forth,  
That possessing and entity of the other,  
Space and that called “empty” and  
Entitiness of an other that is a phenomenon:  
Since they are empty of their own entity,  Emptiness is asserted as twenty.   
                                             
 
109 To appreciate this passage, one must understand the etymology of “sambhara,” the Sanskrit word that is 
translated as “accumulation” here. See Jetsun Chokyi Gyeltsen’s Ocean of Sport . 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
200  
EXPLANATION  
Twenty emptinesses are declared  here. (1) The subject —the six inner  sources —are 
devoid of  true existence, because they are free from being truly existent one or many. Apply 
the sign and the predicate similarly to the rest. (2 -3) The emptiness of true existence of the 
six outer sources, and of the support of the powers due to being both [outer and inner] 
relative to the material and the sources are the emptiness of the outer  and the emptiness of 
both the outer and the inner. (4) The emptiness of true existence of things that are empty  
of true existence is the emptiness of the  just empty .110 (5) The emptiness of true existence 
of the ten directions  is the emptiness of the  great. (6) The emptiness of true  existence of 
nirvana is the emptiness of the ultimate . They [5 & 6] negate cyclic existence and peace as 
truly  existent. 
 (7-8) The emptiness of true existence of the compounded produced from conditions  and 
the emptiness of true existence of the other , the uncompounded , such as space, are the 
emptiness es of the compounded and the uncompounded . (9) T he emptiness of true 
existence of the  past, future and  middle , which are empty of the extremes of permanence 
and severance , is the emptiness of that passed beyo nd extremes . (10-11) The emptiness es 
of true existence of the beginning and the end, and of what is to be adopted [not]  discarded 
are [respectively] the emptiness of that without beginning or end  and the emptiness of 
that not discarded.  Alternatively, for the latter [the emptiness of that not discard ed], take 
generosity and so forth that are not to be discarded as the bas es of emptiness .  
 (12-13) The emptinesses of true existence of the mode of abidance and of all phenomena 
which are ex pressions [of the mode of abidance] are [respectively] the emptinesses of 
nature  and of all phenomena . (14 -15) The emptinesses of true existence of phenomena 
that are produced and so forth , [and] of the past and so forth are [respectively] the 
emptinesses of the specifically -characterized , and of that not observed. (16 -17) The 
emptinesses of true existence of th at possessing causes and conditions and that  which  is a 
composite, and of the entity of the other , the five aggregates , are [respectively] the 
emptinesses of the entitiness of non -things , and of things . (18-19) The emptinesses of true 
existence of uncompounded  space and of that called “empty nature ” are [respectively] the 
emptinesses of non- things , and of self- entity . (20) The emptiness of true existence of the 
entitiness of another that is a phenomenon, the emptiness that is the  emptiness of another 
agent, is the emptiness of the  others ’ entity. In this way, since the twenty bases of 
emptiness are empty of an entity  that is their own true exi stence , emptiness is asserted as 
twenty.   
 This is an extensive division; when condensed, the first sixteen can be subsumed under 
the last four. Those [ in which non -thusness]  has been taken as the bases of emptiness , the 
property -possessors,  can be subsum ed under the first two [17 & 18]. Those in which 
thusness has been taken as the bases of emptiness can be subsumed under the last two [19 & 
20]. According to those who assert that the basis of emptiness of the emptiness of the just 
empty is an exalted wisd om, there are three [ways] in which thusness is taken as the bases 
of emptiness: refuting the qualm, “Has the mode of existence of phenomena been newly produced by the aryas through knowing and seeing?” refers to the emptiness of nature; 
                                             
 
110 For a more common presention of this fourth emptiness, see the first type of emptiness discussed under 
the outline 2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -2C2D -2. Aspect of pacification . 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
201 refut ation of the qualms, “Is its own entity truly existent?” and “Has it been created by an 
agent that is a different object?” refers  to the last two emptiness es.  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -1B. The object -possessor s, the twenty exalted wisdoms that  realize those  
The accumulation of exalted wisdom is included within the levels of ordinary beings, the 
ten grounds, and the exalted wisdom of a buddha. Regarding the first [the accumulation of 
exalted wisdom included within the levels of ordinary beings], the three exal ted wisdoms 
that realize (1 -3) the emptiness of the inner, the outer, and that which is  both of them stop 
the adherence to true existence of the three —the utilizers, the objects of utilization and their 
supports —and are posited on the occasion of the path of accumulation. Regarding the 
teaching in [Haribhadra’s] Great Commentary, “By way of utilization,” if one were to explain that the first three [exalted wisdoms are posited on the occasions of] the first three 
levels of the path of preparation, and the fo urth on the supreme mundane quality, it appears 
to be just suitable. However, if we were to posit the first three on the occasions of the path 
of accumulation, there would not be any contradiction. (4) The realization of emptiness as 
just empty by a mundane wisdom arisen from meditation is posited on the path of 
preparation.   
 (5-6) The emptiness of the great and the emptiness of the ultimate impel the exalted 
wisdoms directly realizing them to realize that dharmadhatu is omnipresent in property -
possessors, and to realize that dharmadhatu is the supreme meaning. Hence these are 
respectively posited on the first two grounds. 
 (7) The emptiness of the compounded impels the exalted wisdom realizing it to realize 
that dharmadhatu is a meaning concordant with th e cause. (8) The emptiness of the 
uncompounded impels the exalted wisdom realizing it to realize that dharmadhatu is a 
meaning that cannot be fully held. These two are respectively posited on the third and fourth 
grounds.  
 (9-10) The emptinesses of that pa ssed beyond extremes, and that without beginning or 
end, impel the realization that dharmadhatu is not a different continuum and the realization 
of the meaning of non -existence of the thoroughly afflicted and the completely pure as 
empty. Hence they are po sited on the fifth and sixth grounds.  
 Likewise, the exalted wisdom that is the object -possessor impelled by (11) the emptiness 
of that not discarded is posited on the seventh ground, and the object- possessors impelled by 
(12-13) the emptinesses of nature and of all phenomena are posited on the eighth ground.  
 The exalted wisdoms impelled by (14 -15) the emptinesses of the specifically -
characterized and of that not observed are posited on the ninth ground. The exalted wisdoms 
that are the object- possessors impelled by (16 -17) the emptiness of the entitiness of non -
things and [the emptiness] of things are posited on the tenth ground. The exalted wisdoms 
that are the object -possessors impelled by (18 -20) the emptinesses of non-things, of one's 
own entity, and of the  entity of others are posited on the buddha ground.  
 The last three are supports that have exhaustively abandoned the two obscurations as well 
as their latencies, and are posited on the buddha ground by way of the meaning of being self-arisen; the ex alted wisdoms impelled by the first seventeen [have abandoned] some 
manifest afflictions or seeds that are objects of abandonment, and are posited on the tenth ground and below. As explained above, the emptiness of the great impel the realization that 
dharmadhatu is a meaning that is omnipresent. Although it has been explained that it is 
posited on the first ground, I think there is no contradiction. Further, [Haribhadra’s] Great 
Commentary says:  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
202  
Regarding that, at that time, by meditating, thinking, ‘All  phenomena are 
selfless,’ although that has already realized dharmadhatu by way of all natures 
due to [its] partlessness, in reliance upon generating certainty, he individually 
realizes it by way of a meaning that is omnipresent. Hence he will generate a 
very clear knower that acts directly on the absence  of entity of all phenomena. At 
that time, by perfectly entering into the faultlessness of bodhisattvas, he will attain the path of seeing.  
 The meaning of that explanation is as follows. The teaching that  dharmadhatu is partless 
[means]  that it does not appear to a direct cognizer as individual parts that are dissimilar 
aspects like blue and yellow; it is not that it is inappropriate to divide it into parts that are isolates and so forth. For, there are as many parts as there are property -possessors.  
 Since the dharmata of a sentient being and the dharmata of a buddha do not differ even 
slightly as to whether or not they are realized through direct cognition by the meditative 
equipoise of a learner arya, asc ertainment regarding the dharmata of a buddha is also 
induced by the force of experience. The explanation here that ascertainment is generated progressively means the following. In dependence on the meditative equipoises of the ten 
grounds having abandoned successively the seeds of the two obscurations, great or small 
ascertainment and dissimilar ascertainments are generated regarding the various attributes of 
illusory dependent -arisings during subsequent attainment; the appearances of wrong classes 
[contra dicting] dependent -arisings appearing as illusions during subsequent attainment 
become weaker and weaker.   
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -1C. Analyzing what the objects of observation of the exalted wisdoms are  
[Haribhadra’s] Great Commentary  says:  
 
QUALM: Also, what are the objects of observation of this non - conceptual 
exalted wisdom? …  
 
When its meaning is explained slightly, there are five [divisions]:  
(1) Setting forth the two systems  
(2) Proving the latter as correct  
(3) Rejecting the arguments of others with respect to that [latter system] (4) Refuting the former system  
(5) The reason for not mentioning other divisions of exalted wisdoms  
 
(1) Setting forth the two systems  
The Proponents  of Cognition -Only  assert that the very truly existent [phenomenon] that is  
the emptiness of other- powered phenomena’s emptiness of apprehended -objects and their 
apprehender -subjects being different substances is the object of comprehension of an arya’s 
meditative equipoise. The others assert that [an arya’s meditative equipoise]  realizes that all 
phenomena are empty of true existence. The latter is correct.  
 
(2) Proving the latter as correct  
If it is the object of knowledge of any knower, it is pervaded by being empty of true 
existence , for example, just like the appearance of a dream horse or elephant. Stating that 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
203 this non -conceptual exalted wisdom also “is a knower” is a nature sign. [Dharmakirti’s] 
Ascertainment of Valid Cognition (Pramanav iniscaya ) says: 
 
If the object of observation is not directly cognized, seeing of the me aning will 
not be strongly established.  
 
Therefore, if the object that is the object of observation has not been observed, then the 
object is not realized.  
 Hence it is not that the property of the subject is not established; and since the concordant 
class is seen, it is not a contradictory [sign]. The existence of truly existent objects of 
knowledge will be refuted on the occasion of “No basis ; no going; no production,” [4.30d]. 
It is also not an indeterminate [sign].   
 
(3) Rejecting the arguments of others  
 
PROPONENTS OF MIND -ONLY : The subject —also the emptiness of true existence of all 
phenomena —it follows that it is empty of true existence, because it is an object of 
observation; for example, as in the case of two moons. If you accept this, then it follows that 
all phenomena would be truly existent, because the emptiness of true existence of all phenomena which is asserted by you to be their mode of abidance is also empty of true 
existence.  
 
RESPONSE: There is no fault because, even though it would be appropriate for Devadatta 
to arise again after having been killed if the victim Devadatta and the killer Yaj ñadatta  
themselves were a part of the killing of Devadatta, since the killer itself is not a part of the 
victim and killing, Devadatta would not arise again. Likewise, the very extreme of superimposition, that the emptiness of true existence , (which is similar to the killer,  the 
emptiness of true existence of all phenomena which is asserted by you to be an extreme of deprecation ,) is truly existent  is refuted by the reasoning that refutes the emptiness of true 
existence as truly existent. Hence it follows that it is not necessary to assert again the true existence of all phenomena, the object of negation, because true existence is not any part 
that is of one nature with the pervader of that emptiness of true existence. 
 Furthermore, it follows that it would be inappropriate to express the fault, “If it is an 
ultimate truth, it must be established ultimately; it is contradictory for it to exist 
conven tionally,” because it is inappropriate for the object of observation of meditative 
equipoise to exist ultimately. That follows, because it bears the finality supported upon that 
illusory falsity which is established by a direct valid cognition of conventio nalities, the 
support that is the property -possessor, and because it is contradictory for it to be supported 
in the nature of false true existence.   
(4) Refuting the former system  
 
If you assert that truly existent emptiness is the observed object, then i t follows that —(1) a 
non-conceptual exalted wisdom and (2) the emptiness of apprehended -objects and their 
apprehender -subjects being different substances —would either be one substance or different 
substances, because, since even emptiness exists truly, you  must assert it [emptiness] to be a 
functioning thing. If you accept this, then you must assert that, if they are different 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
204 substances, then [emptiness]  would be  a different substance from other- powered natures. 
Hence that exalted wisdom would be the posse ssor of an object of utilization that is  a stand -
alone emptiness that is unrelated to other- powered natures, whereby it would not eliminate  
erroneous superimposition s regarding other- powered natures. If they were one substance, 
then it follows that emptine ss would be compounded. If you accept that, then meditating on 
it through observing it would not be able to abandon the seeds of the obscurations.  
 Anyone who asserts that it is the Acarya’s assertion that an arya’s meditative equipoise 
explicitly realize s illusory false dependent -arisings clearly indicates that he has not trained 
well in either of the systems of the Consequentialist and the Autonomist Middle -Wayers, 
has explained the Acarya’s assertions wrongly, and that even he himself does not know the 
presentation that protects the view. 
 (5) The reason for not mentioning other divisions of exalted wisdoms  
 Other divisions such as the mirror- like exalted wisdom have not been explained here, 
because I wish to indicate a mere enumeration of the generality which are the divisions that are instances of the accumulations of exalted wisdoms that explicitly observe emptiness, 
and, since there are infinite other divisions that are instances of exalted wisdom, 
[mentioning them here] would become a hindrance to ascertaining the contextual meaning 
of the clear realizations.  
 Although the Proponents of Mind- Only  verbally  assert that emptiness is truly existent, 
some assert that ultimate truth is a permanent thing that does not rely upon eliminating an 
object of negation. You should understand that there exist differences between Mount Meru 
and a mustard seed or between th e sky and the palm of one’s hand. Realize them from the 
extensive explanation in [Gyaltsab’s ] Explanation of the  Mahayana Treatise on the Sublime 
Continuum . 
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2. Particular explanation of the accumulation of grounds  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2A. Meaning of the generality 
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B. Meaning of the branches   
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2A. Meaning of the generality 
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B-1. Entity  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B-2. Divisions  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B-3. Attributes 
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B-4. Mode of transference  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B-5. Meaning of the name  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B-1. Entity  
This very non- conceptual exalted wisdom, the meditative equipoise directly observing 
thusness that is fully conjoined with great compassion and so forth is called ‘ground’ 
because it is like the ground  since it acts as an abode or a support of excellent qualities. 
Hence it is termed that way.  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B-2. Divisions  
There are ten grounds by way of earlier and later stages which are differentiated by the individual stages that are factors such as  the ability to eliminate the objects of abandonment.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
205 2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B-3. Attributes 
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2A3A. Attributes of entity  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2A3B. Attributes of the objects of abandonment  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2A3A. Attributes of entity  
On the first ground, th ere are twelve sets of a hundred excellent qualities . 
In one instant :  
(1) one sees a hundred buddhas  
(2) one knows that one is blessed by them  
(3) one enters a hundred meditative stabilizations  
(4) one moves a hundred world systems  
(5) one goes to a hundred world systems  
(6) one causes a hundred world systems to appear  
(7) one ripens a hundred sentient beings  
(8) one abides for a hundred eons  
(9) one en gages  their past and future limits  
(10 one opens a hundred Dharma doors  
(11) one displays a hundred bodies 
(12) one displays a retinue of a hundred bodhisattvas for each body, and so forth  
 
The number of excellent qualities increase s more and more; for example, on the second 
ground, there are twelve sets of a thousand of those excellent qualities. The power to purify stains and the power to traverse the paths also increase. One attains the attribute of 
surpassing perfections, for example, the surpassing perfection of generosity is attained on 
the first ground. One’s fruitional rebirths, such as birth as  a king also increase; on the first 
ground one has control over Jambudvipa, while on the second ground one has control over the four continents.  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2A3B. Attributes of the objects of abandonment  
On the occasion of the path of seeing, the seeds of the 112 acquired afflictive obscurations included within the levels of the three realms and the seeds of the 108 acquired knowledge 
obscurations are destroyed. Know that the seeds of the sixteen  afflictions that are objects to 
be abandoned by the path o f meditation and the seeds of the 108 knowledge obscurations 
that are objects to be abandoned by the path of meditation are progressively abandoned by 
the first ground included within the path of meditation until the tenth ground. [Haribhadra’s] 
Great Comm entary  explains:  
 
The clear realization of the truths is the same; therefore the first instant of the 
first ground is the path of seeing. Those other than  that, the second instant and so 
forth until the uninterrupted path called vajra -like, is the path of meditation.  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B-4. Mode of transference  
Know that as long as one has not completed the individual qualities of the training s, one 
will be on that ground; once they are completed one will transfer to another ground.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
206 2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B-5. Meani ng of the name  
The [Sanskrit] equivalent of “ground” is “bhumi.”111 When explained by way of definitive 
words that compound the syllables, it is as follows. It causes fearlessness to innumerable 
bhūtas112, or innumerable excellent qualities increase more and m ore, whereby it is called 
“ground.”  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B. Meaning of the branches  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B1. Making a general connection  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2. The individual natures  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B1. Making a general connection  
COMMENTARY  
With regard to the accumul ation of grounds, in order to indicate which qualities will be 
trained by which ground, twenty- three interceding stanzas have been taught:   
 
EXPLANATION  
With regard to the accumulation of grounds, in order to indicate which qualities will 
be trained  by means of exhausting the faults and completing the excellent qualities of 
which ground, twenty -three interceding stanzas  have been taught:  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2. The individual natures  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A. The nine causal grounds  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2B. Tenth  ground: the resultant ground  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A. The nine causal grounds  
The first of the nine:  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -1. The first ground  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -1A. Root text  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -1B. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -1A. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
1.31 By means of ten types of training s,  
The first ground will be attained. 
Attitude, the very thing that benefits,  
Equality of mind toward sentient beings,  
 1.32 Giving, relying on a spiritual guide, 
Seeking the object of observation —the excellent Dharma,  
A constant mind of definite emergence,  
Desiring and delighting in the body of a buddha,  
 1.33 Teaching the Dharma, and truthful words  
Are asserted to be the ten. 
                                             
 
111 The actual word in Sanskrit has a long first vowel: bhūmi.  
112 While the Sanskrit word bhūta can refer a kind of malignant spi rit in certain contexts, in a more general 
sense, it refers to any living being or even plant according to the Monier -Williams Dictionary.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
207 Know these as the training s  
By way of not observing the nature.   
 
EXPLANATION  
By means of ten types of training s, qualities that act to train, the first ground will be 
attained. “Attitude,…” The way in which one trains is by conjoining these ten qualities 
with great compassion and the wisdom realizing the nature  of true existence as not 
observable . Sutra says:  
 
That which is the training  in the attitude of abiding on the first ground… acting 
in the way propounded; this is the training  in the words of truth.  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -1B. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the ro ot text is said. Exactly in accordance with the sequence, (1) an attitude without 
treachery  regarding all bases, (2) benefit for one's own and others' purposes, (3) oneness of 
mind toward all sentient beings, (4) completely giving away all possessions, (5) pleasing the 
spiritual guide, (6) to desire an object of observation of the excellent dharma included 
within  the three vehicles, (7) strongly displeased to dwell in a household, (8) to desire the 
body of an unsurpassable buddha, (9) to clearly teach the e xcellent dharma, and (10) to only 
propound the truth —because it is an object to be generated in all ways through ten qualities 
with characteristics like the aforesaid, by only those training s with the characteristic of 
being  distinguished by not observing entitiness, the causal attributes of the training s, the 
first ground: Very Joyous, is attained.   
EXPLANATION  
The explanation exactly in accordance with the sequence  in the root text is as follows. 
The subject —the excellent quality in the continuum of a fi rst-grounder who is enthusiastic 
about upholding the excellent Dharma through (1) an  attitude without treachery such as 
deceit and dissimulation regarding all bases  such as sentient beings and roots of virtue —is 
a training  of the first ground , because it i s an excellent quality in the continuum of a first -
grounder that destroys its discordant classes and completes the excellent qualities. Apply 
similarly to the rest.  
 (2) They perform others’ welfare as much as possible, upholding the Mahayana dharma, 
bene fit for one's own and others' purposes, (3) special attitude of others’ welfare by way 
of one-pointedness of the mind  of the four immeasurables  toward all sentient beings, (4) 
completely giving away  all possessions such as the body, resources, roots of virtue, and so 
forth, and not generating even the slightest grasping of miserliness, (5) with the three doors 
pleasing the Mahayana spiritual guide, the root of the path, (6) to desire an object of 
observation of the excellent dharma included within the three  vehicles, observing the 
very extensive scriptural baskets, (7) due to seeing the drawbacks of being a householder, 
strongly displeased to dwell in a household, (8)  without being separated from the 
recollection of the buddha, to desire the body of an unsur passable buddha, (9) due to 
being without stinginess and miserliness of a master regarding the dharma, to clearly teach 
the excellent dharma, and (10) due to fulfilling one’s promise, to only propound the 
truth —through ten qualities of characteristic like the aforesaid, the first ground: Very 
Joyous, is attained, because it is an object to be generated  and attained in all ways since 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
208 one is able to complete all the excellent qualities of the first ground without exception 
through these ten, by only those training s with the  characteristic of being distinguished 
by realizing that the entitiness —which is the true existence of the ten, the causal 
attributes  of the training s—as not observed .   
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -2. The second ground  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -2A. Roo t text  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -2B. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -2A. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
1.34 Ethics, repaying that done, patience,  
Very joyful, great compassionate kindness ,  
Honor, listening respectfully to the guru, and  
The eighth —striving in generosity a nd so forth.  
 
EXPLANATION  
One is able to train in the second ground by means of the eight, ethics and so forth, because one is able to destroy its discordant classes and complete the antidotes. On the second 
ground, not even the slightest stain of corrupte d ethics will arise in dreams. Since the 
perfection of patience and so forth are not possessed in as much a manner as the surpassing perfection of ethics, ethics is said to be “surpassing;” it is not that the remaining perfections 
do not exist on that grou nd. 
 Sutra says, “What is pure ethics ? Not paying attention to the mind of hearers and solitary 
realizers… [He] seeks the perfections in none other than [those]. This [bodhisattva] strives 
for and seeks the remaining perfections.”   
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -2B. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. (1) The ethics of virtuous qualities, of enacting the welfare of 
sentient beings and of restraint, (2) to remember the benefit done by others, (3) to be patient 
towards the harms done by others and so forth,  (4) to not regret achieving virtuous qualities, 
(5) to love all beings, (6) to bow to the abbot and so forth, (7) to achieve the dharma taught by the spiritual guide, and (8) to be enthusiastic about the six perfections, generosity and so 
forth —the traini ngs like the aforesaid, by eight types of attributes that trained as before, the 
second ground: Stainless, is attained.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Completing the perfection of ethics on the second ground is distinguished as follows. (1) Possessing the three: the ethics  of gathering virtuous qualities, the  ethics of enacting the 
welfare of sentient beings and the  ethics of restraint, (2) to remember the benefit done 
by others  and not allowing it to go to waste, a branch of purifying ethics , (3) to be patient 
towards the harms done by others and so forth, not thinking about the harms at all, 
possessing the patience of accepting suffering and definitely thinking about the dharma , (4) 
to be enthusiastic about  achieving virtuous qualities without regret, (5) to love all 
being s, never discarding sentient beings , (6) to bow to higher beings, the abbot and so 
forth, (7) to achieve the dharma taught by the spiritual guide  exactly as taught, and (8) 
to be enthusiastic about the six perfections, generosity and so forth , the excellen t 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
209 achievings —by means of the training s like the aforesaid  being conjoined with great 
compassion and the wisdom realizing emptiness as before, by eight types of attributes  
that trained, the second ground: Stainless, is attained.  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -3. The third ground: Luminous  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -3A. Root text  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -3B. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -3A. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
1.35 Not satiated by hearing,  
Giving Dharma without reward, 
Thoroughly purifying the buddha land,  
Not being dishearten ed by cyclic existence, 
 
1.36ab Shame and embarrassment – 
These are the five types, the nature of non -clinging.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The third ground is trained by way of the five, not satiated by hearing and so forth,  
because they eliminate its faults and complet e the excellent qualities. A great bodhisattva 
abiding on the third ground abides in the five qualities. What are the five? “Not satiated by 
much hearing, not adhering to syllables…”  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -3B. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. (1) Not knowing satiation by listening to the excellent dharma, (2) 
with a mind that does not regard gain and so forth, to thoroughly teach the excellent dharma, 
(3) to thoroughly purify one's own supporting and supported buddha land, (4) not being 
disheartened at all by seeing disagreeable sentient beings and so forth who were benefited, 
and (5) in relation to oneself and others, to not enact non -virtuous qualities —the five types 
of training s like the aforesaid, through having trained  as before, by not conc eiving 
entitiness, the third ground: Luminous, is realized.    
EXPLANATION  
The two —(1-2) striving in much hearing and never rejecting that, not knowing satiation by 
listening to the excellent dharma, and teaching others the dharma without seeking gain, honor, fame, and so forth with a mind that does not regard gain and so forth, to thoroughly teach the excellent dharma, (3) accomplishing extensive accumulations as 
causes to purify the supporting and su pported land, to thoroughly purify one's own 
supporting and supported buddha land, (4) by the surpassing perfection of patience on the third ground, completing patience towards trainees who have gone astray and the other 
two types of patience, not being di sheartened  at all by seeing disagreeable sentient 
beings and so forth who were benefited, and (5) due to complete shame and embarrassment, shunning negative behavior  in relation  to oneself and others, to not enact 
non-virtuous qualities —by the five types o f training s like the aforesaid being conjoined 
with great compassion and  not conceiving entitiness as before, through having trained , 
the third ground: Luminous, is realized.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
210 2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -4. The fourth ground: Radiant  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -4A. Root te xt 
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -4B. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -4A. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
1.36cd Dwelling in a forest, small desires, contentment, 
Training, depending on perfect restraint,  
 
1.37 Thoroughly not forsaking training,  
Contempt for desire,  Nirvana, gi ving away all possessions,  
Being undiscouraged and without viewing.  
 
EXPLANATION  
One completely trains in the fourth ground by way of the ten —dwelling in a forest devoid 
of the attention of the hearers and solitary realizers, small desires, contentment, training  
through firm mental commitment to the twelve excellent qualities of training , depending  on 
perfect restraint, and so forth, because they eliminate its faults and complete the excellent 
qualities. Sutra says: “Do not give up the ten qualities of a great bodhisattva abiding on the fourth ground. What are the ten? They are like this: abiding in a secluded place...”  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -4B. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
(1) To dwell in a secluded place, (2) without strong desire toward that not gained, (3) regarding gains obtained, without seeking excess, (4) perfectly binding the excellent 
qualities of training, just begging for alms and so forth, (5) not to forsake, even for one's life 
and so forth, the adopted training, (6) contempt for the objects of desire by viewing them as 
hindrances, (7) appropriate to trainees, to strive for nirvana, (8) to give away all possessions, (9) undiscouraged mind with regard to accomplishing virtue, and (10) not viewing all 
things —the training s like the aforesaid, as before, by the ten types, the fourth ground: 
Radiant, is overcome. 
 
EXPLANATION  
(1) To dwell in a secluded  place  that is isolate d from disquiet and is at least a furlong113 
from the city, (2) small desires, without strong desire toward that not gained, (3)  
contentment regarding gains obtained, without seeking excess , such as that better or more 
than those, (4) perfectly binding  throu gh firm mental commitment to the  twelve excellent 
qualities of training, just begging for alms and so forth, (5) not to forsake, even for 
one's life and so forth, the adopted training  through not being sullied by infractions and 
downfalls, (6) contempt for  the objects  of desire by viewing them as hindrances  through 
specifically  abandoning craving by means of their self- entities, (7) through  setting in 
liberation appropriate to trainees, to strive for nirvana, (8) to give  away all outer and 
inner possessions, (9) having understood that one has the ability to accomplish all virtues by 
completing the perfection of joyous effort on the fourth ground, undiscouraged mind  with 
regard to accomplishing virtue, and (10) without relying on anything, not viewing  all 
                                              
113 A measure of  distance that is  approximately  2 miles . 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
211 things by way of adherence —by the ten types of training s like the aforesaid , conjoined 
with great compassion and the wisdom realizing emptiness as before, the fourth ground: 
Radiant, is overcome . 
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -5. The fifth ground, Difficult to Overcome  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -5A. Root text  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -5B. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -5A. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
1.38 Familiarity, possessiveness towards householders,  
Places where there is disquiet, 
Praising oneself, belittling others, 
The ten non-virtuous paths of actions,  
 1.39 Due to conceit being puffed -up, erroneous,  
Faulty intelligence, putting up with afflictions — 
Having completely abandoned these ten  
The fifth ground is perfectly attained.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Having completely abandoned those  ten, “Familiarity ” and so forth, the fifth ground is 
perfectly attained, because its excellent qualities are completed without exception .  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -5B. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. (1) To associate with the ordained and so forth for the purpose of gain and so forth, (2) not to reveal faithful householders , (3) cities with many people, (4) to 
praise oneself, (5) to criticize others, (6) the ten non -virtuous p aths of actions, (7) to be 
conceited due to hearing and so forth, and not bowing to others, (8) having reversed virtue 
and non- virtue, to adhere, (9) faulty intelligence, wrong view and so forth, and (10) to turn 
towards all afflictions such as attachment —the ten qualities with characteristics like the 
aforesaid are completely abandoned, and by the ten types of training s, the implied opposite 
qualities, like before, the fifth ground: Difficult to Overcome, is attained.  
 
EXPLANATION  
(1) To associate with th e ordained and so forth for the purpose of gain and so forth due 
to craving to gain and honor, (2) not reveal faithful householders  to others out of craving 
to the householders , (3) staying in cities  and so forth with many people  due to excessively 
desirin g disquiet, (4-5) to praise oneself and criticize others , for the sake of gain and 
honor, (6) especially increase the ten non -virtuous paths of actions  in dependence on 
those, (7) to be conceited due to hearing and so forth, and not bowing to others , onese lf 
being puffed -up and scorning others, (8) due to erroneous adherence to what is to be 
adopted and what is to be discarded, having reversed virtue and non -virtue, to adhere, 
(9) faulty intelligence, wrong view , the view of the transitory collection, and so forth, and 
(10) to turn towards all afflictions such as attachment—the ten qualities with  
characteristics like the aforesaid are completely abandoned, and by the ten types of 
training s conjoined with great compassion and the wisdom realizing emptiness, t he 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
212 implied opposite qualities , the antidotes, like before, the fifth ground: Difficult to 
Overcome, is attained. 
 The wrong view of deprecating actions and their results as well as its seeds have already 
been abandoned on the first ground. Therefore, [the wrong view (9) that is discussed here] is 
only in relation to the trainees who abide in the retinues [of bodhisattvas on this ground] at 
that time. Or alternatively, viewing an extreme that is held as a measure of the view holding 
to extremes is designated  a wrong view. When it is explained definitively to be a wrong 
view, you should take it that the antidote that casts to a distance114 has been generated. The 
other objects of behavior indicate d here will probably not manifest at this stage but are 
presented in order to make known that some of their seeds have been abandoned on this 
ground.  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -6. The sixth ground, Approaching  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -6A. Root text  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -6B. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -6A. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
1.40 Generosity, ethics, patience, joyous effort,  
Concentration, and wisdom —by their completion,  
By abandoning a mind of liking for learners and rhinoceroses  
And of terror,  
 
1.41 Undismayed when begged from,  
Without dislike even for giving away all possessio ns, and  
Not abandoning mendicants even though poor –  
By these the sixth ground is perfectly attained.   
 
EXPLANATION  
The sixth ground —on which the six excellent qualities “ generosity ” and so forth have been 
completed and the six faults have been abandoned —is perfectly attained, because it is 
attained by means of eliminating its faults and completing the excellent qualities. 
 Sutra says, “One who is abiding on the sixth ground should perfectly complete the six 
qualities, and in that way, the six perfections. Furthermore, he should completely abandon 
the six qualities. What are the six? He should completely abandon the mind of hearers and 
so forth.”  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -6B. Commentary  
COMMENTARY  
So the root text is said. Through fully completing (1 -6) the six perfections, to abandon (7 -8) 
desire toward hearers and solitary realizers, (9) terror regarding not observing entitiness, 
(10) dismay when begged from by mendicants, (11) dislike to engage in giving away all 
possessions voluntarily, and (12) the mind of a bandoning mendicants even though 
                                              
114 This is one of four types of antidotes : (1) antidotes that a bandon , (2) antidotes that are bases , (3) an tidotes 
that cast to a distance,  and (4) antidotes that repudiate.  See stanza 5.61  & 5.62 of Vasubandhu’s  Treasury of 
Manifest Knowledge  (Abhidharmakosha ). 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
213 destitute —by the twelve training s like the aforesaid, as before, the sixth ground: 
Approaching, is fully known. 
 
EXPLANATION  
Through completing (1- 6) the six perfections, the six objects of abandonment are 
abandoned, becaus e, (7-8) by completing the perfection of ethics and the perfection of 
concentration, desire to attain the states of hearers and solitary realizers are abandoned;  
(9) by completing the perfection of patience , terror regarding not observing entitiness  of 
all phenomena is abandoned, (10) by completing the perfection of generosity, dismay when 
begged from by mendicants  is abandoned , (11) by completing the perfection of joyous 
effort that is enthusiastic and joyful regarding generosity, dislike to engage in givi ng away 
all possessions voluntarily  is abandoned , and (12) by completing the perfection of 
wisdom , the mind of abandoning mendicants even though oneself is destitute  is 
abandoned —by the twelve training s like the aforesaid  having completed the six antidotes  
and having abandoned the six objects of abandonment , as before, the sixth ground: 
Approaching, is fully known. Alternatively, due to the six perfections being conjoined 
with the mind of enlightenment, the first three faults are abandoned; due to having 
completed the perfection of generosity the last three faults are abandoned.  
 In dependence on having completed the perfection of concentration on the fifth ground, 
one completes the perfection of wisdom on this [sixth] ground. In dependence on having attain ed a fully qualified common  calm abiding , after that one attains  special insight . Know 
the sequence of the last two perfections as in that sequence [of attaining calm abiding and 
special insight] . It will be explained below .  
 
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -7. The seventh ground: Gone Afar  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -7A. Abandoning t he twenty objects of abandonment  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -7B. Indicating reliance on  the twenty antidotes  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -7A. Abandoning t he twenty objects of abandonment  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -7A1. Root text  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -7A2. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -7A1. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
1.42 Apprehending a self and sentient beings,  
Life, persons, severance , permanence,  
Signs, causes, aggregates,  
Constituents, sources,  
 
1.43 Abidance in and atta chment to the three realms,  
Discouraged mind,  
The Three Jewels,  
Adherence to a view regarding ethics,  
 1.44 Dispute about emptiness, and  
Contradictory with that –  
By severing the twenty faults  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
214 The seventh ground is attained.  
 
EXPLANATION  
By severing the twenty faults  such as apprehending a self and sentient beings, the 
seventh ground is attained, because it is attained by means of completing twenty qualities 
of excellence . 
 Sutra says, “Twenty qualities do not occur in a great bodhisattva abiding on the s eventh 
ground. What are the twenty? They are apprehending a self, apprehending life, apprehending sentient beings...”  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -7A2. Commentary 
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. A dherence which views: —(1) self, ( 2) sentient beings, ( 3) life, (4) 
persons, (5) severance , (6) permanence , (7) signs, ( 8) causes, ( 9) aggregates, ( 10) 
constituents , (11) sources , (12-13) abidance in and attachment to  the three realms, ( 14) 
discourag ed mind, (15) buddha (16) dharma, (17) sangha, and ( 18) ethics —(19) dispute 
about emptiness and (20) holding to expressing contradictions —having separated from the 
twenty faults like the aforesaid  through full abandonment, by the twenty types of trainings , 
the implied  opposite qualiti es, as before, the seventh ground: Gone Afar, is fully known.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the seventh ground— has abandoned some seeds of apprehending (1) self, 
because it has cultivated for many eons the direct realization of the emptiness door of 
liberation. Apply similarly to the others; the y will also be explained on the occasion of the 
antidotes.  
  (19) Dispute about emptiness , holding emptiness as causing fear of things , and (20) 
holding to expressing the empty and the conventional as contradictions —having 
separated from the twenty faults like the aforesaid through full abandonment, by the 
twenty types of trainings , the implied twenty antidotes  that are  opposite qualities , that are 
the reverse qualities as before, the seventh ground: Gone Af ar, is fully known.  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -7B. Indicating reliance on the twenty antidotes  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -7B1. Making a connection  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -7B2. Root text  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -7B3. Commentary 
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -7B1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
In order to show the very qualities impl ied: 
 
EXPLANATION  
In order to show the very  antidotes, the qualities implied  by indicating the twenty as 
objects of abandonment :  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -7B2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
1.45 Knowing the three doors of liberation,  
Complete purity of the three spheres , 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
215 Compassion, non-clinging ,  
Phenomena as just equal, knowing as one mode,  
 
1.46 Not produced, patience and knowing,  
Teaching  phenomena as of a single aspect,  
Totally destroying conceptions,  
Abandoning discrimination, views, and afflictions,  
 
1.47 The definite intent of calm abiding,  
Special insight  and skill, 
A pacified  mind, exalted wisdom  
Unimpeded with regard to all,  
 
1.48 No ground of attachment, anywhere as wished  
Travel to other lands simultaneously, 
Always demonstrating one’s own entity – 
Thes e are the twenty.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The seventh ground is trained  by way of the twenty, knowing the three doors of liberation, 
and so forth, because they eliminate its faults and fully complete the excellent qualities.   
 Sutra says: “A great bodhisattva abidin g on the seventh ground should fully complete 
these twenty qualities. What are the twenty? He should fully  complete emptiness and ...”  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -7B3. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. To (1-3) correctly  know the emptiness, signlessness, and 
wishlessness doors of liberation, ( 4) regarding the ten virtuous paths of action, not to 
observe  the object to be killed, the killer, the killing and so forth, ( 5) a kind heart which 
observes  all beings, ( 6) without o bserving  things, (7) to realize all phenomena as just equal, 
(8) to realize the Mahayana as one, ( 9) to fully know  [phenomena] are not produced , (10) to 
realize  the patience of definitely realizing the profound dharma, ( 11) to strongly  teach all 
objects of knowledge by means of Mahayana method, ( 12) to cut all conceptions,  
 
EXPLANATION  
Because the seventh -grounder has cultivated  (1-3) the correct knowing  by direct cognition 
of the emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness  doors of liberation,  the emptiness  of true 
existence of the three —entity, cause and result —he respectively abandons the apprehension 
of the self of persons, sentient beings and life. 
  (4) Regarding the ten virtuous paths of action such as abandoning killing, by realizing 
with direct cognition that the three circles such as the object to be killed are not observed  
as truly existent, abandoning the apprehension of a single independent person , (5) by 
possessing a kind  heart which obse rves all beings  tormented by suffering in many 
rebirths, abandoning the apprehension of sentient beings as  sever ed, (6) since it would be 
suitable to observe truly existent things if they were to exist, by possessing the absence  of 
[such]  observ ation , aban doning the apprehension of sentient beings as permanent, (7) by 
realiz ing all phenomena of samsara and nirvana a s just equal  in being empty of true 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
216 existence, abandoning apprehension of the signs of what is to be adopted and what is to be 
abandoned as trul y existent, (8) by realizing all vehicles as  one final Mahayana (Great 
Vehicle) mode , abandoning the apprehension of the final cause s as three different lineages, 
(9) by fully knowing phenomena of name and form are not produced ultimately, 
abandoning the apprehension of the aggregates as truly existent , (10) by  realizing the 
patience of definitely realizing the profound dharma  that is emptiness, abandoning the 
apprehension of the constituents as truly existent , (11) in dependenc e on strongly teaching 
all objects of knowledge  included within the sources to be apprehended -objects and 
apprehender -subjects that are devoid of true existence  by means of Mahayana method, 
abandoning the apprehension of the sources as truly existent , (12) in dependence on  cutting 
all conceptions that apprehend true existence, abandoning the apprehension of objects of abidance in the three realms as truly existent , 
 
COMMENTARY 
(13) without conceptions that apprehend signs, to reject the five, view of the transitory collection and so forth, and to abandon afflictions such as attachment, (14) to cultivate calm 
abiding , (15) to enact wisdom and skillful means, (16) to finely pacify the mind, (17) 
unimpeded exalted wisdom towards forms and so forth, (18) not bei ng an abode of 
adherence, (19) to travel to all buddha lands simultaneously as one wishes, and (20) in 
accordance with trainees, to exhibit one's body everywhere —by these twenty types of 
training s also, as before, the seventh ground is realized.   
 
EXPLANA TION  
(13) by the three —being without conceptions  of improper attention that apprehend signs  
of cleanness, happiness, and so forth, rejecting the five, view of the transitory collection and so forth, and abandoning afflictions such as attachment —abandoning attachment to 
objects to be rejected in the three realms as truly existent, (14)  by cultivating calm abiding 
that has attained mastery over excellent qualities due to special calm abiding, abandoning a 
discouraged mind that thinks, “I cannot at tain higher attributes”, (15) by enacting  the 
special wisdom  included within special insight  and the skillful means  that knows 
dependent -arisings as illusions, abandoning adherence to the buddha as truly existent, (16)  
by being free from the conceit that v iews the object of observation and finely pacifying the 
mind  that directly realizes the mode of abidance, abandoning apprehension of dharma  as 
truly existent, (17)  by possessing unimpeded exalted wisdom towards forms and so forth 
included within objects of knowledge that are modes and varieties, abandoning adherence to 
the sangha as truly existent, (18)  by possessing the realization of the truth as not being an 
abode of adherence  anywhere, abandoning adherence to the true existence which views 
ethics, (19) by possessing travel to all buddha lands simultaneously as one wishes for the 
sake of discern ing phenomena, abandoning erroneous disputing about emptiness, and (20)  
by exhibiting  the attainment of dominion over one's body everywhere, in accordance 
with trainees  for the sake of taking care of sentient beings who adhere to objects of 
observation as truly existent, abandoning holding to expressing the empty and dependent -
arisings as contradictions —by these twenty types of training s also, by means of being 
conjoined with great compassion and the wisdom realizing emptiness as before, the 
seventh ground is realized . 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
217 2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -8 The eighth ground: Immovable  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -8A. Root text  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -8B. Commentary   
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -8A. R oot text  
ROOT TEXT  
1.49 Knowing the mind of all sentient beings,  
Play through  clairvoyance,  
Establishing an excellent buddha land,  
Relying on a buddha in order to fully investigate,  
 
1.50 Knowing faculties, purifying a victor’s land,  
Abiding like an illusion, and  
Taking existence in accordance with mentality – 
These kinds of actions are explained as the eight.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The eighth ground is trained  by way of either of the two sets of four, knowing the mind of 
all sentient beings, and so forth, becaus e they eliminate its faults and fully complete the 
excellent qualities.  
 Sutra says: “A great bodhisattva abiding on the eighth ground should fully complete these 
four qualities. What are the four? Realizing the minds of all sentient beings and…” and 
“Furthermore, he should fully complete the four qualities...”   
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -8B. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. (1) To know just as it is, the mental behavior of all sentient beings, 
(2) to play in the world systems through the clairvoy ance of magical emanation, (3) to fully 
transform the supporting buddha land into the entity of gold and so forth, (4) through having fully investigated the dharma in all ways, to please the Buddha, (5) to generate the divine 
eye, (6) to completely purify the supported sentient beings of the buddha land, (7) to always 
abide in the illusion -like, and (8) having seen the welfare of all sentient beings, to fully 
uphold a premeditated rebirth —through eight types like the aforesaid qualities of training s, 
as before, the eighth ground: Immovable, is experienced.  
 
EXPLANATION  
(1) To know just as it is  with a single mind, the mental behavior of all sentient beings , 
being with attachment, being free from attachment, and so forth, (2) to play in the world 
systems of the ten directions through the clairvoyance of magical emanation  of play, (3) 
to fully transform  with extensive roots of virtue one’s supporting buddha land into the 
entity of gold , vaidurya, and so forth, (4) through having fully investigated the words 
and the meanings of the Dharma in all ways, to please the Buddha  with the three doors 
for the sake of that, (5) by principally  generating the divine eye  concordant with the ten 
strengths, knowing faculties that are supreme and not supreme, (6) to completely p urify  the 
faults of the supported sentient beings of the buddha land  where one will become 
enlightened , (7) to abide  like an illusion in all  arising [from absorption] and entering [into 
absorption], and (8) having seen the welfare of all sentient beings when one has  
apprehended where they will be reborn, to fully uphold a premeditated rebirth  by way of 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
218 compassion and prayers —through eight types like the aforesaid qualities of training s, as 
before, the eighth ground: Immovable, is experienced . 
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -9. The ninth ground: Good Intelligence  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -9A. Root text  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -9B. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -9A. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
1.51 They are infinite prayers,  
Knowing the languages of gods and so forth,  
Confid ence like a river,  
Supreme entry into a womb,  
 
1.52 Castes, clans, family,  
Retinue, rebirths,  Renunciation, bodhi trees, and  
Fulfilling excellent qualities.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The ninth ground is trained  by way of the twelve, such as infinite prayers that ac complish 
whatever wished for, because they eliminate its faults and fully complete the excellent 
qualities.  
 Sutra says: “A great bodhisattva abiding on the ninth ground should fully complete these 
twelve qualities. What are the twelve? Fully upholding in finite prayers in that manner, fully 
knowing the languages of gods and so forth and…”  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2A -9B. Commentary  
COMMENTARY  
So the root text is said. (1) Infinite prayers, (2) to know the languages of all sentient beings, 
gods and so forth, (3) i nexhaustible confidence like a river, (4) to enter into a womb extolled 
by all beings, (5) to reside as a king and so forth, (6) birth from the sun and so forth, (7) well 
related relatives, mother and so forth, (8) an independent retinue, (9) rebirths prai sed by 
Indra and so forth, (10) having been urged by the buddhas and so forth, to renounce,  
 
EXPLANATION  
(1) By completing the six perfections, accomplishing infinite prayers, (2) by attaining the 
individual correct knowledge of definitive words which kno ws the various conventions for 
propounding Dharma, knowing the languages of all sentient beings, gods and so forth, (3) by attaining the individual correct knowledge of confidence that has mastery over 
profound expressions, inexhaustible confidence like a river  regarding teaching the 
Dharma , (4) to enter into the  womb of a mother extolled by all beings  due to being free 
from all the faults of a woman , (5) to reside in an excellent caste, the king and brahmin 
castes, and so forth, (6) birth in an excellent c lan [literally: bone (from the father)], such as 
the sun , sugarcane  and so forth, (7) maternal lineage, excellent well related relatives, 
mother and so forth, (8) an excellent independent retinue  subdued by oneself and placed 
in enlightenment , (9) rebirths  praised by Indra, lords of humans,  and so forth, (10) 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
219 having been urged by the buddhas , the sons of the gods of the pure places, and so forth, 
to renounce  being a householder,   
 
COMMENTARY 
(11) a tree like a wish -granting gem, Ashvadtha and so forth, and (12) to bring to full 
completion all excellent qualities that are the entity of a buddha and the B uddhad harma —by 
twelve types of training s with excellent characteristics like the aforesaid, through the 
attributes that have trained  as before, the ninth ground: Good Intelligence, is actualized. 
 
EXPLANATION  
(11) A bodhi tree like a wish -granting gem due to giving rise to all that is needed and 
desired, sitting at the seat  of enlightenment, Ashvadtha  of this teacher [Shakyamuni ], 
Nagapushpa  of Maitreya , and so forth, and (12) to bring to full completion all excellent 
qualities that are the entity of the strengths of a buddha and the B uddha dharma and so 
forth —by twelve types of training s with  excellent characteristics like the aforesaid, 
through the attributes which have trained  by means of being fully conjoined with great 
compassion and the wisdom realizing emptiness as before, the ninth ground: Good 
Intelligence, is actualized . 
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2B. The tenth ground: the resultan t ground  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2B -1. Making a connection  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2B -2. Root text  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2B -3. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2B -1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
Having definitely indicated in that manner the training s of the causal grounds, on the 
resultant ground itself, without explaining those, by means of summarizing all the grounds, the characteristics of the tenth ground.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Having definitely indicated in that manner  explained above the training s of the causal 
grounds, the charac teristics of the tenth ground will be explained by means of 
summarizing the possession of the fully complete types of abandonments and realizations 
of all the  lower grounds . There is a reason for not explaining the tenth ground by means of 
the training s, because on the resultant tenth ground itself, without explaining those  
training s, one is able to completely understand them through just the explanation by means 
of the characteristics, whereby they are not explained .  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2B -2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
1.53 Having passed through the nine grounds, the exalted wisdom  
By which one abides on the buddha ground—  
Know that as  
The tenth bodhisattva ground.  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
220 EXPLANATION  
Know that. Know what? Know the exalted wisdom by which one abides on the buddha 
ground explained immediately after the explanation on the nine grounds, the objects to be 
passed through taught in sutra , having passed through the nine grounds —the eight lesser 
grounds, and the nine causal grounds, which have been taken as one, that called “the 
bodhisattva’s grounds” —the former by knowing and seeing, and the latter by abiding. 
Know that as what? Know that as  the tenth bodhisattva ground.  
 The subject —the buddha ground mentioned in sutra immediately after the nine grounds 
that are to be passed through—is the tenth ground, because it is a Mahayana ground and, in terms of one abiding on it, that a tenth -grounder “should be expressed as only a buddha who 
is a bodhisattva; he is not a perfect complete buddha” occurs. Sutra says: “Subhuti, who is a 
tenth-ground great bodhisattva? In this way, a great bodhisattva practices the six perfections 
with skillful means and ...,” “When he practices [those and so forth] until the eighteen 
unmixed qualities of a buddha, the ground of the lineage ...,” “He perfectly p asses through 
the bodhisattva grounds. Subhuti, in that way, having passed through the nine grounds, he 
abides on the buddha ground. Subhuti, that is a tenth -ground great bodhisattva.”  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2B -3. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2B -3A. Explaining th e nine grounds that  are to be passed through  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2B -3B. Explaining the tenth ground that  has passed beyond those  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2B -3A. Explaining the nine grounds that  are to be passed through  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. (1) The lineage of hearers and so forth, (2) approachers to the first result, (3) stream -enterers, (4) once -returners, (5) non -returners, (6) foe -destroyers 
themselves —the six aforesaid, and, (7) the three approachers of the remaining condensed, 
by intending to pr esent the three modes, and (8) solitary realizers , respectively are the 
grounds of (1) lineage, (2) the eighth, (3) seeing, (4) diminishment, (5) separation from attachment, (6) realizing completion, (7) hearers, and (8) solitary realizers; and (9) just one, 
the nine types of bodhisattva grounds which were explained.  
 
EXPLANATION  
(1) The subject —the four levels of the path of preparation that are based upon the lineage  
that is the dharmata of hearers , and solitary realizers [included within the expression]  “and 
so forth ”—are the grounds of lineage  respectively, because they are realizations of ordinary 
beings that are unmistaken regarding the lineage that have been correc tly adopted by the 
Hinayana. Persons who abide on the grounds of lineage are not certain  to be irreversible 
from their own enlightenment, just like the hearer who is someone fully transformed to the 
enlightenment of one abiding on a hearer’s path of preparation. It is not that it is not suitable 
to be posited by lineage, because [otherwise] i t follows that one does not realize the 
definition of the generality of a ground of lineage.   (2) The subject —the realizations of serialist approachers to the first result—are the 
grounds of the eighth , because they are realizations of the first component [of the first pair] 
from among the four pairs. (3)The realizations of the serialist stream -enterers  are the 
grounds of seeing , because they are realizations distinguished by having abandoned the 
three entwinements. (4) The subject —the realizations of once -returners —are the grounds 
of diminishment , because they are realizations of an abider in the result distinguished by 
having largely separated from attachment. (5) The realizations of non -returners  are the 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
221 grounds of  separation from attachment, because they are realizations of an abider in the 
result distinguished by having abandoned the partial concordances with the bottom. (6) The 
realizations of the hearer foe-destroyers themselves are the grounds of realizing 
completion, because they are realizations of the small vehicle distinguished by having 
abandoned the partial concordances with the upper. (7) The subject —the realizations of the 
three approachers  to the remaining results of a hearer—are the groun ds of  hearers,  
because they are realizations of the remaining approachers to the results of hearers.  
 There is a reason for condensing [these three] into one, known as “the grounds of 
hearers” here, because, by presenting the three modes  of a vehicle that are to be passed 
through having been viewed and to be passed through having been abided upon, it is 
intended to explain that having passed beyond them is a characteristic of the tenth ground, 
whereby they are condensed  into one, “the grounds of  hearers.”  
 (8) The subject —the clear realizations of solitary realizer  aryas —are the grounds of  
solitary realizers, because they are realizations of aryas of the middling vehicle. (9) The 
nine types of bodhisattva grounds which were explained earlier are  just one  of the nine 
grounds that are to be passed through, called “the grounds of bodhisattvas ,” because they 
are posited by condensing into one the grounds (that are passed through having been abided 
upon) which are the nine grounds to be passed through.  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -2B2B -3B. Explaining the tenth ground that  has passed beyond those  
COMMENTARY 
Having passed through the nine grounds in that manner, because that a tenth -grounder 
“should be expressed as only a buddha who is a bodhisattva; he is not a perfect complete 
buddha” occurs, one abiding on the buddha ground who knows prayers  is to be known as a 
tenth -grounder bodhisattva. 
 
EXPLANATION  
Immediately after indicating having passed through the nine grounds in that manner  in 
sutra, that explained to be one abiding on the buddha ground who knows prayers  with 
mastery over the actions of great clairvoyance, immediately after which is the buddha 
ground,  is to be known as a tenth- grounder bodhisattva,  because in terms of a 
bodhisattva abiding on that ground, that a tenth -grounder “should be expressed  as only a 
buddha who is a  bodhisattva; he is not a perfect complete buddha” occurs  in sutra. 
[Maitreya’s] Mahayana Treatise on the Sublime Continuum ( Mahayanottaratantrasastra ) 
[1.76] says:  
 This mode of the bodh isattvas  
During subsequent attainment [is seen] In the world to be just equal with the tathagatas  
With respect to correctly liberating sentient beings.  
 
Having pacified coarse exertion in enacting the welfare of others, they are taught to be equal to the buddhas in just engaging in exalted activities for all sentient beings, whereby they are 
described  as buddhas. However, these bodhisattvas have not exhaustively abandoned the 
levels of imprints of ignorance, the uncontaminated actions arisen from the ela borations of 
signs, a body that is the nature of mind, and inconceivable transformed death -transference. 
Hence they have not attained the truth body ’s perfection s of purity, bliss, an excellent self, 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
222 and permanen ce, thereby they are not referred to as “com plete buddhas.”115 “Prayer” refers 
to attaining the special ten powers116; when the actualizing of the truth body is asserted, it 
refers to the attainment of mastery.  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -3. Particular explanation of the accumulation of antidotes  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -3A. Making a connection  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -3B. Root text  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -3C. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -3A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
With regard to the accumulation of antidotes, an interceding stanza:  
 
EXPLANATION  
With regard to the accumulation of antidotes, an interceding stanza:   
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -3B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
1.54 Regarding the paths of seeing and familiarization,  
Because of thoroughly pacifying  
The conceptualizations of apprehendeds and apprehenders,  
They are said to be the eight types of antidotes. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —regarding the Mahayana paths of seeing and familiarization —eight types 
of antidotes are said to  exist, because  there are eight by way of enumeration of acting to 
thoroughly pacify the  eight conceptualizations of apprehendeds and apprehenders , the 
objects of abandonment. 
 Sutra says, “Subhuti, from where will the vehicles arise?’ He said, ‘They will arise from 
the three realms by way of the mode of non -observation, and by way of the mode of non -
duality one will abide in omniscience wherever it is.”  
2B2C -1A2C -4B3B -3C. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. Conceptualizations of apprehendeds are two: those bearing the 
supports of (1) mere thoroughly afflicted things, and (2) an tidotes; and conceptualizations of 
apprehenders are two: those bearing the supports of (1) substantially existent persons and 
(2) imputed beings. Because of thoroughly pacifying the eight conceptualizations of 
apprehendeds and apprehenders, since they are individually abandoned on the paths of 
seeing and meditation, those to be actualized in dependence on aspects of both the two 
truths, by way of classification of discordant classes, the distinctions of the occasions of 
only the two paths, are eight types o f antidotes. 
 
                                              
115 Refer to [Maitreya’s] Mahayana Treatise on the Sublime Continuum (Mahayanottaratantrasastra ), 
stanzas 34 –36. 
116 The ten powers are: power s over (a) life, (b) mind, (c) necessities, (d) actions, (e) rebirth, (f) imagination, 
(g) wishes, (h) magical emanation, (i) exalted wisdom, and (j) Dharma. See the explanation of root text 
stanza 8.4.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
223 EXPLANATION  
The subject —the distinctions  of the occasions that are able to eliminate the objects of 
abandonment of only the two, Mahayana paths  of seeing and meditation —are of eight 
types of antidotes, because there are eight by way of classification of discordant classes , 
the objects of abandonment. There are divisions of the discordant classes into eight, because 
they thoroughly pacify the eight conceptualizations of apprehendeds and apprehenders  
included within the acquired and the in nate.  
 The antidotes to the objects to be abandoned by the path of seeing and the objects to be 
abandoned by the path of meditation are indicated in sutra  to be actualized , that is, to be 
known  in dependence on aspects of both the two truths, because (i) i t has been taught 
that asserting the locus from where  one definite emerges and that which acts to definitely 
emerge as existing conventionally is  are the antidote s to the [ conceptions of] apprehendeds  
and apprehenders , the objects to be abandoned by the pa th of seeing, in dependence on 
conventional truths, and (ii) it has been taught that refuting them as existing ultimately is to 
be known as the antidote to the [conceptions of] apprehendeds  and apprehenders , the objects 
to be abandoned by the path of medit ation, in dependence on ultimate truths. It is 
appropriate to divide the antidotes into eight types by way of divisions of the discordant 
classes, since the seeds of the acquired and the seeds of the innate of the two conceptions of 
apprehendeds (called th e conceptualizations of apprehendeds) and the two conceptions of 
apprehenders are  individually abandoned on the paths of seeing and meditation  
respectively.  
2B2C -1A2C -4B4. [ That which u ndoubtedly issu es forth omniscience:] the achieving of definite emergen ce 
2B2C -1A2C -4B4A. Making a connection  
2B2C -1A2C -4B4B. Root text  
2B2C -1A2C -4B4C. Commentary  
2B2C -1A2C -4B4A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
Having collected the accumulations in that manner, since one definitely emerges, the fourth, 
the achieving of definite emergence:  
 
EXPLANATION  
Having collected  the accumulations  of army through extensive attitude and application in 
that manner, since one definitely emerges  into omniscience, the fourth, the achieving of 
definite emergence : 
2B2C -1A2C -4B4B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
1.55 Objects of intent, equality, 
The welfare of sentient beings, without effort, 
Definite emergence in passing beyond the extremes,  
Definite emergence with the characteristics of attainment,  
 
1.56 The very exalted knower of all aspects, and  The path:  
This nature of eight types  of definite emergence  having those objects — 
Know that it is the achieving of definite emergence.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
224  
EXPLANATION  
Know that this nature of the eight types of loci of definite emerge nce is the achieving of 
definite emergence, the object to be practiced, because the loci of  definite emerge nce are to 
be known by means of the eight , a generalit y and particularities: the objects of intent, and 
so forth.  
 Sutra says: “Bhagavan, this ‘Mahayana,’ by way of outshining the world together with 
the gods, humans, and anti- gods, will arise.”   
2B2C -1A2C -4B4C. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. (1) The objects of intent which have been  explained, (2) the equality 
of all phenomena, ( 3) to constantly en act the welfare of sentient beings, ( 4) through just  
performing all without signs, spontaneous  accomplishment , (5) attribute of the occasions  of 
the entity that is free from permanence  and severance , (6) to attain all aims of the three 
vehicles,  
 
EXPLANATION  
The achieving of definite emergence is of eight types , since all  the loci of  definite 
emerge nce are realized as being distinguished by just not being observed  ultimately, and 
conventionally the objects of definite  emerge nce are definite as eight types. The loci of  
definite emerge nce are definite as eight, because there are eight and there is no other 
phenomenon that is superior to such eight bases  of definite emerge nce. [The parts in 
bold occur in the commentary below.]  
 What are the eight?  (1) The three great objects of intent which have been explained, 
and are explained as the attributes of the achievings [by] the great Lotsawa, (2 -3) 
distinguish ed by seeing the equality of all phenomena  in being empty of true existence, to 
constantly , that is, infinitely  enact the welfare of sentient beings, by means of the great 
mind —that is, the great exalted compassion that knows the suffering of all sentient beings 
to be eliminated as equal —and application, (4) its attribute, as taught in [Maitreya’s] 
Mahayana Treatise on the Sublime Continuum ( Mahayanottaratantrasastra), “Indra, drum, 
cloud, Brahma...,” through just performing all without signs  of conception and exertion , 
spontaneous accomplishment  of others’ welfare.117 These three [(2)- (4)] are the attributes 
of the great mind. (5) Attaining exhaustion of the  objects of abandonment, attributes of the 
occasions of the entity that is free from permanence and sev erance  of the conception of 
extremes, due to having abandoned the extremes of cyclic existence and solitary peace , and 
(6) due to having exhausted the objects to be abandoned, attaining all aims that are objects 
of realization of the three vehicles —these two [(5) & (6)] are the attribute of great 
abandonment.   
 
                                              
117 [Maitreya’s] Mahayana Treatise on the Sublime Continuum (Mahayanottaratantrasastra), Chapter 4, the 
Seventh Vajra Point on the exalted activities of tathagatas, stanza 292:  
Something that, similar to Indra, the drum, clouds, Brahma,  
The sun, the precious king of wish-granting gems, an echo,  space,  
And the earth, effortlessly and as long as existence may last  
Fulfils others’ benefit is only conceived of by [supreme] yogis.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence        Chapter 1: The Exalted Knower of All Aspects  
 
225 COMMENTARY 
(7) the exalted knower of all aspects itself, which has been explained, and (8) the path of 
distinction of that —the bases of definite emergence , because there is no other phenomeno n 
that is superior to such, by just not observing anything, as the definite emergence is of eight 
types, the achieving of definite emergence is of eight types.  
 
EXPLANATION  
(7) the exalted knower of all aspects itself that directly knows the ten, the generated mind 
and so forth, which has been explained, and (8) the path of distinction  of that exalted 
knower of all aspects, included within the vajra -like meditative stabilization —are the eight. 
Know that the last two [(7) & (8)] are attributes of great realization. You should understand 
that if the paths  of distinction are taken to be the eighth ground and above, the achievings of 
definite emergence also exist from there.  
2B2C -1A3. Summarizing the chapter  
ROOT TEXT  
The first chapter on the exalted knower of all aspects from the Treatise of 
Quintessential Instructions of the Perfection of Wisdom: Ornament for Clear 
Realization. 
 
COMMENTARY 
The commentary on the first chapter from the Treatise of Quintessential Instructions of 
the Perfection of Wisdom: Ornament  for Clear Realization . 
 
EXPLANATION  
The explanation of the commentary on the first chapter from  the Ornament of the 
Essence, which is an explanation of the commentary on the Treatise of Quintessential 
Instructions of the Perfection of Wisdom: Ornament for  Clear Realization .   
 In this context [Haribhadra’s] Great Commentary says: 
 
The nature of the generation of the mind of only the very knower of all aspects and so forth, the aspects of practice due to establishing a relationship with the 
tathagatas, has been explained repeatedly by means of the nature of cause and 
result. Thus it is a chapter of this text. 
 Hence the mode in which the object -possessor is characterized by the objects is clearly 
indicated. The exalted knower of all aspects that is the object of seeking is expressed repeatedly by way of the ten topics that characterize an exalted knower of all aspects, 
stating: having generated the first mind [of enlightenment], one directly experiences the 
twenty -two generated minds progressively; likew ise, having directly experienced the four 
achievings progressively, one abides in the direct nature of all the ten topics in the present. Due to [this explanation of the first chapter] may the precious teachings spread and flourish 
in all directions throug h every means and remain for a long time. 
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
226  
Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
I pay homage to the excellent venerable gurus. 
 Having explaine d in this way the exalted knower of all aspects which is the result to be 
attained, [there is]:  
2B2C -1B. Explaining the knower of paths which proceeds to the exalted knower of all aspects  
2B2C -1B1. Making a connection by stating the commentary118 
2B2C -1B2. C haracterizing and indicating the knower of paths by eleven topics  
2B2C -1B3. Summarizing the chapter  
2B2C -1B1. Making a connection by stating the commentary 
COMMENTARY 
Without fully knowing the knower of paths, there is no realization of the exalted knower of all aspects. Hence the knower of paths:  
 
EXPLANATION  
Without completely cultivating and fully knowing the  knower of paths which proceeds to 
the direct realization  and attainment of the  exalted knower of all aspects, there is no  
attainment of an exalted  knower of all aspects. Hence , through inducing a mere cause from 
those [points] explained above, the knower of paths will be explained. [Haribhadra’s] 
Great Commentary says:  
QUALM: If it were like that —since the grounds, Very Joyous and so forth have 
been mentioned there [in the first chapter], the bodhisattva’s paths of seeing and 
so forth have been indicated —therefore why are they indicated again?  
RESPONSE: They are to be described; in order to eliminate the doubt that 
thinks, “The exalted knower of al l aspects of the tathagatas based  on the 
realization of all causes and results without exception was described [in the first chapter], whereby the paths of the v ictors ’ children have not been taught  in that 
[first chapter],” through drawing out  just the  causes in that [first chapter] itself, 
the knower of paths bearing the nature of the bodhisattva’s paths of seeing and so 
forth is separately posited.  
 Its meaning is as follows. There is a wrong conception that thinks:  
 
Although the paths of seeing and meditation included within the knower of paths 
have been indicated previously, when indicating that ‘The direct realization of 
the ten topics is the exalted knower of all aspects which is the object of seeking,’ [it has bee n taught that] all phenomena are directly seen by an exalted knower of 
all aspects. In order to attain that, it is sufficient to meditate solely on the 
                                             
 
118 If ‘grel  were emended to read ‘brel , this outline would read “ Making a connection by stating the  
relationship,” which seems to make more sense.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
227 meaning of the mode of abidance; there is no need to meditate on the complete 
paths of the three vehicle s. 
 Another thinks that:  
 
Omniscience will be attained even by merely going for refuge to the Three 
Jewels.  
 
Yet another wrong conception regarding the path of an exalted knower of all aspects thinks:  
 
Cultivating disillusionment by cyclic existence and despondency towards cyclic existence is wonderful for hearers and solitary realizers; since bodhisattvas need to remain in cyclic existence for others’ welfare, it is not like that for them.  
 For the sake of refuting these, just the  cause s from among the t en topics explained above are 
singled out. Hence a chapter is set out separately for the purpose of making known that, when those who wish to attain omniscience cultivate these complete three paths, they enter 
the ranks of “a knower of paths that proceeds to omniscience”; besides that, the paths will 
not occur from something trifling, and also the result from something trifling. Nowadays 
there are people who are like that, for they claim to practice the Mahayana path, yet seem 
not to know even the mere stru cture  of the common path.  
 The meaning of that statement is as follows. There is a reason for explaining the knower 
of paths after the exalted knower of all aspects, because it is for the sake of making known 
that one must cultivate the complete paths in o rder to attain it. 
2B2C -1B2. Characterizing and indicating the knower of paths by eleven topics  
2B2C -1B2A. The branches of the knower of paths 
2B2C -1B2B. The nature of the knower of paths   
2B2C -1B2A. The branches of the knower of paths 
2B2C -1B2A -1. Root t ext 
2B2C -1B2A -2. Commentary  
2B2C -1B2A -1. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
2.1 In order to make the gods suitable, Eclipsing with light;  
Definite object; pervaded; 
Nature; and its action. 
 
EXPLANATION  
There is a purpose for eclipsing the lights of the gods  with the natural light of the tathagatas 
in order to make the gods of the desire and form realms  suitable  vessels for the generated 
mind [of enlightenment] by destroying their pride, because it is for the sake of making known that, in order to generate the gene rated mind and a knower of paths, the pride that 
does not seek higher attributes must be destroyed. Sutra says, “In the presence of the natural light of the tathagatas the light of the gods that arises from the maturation of karma is not 
vivid; it is not b right; the light of the tathagatas alone is the best,” and “Venerable Subhuti, 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
228 how do the bodhisattva mahasattvas abide in the Perfection of Wisdom? What is the 
Perfection of Wisdom of the bodhisattva mahasattvas?”  
 The object  that is the support for gene rating the knower of paths is definite , because in 
order to be skilled in the path that cultivates the complete three paths , prior to that  one 
definitely need s the support that is the desire to attain buddhahood for the sake of all three 
lineage -bearers. S utra says, “However, if they were to generate the mind [aspiring] for 
unsurpassable enlightenment, one should rejoice in them.”  
 It is not that it is unsuitable for those other than bodhisattvas to generate a knower of 
paths, because all sentient beings are pervaded  by the buddha lineage. The sutra related to 
this says: “Sons of the gods, even those who have not generated their mind [aspiring] for 
unsurpassable perfect complete enlightenment will also generate the mind [aspiring] for 
unsurpassable perfect c omplete enlightenment. Those who have entered the perfect 
faultlessness lack the might to generate the mind towards unsurpassable perfect complete 
enlightenment. Why? Because they have severed the boundaries of the continuum of cyclic 
existence.”  
 The mean ing of that is as follows. Those who have entered faultlessness are those on the 
hearer’s path of seeing. They do not take rebirth in cyclic existence even through the force 
of compassion and prayers. Having intentionally given up rebirth by way of karma a nd 
afflictions and put a stop to it, they have severed the continuity of rebirth in cyclic existence.  The purpose of mentioning this is for the sake of (i) causing those lineage -bearers 
indefinite in the hearers [lineage] to enter the Mahayana and (ii) ta king care of those who 
have already entered [the Mahayana]. In relation to this, [Haribhadra’s]  Great Commentary  
says:  
 
The protector Nagarjuna and his followers who propound one final vehicle assert that this sutra bears an intention, while the Acarya As anga and his followers who 
propound three final vehicles assert that this sutra is literally acceptable. 
Regarding the two systems that have been set forth, Acarya Asanga is asserted to 
have opened the chariot tracks of the Proponents of Cognition -Only; it  is not that 
Acarya Asanga himself is asserted to be a Proponent of Mind -Only . For, in 
Acarya Asanga’s commentary on the meaning of [Maitreya’s]  Mahayana 
Treatise on the Sublime Continuum (Mahayanottaratantrasastra) , Asanga 
proved that there is one final vehicle and also clearly commentated on the view 
of emptiness as the system of Middle -Way, differently from how it has occurred 
in [his] Summary of the Great Vehicle ( Mahayanasamgraha) and [his] Treatises 
on the Grounds; in this way even the Acarya [Haribhadra] is asserted to [have] 
the intention of Arya Asanga.  
 A knower of paths is superior in nature to hearers’ paths, because it bears the nature  of [the 
afflictions ] acting as a branch that accomplishes others’ welfare without principally 
abandoning the afflictions. Sutra says, “For me, it does not act as interference to the class of 
roots of virtue of those.”  
 Its actions  are also superior to those of hearers, because it  does not actualize the perfect 
end at an imp roper time and it  bears  the function of ripening and liberating infinite sentient 
beings. Sutra says, “[ It] shall attain qualities that are greatly superior to the superior 
qualities.”   
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
229 2B2C -1B2A -2. Commentary  
2B2C -1B2A -2A. The support who is separated fr om hindrances  
2B2C -1B2A -2B. Cooperative condition  
2B2C -1B2A -2C. Indicating as pervaded by lineage  
2B2C -1B2A -2D. Nature of the knower of paths  
2B2C -1B2A -2E. Function  
2B2C -1B2A -2A. The support who is separated from hindrances  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. In order to achieve the suitability to generate the knower of paths, 
eclipsing the maturation light of the gods and so forth by the natural lights of the tathagatas 
was done in order to make known that realizations are generated only in continua where 
pride has been destroyed. Because of that, the support is alluded to by words.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —eclipsing the  contaminated light of maturation  of karma of the gods and so 
forth by the natural lights of the tathagatas —has a purpose, because it wa s done in 
order to achieve the suitability to generate  the generated mind [of enlightenment] and the 
knower of paths  through having destroyed strong pride, and in order to make known that 
realizations  of the generated mind [of enlightenment] and a knower o f paths are generated 
only in continua where  strong pride has been destroyed . The support  for generating the 
generated mind [of enlightenment] and a knower of paths is alluded to by words  in sutra, 
because it has been indicated that they are generated only  in continua where pride has been 
destroyed.  
2B2C -1B2A -2B. Cooperative condition  
COMMENTARY 
Also, since it is only one who has generated the mind towards enlightenment, it is definite to 
the individual object.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject—also  that knower of paths —is definite to the individual object that is the 
support who actually generates it , since that person who generates it without being 
obstructed by other paths  is only one who has generated the mind towards 
enlightenment.   
 Furthermore, fa miliarizing oneself with directly knowing the paths of all the three 
lineage -bearers is asserted to be enacting the welfare of the three lineage -bearers. Since no 
one other than a buddha is able to complete their welfare, it is clear that, having been 
preceded by the desire to attain buddhahood, [one has] to meditate on the three paths as a 
method [to achieve that]. Otherwise, it is clear that one would not be skilled in the divisions of how to practice the path.  
 In this way, through having indicated that  even beginners should know all three paths if 
they wish to quickly attain omniscience, it is made known that a generated mind is necessary in the support of a knower of paths. 
2B2C -1B2A -2C. Indicating as pervaded by lineage  
2B2C -1B2A -2C1. Meaning of the w ords  
2B2C -1B2A -2C2. Decisive analysis  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
230 2B2C -1B2A -2C1. Meaning of the words  
COMMENTARY 
Since “The presentation of the three vehicles bears an intention; it is not fully qualified” 
occurs in the system, all beings bear the finality of the unsurpassable perfect complete enlightenment. Because of that, those who have separated from attachment and even the other yogis are pervaded, since the knower of paths is an object to be cultivated in order to attain buddhahood.  
 
EXPLANATION 
The subject —hearer and solitary realizer foe -destroyers who have separated from the 
attachment of the three realms and even the other yogis who have not separated from 
attachment—are pervaded by lineage, since the knower of paths is an object to be 
cultivated in order to attain buddhahood . It is like that, because all sentient beings bear 
the progression to the finality of the unsurpassable perfect complete enlightenment.  
That is the case, since “The presentation of the three final vehicles bears an intention; it 
is not a fully qualified  definitive meaning that is literally acceptable ” occurs in the system  
of the great trail -blazers (or openers of the chariot tracks) Nagarjuna and Asanga .  
2B2C -1B2A -2C2. Decisive analysis  
2B2C -1B2A -2C2A. Proving that there is one final vehicle 
2B2C -1B2A -2C2B. Setting forth other systems that assert that there are three [final vehicles]  
2B2C -1B2A -2C2C. Analyzing whether or not there is a limit to samsara 
2B2C -1B2A -2C2D. Analyzing from which of the Mahayana paths the hearers and solitary realizers enter  
2B2C -1B2A-2C2A. Proving that there is one final vehicle 
In regard  to scripture, the Descent into Lanka Sutra  (Lankavatarasutra) says:  
 
Mahamati, those of the hearer vehicle are not liberated by the hearer’s vehicle; 
for them, it is the finality of the Mahayana. 
 
The White Lotus Sutra  (Pundarikasutra ) says:  
 
The three vehicles taught by the great sage is a skillful  means of the guides. 
There is one vehicle; it is not that there are two. For the sake of respite, three vehicles were taught.  
 The Glorious Lion's Ro ar of Shrimaladevi Sutra ( Shrimaladevisimhanadasutra ) says:  
 
This ‘thoroughly passing beyond sorrow’ is a method of the tathagatas.  
 Also, sutra says:  
Manjusri, if the tathagatas were to teach the Mahayana to some, the hearer’s vehicle and the solitary realizer’s vehicle to some, it follows (i) that the tathagatas’ exalted minds would be completely impure, (ii) that they would have the fault of adherence, (iii) that they would have trifling great compassion, (iv) that they would discriminate as different, and (v) that they would be masters who are stingy in regard to the Dharma. 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
231 On account of these five reasons, it has been taught that the three lineage -bearers are set in 
the state that has been found by the Buddha himself.  
 In regard  to reasoning, the dharmadhatu pure by nature that is free from all elaborations 
of true existence exists in all sentient beings without any difference. Although dissimilar 
divisions of its entity do not exist even slightly, the very erroneous apprehension  of it, the 
root of all afflictions, the conception of true existence that apprehends the aggregates and so 
forth as truly existent, like the apprehension of a mottled rope as a snake, is an unstable root 
that arises adventitiously in the mental continuum, and is suitable to be separated from by its 
antidote. Hence, if the stains of all sentient beings are suitable to be separated from, it would be impossible for (i) the knowledge obscurations (in the continua of hearer and solitary 
realizer foe -destroyers who have arisen from the sphere of peace) to be unsuitable to be 
abandoned, and (ii) the activities of the buddhas who teach the methods for abandoning 
them to be discarded. Furthermore, reasonings that refute other extremes will be explained 
below.   
 
OPINION: That contradicts the teachings that there are three final vehicles.  
RESPONSE: There is no fault. For example, a ship captain who is skillful  in means 
emanates a city on an island in the ocean in order for the travelers, tired due to the long 
journey,  to relax; having relaxed, they gradually proceed to the island of jewels. Likewise, 
the teaching on the two nirvanas, which are likened to the emanated city, for the sake of 
respite, to those who are tired due to the passage of cyclic existence and do not  initially wish 
to enter the Mahayana path is a skillful  means of the tathagatas.  
 The teaching (in the Sutra Unraveling the Thought  and the like) given to some trainees 
who bear the Mahayana lineage, that there are three final vehicles, is intended and t aught for 
the sake of guiding those trainees who, although bearing the Mahayana lineage, are not 
suitable to be taught the profound path for the time being. Regarding the basis in [Buddha’s] 
thought , it is intended that one needs to lead those —who, tempora rily, are of dissimilar 
interests and dissimilar dispositions —through the paths of the individual vehicles. 
Regarding the purpose, it is for the sake of taking care of lineage -bearers who are to be led 
to the Mahayana path without refuting that the emptine ss of apprehendeds that are forms 
and their apprehenders being different substances is truly existent. Those which damage 
what is overtly stated are the reasonings that prove that all phenomena are empty of true 
existence and the reasonings below that refu te other extremes.  
2B2C -1B2A -2C2B. Setting forth other systems that assert that there are three [final vehicles]  
Proponents  of Cognition- Only assert that there are three final vehicles, in dependence on a 
literal reading of the Sutra Unraveling the Thought . The reason for asserting it this way is 
that, since the two —other- powered natures and thoroughly established phenomena —exist 
ultimately, the lineage, which is the uncontaminated seed in the continua of sentient beings 
rendering them suitable to be led on  the paths of the individual vehicles is something 
definite to the individual. However, since the lineage is definite to the individual ultimately, 
even though interests and thinking are suitable to transform slightly due to temporal 
conditions, [lineage] is definite to the individual ultimately by way of entitiness, whereby 
the final vehicle is also definite as three different individuals. I n this system , the explanation 
of someone having the property of never fully passing beyond sorrow  is taken to be  their 
system.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
232  Although it has been explained that there is one final vehicle, [Proponents  of Cognition -
Only] take it as a n interpret able meaning that is not literally acceptable. Regarding the bases 
in [Buddha’s] thought , [one  final vehicle] ha s been taught by intending the seven bases in 
[Buddha’s] thought:  
(1) there is no difference in the dharmadhatu of the three vehicles, which is like space,  
(2) the persons of the three vehicles are similar in realizing selflessness,  
(3) the liberations in which sufferi ngs and origins have been abandoned are similar,  
(4) since a lineage -bearer indefinite in the hearer [lineage] enters the Mahayana and 
becomes a buddha, even two different lineages enter the same path,  
(5) the tathagatas have practiced the deeds of bodhi sattvas from the beginning, and when 
some of those definite in the hearer lineage practice the deeds of bodhisattvas for some time, then give them up and attain nirvana, the tathagatas think, “By having previously practiced the deeds of a bodhisattva I att ained buddhahood”; likewise, by the power of the buddhas 
one gains just once a similar thought, “By having previously practiced the deeds of a bodhisattva I will attain buddhahood,”  
(6) emanated hearers show the manner of attaining nirvana by way of the h earer’s vehicle 
many times for the sake of trainees, and  
(7) there is none but one final  vehicle.  
 The purpose is to lead those who are indefinite in the hearer lineage to the Mahayana, and to 
take care of those who are indefinite in the Mahayana [lineage] so that they do not fall into 
other vehicles. Those which damage what is overtly stated are, in te rms of scripture, the 
Sutra Unraveling the Thought  and so forth, and in terms of reasoning, the reasonings that 
prove that other- powered natures and thoroughly established phenomena are truly existent. 
2B2C -1B2A -2C2C. Analyzing whether or not there is a li mit to samsara 
Questions are to be asked in this manner as follows:  
• If it were possible for all sentient beings to attain buddhahood, then later buddhas need only to enact the welfare of a small number of sentient beings, whereby others’ welfare 
would bec ome trifling and they would not fully complete the accumulation of merit.  
• When all sentient beings have become buddhas, [the buddhas] would not enact the 
welfare of even one sentient being, whereby others’ welfare would be interrupted and 
they would fall into the extreme of peace.  
 
• If it were not possible for all sentient beings to attain buddhahood then: (i) perfect 
complete buddhas who desire to place all sentient beings in the state that they themselves 
have found would lack the result of turning the w heel of Dharma by way of the twelve 
deeds until cyclic existence is empty, and (ii) even the seeking of the mere pacification of the suffering of cyclic existence of all sentient beings would not be the complete fully -
qualified great compassion of the Maha yana; there would be contradiction with the 
teaching that if the bhagavans were to not set all sentient beings in the state that they 
themselves have found, then there would be five types of damage
119, the consequence that 
[the bhagavans] are stingy in regard  to the Dharma and so forth. If all sentient beings 
were able to attain the pacification of the sufferings of cyclic existence, then one final 
vehicle would be well established, whereby their attainment of buddhahood would be 
                                              
119 See the sutra citation under the outline 2B2C -1B2A -2C2A.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
233 established effortlessly . If there are sentient beings for whom it is impossible to attain 
even mere liberation, then it would contradict the proofs by scripture and reasoning made 
by Acarya  [Haribhadra] and Arya [Vimuktisena] that [the teaching that there are sentient 
beings for whom it is impossible to attain even mere liberation] bears an intention and is 
not literally acceptable. Therefore, how this is so must be expressed. And if it is possible 
for all sentient beings to attain buddhahood, then also the explanation that there  is no 
limit to cyclic existence would be incorrect.   
 
With respect to this, there are:  
 
2B2C -1B2A -2C2C -1. Refuting other systems  
2B2C -1B2A -2C2C -2. Presenting our system  
2B2C -1B2A -2C2C -1. Refuting other systems  
OPINION: Let alone it being definite that al l sentient beings will attain buddhahood, you 
are not able even to prove that they are just suitable to attain buddhahood. In order to prove 
that the result is suitable to be produced, one has to state as the sign: “The collection of 
causes is complete.” B ut if the collection of causes of buddhahood were to be complete in 
all sentient beings, then it follows that it would be impossible for there to be a sentient being 
who has not entered the path to liberation. On account of that reason itself, there is no 
exhaustive limit to cyclic existence, for which one may say, “Prior to this point, there is a 
sentient being circling in cyclic existence, but from this point onwards, there is none.”  
 
RESPONSE: It is not obvious that the teaching that “The significance of the proof that there 
is one final vehicle is that all sentient beings who have entered the path will attain 
buddhahood” is a thesis that is established by reasoning. It is intended to propound the 
reasoning of definite pervasion by way of suitability to p roduce the result if the collection of 
causes is complete; it is not intended to mean that if the result is suitable to be produced, 
then the collection of causes is pervaded by being complete, because that contradicts 
reasoning.  
 This is because even thou gh a barley sprout is suitable to be produced from a barley seed, 
it is not established that the collection of causes is complete. Furthermore, are hearer arya s 
suitable to attain buddhahood or not?  
 In the first case [that they are suitable to attain budd hahood], it follows that the collection 
of causes of buddhahood would be complete. If you accept that, then it follows that they 
have entered the Mahayana path. Having accepted the sign s and the pervasion s of both the 
former and the latter consequence s, and having accepted the predicate of the latter 
consequence, [your position that] not all sentient beings have merely entered a path would 
degenerate.  
 In the second case [that they are not suitable to attain buddhahood], there would be a 
direct contradiction and it would contradict there being only one final vehicle. In addition, it 
is very clear that it is asserted that “You must  assert that if all sentient beings will attain 
buddhahood, then a time  when [all sentient beings] have attained buddhahood is po ssible.”
  
 
ANOTHER DISPUTANT: The way in which there is no future limit to cyclic existence is like this: although all sentient beings will attain buddhahood, a time when all sentient beings 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
234 have attained buddhahood is impossible. If you assert that, if al l sentient beings will attain 
buddhahood, then a time when all sentient beings have attained buddhahood is pervaded by 
being possible, then —in the consequence “It follows that a time when all things120 have 
disintegrated is possible, because all things will disintegrate” —you are expressing a 
consequence in which neither a valid cognizer nor the asserted predicate can be demonstrated. What fault is there if you were to assert that? It would be an intense assertion 
to say that “If a time when all things have di sintegrated is possible, then it follows that a 
time when all things do not exist is possible.” You would have to assert that if a time when 
all things do not exist is impossible, then a time when things do not exist is impossible. It 
follows that prior to  a certain point, things exist, but from that point onwards, things do not 
exist, because a time when all things have disintegrated is possible.  
 RESPONSE: If the meaning of that is that it follows that from that point onwards things are 
impossible, then i t follows that you are able to prove that prior to a certain point blue exists, 
but from that point onwards blue does not exist, because a time when blue have 
disintegrated is possible. If you say that the sign is not established, then it follows that it i s 
permanent and is a thing , because it is impossible for it to have disintegrated after having 
been produced from its cause. Also with respect to a time when all things have disintegrated being impossible, there would be that consequence.  
 Regarding the as sertion, “It follows that a time when all sentient beings have attained 
buddhahood is possible, because they are  attain ing buddhahood,” the fault posited by 
someone that “It follows that all sentient beings are pervaded by having already died 
because all s entient beings are pervaded by dying” clearly demonstrates a very crude 
intelligence. With regard to the previous consequence, is it saying that “It follows that all sentient beings are pervaded by having already attained buddhahood”? Or that “It follows 
that a time when all sentient beings have attained buddhahood is possible”? Realize them 
well! It is clear that propounding that “All sentient beings will attain buddhahood; it is not 
definite that they will attain buddhahood” is an expression of not unders tanding reasoning. 
Has this ascertaining consciousness of yours that thinks, “All sentient beings will attain 
buddhahood” come through the force of valid cognition in your own continuum or not?  
 In the first case [this ascertaining consciousness has come t hrough the force of valid 
cognition], it follows that it is certain that all sentient beings will attain buddhahood, 
because you have ascertained through the force of valid cognition that all sentient beings 
will attain buddhahood.  
 
DISPUTANT: The pervasion is not established, because although it has been ascertained 
through the force of valid cognition, it is not certain in reality. 
 
RESPONSE: It follows that this ascertaining consciousness of yours that thinks, “All 
sentient beings will attain bud dhahood” is a wrong consciousness that is mistaken with 
respect to the object of adherence, because there is ascertainment by your awareness, 
thinking “They will attain buddhahood,” but there is not even the slightest certainty that 
they will attain buddha hood in reality.  
 
                                             
 
120 A “thing” ( dngos po) in this context refers to an impermanent phenom enon.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
235 DISPUTANT: The production of smoke by fire is established by valid cognition, but the 
production is not certain; [otherwise] in that case, it would be impossible for it to be 
hindered by adverse conditions, because it has been explained in the [Dharmakirti's] 
Commentary on [Dignaga's] 'Compendium of Valid Cognition'  (Pramanavarttikakarika ) 
that, “It is just uncertain because it is possible for it to be hindered.” Likewise, if it is ascertained that [all sentient beings] will attain buddha hood, then hindrances that are 
adverse conditions for their attainment of buddhahood would be impossible.  
RESPONSE: Both the analogy and the meaning  [exemplified]  are not established. Also in 
that analogy, if the production of smoke by fire is ascertained  through the force of valid 
cognition, it is contradictory that the production of smoke is uncertain. If it is not 
ascertained by valid cognition, then the meaning of the thesis is not established by valid cognition. While this is the case, you simply demo nstrate yourself to be very foolish when 
you say, “There is no correct proof whatsoever for whatever thesis posited by us who are the proposers of the thesis.”  
 Furthermore, it follows that it would be  uncertain that hearer and solitary realize r aryas 
will attain buddhahood, because hindrances that are adverse conditions for the attainment of 
buddhahood are possible. You accepted the pervasion. If you accept that, then this contradicts your own assertion that the final vehicle is definite as one. The meani ng of that 
passage from [Dharmakirti's] Commentary on [Dignaga's] 'Compendium of Valid 
Cognition'  (Pramanavarttikakarika ) is also not like that. This has already been extensively 
explained in its  Explanation. If it were not like that, but as you have asserted, then it follows 
that it is uncertain that a vase exists, because hindrances that are adverse conditions for the 
existence of a vase are possible. Hence, even though hindrances that are adverse conditions 
for its production are possible, what cont radiction is there that they are unable to act to not 
produce it now?  
 In the second case, if that ascertaining consciousness of yours thinking, “All sentient 
beings will attain buddhahood” has not come from the force of your valid cognition, then (i) it follows that it is inappropriate for you to propose the thesis that “All sentient beings will 
attain buddhahood,” and (ii) it follows that your subsequent cognizer thinking “They will 
attain buddhahood” does not engage the concordant meaning, because that t hey will attain 
buddhahood is not established by a valid cognition in your continuum. If you say that there is no pervasion, then you would necessarily be making the deprecation, “A correct sign of 
non-observation of the non -appearing does not exist.” In t hat case, you would necessarily be 
asserting that “Since the reasoning is similar also for other correct signs, there is no proof 
whatsoever for all hidden phenomena.”  
 Therefore, the difference between the skilled analytical ones and the confused ones li es in 
whether or not they know how to posit well the mode of establishing by valid cognition the meaning of a thesis that is asserted by themselves . If, having established by valid cognition 
that all sentient beings will attain buddhahood, it is not ascert ained that their attainment of 
buddhahood exists, then it would not be a positing of an existent, that observed by valid 
cognition. How can there be anything more unreasonable than propounding that “If their 
attainment of buddhahood exists, it is not certa in that they will attain buddhahood”? Is it 
certain or not that sentient beings will attain buddhahood  from the perspective of their 
reality ? In the latter case, it would contradict your assertion. In the first case, if it has been 
settled  that they will n ot attain buddhahood, it would contradict your assertion; if it has been 
settled that they will attain buddhahood, it would contradict [your assertion] that it is not 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
236 certain that they will attain buddhahood.If neither has been settled  from the perspective  of 
their reality , then the decision settled upon by you that they will attain buddhahood would 
be unrelated to them. 
 
Lacking the power to discriminate the stainless path of reasoning, and  
Lacking the instructions in which the teachings dawn as advice,  
You propound that “I am commentating on the Victor’s intention.”  
It would be wonderful if you leave the Buddha’s doctrine alone.  
2B2C -1B2A -2C2C -2. Presenting our system  
It has already been explained that, after having asserted that they will attain buddh ahood, 
not asserting that the attainment of buddhahood is certain contradicts reasoning, as 
explained above. Also, the statement “It is not established that all sentient beings will attain 
buddhahood” cannot bear analysis by reasoning. For, if the minds of all sentient beings are 
not pure by nature, then we must assert that a truly existent phenomenon is possible among objects of knowledge, whereby it would not be established by valid cognition that all 
phenomena are empty of true existence. There would be no way to posit ultimate truths. 
However, if their minds are established by valid cognition to be pure by nature, then [that all 
sentient beings will attain buddhahood] is established in dependence on that very reasoning 
that the stains ( that are the conce ptions of true existence as well as their imprints ) are 
adventitious and are suitable to be separated from with respect to the mind. Otherwise, we 
would have to assert that stains have entered the nature of the mind, just like the tirtika 
(non-Buddhist For der) practitioners.  
 OPINION: Although the above [stains] are established by valid cognition to be suitable to 
be separated from, it is not established that the antidotes that will destroy the stains are 
suitable to be generated in the continuum. 
RESPONSE : (1) Is that because there is no method for destroying the stains in the continua 
of sentient beings?  (2) Or is that because, although there is a method, there is no one who knows it?  
(3) Or is that because, although there is someone who knows it, generating [an aspiration] 
seeking that method is not possible at any time?  
(4) Or is that because, although that is possible, a person who knows the method teaching it 
motivated by loving- kindness is not possible?  
(5) Or is that because, although having been  taught, engaging in and cultivating that method 
is not possible?  
 
The first is not reasonable, because by having cultivated the wisdom realizing selflessness 
one is able to exhaust all stains. 
 The second is not reasonable, because a teacher who has culm inated the cultivation of the 
method, the wisdom realizing selflessness, for the welfare of sentient beings is well 
established by reasoning.  
 The third is not reasonable, because (i) it is not possible for sentient beings to not seek 
high status in dependence on being urged by the buddhas, (ii) even though for the time being sentient beings may not generate [a mind] seeking definite goodness, al l sentient 
beings possess the two types of buddha lineage, and (iii) since the [buddhas’] exalted 
compassion that wishes to place all sentient beings in buddhahood does not degenerate, 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
237 [sentient beings] will generate disillusionment regarding cyclic existe nce for the time being 
and [an aspiration] seeking nirvana. This is also established in dependence on a correct sign 
that is a scripture that is pure by way of the three analyses. 
 The fourth is not reasonable, because when [an aspiration] seeking [high st atus and 
definite goodness] is generated from the side of sentient beings themselves, since the buddha bhagavans’ loving -kindness  towards all sentient beings as though they are their only 
child does not degenerate, they do not discard the activity of teach ing Dharma.   
 The fifth is not reasonable, because it is proven (in the root text of [Maitreya’s] 
Mahayana Treatise on the Sublime Continuum (Mahayanottaratantrasastra),  its 
commentary, and so forth) that at a certain time, due to the conditions for awake ning the 
lineage becoming complete, the lineage will be awakened.  
 Therefore, having asserted that a person —for whom it is impossible to attain 
buddhahood —is not possible, one should not assert that (i) it is not the case that all sentient 
beings will atta in buddhahood and (ii) it is not certain that they will attain buddhahood.  
 
DISPUTANT: It follows that a time when all sentient beings have attained buddhahood is 
possible because they will attain buddhahood.  
RESPONSE: It can only be accepted; the flingin g of the consequence that all sentient beings 
have already attained buddhahood has already been explained to be incorrect.  
 
DISPUTANT: Then, it follows that a time when there is no sentient being at all is possible, 
because all sentient beings’ having att ained buddhahood exists.  
RESPONSE: There is no pervasion, because there is the contradiction that you will not exist 
if your having attained buddhahood exists. The consequence that a time when there is no 
sentient being is possible can only be accepted, b ecause things are transitory. The 
consequence that it is possible that a time when there is no sentient being who is the object for enacting welfare by the buddhas is possible is accepted, as before [because things are 
transitory].  
 
DISPUTANT: It follows t hat a time when the continuity of sentient beings who are the 
objects for enacting welfare by the buddhas have been severed is possible, because all sentient beings’ having attained buddhahood exists.  
RESPONSE: The subject —an eighth ground bodhisattva —it follows that a time when his 
continuity have been severed is possible, because his having attained buddhahood exists.  
 Since the pervasions are similar in strength, all three are accepted. Realize well whether or 
not you think that —if it is a buddha it is pervaded by not being a sentient being. If examined 
closely, you did not make a difference between [the statements] “all sentient beings’ having 
attained buddhahood exists” and “all sentient beings have attained buddhahood.”    
DISPUTANT: If all sentient b eings’ having attained buddhahood exists, where will it exist 
and at what time will it exist?  
RESPONSE: In whose continuum does the perfect complete buddha —that is the object to 
be attained when you think “I will attain buddhahood for the welfare of senti ent beings” —
exist, and when does it exist?  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
238 DISPUTANT: When one has attained clear complete buddhahood it exists in one’s 
continuum; the object to be attained, buddhahood of a bodhisattva on the path of 
accumulation, does not exist in his continuum, becau se a cause and [its] result do not 
coexist.  
RESPONSE: Why is it unreasonable to propound in that way for the other [case ]? 
 
DISPUTANT: If cyclic existence had a beginning it would be causeless. Therefore, there is 
no beginning limit. But does an end limit exist or not?  
RESPONSE: Saying that “The mere generality cyclic existence has no future limit, but a particularity of cyclic existence has a future limit” is contradictory, because it is 
contradictory for a vase that is not possible among functioning thin gs to exist. Therefore, 
both the generality cyclic existence and a particularity of cyclic existence have future limits, 
because the significance of the teaching in a certain scripture —that a future limit to cyclic 
existence is not evident —is that childish  beings cannot conceive of a definite time, thinking, 
“Some sentient being s will attain liberation at just this time, not before or after.” As 
explained before, know that [specifying] a time when [all sentient beings] have attained 
liberation is impossible.  
 
Someone’s saying —that cyclic existence has no future limit but all sentient beings will 
attain buddhahood —is only a load of contradictions. Enough elaboration.  
2B2C -1B2A -2C2D. Analyzing from which of the Mahayana paths the  hearers and solitary realizers enter  
QUALM: When hearer and solitary realizer foe -destroyers arise from the sphere of peace 
and enter the Mahayana path, do they enter from the Mahayana path of accumulation or 
from the p ath of seeing and above?   
 
Regarding this, there are:  
 
2B2C -1B2A -2C2D -1. Repudiating others’ assertions 
2B2C -1B2A -2C2D -2. Presenting our own system  
2B2C -1B2A -2C2D -1. Repudiating others’ assertions 
DISPUTANT: In the case of asserting that hearers have the realization of selflessness of 
phenomena , [hearer and solitary realizer foe -destroyers] should not enter [the Mahayana 
path from] the Mahayana path of seeing or below, because if one needs to generate a 
Mahayana path of seeing for the sake of newly realizi ng emptiness that has not been 
previously realized by way of direct cognition, then there would be no need [for them to generate the Mahayana path of seeing] since they have already realized emptiness and 
familiarized with it. Hence, they should enter from  the seventh ground or above.  
 However, in the case of [asserting that] hearers do not have the realization of selflessness 
of phenomenon, they must generate the Mahayana path of seeing which newly realizes 
emptiness by way of direct cognition. As a cause of that they must generate the Mahayana 
path of preparation that meditates on emptiness by way of a meaning -generality with a 
wisdom arisen from meditation. In order for that to occur, they must determine emptiness by 
way of hearing and thinking, whereby t hey enter from the Mahayana path of accumulation.  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
239 RESPONSE: That is very unreasonable. For, if it is said, “Further, in the case of asserting 
that hearers do not have the realization of selflessness of phenomen a, it follows that there is 
no need for them to generate a Mahayana path of seeing in the continuum; it is necessary to 
generate a Mahayana path of seeing for the sake of newly realizing selflessness that has not 
been previously realized by way of direct cognition, but hearer foe -destroyers have 
familiarized with selflessness that has already been directly realized,” what reply can you 
give?  
 DISPUTANT: The Mahayana path of seeing  is not distinguished by newly realizing mere 
selflessness by way of direct cognition; it is differentiated also by newly realizing subtle emptiness by way of direct cognition. Hence it must be newly generated. 
 RESPONSE: Even according to the former assertion [that hearers have the realization of 
selflessness of phenomen a], it follows that the Mahayana path of seeing must de finitely be 
generated in one’s continuum, because that path of seeing is distinguished by the two 
accumulations, the extensive accumulation of merit and the accumulation of exalted 
wisdom. The path of seeing that is included within the accumulation of merit must be newly 
generated in one’s continuum, and one must also generate, as its cause, the path of 
accumulation and the path of preparation.  
 
DISPUTANT: According to the former system , the accumulation of merit included within 
the Mahayana path is completed on the seventh ground and above, whereby there is no 
fault. 
 
RESPONSE: It follows that those who wish to quickly attain unsurpassable enlightenment 
should definitely first enter the hearer’s path, because (i) with blazing joyous effort they would be abl e to attain the result of a hearer foe -destroyer in three lifetimes and then they 
can enter [the Mahayana path] from the seventh ground without needing to generate in their continu a the sixth ground and below, and (ii) because [otherwise] they would have t o gather 
the accumulations for up to one countless great eon on the Mahayana paths of accumulation and preparation.  
 Therefore, in dependence on this [explanation above], understand that it is incorrect to 
assert that hearer foe -destroyers do not need to generate the Mahayana paths of 
accumulation and preparation and below, and enter at the minimum from the eighth ground, 
and the like. 
2B2C -1B2A -2C2D -2. Presenting our own system  
Therefore, even if hearer and solitary realizer foe -destroyers are taken to ha ve realized by 
way of direct cognition both of the subtle selflessnesses, when they enter the Mahayana they 
definitely enter from the path of accumulation, because, having initially determined well by 
way of hearing and contemplation the infinite divisions  of instances that are included within 
the accumulation of merit, they then familiarize with them by way of a mundane wisdom arisen from meditation for up to a countless eon, after which, they attain twelve sets of a 
hundred excellent qualities and so fort h which are included within the first ground.  
 Asserting that such [hearer and solitary realizer foe -destroyers] are ordinary beings when 
they abide on Mahayana paths of accumulation and preparation is a deprecation of arya 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
240 persons. Understand that [saying  that] what has been abandoned by a supr amundane path 
can return is a great wrong view that asserts that liberation is not trustworthy.   
 Furthermore, although [hearer and solitary realizer foe -destroyers  who have realized 
emptiness , and Mahayana aryas] d o not differ in the mere direct realization of dharmadhatu, 
know that the difference in their ability and power to destroy the discordant class and so 
forth is [like] the difference between Mount Meru  and a mustard seed. Therefore, you 
should know that, re gardless of whether hearers are asserted to have the realization of 
selflessness of phenomena or not, they enter [the Mahayana path] from the Mahayana path 
of accumulation.  
 In dependence on this [explanation], also know that in regard  to the two —someone 
definite in the Mahayana lineage and someone temporarily definite in the hearers’ lineage, who enter [the Mahayana path] from the path of accumulation at the same time —attaining 
unsurpassable enlightenment, there is a great difference in the Mahayana linea ge-bearer 
being very quick, and the other being very slow. I am able to describe the reason for that with infinite collections of reasoning, but fearing wordiness I did not write it down here.  
 Here the principal basis of debate is hearer and solitary rea lizer foe -destroyers who 
proceed to solitary peace. Understand that in proving that there is one final vehicle —as a 
proof that all sentient beings will attain buddhahood —the relationship is established as 
before.  
2B2C -1B2A -2D. Nature of the knower of path s 
2B2C -1B2A -2D1. Meaning of the words  
2B2C -1B2A -2D2. Decisive analysis  
2B2C -1B2A -2D1. Meaning of the words  
COMMENTARY 
By way of  the generated mind  toward s enlightenment being  the very engagement to enact 
the welfare of sentient beings for as long as samsara exists, that “The afflictions  have not 
been abandoned in all ways”  is the nature.   
 
EXPLANATION  
That “The afflictions included within the contaminations of desire and existence121 have 
not been abandoned in all ways  with effort by taking them as pri ncipal objects of 
abandonment ” is the nature  of the knower of paths . Hence it is superior to the paths of 
hearers and solitary realizers, because, b y way of the generated mind toward s 
enlightenment being the very engagement to enact the welfare of sentient beings for as 
long as samsara exists,  the contaminations of desire and existence will serve as the 
branches of accomplishment of others’ welfare by bodhisattva aryas . 
2B2C -1B2A -2D2. Decisive analysis  
DISPUTANT: Although t he afflictions explained here are fully qualified ones, t hey are a 
cause for bodhisattva aryas to take rebirth , because [Arya Vimuktisena’s] Illuminating the 
Twenty Thousand and [Haribhadra’s] Great Commentary  says:  
 
                                              
121 The contaminations of existence are the contaminations of the form and formless realms.  See stanza 5.2  of 
Vasubandhu’s  Treasury of Manifest  Knowledge  (Abhidharmakosha ).  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
241 They abandon the dormancies  included within ignorance and view, but not the 
contaminations of desire and existence, because they intentionally take rebirth in 
cyclic existence. 
 Nevertheless, it has been explained that by destroying the faults of the afflictions —the 
ability to make the mental continuum very unpeaceful, the tak ing of rebirth under the 
influence of afflictions, and so forth —[arya bodhisattvas] do not generate the fault of 
afflictions at any level.   
RESPONSE: That [afflictions are a cause for bodhisattva aryas to take rebirth] is 
contradicted by many scriptures a nd reasonings. Do bodhisattva aryas, not being able to 
take rebirth as they wish through the force of compassion and their prayers, need afflictions as an aid? Or is it that, even though they do not wish for the afflictions, due to fear that the 
self will be severed just before death -transference, craving for contaminated aggregates 
arise, and that [craving] aids the bodhisattvas to transmigrate?   
 The latter case [that craving for contaminated aggregates just before death -transference is 
an aid] contradic ts bodhisattvas not taking rebirth under the influence of afflictions. The 
former case [that bodhisattvas need afflictions as an aid] also contradicts that.  
 Furthermore, if they need afflictions as a cause for taking rebirth, then they have not 
abandoned  the sufferings of aging and so forth through the force of afflictions, whereby 
others’ welfare would be out of the question, since they are not able to enact even their own welfare as they wish. That would contradict many teachings, such as [Maitreya’s] 
Mahayana Treatise on the Sublime Continuum ( Mahayanottaratantrasastra ) which says:  
 
Aryas have abandoned from the root the sufferings of  
Sickness, aging, and death.  Rebirth through the force of karma and afflictions  
Does not exist for them.  
 
The meaning of the above passage [from the Great Commentary ] is not to show [that 
afflictions are] a cause for taking rebirth; one should know [that afflictions are] a branch of producing thousands of sons, by way of having taken the bodies of wheel -turning kings and 
so forth through the force of compassion and their prayers. Understand that, even when they take rebirth in the form realm, since they have extinguished the potency for taking rebirth 
through the force of the contaminated karma of a concentration, they do  not need 
[afflictions] as a cause for taking rebirth in the upper realms; once born there they take the 
contamination of existence as a branch of accomplishing others’ welfare. There is not the 
slightest need for afflicted ignorance, wrong views, and so f orth to be a branch of 
accomplishing others’ welfare. Therefore, [afflictions] included within the objects to be 
abandoned by the path of seeing have been abandoned exhaustively in them.  
 
DISPUTANT: In the  Sutra Requested by Sagaramati ( Sagaramatiparipriccha -sutra ), what 
are explained as the eight causes for taking rebirth
122 are imputed as afflictions. The y are 
                                              
122 According to the  Sutra Requested by Sagaramati ( Sagaramatiparipriccha-sutra ), these eight causes for 
taking rebirth are:  
1. Not being satisfied with seeking the accumulation of merit  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
242 designated [afflictions]  due to being similar in function to the afflictions , the causes for 
taking rebirth in ordinary beings .   
RESPONSE: That is  not correct. For, those [eight causes] are fully complete factors of 
method of a knower of paths, whereby there is no need to examine the qualm wondering, 
“Do bodhisattvas specifically abandon them?” here. If the afflictions explained here were  
designated  [afflictions], then also the afflictions that are to be specifically  abandoned by 
hearers’ paths would be designated   [afflictions] , because they [bodhisattvas] act to achieve 
their own enlightenment without having specifically  abandoned the afflictions, whereby 
[their paths] are shown to be superior in nature to hearers’ paths.   
 
Therefore, the afflictions [mentioned here] are fully qualified ones. Although they are the 
contaminations of desire and existence, they are not necessary as causes for taking rebirth; not only are the faults of the afflictions not generated, they become branches of 
accomplishing others’ welfare.  
 When those on the seventh ground and below accomplish [ a body of the nature of mind ] 
with effort, they are able to take a body of the nature of mind in dependence on the level of 
the latencies of ignorance and uncontaminated karma. However, know that spontaneous 
accomplishing [of a body of the nature of mind occurs] in hearer and solitary realizer foe -
destroyers, as well as in bodhisattvas who have gained mastery.  
2B2C -1B2A -2E. Function  
COMMENTARY 
After that, due to the actions bearing such a nature not actualizing the perfect end, and 
through wisdom and skillful means, fully gathering s entient beings not gathered and so 
forth, are deeds. 
 
EXPLANATION  
After that explanation on the nature , the function of the  knower of paths bearing such a 
nature is superior to the function of hearers’ path s, due to the deeds  of not actualizing the 
perfect end until one has fully completed prayers, fully ripened sentient beings, and 
completely purified the buddha land , and through the wisdom observing emptiness and 
the skillful means  of compassion and so forth, fully gathering sentient beings not 
gathered a nd so forth.  
2B2C -1B2B. The nature of the  knower of paths  
2B2C -1B2B -1. Knower of the nature of hearers’ paths  
2B2C -1B2B -2. Knower of the nature of solitary realizers’ paths  
2B2C -1B2B -3. Knower of the nature of bodhisattvas’ paths  
2B2C -1B2B -1. Knower of th e nature of hearers’ paths  
2B2C -1B2B -1A. The entity of the  knower of paths [that knows hearers’ paths]  
                                                                                                                                                      
2. Upholding rebirth in cyclic existence according to one’s wishes  
3. Wishing to meet the buddhas  
4. Not being disillusioned with respect to activities to ripen  sentient beings  
5. Striving to uphold the excellent Dharma  
6. Enthusiasm, thinking: “What activities of sentient beings are there?” 
7. Not discarding the dormancies that desire the Dharma  
8. Not giving up the applications with respect to the perfections  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
243 2B2C -1B2B -1B. The cause [of the knower of paths that knows hearers’ paths] : the partial concordance with 
definite discrimination   
2B2C -1B2B -1A. The ent ity of the knower of paths [that knows hearers’ paths]  
2B2C -1B2B -1A1. Making a connection  
2B2C -1B2B -1A2. Root text  
2B2C -1B2B -1A3. Commentary  
2B2C -1B2B -1A1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
Having described the support and so forth in that way, since it is ne cessary to complete all 
paths on the occasion of a knower of paths, hearers’ paths : 
 
EXPLANATION  
Having described the support and so forth in that way, it is appropriate to describe the 
mode of knowing hearers’ paths on the occasion of a knower of paths, s ince it is 
necessary to completely  cultivate all paths  of the three vehicles in order to attain an  
exalted knower of all aspects.  
2B2C -1B2B -1A2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
2.2 Regarding the mode s of a knower of paths,  
By means of not observing  
The aspects of the four noble truths  
These hearers’ paths are to be known.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Regarding the mode s of completely cultivating  a knower of paths, the way to cultivate 
these hearers’ paths is  also to be known, because one must cultivate the sixteen aspects  
of the four noble truths  by means of being conjoined with the generated mind [ of 
enlightenment], dedication, and the wisdom not observing true existence. 
 The knower of paths knowing hearers’ paths which is explained here is an exalted 
wisdom directly realizing t he sixteen [aspects of the four noble truths], impermanence and 
so forth. These are to be meditated upon in order to take care of hearer lineage -bearers.   
 QUALM: Would it not become a knower of bases? Why is it called a knower of paths?  
RESPONSE: It is presented by means of being conjoined with the three attributes, not in 
terms of observing hearers’ paths and then meditating on their emptiness. An exalted 
wisdom directly realizing impermanence and so forth in the continuum of a bodhisattva on the path o f seeing is a knower of paths that knows hearers’ paths, and also a knower of 
bases. However, here at the time of terminological indicati on, it is indicated in a manner of 
being conjoined with three attributes. In the third chapter [of the Ornament], it is  indicated 
by way of the isolates of the realizations of impermanence and so forth, for the sake of 
passing through them having viewed them by knowing and seeing.  
2B2C -1B2B -1A3. Commentary  
2B2C -1B2B -1A3A. The paths which are to be known  
2B2C -1B2B -1A3B. Th e manner of knowing them  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
244 2B2C -1B2B -1A3A. The paths which are to be known  
Sutra says, “Regarding this, does a bodhisattva mahasattva pay attention to the 
impermanence of forms by way of generating a mind that possesses an exalted knower of all 
aspects, or b y way of not observing?…” With this, [the paths which are to be known] are 
indicated by means of either the entity or the enumeration of the sixteen aspects. With respect to the explanation by the commentary here, there are:  
 
2B2C -1B2B -1A3A- 1. The aspects of true sufferings and true origins  
2B2C -1B2B -1A3A- 2. The aspects of true cessations 
2B2C -1B2B -1A3A- 3. The aspects of true paths 
2B2C -1B2B -1A3A- 1. The aspects of true sufferings and true origins  
2B2C -1B2B -1A3A- 1A. The individual aspects of true sufferings  and true origins  
2B2C -1B2B -1A3A- 1B. The common aspects of true sufferings and true origins  
2B2C -1B2B -1A3A- 1A. The individual aspects of true sufferings and true origins  
2B2C -1B2B -1A3A- 1A1. The aspects of true sufferings 
2B2C -1B2B -1A3A- 1A2. The aspects of true origins  
2B2C -1B2B -1A3A- 1A1. The aspects of true sufferings 
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. Regarding that, in accordance with the sequence of true sufferings: 
(1) impermanence, (2) suffering, (3) emptiness, and (4) selflessness, the characteristi cs of 
those, are the four aspects of pacification , and   
 
EXPLANATION  
Regarding that, in accordance with the sequence of the four aspects of true sufferings: 
(1) impermanence  due to being produced from conditions , (2) suffering  due to being under 
the control of karma and afflictions , (3) emptiness  due to being empty of a self that is 
another object , and (4) selflessness  due to its entity not being established as a self, are the 
four aspects of pacification  since the characteristics of those that are selfles s are not 
established as a self. Take what are overtly mentioned [in the commentary] as the theses and 
the explanation of their meaning as the signs. Within the explicit words of the sutra, the two 
latter aspects [empty and selfless] are indicated by way o f the aspect of enumeration  [of 
names] . According to that, it has been explained that the characteristic of empty is the 
aspect of being selfless, and the characteristic of that [being selfless] is the aspect of pacification .  
2B2C -1B2B -1A3A- 1A2. The aspects of true origins  
COMMENTARY 
The very entities of—(1) cause, (2) origin, (3) strong production, and (4) condition —of true 
origins, and the aspects of (1) disease, (2) boil, (3) pain, and (4) negativity, and  
 
EXPLANATION  
The aspects of true origins  are correlated with the explanation by way of the enumeration 
in sutra as follows. The subject —craving —: 
• is the aspect of (1) cause , like a (1) disease, because it serves as the root of suffering  
• is the aspect of (2) origin , like a (2) boil, because it produces suffering again and again  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
245 • is the aspect of (3) strong production , like a (3) pain,  because it produces intense 
suffering  
• is the aspect of (4) condition , like the aspect of a (4) negativity, because it is a 
cooperative condition for fut ure rebirth.  
2B2C -1B2B -1A3A- 1B. The common aspects of true sufferings and true origins  
COMMENTARY 
Since “in order to be disillusioned, separate from attachment, and cease, there is entry” 
occurs —the characteristics of disillusionment of those individual true sufferings and true 
origins themselves: the very entities of the aspects of (1) the antagonist and (2) the bearer of the property of destruction; the entities of the objects from which attachment is to be 
separated: the aspects of (3) moving and (4) strongly disintegrating; and the self- entity of 
cessations: the aspects of (5) fear, (6) infectious disease, and (7) harm, and  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —those true sufferings and true origins themselves —are to be observed as 
the characteristics of disillusionm ent towards individual  true sufferings and true origins, 
the entities of the aspects of (1) the enemy -like antagonist  due to being an opponent  and 
(2) the bearer of the property of destruction  due to acting to harm, since “in order to be 
disillusioned  regarding the two, true sufferings and true origins, there is entry  into the path 
of preparation” occurs. [The subject —those true sufferings and true origins themselves —] 
are to be observed as  the entities of the objects from which attachment is to be 
separate d, the aspects of (3) moving  due to not remaining for a second period of time, and 
(4) strongly disintegrating  without relying on conditions and causes arising later, since “in 
order to separate from attachment to true sufferings and true origins, there is  entry ” 
occurs. 
 [The subject —those true sufferings and true origins themselves —] are to be observed as  
the self- entity of cessations , the aspects of (5) fear  due to serving as a source of damage , 
(6) infectious disease  due to harm to the skull by rakshasa (cannibal spirits) and so forth , 
and (7) harm  due to lightning striking and so forth , since “in order to cease  true sufferings 
and true origins , there is entry” occurs  in the summary of the enumeration. 
 The three, dis illusionment and so forth, are [posited on] the occasions of the path of 
seeing, the end of the path of meditation, and [nirvana] without the remainder of the aggregates. By implication, entry for their sake is attained on the path of preparation, on the 
occasion of the path of meditation excluding the end, and on the occasion of [nirvana] with 
remainder. 
2B2C -1B2B -1A3A- 2. The aspects of true cessations   
COMMENTARY  
(1) The self- entity of the cessation of true cessations, selflessness, (2) pacification, (3) the 
nature of the aspect of sublim eness , isolation, and (4) the characteristic of definite 
emergence, the aspects of emptiness, signless, wishless, and being devoi d of manifest 
compositional action, and  
 
EXPLANATION  
The aspect of the self- entity of the cessation of true cessations  is the aspect of (1) 
selflessness , because it is a separation in which the afflictions have been abandoned . [True 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
246 cessations ] is the aspe ct of (2) pacification,  because it is a separation in which sufferings 
have been pacified . [True cessations ] is the aspect of (3) isolation, the nature of the aspect 
of sublimeness , because it is a separation that is in the entity of cleanness  and happiness .  
 
Sutra says, “One who possesses the attention to the exalted knower of all aspects, by way of not observing it, takes to mind the cessation —of ignorance and so forth until aging and 
death, and the aggregates of suffering —as selfless, pacification, isolation, empty, signless, 
wishless, and being devoid of  manifest compositional action.” T he second aspect  is 
indicated by way of the entity, and the others by way of enumeration.  
 The subject—a separation with the characteristic of definite emer gence —is the 
aspects of (4) emptiness, signlessness, wishlessness, and being devoid of  manifest 
compositional action , because, respectively, (i) it is an abandonment where the manner 
through which one definitely emerges is free from the three —truly existen t entity, cause and 
result —and (ii) it is an abandonment in which what definitely emerges is free from truly 
existent manifest compositional actions  with exertion.   
2B2C -1B2B -1A3A- 3. The aspects of true paths 
COMMENTARY 
The aspects  of (1) path, (2) suitab ility, (3) achievement, and (4) deliverance —of true paths.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —an aspect of true paths , the wisdom directly realizing selflessness —is the 
aspects of (1) path, (2) suitability, (3) achievement, and (4) deliverance , because, 
respectively , (1) it is a path that actually proceeds to nirvana, (2) it is suitable as the direct 
antidote to the seeds of afflictions, (3) it directly realizes the mode of abidance of the mind, and (4) it is a path that utterly extinguishes suffering . 
 Respectively, sutra says:  
(1) “One who possesses the attention to the exalted knower of all aspects, by way of not 
observing them, cultivates the close placements of mindfulness and so forth until the 
unmixed qualities of a buddha.”  
(2) “One practices the perfection o f generosity.”  
(3) “When one practices the Perfection of Wisdom one connects oneself to the Dharma by 
way of Dharma.”  
(4) “Koushika, that which is a mind of full dedication is not a mind.”  
2B2C -1B2B -1A3B. The manner of knowing them  
COMMENTARY 
By means of not observing entitiness, on the occasion of the knower of paths, bodhisattvas 
should fully know them in that way as being the hearers’ paths.   
 
EXPLANATION  
Bodhisattvas should fully know those paths explained above that are to be known in that 
way as bei ng the hearers’ paths. How?  By means of being conjoined with the generated 
mind [of enlightenment], dedication, and the wisdom not observing entitiness. When?  On 
the occasion of  the knower of paths  [when] the collection of causes of omniscience are 
shown . 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
247 2B2C -1B2B -1B. The cause  [of the knower of paths that knows hearers’ paths] : the partial concordance with 
definite discrimination  
2B2C -1B2B -1B1. Making a connection  
2B2C -1B2B -1B2. Root text  
2B2C -1B2B -1B3. Commentary  
2B2C -1B2B -1B1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
Since the  new complete knowing  with direct cognition of the four truths bears the 
preliminary of realizing the partial concordance with definite discrimination , its cause, 
having expressed the paths, the partial concordance with definite discrim ination:  
 
EXPLANATION  
Since the new complete knowing with direct cognition of the four truths bears the 
preliminary of realizing the partial concordance with definite discrimination, its cause, 
having expressed the paths, the partial concordance with defin ite discrimination:  
2B2C -1B2B -1B2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
2.3 With regard to the paths of arya hearers:  
Since forms and so forth are empty,  
Emptiness is indivisible, therefore  Heat; due to those not being observed,  
 2.4 It is asserted that it transforms in to the peak;  
By stopping the abiding on those  
By way of the permanent and so forth —the forbearance;  
Beginning from the ten grounds   
 
2.5 That extensively indicated as not abiding  
Transforms into  the supreme mundane quality —it is  explained. 
“Why?” Because the buddhas,  
By means of an exalted knower, do not see phenomena.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The direct knowing of the paths of arya hearers  must be preceded by its cause, its partial 
concordance with definite discrimination. The very realization of the sixteen, imperm anence 
and so forth, by way of meaning -generality (that is initially conjoined with the wisdom 
realizing emptiness by way of meaning -generality) is the heat; when increased, it is the 
peak . That conjoined with the attainment of a forbearance in which adherence to the 
permanent, the impermanent, and so forth as truly existent has been stopped is the 
forbearance . That conjoined with a wisdom that realizes that the apprehenders, the ten 
grounds are not truly existent objects to be abided upon is the supreme mu ndane  quality . 
Respectively, sutra says:    
• “Koushika, form is empty of form.”  
• “One should not abide on form by way of the observation of a bodhisattva.”  
• “One should not abide, saying, ‘Form is permanent’ by way of observing it.”  
• “Furthermore, a bodhisattva  should not abide on the first ground by way of observing it.”  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
248  
QUALM: Why  are they not truly existent objects to be abided upon ?  
RESPONSE: Because if phenomena were truly existing objects to be abided upon, the 
buddhas  must see that by means of a direct exalted knower, but they do not.   
 In this context, [Haribhadra’s] Great Commentary  says:  
 
SOME HEARER SCHOOL: With respect to a supreme emanation body 
demonstrating the manner of passing beyond sorrow, that is a passing beyond 
sorrow by way of severing the continuity of matter and cognition.  
 
There is much damage to this from scripture and reasoning. Whatever bears the absence of incomplete causes for its abidance does not bear the nature of its continuity of abidance 
being severed; for example, smoke a nd so forth, where the potentialized causes of 
abidance —fire, wood, and so forth —exist completely. Also the Buddha Bhagavan is one 
who bears the absence of incomplete causes of abidance. Having stated the sign above, 
when proving its property of the subjec t, extensive reasoning was demonstrated by means of 
the incorrectness of all of these following positions. W ould the Bhagavan’s incomplete 
causes for abiding  be: 
(1) due to him having exhausted the power to enact the welfare of sentient beings?  
(2) due to him being separated from great exalted loving- -compassion?  
(3) due to him degenerating from the power gained over the abidance of his compositional factor of life?  
(4) due to him having exhausted the potency of karma for his life power to abide?  
(5) due to  there being no sentient being to be subdued?  
 
Fearing wordiness, I will not elaborate more.  
2B2C -1B2B -1B3. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. (1) Because the aggregates of forms and so forth themselves are empty of their own entitiness, emp tinesses are not mutually different, (2) as before, forms 
and so forth not observed, (3) “similarly, forms and so forth are neither permanent n or 
impermanent,” abidance by way of observing is stopped, (4) because of what? By the 
correctness of the sign of non-observation  by a valid being, “The tathagatas, having attained 
buddhahood in clear complete enlightenment, do not see phenomena,” not abiding in the 
Very Joyous ground and so forth— by these quoted aspects said to have been taught 
extensively, with resp ect to the objects of observation of the truths respectively, the partial 
concordance with definite discrimination is said to be generated. 
 
EXPLANATION  
(1) The aggregates of forms and so forth and their emptinesses themselves are not mutually different ultimately, because they are empty of their own entitiness  ultimately; 
(2) forms and so forth do not exist ultimately, because, as before , if they were to exist 
truly, that would be suitable to be observed, but that is not observed; (3) similarly, abidance b y way of observing forms and so forth  as existing ultimately is stopped , 
because they are neither permanent n or impermanent  by way of existing ultimately, (4) 
the Very Joyous ground and so forth  are devoid of true existence as objects to be abided 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
249 upon; because of what? By the correctness of the sign of non -observation by a valid 
being , “Because, if they exist truly, that must be seen by the tathagatas, but the 
tathagatas, having attained buddhahood in clear  complete enlightenment, do not see 
phenomena  such as the ten grounds as objects to be abided upon ultimately,” not 
abiding —by these aspects said to have been taught extensively  in the sutras, through 
cultivation by observing the objects of observation of the truths respectively, the partial 
concordance  with definite discrimination is said to be generated . 
 What is explicitly presented here is the path of preparation that realizes emptiness. The 
cause of a knower of hearers’ paths, definite discrimination, is a mundane wisdom arisen 
from meditation observing the sixteen attributes, which is implied in this pa ssage.  
 OPINION: What is explicitly presented here repeats the path of preparation in the first chapter. 
RESPONSE: There is no fault because the purpose is dissimilar. The earlier [presentation] 
is for the sake of realizing that [the Mahayana path of prep aration] is superior to a hearer’s 
path of preparation. The [presentation] here is for the sake of making known that one is to meditate on the sixteen attributes of the four noble truths by being conjoined with the 
wisdom realizing emptiness. 
2B2C -1B2B -2. Knower of the nature of solitary realizers’ paths123 
2B2C -1B2B -2A. Meaning of the generality  
2B2C -1B2B -2B. The meaning of the branches  
2B2C -1B2B -2A. Meaning of the generality  
[Solitary realizers] have mild afflictions, an attribute of [their] lineage, where by they do not 
like disquiet and prefer to be alone. Compared to the bodhisattvas, they have little 
compassion and therefore do not engage in the extensive welfare of others. Due to being of 
middling faculty, they desire to attain enlightenment without com petition.  
 Their mode of training in the path is as follows. Some types of solitary realizers, at the 
time when they are ordinary beings, having pleased the buddhas who arise and collected 
merit for a hundred eons, attain the result of foe -destroyer in the  future life in which they 
attain the path of seeing. Some collect the accumulations for an indefinite period of time. Some, having completely generated the partial concordance with definite discrimination and 
below in the presence of a master, generate th e path of seeing in a future life, and then in the 
last rebirth attain the result of foe -destroyer.  
 There are two types of solitary realizers: those who rely on a master to generate an arya 
path and those who do not. In the life in which they attain the s tate of foe -destroyer, they 
definitely attain enlightenment without relying on a master; for, otherwise, they would be 
hearers. Know this extensively from elsewhere.   
2B2C -1B2B -2B. The meaning of the branches  
2B2C -1B2B -2B1. The distinction of support  
2B2C -1B2B -2B2. The way to know their paths 
2B2C -1B2B -2B3. Explaining the cause of that : the partial concordance with definite discrimination  
                                              
123 The Tibeta n text says “T he nature of the k nower of solitary realizers’ paths” here, which is slightly 
different from what was stated above.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
250 2B2C -1B2B -2B1. The distinction of support  
2B2C -1B2B -2B1A. Actual attributes 
2B2C -1B2B -2B1B. Dispelling objections  
2B2C -1B2B -2B1A. Actual attributes 
2B2C -1B2B -2B1A -1. Making a connection  
2B2C -1B2B -2B1A -2. Root text  
2B2C -1B2B -2B1A -3. Commentary 
2B2C -1B2B -2B1A -1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
After the hearers’ paths, it is appropriate to describe the solitary realizers’ pa ths; but how 
are they superior to hearers? By what? In order to anticipate the qualms that wonder if their 
paths are other, for the time being, the proof that they are superior:  
 
EXPLANATION  
In accordance with the scriptures, immediately after the hearers’ paths, it is appropriate 
to describe the solitary realizers’ paths; but for the time being, the proof that they are 
superior  will be explained. If they are not different from hearers’ paths, it is unreasonable 
for them to be other. If there are differences, how are they superior to hearers’ paths? By 
what  reason ? In order to anticipate the qualms that wonder if their paths are other: 
2B2C -1B2B -2B1A -2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
2.6 Self- arisen because he realizes by himself; 
Also he does not need to be taught by others. 
The exalted wisdom of the rhinoceros -like 
Is clearly described as being more profound.   
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —a self-arisen foe-destroyer— does not need to be taught by others  in the life 
of his last existence, beca use in that life he realizes enlightenment by himself  without 
relying on a master.  
 Sutra says, “ Also , within the retinue, some sons of gods think this, ‘We will understand 
those languages of the yakshas and so forth when they are said, but we will not understand 
those explanations of the Perfection of Wisdom given by Arya Subhuti.’” [The significance 
of] “also” is that [solitary realizers] also do not definitely teach Dharma  to others by speech.  
 The subject —the exalted wisdom of the rhinoceros -like—is clearly described as 
being more profound that a hearer’s, because it cannot be realized by an effect sign that is 
speech teaching the Dharma as in the case of hearers, and it possesses profo und realization 
by way of teaching Dharma  with the body . 
 Sutra  says,  “The sons of gods think this, ‘Oh! The Elder  Subhuti cla rifies the Perfection 
of Wisdom; he teaches what is far more profound than the profound; he teaches what is far 
more subtle than the subtle.’ ”  
 Although the paths that will be explained below are  also cultivated  by bodhisattvas, do  
not think that it is contradictory to present the result in this context as that very [result] in 
the continuum of  solitary realizers. T he bodhisattvas ’ practice  of the path realiz ing that 
apprehendeds are devoid of nature  is for the sake of guiding  solitary realizer lineage -
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
251 bearers . The stages of the mode of travers ing their path and the mode of actualizing their 
result are mentioned as a branch of realization.   
2B2C -1B2B -2B1A -3. Commentary 
2B2C -1B2B -2B1A -3A. Diffe rence in traversing  the path  
2B2C -1B2B -2B1A -3B. Difference in teaching the Dharma 
2B2C -1B2B -2B1A -3A. Difference in traversing  the path  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. It occurs in the scriptures, “The hearers, having relied on being 
taught by others , will realize their own enlightenment; others also are caused to engage in 
virtue due to having been taught the articulated Dharma.” The solitary realizers, having 
performed manifest compositional actions previously in hearing and so forth, without 
relyin g on being taught by others, will clearly realize their own enlightenment by 
themselves. Because of that, it is not necessary for them to be taught by buddhas and so 
forth. This is one distinction.  
 
EXPLANATION  
It is not necessary for those  solitary realiz ers to be taught  enlightenment by buddhas and 
so forth  in the life of their last existence, because, without relying on being taught by 
others , they will clearly realize their own enlightenment by themselves  in that life. It will 
be so, since it will be so  due to the cause that is the solitary realizers having performed 
manifest compositional actions with respect to the path previously in hearing, prayers, and so forth. This is one distinction.  
 It is because they abide in the way  it occurs in the scripture s, “The hearers, having 
relied on being taught by others in the life of their last existence, will realize their own 
enlightenment; other  trainees also are caused to engage in virtue due to having been 
taught the articulated Dharma.”    
2B2C -1B2B -2B1A -3B. Difference in teaching the Dharma 
COMMENTARY 
If [hearers] cause the listeners to realize the mental prowess of the explainer by means of 
having taught the Dharma articulated in sound, then, they, through the force of exalted wisdom attained by themselves a nd so forth, by having taught the Dharma without sound, 
cause others to engage in the ten virtues and so forth. Because of that, exalted wisdom itself 
not realized of those is the second distinction.  
 
EXPLANATION  
From  the effect sign of speech, the exalted wisdom itself not realized of those solitary 
realizers is the second distinction  over the hearers by way of teaching the Dharma , 
because those  solitary realizers , through the force of exalted wisdom  attained by 
themselves  and through the force of p rayers  and so forth, by having taught the Dharma 
without sound, cause others to engage in the ten virtues , realizing selflessness, and so 
forth. There is pervasion, because hearers rely on  causing the listeners to realize the 
mental prowess , the ability of the mind  of the explainer by means of having taught the 
Dharma articulated in sound.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
252 2B2C -1B2B -2B1B. Dispelling objections  
2B2C -1B2B -2B1B -1. Making a connection  
2B2C -1B2B -2B1B -2. Root text  
2B2C -1B2B -2B1B -3. Commentary 
2B2C -1B2B -2B1B -1. Making a connectio n 
COMMENTARY 
Again, to anticipate the qualms that wonder how the Dharma is taught without sound : 
 
EXPLANATION  
Since the objection follows from other objections, again, to anticipate the qualms that 
wonder how the Dharma is taught without sounds:  
2B2C -1B2B -2B1B -2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
2.7 Whomever, whatever meanings, however – 
To one desiring to hear,  
The meanings  
Appear in that way even without sound.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Whomever trainees, whatever meanings that are to be realized, however the aspects —to one 
desiring to hear, the meanings appear in that way even without sound.  
 There is no contradiction that the solitary realizers teach Dharma even without sounds, 
because they are able to generate realizations in trainees as are appropriate , even without 
sounds.  
2B2C -1B2B -2B1B -3. Commentary 
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. Because one does not speak words without having investigated and without having analyzed, articulation is a distraction. Since it also disturbs the continuum
, 
bodhisattvas made prayers, “May  I teach the Dharma without articulation, by becoming a 
buddha in that way.” Therefore, they are similar to buddhas . Since, also in the context of 
solitary realizers, by the force of prayers and so forth, even without sound, in the 
consciousness of whoever  desiring to listen to whatever meaning in however an aspect, it 
will appear as only that meaning and that aspect, it is called “teaching Dharma without 
sound.” The aim of “sounds that teach Dharma” is this, “to strongly produce and generate in 
the conscio usness of the listener, the Dharma which is to be articulated in this manner.”  
 
EXPLANATION  
“Teaching Dharma without sound is not contradictory,” because, if the aim that is the 
purpose of “sounds that teach Dharma” is this, “to strongly produce and generate in 
the consciousness of the listener, the realization of the Dharma which is to be 
articulated in this manner,”  then that is present also in Dharma taught by solitary realizers 
without sound. That is present, since, also in the context of solitary reali zers, by the force 
of previous prayers and so forth, even without  the sound teaching Dharma, in the 
consciousness of whoever  trainee desiring  to listen to whatever meaning  of high status 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
253 and definite goodness in however an aspect, it will appear as only th at meaning and that 
aspect. 
 The reason for that is that bodhisattvas made prayers, “May I teach the Dharma 
without articulation, by becoming a buddha in that way”; solitary realizers also made 
prayers in that manner in the past. Therefore, they are simila r to buddhas.  There is a 
reason for solitary realizers making prayers in that way, since articulation  of words 
distracts  [them] from meditative stabilization, and it also disturbs the continuum  of 
meditative stabilization. The reason for that is because one does not speak words without 
having investigated  the entity and without having analyzed the attributes. Bodhisattvas 
accomplish previous prayers, “May I, without relying on articulation, be able to generate realizations in the continua of trainees when  I attain buddhahood.” The meaning of they 
being “similar to buddhas” is just that; it is not that buddhas teach in the absence of speech 
teaching the Dharma.  
 In addition, solitary realizers mostly abide in that manner; it is not that it is impossible fo r 
solitary realizers to give teachings with speech, because it has been taught in the  Vinaya 
Scripture  that [there are solitary realizers who] teach Dharma with speech, and because it 
has been taught in the Clear Lamp ( Pradipoddyotana- Namatika ) that “They mainly teach 
Dharma with the body.”  
 The reason for them mostly abiding in that manner is that, solitary realizers are not able 
to teach with articulation the Dharma without relying on investigation and analysis, in the way that buddhas are able to, whereb y it is said that it “disturbs the continuum” if they were 
to teach the Dharma with articulation.  
 
OPINION: Teaching the Dharma with speech and teaching it with body do not differ with 
respect to causing [others] to realize one’s mental prowess.  
RESPONSE: That is not correct, (i) because by way of displaying magical emanations with 
the body, trainees are able to realize merely one’s possession of magical emanation but they 
are unable to realize that one possess es a realization of selflessness, and (ii) because they are 
able [to realize that one possess es a realization of selflessness] from the effect sign of 
speech. 
 If [the display of magical emanations] were to definitely rely on a motivation thinking “I 
want to display magical emanations,” then the reason  for not teaching Dharma with speech  
[explained above] would  be a counterfeit [reason] . Hence, one is able to display magical 
emanations without relying on such a motivation, since the ability to produce realizations of 
high status and definite goodness in  the continua of trainees in dependence on seeing those 
[magical emanations] is the result of prayer.  
 In our system, it is simply incorrect to negate only the teaching of Dharma with the body 
without being able to posit even slightly the meaning of teach ing the Dharma.  
2B2C -1B2B -2B2. The way to know their paths 
2B2C -1B2B -2B2A. Making a connection  
2B2C -1B2B -2B2B. Root text  
2B2C -1B2B -2B2C. Commentary  
2B2C -1B2B -2B2A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
Having expressed the distinctions in that manner, since the paths of the distinguished ones 
are only superior, the ordinary  solitary realizers’ paths. 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
254  
EXPLANATION  
Having expressed the distinctions  over the hearers in that manner, since the paths of the 
distinguished ones are only superior, the ordinary solitary re alizers’ paths. “Ordinary” 
refers to the ordinary path that is to be known by bodhisattvas.  
2B2C -1B2B -2B2B. Root text  
2B2C -1B2B -2B2B -1. Meaning of the words  
2B2C -1B2B -2B2B -2. Decisive analysis  
ROOT TEXT  
2.8 Because it abandons the conceptions of apprehendeds as objects, 
Because it does not abandon apprehenders, and   
By a support, the path of the rhinoceros -like 
Is to be known as perfectly encapsulated. 
2B2C -1B2B -2B2B -1. Meaning of the words  
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the path of the rhinoceros -like [solitary realizers]—is to be known as 
perfectly encapsulated due to  the possession of three attributes, (i) because it abandons 
the conceptions of apprehendeds , forms and so forth, as external objects , (ii) because it 
does not abandon the conceptions of apprehenders, consciousnesses apprehending forms 
and so forth, as truly existent apprehenders , and (iii) because it is to be known as being 
distinguished by being a support  that is supported by lineage.  
 It is also to be known by bodhi sattvas by way of being conjoined with the generated mind 
[of enlightenment], dedication, and the wisdom realizing emptiness. Respectively, sutra says:  
• “Form is not profound; it is not subtle. Why is that? The nature of form is not profound; it 
is not subtle,”  
• “Then those sons of the gods thought this, “Elder Subhuti, what kind of listening to the Dharma should we seek?” and,  
• “Then Subhuti said to those sons of the gods, “Sons of the gods, seek the listening of the Dharma which is like an illusion and li ke an emanation.”   
2B2C -1B2B -2B2B -2. Decisive analysis  
In this context, by way of the three attributes that have been indicated in sutra, both the objects to be generated in the continua of Hinayana persons and the objects to be generated 
in the continua of bodhisattvas have been indicated. Know them also in that way in this 
treatise. Now, the analysis of this:   
DISPUTANT: The views of solitary realizers and the  Proponents of Mind -Only  are not 
similar, because, even though the former have abandoned the c onception of apprehendeds, 
they adhere to apprehenders as truly existent; the latter realize apprehendeds and 
apprehenders as being devoid of  true existence.  
RESPONSE: You have not examined this closely at all. What is the meaning of a solitary realizer realizing apprehendeds as being devoid of  true existence?  
 
DISPUTANT: He realizes that those objects —property -possessing bases, forms and so 
forth, established by valid cognition —are devoid of  true existence. However, he does not 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
255 realize that the sense con sciousnesses that apprehend them and so forth are devoid of true 
existence. 
RESPONSE: That is very unreasonable, because, having realized that a property -possessing 
base does not exist truly, when one engages in analysis as to whether or not other property -
possessing bases exist truly, in dependence upon remembering the way in which the 
previous property of the subject and pervasion have been established by valid cognition, one 
definitely realizes that they  are devoid of true existence. For, otherwise, it follows that it 
would be impossible to realize that all property -possess ors are devoid of  true existence on a 
learner’s path. Therefore, Acarya  Aryadeva says in his  Four Hundred Stanzas  
(Chatushataka):  
 
Due to seeing the thusness of one thing,  
One sees the  thusness of all things.  
 DISPUTANT: Although they realize that forms and so forth do not exist as external objects, 
solitary realizers do not realize that there is no apprehender that is a different substance 
from them.  
RESPONSE: It is not possible for anyone, even someone with dull faculties, to have negated a form as being a different substance from a sense consciousness, but not have 
negated sense consciousness as being a different substance from form.  
 
DISPUTANT: Although forms have been negated as b eing external objects, there is no 
certainty that the apprehendeds included within the substance of consciousness have been 
negated as being different objects, because [Dharmakirti's] Commentary on [Dignaga's] 
'Compendium of Valid Cognition'  (Pramanavarttikakarika ) says: “The argument is similar 
for that,” indicating other reasonings that negate them. 
RESPONSE: There is no fault, because if the apprehendeds that rely upon the substance of 
consciousness have been negated as being different objects, it is imp ossible that the 
apprehenders have been not negated as being different objects. It is incorrect that tenets that, 
having negated external objects, do not negate the apprehendeds as being mere other objects 
differ in being higher or lower. 
 Hence, the meani ng of “[the path of solitary realizers] abandon s the conception s of 
apprehendeds ” [in 2.8a] is that it realize s that forms and so forth do not exist as a different 
substance from the sense consciousnesses that apprehend them. As for “[the path of solitary 
realizers] does not abandon apprehenders ” [in 2.8b] , not only do they not realize that 
consciousnesses, such as sense consciousnesses, are empty of true existence, they do not 
definitely need to familiarize with that realization in order to attain  the state of a foe -
destroyer of the middling vehicle.   Therefore, saying that “Since the view of solitary realizers indicated here and the view of 
the Proponents of Mind- Only  do not differ even slightly in being higher or lower, it is 
amazing that the tw o have similar tenets” is a joke for the clarifiers. The intention of 
[Haribhadra’s] Great Commentary  is also to be understood to be only that. This Acarya  
[Haribhadra] asserts there are no external objects even conventionally, in agreement with 
the Propon ents of Cognition -Only. Even bodhisattvas meditate on the emptiness of 
apprehenders and apprehendeds being different substances, on the occasions of the first 
three [paths]. Although they pass through it having viewed them by knowing and seeing on 
the occa sion of the path of seeing, they are not diligent in mainly familiarizing with it on the 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
256 occasion of the path of meditation; it is cultivated in the manner of an auxiliary. Therefore, 
know that it will transform into the non -dual instantaneous application at the time of the end 
of the continuum of a sentient being.   The assertion that it is possible for solitary realizers to realize the subtle meaning of 
emptiness has already been explained above. A knower of bases that is included within this realization has been presented with respect to solitary realizers, the support of the 
presentation, but it is also generated in the continua of bodhisattvas. Hence, the mode of knowing solitary realizers’ paths is that they are not to be comprehended as if one is look ing 
at visual form with eyes. Although solitary realizers observe the scriptural basket of hearers, due to the distinction in faculty, they realize the selflessness of phenomena.  
2B2C -1B2B -2B2C. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. Concerning s olitary realizers’ paths: only to meditate on the truths 
which have been explained, and by having meditated on dependent -arising according to the  
actual, respectively to abandon and not abandon conceptualizations of objects of 
apprehendeds and apprehenders ; and by the attribute of the basis of the supported qualities 
included within the solitary realizer’s vehicle, to realize the qualities possessing 
distinction —are to be known by the bodhisattvas; they are not to be known in all ways. 
These are the paths o f the solitary realizers.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Solitary realizers’ paths  are to be directly known by bodhisattvas; they are not to be 
known in all ways  by way of actualization. These are the paths of the solitary realizers  
that are to be known . Distinguished by wh at are they to be known? Concerning solitary 
realizers’ paths: only to meditate on the sixteen aspects of the truths which have been explained,  (definite apprehension is the negative of non -possession); by having meditated 
on the forward and reverse proces ses of the twelve links of dependent -arising according 
to the actual modes of arisal and reversal , respectively to abandon conceptualizations 
that adhere to apprehendeds as external objects, and not abandon conceptualizations of 
objects that apprehend consciousness as truly existent ; and, by the attribute of the  
supporting basis that is supported  on lineage, the  dharmata  of the supported qualities 
included within the solitary realizer’s vehicle, to realize the q ualities possessing 
distinction. 
 That ve ry exalted wisdom which directly realizes apprehendeds as being devoid of  true 
existence is called a solitary realizers’ path. That which is present in the continuum of a 
solitary realizer is supported upon the dharmata of his six sources. That which is present in 
the continuum of a bodhisattva is supported upon his lineage abiding in the nature. Do not 
think that it follows that that very lineage in the continuum of a bodhisattva is the solitary 
realizers’ lineage. Although even hearers directly realize th e modes of entering into and 
turning away from cyclic existence and familiarize with them, they do not abandon the 
adherence to external objects. That they do not directly realize [the appearances of external 
objects] as mere mistaken appearances of the erroneous adherence to external objects is due 
to their having dull faculties as compared to the former [solitary realizers].  
2B2C -1B2B -2B3. Explaining the cause of that : the partial concordance with definite discrimination  
2B2C -1B2B -2B3A. Making a connectio n 
2B2C -1B2B -2B3B. Root text  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
257 2B2C -1B2B -2B3C. Commentary  
2B2C -1B2B -2B3A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
If the partial concordance with definite discrimination is attained, the paths which have been 
explained will be generated, therefore the partial concorda nce with definite discrimination:   
 
EXPLANATION  
The reason for explaining the partial concordance with definite discrimination after having explained the way in which solitary realizers’ paths are directly known is that, if the partial 
concordance with de finite discrimination is attained, the paths which have been 
explained will be generated, therefore  the partial concordance with definite 
discrimination:  
2B2C -1B2B -2B3B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
2.9 The aspect that shows  
As not contradictory with the dharmata of that imputed is transformed -into-
heat. 
Transformed -into-peak is differentiated by  
Forms and so forth being devoid of  diminishment and so forth.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The aspect that shows  forms and so forth as not contradictory with the dharmata  of that 
imputed  with terminology even though they are realized to not exist as external objects is 
transformed -into-heat. And transformed -into-peak is differentiated by external objects, 
forms and so forth being devoid of  diminishment and so forth , and  
 
ROOT TEXT  
2.10 Through the emptiness of the inner and so forth,  
Because of not apprehending forms and so forth, forbearance.  
That bearing the aspect of forms and so forth  
Being devoid of  production and so forth is supreme mundane quality. 
 
EXPLANATION  
Through the realization of emptiness of the inner and so forth, because of not 
apprehending forms and so forth  as external objects, forbearance . And that bearing 
the aspect of forms and so forth being devoid of  production  is supreme mundane  
quality . Respectively, sutra sa ys:  
• “Oh, Elder Subhuti, this does not contradict imputation. Showing dharmata also possesses 
profound wisdom”;   
• “Also, one should not train in order to increase forms”;  
• “Also, Subhuti said, “Venerable Sariputra , in this way there is no full apprehension as 
forms”; and  
• “Subhuti said, ‘Sariputra , when a bodhisattva mahasattva practices the Perfection of 
Wisdom in this way, he does not see the production of forms.”  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
258 It appears to be just suitable to explain the e xplicit presentation of the root text as explicitly 
indicating the four levels of the path of preparation which realize the emptiness of 
apprehendeds and apprehenders being different substances, whereby it is explained thus. 
The Commentary  has explained it  in a way similar to the previous path of preparation [in the 
first chapter].  
2B2C -1B2B -2B3C. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. (1) “To clearly show that they are not contradictory with the 
dharmata of that imputed which arose from the terminology of phenomena that are forms 
and so forth, (2) to learn the meaning of forms and so forth being devoid of  decre ase and 
increase and so forth ultimately, (3) to not apprehend by the emptinesses of the inner, the 
outer, and so forth with respect to forms and so forth, because of the emptiness of entitiness, 
and (4) the absence  of production and cessation with respect  to forms and so forth.” With 
respect to the objects of observation that are the four truths respectively, by way of these abovementioned aspects, the partial concordance with definite discrimination is generated.  
 
EXPLANATION  
(1) By explicitly showing the  exalted wisdom of the heat level (which realizes that , in the 
way forms and so forth have been clearly  shown,  they are not contradictory with the 
dharmata of  that imputed which arose from the terminology of phenomena that are 
forms and so forth, which alt hough not existing ultimately, exist just conventionally), the 
heat level which by means of a meaning -generality realizes the emptiness of apprehendeds 
and apprehenders being different substances is shown implicitly. (2) By [explicitly] showing the peak le vel which realizes the meaning  of forms and so 
forth being devoid of  decrease and increase and so forth ultimately, in the way  it has 
been  learnt, the other peak level is shown implicitly. 
(3) By [explicitly showing] the forbearance level which does not ap prehend apprehendeds 
as truly existent by the very realization of the emptinesses of the inner, the outer, and so 
forth with respect to forms and so forth, because of the emptiness of entitiness  
ultimately, the other [forbearance level is shown implicitly] . 
(4) By explicitly showing the supreme mundane quality level which realizes the absence of 
production and cessation ultimately  with respect to forms and so forth, the other 
[supreme mundane quality level] is shown implicitly .  
 
By observing and meditating on the objects of observation that are the four truths 
respectively , by way of these abovementioned aspects  which have been explained, the 
partial concordance with definite discrimination is generated . There is a purpose for 
explicitly showing the four le vels of the path of preparation that bear the aspect of 
emptiness in this context, because it is for the sake of making known that the four levels of 
the path of preparation shown implicitly are cultivated by being conjoined with the wisdom 
realizing empti ness.  
2B2C -1B2B -3. Knower of the nature of bodhisattvas’ paths124  
2B2C -1B2B -3A. Making a connection for the generality  
                                              
124 The Tibetan text says “Explanation of the nature of a knower of bodhisattvas’ paths ” here, which is 
slightly different from what was stated above.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
259 2B2C -1B2B -3B. Individual entities   
2B2C -1B2B -3A. Making a connection for the generality  
COMMENTARY 
After the solitary realizers’ paths, the bodhisattvas’ paths:  
 
EXPLANATION  
After the solitary realizers’ paths, the bodhisattvas’ paths: 
2B2C -1B2B -3B. Individual entities  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1. The path of seeing  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2. The path of meditation  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1. The path of seeing  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1 A. Meaning of the generality  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1B. Meaning of the branches  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1A. Meaning of the generality  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1A -1. The support  of the path of seeing  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1A -2. The supported path of seeing  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1A -1. The support of the path of seeing  
The body support is humans excluding those of [the northern continent] Unpleasant Sound, 
hermaphrodites and neuters, and the support of the gods of desire realm. It is not generated 
on the support of the upper realms, because [beings of the form and  formless realms] have 
weak despondency with regard  to the three realms.  
 Regarding the mind support, it is supported on an actual concentration. Although it is 
explained in [Haribhadra’s] Great Commentary that the path of meditation is supported on a 
desire realm mind and on the Peak of Existence, I wonder if that is able to characterize the 
path of seeing.  
 The explanation in the Sutra on the Ten Grounds  that one attains the concentrations and 
clairvoyances on the occasion of the third ground indicates an attainment by the force of 
meditative equipoise, an uncommon attribute. For, the actual fourth concentration bearing 
the aspect of peace and coarseness has  definitely  been  attained by a bodhisattva on the 
occasion of the path of preparation; if that has  beenattained , there is no need to generate a 
supramundane path in dependence on a more difficult path.  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1A -2. The supported path of seeing  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1A -2A. The entity of the path of seeing  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1A -2B. Divisions  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1A -2C. Decisi ve analysis  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1A -2A. The entity of the path of seeing  
[The entity of the path of seeing] is that concomitant with wisdom and meditative 
stabilization, [occurring] immediately after the supreme mundane quality level of the path 
of preparation, ne wly realizing emptiness free of elaboration by way of direct cognition, 
through observing the sixteen attributes of the four noble truths, and conjoined with all types of deeds, generosity and so forth.  
 That is from the point of view of the uncommon Maha yana path of seeing; the definition 
of a mere Mahayana path of seeing is: a Mahayana clear realization of the truth that is 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
260 conjoined with a Mahayana exalted wisdom newly realizing emptiness by way of direct 
cognition in the continuum of the one [possessin g it]. There is also a path of seeing that 
directly realizes the sixteen, impermanence and so forth, on that occasion.  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1A -2B. Divisions  
There are eight forbearances included within the uninterrupted path which observe the dharmata of the four noble truths, and eight knowledges included within the liberated paths: 
sixteen differentiated by way of isolates.  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1A -2C. Decisive analysis  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1A -2C1. How refutation [of others’ systems] and positing [of our system] is done by Acarya 
[Haribhadra] in the Great Commentary  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1A -2C2. Summarizing and indicating the assertion of Acarya [Haribhadra]  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1A -2C3. Analyzing the sequence in which the path of seeing that acts to pass through and the 
path of seeing that is to be passed through are generated  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1A -2C1. How refutation [of others’ systems] and positing [of our system] is done by Acarya 
[Haribhadra] in the Great Commentary  
DISPUTANT: The dharmatas of the four noble truths are realized by way of direct cognitio n with a single mind in one instant. Therefore, at that time, sufferings are known, 
origins are abandoned, cessations are actualized, and paths are cultivated. Thus, the clear realization that is an object upon which one acts with respect to the four noble  truths, or the 
resultant clear realization, is one instant. However, from the point of view of the sequential 
elimination of the errors with respect to each of the four noble truths, there are sixteen 
instants of individually realizing clear realization. Therefore, the presentations of the 
approachers and abiders are correct.  
RESPONSE: This is not the assertion of Acarya  [Haribhadra]. It is not correct even by way 
of reasoning, because (i) if true cessations were actualized at the time of newly realizing the 
dharmata of true sufferings, then it follows that true cessations would not need to be 
preceded by true paths, and (ii) it follows that the uninterrupted path and liberated path of a 
specific basis would arise simultaneously.  
 DISPUTANT: True cessatio ns will be realized [afterwards].  
RESPONSE: With respect to the two —the earlier and the later—the classification of either 
one or sixteen instants would be meaningless.  
 
ANOTHER DISPUTANT: [Dharmakirti's] Commentary on [Dignaga's] 'Compendium of 
Valid Cognition'  (Pramanavarttikakarika) says:  
 
A single self- entity of the object  
Is the nature directly cognized.  
Of any object to be investigated by valid cognition,  
What other unseen part is there?  
 
Rather than being the clear realizations which individually realize by way of the mode 
described above, it is one instant. This asserts that an uninterrupted path and a liberated path are produced in one instant, not sequentially, because, otherwise it wou ld not be right to 
fling to this [disputant above] the consequence that the presentation of the approachers and abiders is incorrect.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
261  
RESPONSE: That is also not the assertion of Acarya  Haribhadra because he asserts that the 
forbearances and knowledges are produced sequentially. Hence, Pramanavarttikakarika  
says:  
 
Due to seeing form of concordant qualities,  
The outside of a fish [appears] like the aspect of silver.  Due to this mistaken reason,  
Other excellent qualities are not connected.  
 
If it were l ike that, then since there are many erroneous superimpositions., although [the 
uninterrupted path of the path of seeing] is one instant by way of the force of reasoning, it is 
explained to be sixteen instants by way of isolates. Since the forbearances and knowledges 
are produced sequentially, it is taught that “The presentation of the approachers and abiders 
is correct.”  
 
This is what is asserted by Haribhadra. With respect to this:  
 DISPUTANT: Although all the parts are apprehended, from the point of view  of the ability 
to dispel superimpositions, all the sixteen instants only arise sequentially. Furthermore, the 
ability is attained sequentially by way of one session of meditative equipoise. 
 RESPONSE: This is not correct by way of reasoning. It means that  during subsequent 
attainment sixteen dissimilar ascertaining consciousnesses are generated sequentially; it does not mean that a valid cognizer that induces the ascertaining consciousnesses only 
arises sequentially.  
 This is like the case of the generati on of sequential ascertainments thinking “I have seen 
this place” due to a single direct cognizer even in ordinary beings.  
 Although [all the parts] are apprehended in every way, the explanation that the ability to 
dispel obscurations with respect to them is a valid cognizer does not mean that sixteen dissimilar valid cognizers are produced sequentially in one session of meditative equipoise 
of the path of seeing, because, otherwise it would be meaningless to differentiate [the path 
of seeing] from the vali d cognizer of an ordinary being.  
 The meaning of that is as follows. The reply is that, there is indeed a difference in 
whether or not they are able to abandon the seeds; in ordinary beings, there is a 
consciousness to which an object appears but is not as certained, such that ascertainment is 
not generated although an object has been apprehended by way of direct cognition; however, like it has been taught in [Dharmakirti's Commentary on [Dignaga's] 
'Compendium of Valid Cognition'  (Pramanavarttikakarika )] wi th respect to aryas that “The 
greatly intelligent ones, from seeing, ascertain all aspects,” a consciousness to which an object appears but is not ascertained is not possible in aryas. For, otherwise, the reply that 
“Due to the aspects having become cleare r after that, by that much their consciousness es 
become free from mistaken reasons; by way of just that they are superior,” would be 
meaningless. 
 Therefore, the uninterrupted path that is the dharma forbearance of true sufferings itself is 
generated in th e entity of the eight forbearances, and, by means of it having become valid 
with respect to the dharmata of the four noble truths, it is an uninterrupted path that 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
262 abandons the seeds that are the objects to be abandoned by the path of seeing of all four 
noble truths. 
2B2C -1B2B -3B1A -2C2. Summarizing and indicating the assertion of Acarya [Haribhadra]  
When the dharmata of the four noble truths which has not been directly realized before is 
newly realized in a manner of water placed in water, while it is reaso nable that one is afraid 
of this profound dharma which one  has never previously familiarized with in cyclic 
existence, one is unafraid, whereby it is called “dharma forbearance.” Therefore, there are 
four forbearances by way of isolates comprehending the d harmata of the four noble truths.  
 While it is reasonable that subsequently one is  afraid of that mind in which dharmata has 
become [like] water placed in water, one realizes it without fear, whereby it is called 
“subsequent forbearance.” There are the fo ur subsequent forbearances from the point of 
view of realizing the four object -possessors of the dharmata of the four noble truths, 
differentiated by way of isolates. The eight forbearances exist in the manner of being one 
entity but different isolates. At  that time, a true cessation that is free from adventitious stains 
has not been attained yet.  
 From the point of view of realizing the dharmata of the four noble truths, one is posited 
to realize the object -possessors of that. When one, without arising from that very meditative 
equipoise, attains a true cessation that is free from adventitious stains and generates a 
liberated path, the four dharma forbearances (differentiated by way of isolates) which 
realize the dharmata of the four noble truths, the fo ur subsequent forbearances which realize 
those very object -possessors [as being empty of true existence] , and the eight knowledges 
exist in a manner of one entity and different isolates. Hence the clear realization of truth of a 
single session of meditativ e equipoise is generated in the nature of sixteen instants of 
knowledges and forbearances in one instant. We do not assert in this context that the subsequent forbearances are generated subsequent to having generated the dharma 
forbearances. 
 The path of s eeing being one instant means that the meditative equipoise which is set in 
equipoise on emptiness is a single session, not that it is the shortest limit of time. Also the 
presentation of approachers at the time of abiding on the forbearances, and abiders in the 
result at the time of abiding on the knowledges is correct; at the time of the meditative equipoise, one abides in the nature of powerful ability to practice the yoga that includes the 
six perfections in their entirety in each of [the six perfection s] generosity and so forth, for, 
otherwise, one would not be able to destroy the seeds that are knowledge obscurations.  
 At the time of the subsequent knowledge of true origins, there is no manifest meditation 
on the four immeasurables, love and so forth. However, since these excellent qualities 
(which have been previously meditated on and will be meditated on again later) exist 
without degeneration in the continuum of that person, he does not have the fault of falling 
into the cessation.  
 In regard  to the  way of positing the number of instants of the path of seeing, I do not see 
any difference between this Acarya [Haribhadra] and what occurs in the root text and 
commentary of [Nagarjuna’s] Sixty Stanzas of Reasoning ( Yuktisastikakarika ). However, 
they differ drastically when it comes to whether or not a self- cognizer is asserted and so 
forth.  
 Apart from that, regarding those who do not assert that one realizes the dharmata of true 
origins when one  realizes the dharmata of true sufferings, I see them as a source of many 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
263 faults, such as having to assert that “an object of hearing”125 is a correct sign in the proof 
that sound is impermanent.  
 At the time of being set in meditative equipoise on emptiness, also the Mahayana 
generated mind is present in the continuum of that person, but how can it be necessary for there to be a manifest awareness thinking, “I will attain enlightenment for the bene fit of 
sentient beings”? Understand the other qualities in a similar way.  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1A -2C3. Analyzing the sequence in which the path of seeing that acts to pass through and the 
path of seeing that is to be passed through are generated  
OPINION: Are the t wo—(1) the clear realization that is to passed through, which directly 
realizes the sixteen, impermanence and so forth, and (2) the path of seeing bearing the 
aspect of dharmata —simultaneous or sequential?  
 In the first case [they are simultaneous], when a single mind directly realizes both [the 
sixteen aspects and emptiness] by way of direct cognition, the exalted knowers of modes 
and of varieties would exist as a single entity. That they differ in being an explicit or 
implicit realization is incorrect, b ecause, otherwise, the same would follow on the occasion 
of the path of preparation.  
 In the latter case [they are sequential], if the path of seeing that is to be passed through is 
generated first, then a bodhisattva would need to sequentially abandon th e seeds of the 
acquired afflictions that are the two obscurations; if they are generated in opposite order to 
that [the path of seeing that acts to pass through is generated first], then, after having already 
generated the path of seeing that acts to pass through, one would have to subsequently 
generate a path of seeing that newly realizes the selflessness of persons, whereby it would 
be endless.  
 
RESPONSE: There is no fault, because, although that very path of seeing that acts to pass 
through realizes wit h direct cognition that the sixteen aspects are free from elaboration, it 
does not realize the sixteen aspects. Having exhaustively destroyed the seeds of the acquired afflictions that are the two obscurations by that itself, afterwards a manifest path of seeing 
that is to be passed through which directly realizes the sixteen aspects is generated. 
 The instants [of the path of seeing] explained above are in terms of meditative equipoise; 
as long as one has not been directly set in meditative equipoise on em ptiness in order to 
directly destroy the seeds of the innate afflictions that are obscurations to knowledge, one is 
to be known as being included within the path of seeing.  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1B. Meaning of the branches  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1B -1. Brief indication of the  instants 
2B2C -1B2B -3B1B -2. Extensive explanation of the way to meditate on the aspects  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1B -3. Refuting the assertion that the aspects have not been indicated  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1B -1. Brief indication of the instants 
2B2C -1B2B -3B1B -1A. Root text  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1B -1B. Commentary  
                                              
125 This is in fact a kind of counterfeit sign known as an indeterminate sign  in the proof that sound is 
impermanent . 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
264 2B2C -1B2B -3B1B -1A. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
2.11 By way of four types of instants of the forbearances  
And knowledges with respect to the truths and truths,  
This path of seeing in regard to a knower of paths  
Is explained along with the benefits.  
 
EXPLANATION  
This path of seeing  in the context of a knower of paths is explained along with its 
benefits , because it is explained by way of  the benefits and four types of instants of the 
forbearances and knowledges with respect to the true  sufferings and origins and true  
cessations and paths.  
 Sutra says, “‘Venerable Sariputra , where should the Perfection of Wisdom be sought?’ 
Sariputra  said, ‘Koushika, the Perfection of Wisdom is to be sought in the Subhuti 
chapter.’”  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1B -1B. Co mmentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. On the occasion of a knower of paths, (1 -2) “forbearance and 
dharma knowledge of dharma knowledge and (3- 4) forbearance and subsequent knowledge 
of subsequent knowledge,” that to be meditated on by bodhisattvas , possessing the four 
instants of forbearance and knowledge individually related to true sufferings and so forth, 
possessing excellent qualities of this and others, is described as “the path of seeing, the great 
benefit.”  
 
EXPLANATION  
That  in which emptine ss is to be newly meditated on  by way of direct cognition 
possessing excellent qualities of this life and other lives, such as ripening sentient beings 
on the occasion of a knower of paths, is described as “the path of seeing, the great 
benefit.”  
 This is  because the possession  of each of the four instants of forbearance of dharma 
knowledge and so forth individually related as object and object -possessor to the 
dharmata of true sufferings and so forth by bodhisattvas  is described as “the path of 
seeing bea ring great benefit.”  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1B -2. Extensive explanation of the way to meditate on the aspects  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1B -2A. Making a connection  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1B -2B. Root text  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1B -2C. Commentary  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1B -2A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY  
“How should one meditate on the aspects?”  
 
EXPLANATION  
“How should one meditate on the aspects  of the path of seeing?”  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
265 2B2C -1B2B -3B1B -2B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
2.12 Because in thusness and buddhas, 
Mutual support and supported do not exist,  
Not accepting categorization;  
The great; as well as valid cognizer does not exist;  
 2.13 Immeasurable; without extremes;  
One abiding on that definitely apprehends  Forms and so forth as the state of buddha;  
Not adopted, not discarded, and so forth;  
 
2.14 Love and so forth; emptiness;  
Attaining buddhahood itself;  
Thoroughly included in all the completely pure;  
Dispelling all anxieties and sicknesses;  
 
2.15 Pacifying apprehending nirvana;  
Being guarded by the buddhas and so forth;  
Not killing and so forth,  
The manner of an exalted knower of all aspects,  
 
2.16 Oneself abiding, thereby setting sentient beings;  
Generosity and so forth,  
Dedicating to complete enlightenment –  
These are the instants of the knower of paths. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The Great Lama Lotsawa, referring to the assertions of Acarya  Vimuktisena, explains that 
the entity of sixteen instants of knowledges and forbearances are indicated by the first four 
instants and the benefits by the remaining [instants]. He explains that the benefit of the first 
five instants is indicated by “ without extremes ”; the benefit of the dharma knowledge of 
true origins is indicated by “ One abiding on that definitely apprehends forms and so 
forth as the state of buddha”; the benefit of the subsequent forbearance of true origins is 
indicated by “ Not to be adopted, not to be discarded, and so forth ”; and the benefit of the 
subsequent knowledge [of true origins] is indicated by “ love and so forth”; the benefits of 
the four instants of knowledges and forbearances of true cessations are respect ively 
indicated by “ emptiness ” and so forth until “dispel all anxieties and sicknesses ”; the 
benefits of the four instants of knowledges and forbearances of true paths are respectively indicated by the four below.  
 It is asserted that these dissimilar aspe cts explained here are indicated to be aspects that 
are meditated on the occasion of the path of preparation; by meditating on them in that way, 
one generates the path of seeing, and one also attains these benefits during the occasions 
after that; the sixt een instants are characterized and indicated by them. Although these 
aspects are to be meditated on during the occasion of the path of preparation, these excellent qualities must definitely be possessed on the occasions of the sixteen instants of the path of 
seeing.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
266 2B2C -1B2B -3B1B -2C. Commentary  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1B -2C1. Extensive explanation  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1B -2C2. Summary  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1B -2C1. Extensive explanation  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1B -2C1A. The aspects of [true] sufferings 
2B2C -1B2B -3B1B -2C1B. The aspects of [true] origins  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1B -2C1C. The aspects of [true] cessations 
2B2C -1B2B -3B1B -2C1D. The aspects of [true] paths 
2B2C -1B2B -3B1B -2C1A. The aspects of [true] sufferings 
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. (1) Through just the ultimate mode, there do not exist  the things that 
are the support and the supported regarding thusness and buddhas -  because of that, not 
asserting them as abiding by way of mutual categorizations and (2) through the entitiness of 
the dharmadhatu of forms and so forth, just great and (3) similarly, a valid cognizer of those 
just does not exist, and (4) like the former, through space just being devoid of  measure, they 
are devoid of  measure. The aforesaid like that are the aspects of true sufferings.  
 
EXPLANATION  
(1) Through just the ultima te mode , the exalted wisdom directly realizing the thusness  of 
true sufferings and buddhas does not assert them as abiding by way of  categorizations  
of mutual  support and supported ultimately, because  the things that are the support and 
the supported  do not exist in  them ultimately. By meditating in this way on the occasion 
the dharma forbearance of true sufferings of the path of seeing, one obtains the benefit of the firm exalted wisdom of a buddha in the future.  
 In short, the subject —the exalted wisdom o f dharma forbearance of true sufferings that 
directly realizes that (i) the thusness of true sufferings and (ii) the exalted wisdom that is its object -possessor are not established as the support and the supported ultimately —is the 
aspect of the dharma forbearance of true sufferings , because it is an exalted wisdom of 
dharma forbearance that acts as a direct antidote to the seeds that are the corresponding 
objects of abandonment of dharma forbearance. Know the rest similarly.   Sutra says: “In the thusness of forms, tathagatas are not observed; in the tathagatas, the 
thusness of forms is also not observed.”  
 
(2) Apply similarly as before to “ through  the entitiness of dharmadhatu , the emptiness of 
true existence ultimately with r espect to forms and so forth, its object -possessor, the 
Perfection of Wisdom is  just great.” (3) The subject —the exalted wisdom of subsequent 
forbearance of true sufferings that directly realizes that similarly, a valid cognizer  that 
comprehends those  sufferings ultimately  just does not exist—[apply as before]. (4) The 
exalted wisdom of subsequent knowledge of true sufferings that directly realizes that, like 
the former, through space just being devoid of  measure, those sufferings  being devoid 
of measure  ultimately is the aspect of that [subsequent knowledge of true sufferings]; the 
reason is as before [because it is an exalted wisdom of subsequent knowledge that has 
abandoned  the seeds that are the corresponding objects of abandonment of subsequent 
forbeara nce]. The aforesaid like that are the aspects of true sufferings.  
 
Sutra says:  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
267 • “Because form is just great this Perfection of Wisdom of the great bodhisattvas is just 
great.”  
• “Koushika, because a valid cognizer with respect to forms does not exist, a vali d cognizer 
with respect to this Perfection of Wisdom of the great bodhisattvas does not exist.”  
• “Koushika, because forms are devoid of  measure, this Perfection of Wisdom of the great 
bodhisattvas is devoid of  measure.”  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1B -2C1B . The aspects of [ true] origins  
COMMENTARY 
(1) Through the very  non-existence of entitiness in form s and so forth, the non- existence of 
the very extremes of permanence  and severance , (2) abiding in the Perfection of Wisdom , 
through the entit iness  of dharmadhatu, the definite apprehension of form s and so forth as the 
state of tathagata , (3) similarly, abiding in that, to meditate on all phenomena as neither  
adopted  nor discarded  and (4) to meditate on the four immeasurables of preliminary belief 
as being devoid of  entitiness. The aforesaid  like that  are the aspects of true origins . 
 
EXPLANATION  
(1) The exalted wisdom of dharma forbearance of true origins  that directly realize s the non -
existence of the very extremes of permanence and severance  and so forth through the 
very non- existence of entitiness  ultimately in forms and so forth included within 
contaminated causes, is the aspect of that [dharma forbearance of true origins ]; (2) through 
the entitiness of dharmadhatu, the definite apprehension of forms and so forth as  the 
nature of the state of tathagata , the emptiness of true existence , of an yogi who abides in 
the Perfection of Wisdom  of dharma knowledge of true origins , [is the aspect of that] 
dharma knowledge; (3)  the exalted wisdom of subsequent forbearance of true origins  that, 
similarly, abiding in that  continuity of the Perfection of Wisdom, meditates on all 
phenomena as neither adopted nor discarded ultimately and so forth; and (4)  the exalted 
wisdom of subsequent knowledge of true origins that, by meditating on the four 
immeasurables of preliminary belief as being devoid of  entitiness  ultimately, possesses 
the excellent qualities of meditation in that way, is the aspect of that [subsequent knowledge of true ori gins]. The aforesaid like that are the aspects of true origins. 
 Due to possessing the excellent qualities of the four immeasurables on the occasion of 
subsequent knowledge, the fault of falling into cessation is immediately blocked; they are 
neither medit ated on manifestly at the time of being set in meditative equipoise, nor 
meditated on by dividing meditative equipoise into earlier and later intervals. Sutra says:  
• “Koushika, because form is infinite, this Perfection of Wisdom of the great bodhisattvas 
is infinite.”  
• “Bhagavan, I will hold that which is not separate from this Perfection of Wisdom of the great bodhisattvas of ours as the state of tathagata.”  
• “Bhagavan, the mode of not accepting and not discarding this Perfection of Wisdom [of] great bodhisat tvas until omniscience.”   
• “By way of not observing all sentient beings, others, [they] meditate on love, compassion, joy, and equanimity, whereby humans and non- humans will not find a chance with 
respect to them.”  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
268 2B2C -1B2B -3B1B -2C1C. The aspects of [tru e] cessations 
COMMENTARY  
(1) The primordial entity of forms and so forth  is just empty of only nature, (2) to attain the 
state of tathagata, the result of the roots of virtue which equal dharmadhatu, (3) the antidotes 
being gathered in all ways within the  Perfection of Wisdom, and (4) by that itself, to 
strongly pacify outer and inner harms. The aforesaid like that are the aspects of true cessations. 
 
EXPLANATION  
(1) The exalted wisdom of dharma forbearance of true cessations that directly realizes that  
the primordial entity of forms and so forth is just empty of only the nature  of true 
existence from the beginning, is the aspect of that [dharma forbearance of true cessations];  
(2) the dharma knowledge of true cessations that bears the benefit of attaining the state of 
tathagata, the result of the roots of virtue which equal dharmadhatu,  is the aspect of 
that; (3) the subsequent forbearance of true cessations which possesses the excellent quality 
of the antidotes, the completely pure class  being gathered in all ways within the 
Perfection of Wisdom  of subsequent forbearance of true cessations , [is the aspect of that], 
and (4) the  exalted wisdom of subsequent knowledge of true cessations, by that  subsequent 
knowledge of true cessations  itself, which possesses the excellent quality of strongly 
pacifying outer and inner harms,  is the aspect of that. The aforesaid like that are the 
aspects of true cessations. Sutra says:  
• “That is because those sons or daughters of the lineage thoroughly meditate on inner emptiness by way of not observing it.”  
• “Bhagavan, to what extent does a great bodhisattva hold...” until “...the vinaya with 
respect to the three vehicles is most amazing.”  
• “Bhagavan, to what extent when this profound Perfection of Wisdom is fully held, will the Perfections be fully held?”  
• “Koushika, likewise any son or daughter of the good lineage who holds the Perfection of 
Wisdom, wields it, and so forth will quickly pacify and obliterate those conflicting 
disputes and arguments by the power of the Perfection o f Wisdom.”  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1B -2C1D. The aspects of [true] paths 
COMMENTARY 
(1) By only meditating on the absence  of entitiness, to pacify adherence to forms and so 
forth and to nirvana, (2) upon engaging in wisdom and skillful means, being guarded, protected and hidden by the buddhas, (3) by strongly desiring buddhahood, having abided in 
the exalted -knower of all aspects, oneself to abandon killing and so forth, to set others in 
that itself, and (4) by the desire to make generosity and so forth inexhaustible, one should 
dedicate to perfect complete enlightenment. The aforesaid like that are the aspects of true 
paths.  
 
EXPLANATION  
(1) The exalted wisdom of dharma forbearance with regard  to the path that  pacifies 
adherence to forms and so forth and to nirvana as truly existent by only meditating on 
the absence of entitiness  ultimately , is the aspect of that [dharma forbearance of true 
paths]; (2) that very exalted wisdom of dharma knowledge with regard  to the path that bears 
the benefit of being guarded, protected  and hidden by the buddhas  from the three 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
269 obstacles bearing the nature of action of the gods, evolutes of the elements and sickness  
upon that exalted wisdom of dharma knowledge  engaging in wisdom and skillful means, 
is the aspect of that, (3) the exalted w isdom of subsequent forbearance that bears the 
excellent quality that, by strongly desiring buddhahood, having oneself abided in the 
perfections, the cause of the exalted knower of all aspects, oneself to abandon killing 
and so forth, places others in that  itself, [is the aspect of that]  and (4) the subject—the  
exalted wisdom of subsequent knowledge with regard  to the path that possesses the 
excellent quality of dedicating to perfect complete enlightenment by the desire to make 
the virtues of generosity and  so forth inexhaustible —is the aspect of subsequent 
knowledge with regard  to its path, because it is an exalted wisdom of subsequent knowledge 
with regard  to the path that is the entity of a liberated path in which one has been directly 
liberated from the seeds that are the objects to be abandoned by the path of seeing of paths . 
Alternatively, apply [the reason] exactly as explained above. The aforesaid like that are 
the aspects of true paths. Sutra says:  
• “Koushika, in that way all phenomena are totally pac ified [by] the Perfection of Wisdom 
and they are not increased.”  
• “The sons -of-the-gods of the billionfold world systems who hold this Perfection of 
Wisdom of the great bodhisattvas, wield it, and so forth are always guarded, protected, and hidden continuously.”  
• “I will abandon killing. I will also correctly urge others to abandon killing.”  
• “Koushika, in addition, when the great bodhisattvas practice the six perfections, whatever generosity that is performed will be shared with all sentient beings and fully  dedicated to 
unsurpassable complete enlightenment by way of not observing it.”  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1B -2C2. Summary  
COMMENTARY 
Those like that are the instants of a knower of paths.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Those like that are the instants of a knower of paths. Meditate upon types similar to 
these aspects  also during the subsequent occasions; they are not to be applied only there. 
For, [otherwise,] there will be contradiction with the explanation in the chapter on peak 
application which says, “ That which is those mutually included in each of generosity and so 
forth,” [5 .22bc ].  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1B -3. Refuting the assertion that the aspects have not been indicated  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1B -3A. Describing the assertion  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1B -3B. Refuting it  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1B -3A. Describing the asserti on 
COMMENTARY 
OPINION: Without explaining the meaning of the aspects by way of the passage which emphatically  characterizes the meaning of the verses here, a trifling characterization of the 
sixteen instants of the path of seeing was simply made. One shoul d similarly view the verses 
on the meaning of the partial concordance with definite discrimination which was explained 
and not explained, and so forth.  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
270 EXPLANATION  
OPINION: Without explicitly explaining the meaning of the aspects of the knowledges 
and for bearances of the path of seeing by way of words of the sutra that indicate those 
words and meanings of the passage  of extensive explanation which emphatically  
illustrates  and indicates  the meaning of the subject matter of the verses briefly indicating 
the instants here, by explicitly indicating the benefits that will arise during the subsequent 
occasions , a trifling illustration of the sixteen instants of the path of seeing was simply 
made. Not only that, saying “explained above and,” without explicitly exp laining the 
aspects that are to be meditated upon in those [sections], they were characterized and 
indicated by the subsequent deeds and so forth. The aspects are indicated in the context of 
the 173 aspects.  
2B2C -1B2B -3B1B -3B. Refuting it  
COMMENTARY  
OTHE RS: Because those did not show the stages of meditation, the stages of clear 
realization were not shown even slightly. Furthermore, why do you cite the meaning of the verse “By way of object of observation, aspect,” [1.8 a] and so forth?   
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —those  passages  “Because in thusness and buddhas,” [2.12a] and so forth, 
according to the Acarya and others  agreeing with him —it follows that the stages of clear 
realization were not shown even slightly  by them, because they did not explicitly show 
the stages of how to meditate  on the aspects that are the modes of apprehension of the clear 
realizations. Furthermore, there is the fault of not engaging the meaning of the words of 
the text: why do you cite the meaning of the verse “By way of object of observation, 
aspect,” [1.8 a] and so forth? It follows that citing it should be incorrect, because the 
passages on the partial concordance with definite discrimination in the first chapter do not 
indicate the aspects. Regarding the former [fault], the c onsequence that the title and the 
meaning of the treatise do not concord is flung.  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2. The path of meditation  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2A. Making a connection for the generality  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B. Explaining the individual meanings  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2A. Making a co nnection for the generality  
COMMENTARY 
After the path of seeing, it is  reasonable that the path of meditation is to be described  
immediately . However, …  
 
EXPLANATION  
After the path of seeing, it is reasonable that the path of meditation is to be described 
immediately. However, …  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B. Explaining the individual meanings  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -1. The actions of the path of meditation  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2. The path of med itation which bears the actions 
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -1. The actions of the path of meditation  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -1A. Making a connection  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -1B. Root text  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
271 2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -1C. Commentary  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -1A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
… because just a few  objects are to be described, and trainees will engage in just exerting 
for the result, for the time being, the actions of that:  
 
EXPLANATION  
… for the time being, the actions of that path of meditation will be explained; the reason 
is because just a few objects are to be described, and trainees will engage the cause in  
just exerting for the result and be caused to enter it. 
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -1B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
2.17 They are thorough pacification, bowing down to all,  
Victory over the afflictions,  
Not b eing overwhelmed by harm,  
Enlightenment, and just worship of the support.  
 
EXPLANATION  
There are six actions of the path of meditation, because there are the first four results created by beings, a fifth result which is concordant with the cause, and a sixth 
environmental result.  
 Sutra says respectively:  
• “With this Perfection of Wisdom, the great bodhisattvas are thoroughly subdued in that 
way. To closely abide in order to not to have pride is a great amazement.”  
• “Bhagavan, therefore with this Perfectio n of Wisdom great bodhisattvas will thoroughly 
bow down and closely abide in order not to have pride.”  
• “Thus, daughters of lineage, in this way the weapons of attachment of those who for a 
long time practice the Perfection of Wisdom and one’s arrows of att achment will be 
destroyed.”  
• “Regarding that, someone will not be harmed by any of these: doused with poison, cast 
with spells, thrown into a fire pit, stabbed by weapons, given food or drink mixed with 
poison, and thrown into a river.”  
• “They do not observe all phenomena and attain unsurpassable perfect complete enlightenment, and will look upon all sentient beings.”  
• “With this very Perfection of Wisdom, the location becomes a support of worship of sentient beings.”  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -1C. Commentary  
COMMENTARY  
(1) To act with self- power in the mind in all ways, (2) to bow down to all beings, the 
spiritual guide and so forth, (3) to overcome attachment and so forth, (4) just not being an object for subsequent accomplishment of harms by antagonists, (5) to a ccomplish perfect 
complete enlightenment, and (6) to take the place of support as the very thing to be 
worshipped: are the six types of actions. 
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
272 EXPLANATION  
(1) To act with  self-power with respect to generating higher paths in the mind in all ways, 
(2) by destroying all pride and arrogance, to bow down to all beings, the spiritual guide 
and so forth, (3) without coming under the control of afflictions, to overcome attachment 
and so forth instead , (4) just not being an object for subsequent accomplishment o f 
harms  of poisons, weapons, spells, and the like by antagonists, (5) to accomplish perfect 
complete enlightenment by one’s own strength, and (6) to take the place of support 
where a bodhisattva who has cultivated the path of meditation has stayed at as th e very 
thing to be worshipped: are the six types of actions.  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2. The path of meditation which bears the actions  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2A. Making a connection by indicating the divisions  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B. The individual entities  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2A. M aking a connection by indicating the divisions  
COMMENTARY 
After the actions, the path of meditation, by the particularities of being with contamination 
and without contamination, is of two types.  
 
EXPLANATION  
After the actions, the path of meditation. Furt her, that is of two types, by the 
particularities of being with  the contamination and without  the contamination  of 
conceptions . 
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B. The individual entities  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1. The contaminated path of meditation  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2. The uncon taminated path of meditation  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1. The contaminated path of meditation  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1A. Making a connection by way of the divisions  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1B. Explaining the individual meanings  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1C. Summary  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1A. Making a connection by way of the divisions  
COMMENTARY 
Because of that, from among the “attention to belief, dedication , and rejoicing” path s of 
meditation with contamination, …  
 
EXPLANATION  
Because of that, from among the “attention to belief, dedication , and rejoicing” path s of 
meditation with contamination, …   
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1B. Explaining the individual meanings  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1B -1. Belief  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1B -2. Dedication  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1B -3. Rejoicing  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1B -1. Belief  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B-2B1B -1A. Actual  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1B -1B. Benefits 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
273 2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1B -1A. Actual  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1B -1A1. Making a connection  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1B -1A2. Root text  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1B -1A3. Commentary 
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1B -1A1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
… the first path of meditation, “attention to belief”:  
 
EXPLANATION  
… the first path of meditation, “attention to belief”:  
 
Regarding the positing of these as contaminated, that which is with the conception which 
apprehends a sound -generality and a meaning -generality as suitable to be mixed is posited 
as being with contamination; these are not contaminateds that are included wi thin the 
objects of abandonment, (i) because it is that which a bodhisattva repeatedly generates with 
effort on the occasions of subsequent [attainment] of the path of meditation as a branch of 
completing the accumulation of merit, and (ii) because no arya  would generate an object 
that is to be abandoned by the path of meditation with effort.  
 If it were an object of abandonment, it must be taken as an object to be abandoned by the 
path of meditation; no one would [assert] a common locus between an object of abandonment of a Mahayana arya and a Mahayana path of meditation.  
 In [Asanga’s] Summary of Manifest Knowledge  (Abhidharmasamuccaya ), the 
contaminated is explained to be pervaded by being an object of abandonment; taking that as 
a proof is irrelevant, because that is a contaminated that is an affliction. If there were no 
conception which apprehends a sound- generality and meaning -generality as suitable to be 
mixed on the eighth ground and above, then there would not be the slightest need for hidden 
phenomena to be taken as object s.  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1B -1A2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
2.18 Belief is to be known  As being of three types: one’s welfare,  
One’s and others’ welfare, and others’ welfare.  
Further, they are asserted to be individually  
 
2.19 Of three types: small, middling, and great. 
Moreover, they are of three types by way of the divisions:  
The small of the small and so forth. In this way, It is asserted to be of twenty -seven types. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the Mahayana path of meditation of belief—is to be known as  being of three 
types , because there are the beliefs of one’s welfare, one’s and others’ welfare s, and 
others’ welfare . The subject —further, those three beliefs —are asserted to be 
individually of three types  each, because each has three : small, middling, and great. The 
subject —moreover, the small, middling, and great —are  each of three types  by way of the 
divisions:  the small of the small and so forth. In this way, belief is asserted to be of 
twenty -seven types . 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
274 2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1B -1A3. Com mentary 
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. The very observation of one’s, both, and others’ welfares, although 
being the support of the virtuous qualities which are seen in accordance with  how they are 
believed, from having mastered the path of meditatio n, also the entity which is not 
actualized at the beginning is of three types. Further those are each of three types by way of 
the particularities, the small and so forth. Moreover, those are individually of three types by 
way of the divisions, the small o f the small so forth.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —also the entity of the Mahayana path of meditation of belief —is of three 
types , because there are three by means of the very observation of one’s, both, and 
others’ welfares. The subject —the Mahayana path of meditation of belief—there is a 
reason for not actualizing  it at the beginning  of the arya paths, because, although being 
the support of the Perfection of Wisdom itself, the object of belief, the virtuous qualities 
which are  seen in accordance with how the  Mothers are believed  as the source of the 
three welfares , it is a path that is attained from having mastered  the mundane  path of 
meditation  that is pure subsequent attainment. The subject —further those three beliefs —
are each of three types , each by way of  the particularities, the small and so forth. The 
subject —moreover, those, the small and so forth —are individually of three types  each,  
by way of the divisions, the small of the  small so forth. 
 
In summary:  
COMMENTARY  
In this way, by means of three sets of nine, twenty -seven types of belief.  
 
EXPLANATION  
In this way, by means of  three sets of nine, twenty -seven types of belief. In general, an 
object of belief is a meaning that has been determined by scripture and reasoning. However, 
the objects of the pa th of meditation of belief are the textual, path and resultant Perfection of 
Wisdom.  
 Its entity is the faith of conviction and lucid faith, which are faiths attained by way of the 
conviction that the three types of Perfection of Wisdom are the source of t he three welfares, 
during the subsequent attainment that is attained from the force of meditating on the path 
Perfection of Wisdom during meditative equipoise.  
 In terms of (i) the occasion of not having abandoned the pride of I, (ii) the occasion of 
having realized that oneself and others are equal, and (iii) the occasion of engaging only in others’ welfare in all ways, it seems like the divisions have been posited on (i) the seven impure grounds, (ii) the eighth and ninth grounds, and (iii) the tenth grou nd. However, those 
are in terms of the principal ones; there is no contradiction in positing that they exist during all nine  subsequent attainments of the path of meditation.   
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1B -1B. Benefits 
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1B -1B1. Making a connection  
2B2C-1B2B -3B2B -2B1B -1B2. Root text  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1B -1B3. Commentary 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
275 2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1B -1B1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY  
“In order that the bodhisattvas who meditate on that generate enthusiasm, the buddhas and 
so forth make praises and so forth tow ards belief in that way” —praises, eulogies and 
laudations:  
 
EXPLANATION  
“There is a purpose for the buddhas and so forth to make praises and so forth towards  
meditating on belief in that way , because it is i n order that the bodhisattvas who 
meditate on that  belief generate enthusiasm” —praises, eulogies and laudations : 
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1B -1B2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
2.20 On the occasions of belief  
In the Perfection s of Wisdom,  
By means of three sets of nine, they are asserted  
To be praised, eulogized, an d lauded.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —on the occasions of belief in the textual, path and resultant Perfection s of 
Wisdom  as the source of the three welfares —they are asserted to be praised, eulogized, 
and lauded, because they are taught to be praised, eulogi zed, and lauded  by means of three 
sets of nine. 
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1B -1B3. Commentary 
COMMENTARY 
On all occasions —the first, second , and third attentions to belief which engaged in the 
Perfection of Wisdom, with the characteristic of the qualities which are seen in accordance 
with how they are believed —respectively higher and higher by nine types individually, 
cause manifest joy and are asserted to be praised, eulogized, and lauded.  
 Thus these praises and so forth bear the characteristic of realizing facts  just as they are  in 
reality; they are not the entity of flattery.  
 
EXPLANATION  
They are asserted to be praised, eulogized, and laud ed. On which occasions? On all 
occasions —the first, second and third attentions to belief which engaged  with the aspect 
of conviction in the object of belief, the Perfection of Wisdom, with the characteristic of 
the qualities which are seen in accordance w ith how  the Mothers are believed  to be the 
source of the three welfares —by also causing manifest joy and  making praise and so forth 
by means of the later ones being superior, respectively higher and higher  compared to the 
former ones by nine types individu ally. 
 The subject —thus these praises and so forth —are not the entity of ingratiatory 
flattery  not abiding in accordance with fact, because the praises and so forth are made 
motivated by that bearing the characteristic of realizing facts just as they are i n reality  
according to how the excellent qualities exist. 
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1B -2. Dedication  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1B -2A. Making a connection  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
276 2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1B -2B. Root text  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1B -2C. Commentary  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1B -2A. Making a connection  
COMMEN TARY  
In regard  to belief in that way, since dedication arises, the second “attention to dedication”:  
 
EXPLANATION  
In regard  to belief in that way, since dedication arises, the second “attention to 
dedication”:   
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1B -2B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
2.21 The action of that  
Special thorough dedication is superior;  
That bearing the aspect of not observing;  The characteristic of not being erroneous;  
 2.22 Devoid; bearing the object of utilization that recollects  
The nature of the buddhas’ accumulation of merit;  
Together with means; signless;  
Rejoicing by the buddhas;  
 
2.23 Not included in the three realms;  
The other dedications are the three types  
Of small, middling, and great, 
The nature of being a source of great merit.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The action of that dedication of an arya on the path of meditation, the  special thorough 
dedication,  is superior to the other dedications —because it is an unsurpassable dedication 
that transforms all one’s and others’ roots of virtue into the branches of enlightenment. 
Sutra says, “A bodhisattva abides closely in order to subdue sentient beings and so forth; the 
things that are meritorious activities possessing rejoicing are  shared with all sentient beings 
and dedicated to unsurpas sable complete enlightenment by way of not observing them.”   
 The nature of dedication, the stopping of adherence —to (i) the substance that is to be 
dedicated, (ii) the mind that acts to dedicate, and (iii) the dedicator—as truly existent, is 
indicated by  “that bearing the aspect of not observing;  the characteristic of not being 
erroneous ; devoid. ” The stopping of adherence to one’s own virtue and the buddhas’ virtue 
as good or bad is indicated by “ bearing the object of utilization that recollects the natu re 
of the buddhas’ accumulation of merit.” The stopping of adherence to the virtue of the six perfections as good or bad is indicated by “ together with means .” The stopping of 
[adherence to] the three spheres with respect to all dedications as truly existe nt is indicated 
by “signless.” Having understood dependent -arisings as illusions conventionally, dedicating 
towards buddha ground and not dedicating towards the causes of cyclic existence are respectively indicated by the two lines “ Rejoicing by the buddha s; Not included in the 
three realms .” The other dedications are the three types  by means of types, because 
there are three types by means of small, middling, and great dedication with the nature of 
being a source of great merit. 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
277 2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1B -2C. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. (1) The special belief that has been  explained, (2) not observing, (3) 
not erroneous, (4) devoid, (5) recollecting  the nature of the tathagatas’ accumulation of 
merit, (6) together with skill in means, (7) sign less, (8) permitted by the buddhas, (9) not 
included in the three realms, and (10) small, (11) middling, and (12) great, giving rise to 
great merit. The attentions imputed with the aforesaid names in that way, respectively do 
not observe and observe: (1) u nsurpassable enlightenment, (2) the aggregates of ethics  and 
so forth, (3) the mind that acts to dedicate, (4) the thing possessing a self and so forth, (5) the virtues of the buddhas of the three times, (6) generosity and so forth, (7) signs, (8) all 
paths, (9) the desire realm and so forth, (10) the paths of action of the ten virtues and so 
forth, (11) stream -enterers and so forth, (12) to abide in unsurpassable enlightenment. With 
those possessing the action of causal entity  that show the path to sentien t beings who are to 
be subdued by the three vehicles, in order to make [virtues] inexhaustible for the benefit of 
all sentient beings, they make twelve types of dedication towards unsurpassable perfect 
complete enlightenment.  
 
EXPLANATION  
They make twelve  types of dedication towards unsurpassable perfect complete 
enlightenment; the purpose is in order to make [virtues] inexhaustible for the benefit of 
all sentient beings . They are dedications by means of being conjoined with special method 
and wisdom, beca use they are dedications (i) conjoined with the wisdom realizing [the 
corresponding objects] to not be observed  as truly existent, and that observe them as 
existing conventionally , [and] (ii) conjoined with those  methods possessing the action of 
causal entity that show the path to sentient beings who are to be subdued by the three 
vehicles  in accordance with their fortunes. 
 What are those twelve? Correlate the attentions imputed with the names in that way, 
[for instance]  (1) “ the dedication that has tak en as its object the  belief that has been  
explained, the special attention [superior] to the virtues of hearers and solitary realizers,”  
respectively  with being whatever dedication, [for instance] “is a dedication that does not 
observe (1) unsurpassable enlightenment as existing ultimately but observes it as existing 
conventionally.”  
 (2) The dedication that does not observe  the object to be dedicated is a dedication that 
does not observe (2) the aggregates of ethics  and so forth as existing ultimately but 
observes them [as existing conventionally].  (3) The dedication bearing the name “ not erroneous ” is a dedication that does not 
observe (3) the mind that acts to dedicate as existing ultimately but observes it [as 
existing conventionally]. Apply this [patte rn of correlation] also to the ones below.  
 The meaning is as follows. (4) The subject—the path of meditation of unsurpassable 
attention to dedication indicated here —is called “a dedication ultimately devoid  of a 
dedicator,” because it is a dedication tha t does not observe (4) the thing  that is the dedicator 
possessing a self  and so forth as existing ultimately but observes it as existing 
conventionally. Apply similarly to all of the above and the below.  
  (5) The dedication bearing the name “ recollecting the nature of the tathagatas’ 
accumulation of merit” is a dedication conjoined with the wisdom that does not observe (5) the virtues of the buddhas of the three times as existing ultimately but dedicates them 
towards enlightenment conventionally. 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
278  (6) That bearing the name “ together with skill in means ” is a dedication that does not 
observe (6) generosity and so forth as existing ultimately but observes them as existing 
conventionally. (7) That bearing the name “ signless ” is a dedication that refutes ultima te (7) 
signs. (8) That bearing the name “ permitted by the buddhas ” does not observe  (8) all 
paths  as existing ultimately and dedicates them towards enlightenment conventionally. (9) 
That bearing the name “ not included in the three realms ” does not observe (9) the desire 
realm and so forth as existing ultimately and dedicates all roots of virtue towards 
enlightenment conventionally.  
 (10) The “ small dedication giving rise to great merit” is a dedication that does not 
observe the virtues of placing sentient beings of the billionfold systems in  (10) the paths of 
action of the ten virtues and so forth  as existing ultimately and transforms them into a 
branch of enlightenment conventionally. Correlate (11) “ the middling dedication giving 
rise to great merit” with  “virtues of placing sentient beings in [the states of] (11) stream -
enterers and so forth.” Correlate (12) “ the great dedication giving rise to great merit ” 
with “virtues of placing sentient beings (12) in unsurpassable enlightenment.”   
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1 B-3. Rejoicing  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1B -3A. Making a connection  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1B -3B. Root text  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1B -3C. Commentary  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1B -3A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
The things which have been well dedicated in that way, due to being objects to be increased, 
the third, the “attention to rejoicing”:  
 
EXPLANATION  
The things that are virtues of oneself and others which have been well dedicated towards 
unsurpassable enlightenment in that way, due to being objects to be increased higher and  
higher, the third, the “attention to rejoicing”:  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1B -3B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
2.24 By way of method and not observing,  
Rejoicing in roots of virtue  
Is described here as the meditation  
Of attention to rejoicing.  
 
EXPLANATION  
It is described  in this  context  as the contaminated meditation of attention to rejoicing. 
The lucid faith concomitant with mental happiness that cultivates joy in the roots of virtue  
of oneself and others by way of  being conjoined with the method  that realizes the roots of 
virtue as existing conventionally like illusions  and the wisdom that does not observe  them 
as existing ultimately is described as rejoicing.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
279 2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1B -3C. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. With a very joyful mind, through observi ng the roots of virtue (by 
way of method) as existing conventionally, by way of just not observing them as existing 
ultimately, they are the objects to be rejoiced in.   
 
EXPLANATION  
With a very joyful mind towards the  roots of virtue of oneself and others , through 
observing the roots of virtue (by way of the method  increasing virtues higher and higher ) 
as existing conventionally, by way of just being conjoined with the wisdom realizing that they are not observed as existing ultimately, they are the objects  to be rejoiced in. 
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B1C. Summary  
COMMENTARY 
Regarding that, the summary is this: attention to belief strongly composes merit like gold nuggets from a mine; attention to dedication makes the limbs of perfect complete 
enlightenment like ornaments by a goldsmith; attention to rejoicing attains the equality of 
the produced merit of oneself and others. 
 
EXPLANATION  
Regarding that, the summary  of the functions of the three is this: attention to belief 
strongly composes  extensive merit newly like finding gold nuggets from a mine . The 
subject —attention to dedication —accomplishes special action, because it makes  virtues 
into the limbs of perfect complete enlightenment like  the transforming of the gold 
nuggets into ornaments by a goldsmith. The subject —attention to rejoicing  –with the 
previous predicate [accomplishes special action], because it attains the equality of the produced merit of oneself and others  as if oneself created the virtues that have been 
establishe d in others’ continua.  
2B2C -1B2B-3B2B -2B2. The uncontaminated path of meditation  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2A. Making a connection by way of the divisions  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B. The individual entities   
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2A. Making a connection by way of the divisions  
COMMENTARY 
After the contami nated, the path of meditation without contamination. Further, it is of two 
types.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —further, the path of meditation without contamination  which arises after 
the contaminated —is of two types, because there are two, a path of meditatio n of 
achieving and a path of meditation of purity.  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B. The individual entities  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -1. The path of meditation of achieving  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2. The path of meditation of purity  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -1. The path of meditation  of achieving  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -1A. Making a connection  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
280 2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -1B. Root text  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -1C. Commentary  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -1A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
Because of that, the first, the path of meditation with the characteristic  of strongly 
achieving:  
 
EXPLANATION  
Because  there are two uncontaminated paths of meditation, the first, the path of 
meditation with the characteristic of strongly achieving:  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -1B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
2.25 The entit iness  of that is just supreme,  
Not strongly composing with respect to all,  
Bestowing without observing phenomena , 
The great aim itself.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The path of meditation of achieving is of five types, because there are those related to entity, 
distinguished result, functio n, temporal excellent qualities, and final excellent qualities.   
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -1C. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. (1) To see forms and so forth non- erroneously is the entit iness . (2) 
That others will not attain buddhahood is just su preme. (3) The application realizing the 
absence  of production, an attribute of all phenomena, does not strongly compose any. (4) To 
generate in the continua of yogis, phenomena are just not observed by  the paths which 
possess such entity itself and so forth , is to bestow. (5) Because of enacting the great aim, 
buddhahood, the great aim itself.  
 
EXPLANATION  
(1) The subject —the exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise of the second ground —is the 
entitiness  of the path of meditation of achieving, because, as it says in sutra, “The 
Perfection of Wisdom is very pure, therefore it illuminates,” it is a subsequent clear realization that sees the mode of abidance of forms and so forth non- erroneously. (2) It is 
just the supreme  method , because, while buddhahood is  not attained by others , such as 
generosity that is not conjoined with it, it is attained through the force of being conjoined 
with it.  
(3) The application realizing the absence  of production, an attribute of all phenomena, 
does not strongly compose a ny as truly existent. Sutra says: “Furthermore, because forms 
and so forth until  omniscience are not to be strongly achieved, the Perfection of Wisdom is 
to be strongly achieved.”  (4) A path of meditation of achieving possesses special temporal result s, becau se it bestows  
special temporal result s in the continua of yogis. That follows, because it generates [special 
temporal result s] in the continua of yogis by means of being conjoined with the wisdom 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
281 realizing that phenomena are just not observed by the paths which possess attributes of 
such entity itself, result, action, and so forth.  
(5) It enacts the final result, the great aim itself, because it  enacts the great aim, 
buddhahood. Sutra says: “By what categorization is this Perfection of Wisdom great? 
Regardi ng the Perfection of Wisdom, forms are not great and are not small.”  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2. The path of meditation of purity  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2A. Attribute of cause  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2B. Objects 
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2C. Results 
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2D. Attribute of entity  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2A. Attribute of cause  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2A1. Making a connection  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2A2. Root text  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2A3. Commentary 
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2A1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
After that, by means  of dispelling the doubt wondering what the causes of the generation 
and the non- generation of this are, which will be attained by fully holding to some and 
forsaking some, second, the characteristics of the very pure. 
 
EXPLANATION  
After that path of medit ation of achieving, the second , the path of meditation with the 
characteristics of the very pure will be explained, by means of dispelling the doubt 
wondering what the causes of the generation and the non- generation of this are, which 
will be attained by fully holding to some  conducive conditions and forsaking some  
adverse conditions.  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2A2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
2.26abc  Devotion to the buddhas, generosity and so forth,   
And any skill in means  
Are the causes of belief in this. 
 
EXPLANATIO N 
These three are the causes of belief in this  path of meditation of purity: the outer condition 
of devotion to the buddhas, the inner condition s of generosity and so forth, and any skill 
in means  of union of calm abiding and special insight . 
 
Sutra says:  
• “Great bodhisattva, by devoting oneself to the countless buddhas of the world systems of 
the ten directions, rays of light will come forth and be generated.”  
• “When the first mind [of enlightenment] is generated, one practices the perfection of generosity.”   
• “Any great bodhisattva, having generated the first mind [of enlightenment] and held it closely, strives by way of not observing this profound mother.”  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
282 ROOT TEXT  
2.26d The causes of being bereft of qualities  
 
2.27 Are being oppressed by maras,  
Not believ ing in the profound Dharma,  
Adhering to the aggregates and so forth, and  
Being s eized by negative companions.  
 
EXPLANATION  
There are four causes of being bereft of qualities  such as the path of meditation of 
achieving : being oppressed by maras, disbelief in the profound Dharma, adhering to 
the aggregates and so forth, and  being  seized by negative companions . 
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2A3. Commentary 
COMMENTARY  
“(1) To please the buddhas, (2) to complete the perfections of generosity and so forth, and 
(3) skill  in calm abiding ” are the causes for generation. “(1) Being harmed by maras, (2) 
not believing in the profound Dharma, (3) to hold to things, and (4) to keep company with non-virtuous companions” are the causes for non -generation.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The conducive conditions are the causes for  generating  a path of meditation of achieving: 
“(1) for the sake of fully completing the qualities of a buddha, to please the buddhas , (2) 
to complete the perfections of generosity and so forth, and (3) skill in calm abiding that 
has attained special meditative stabilization.”  
 There are four causes for not generating  a path of meditation, because there are the 
four:  (1) due to not having collected virtue in the past, being  harmed by maras, and so 
forth.  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2B. Objects 
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2B1. Making a connection  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2B2. Root text  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2B3. Commentary 
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2B1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
Having explained the causes of attaining and not att aining in that way; the complete purity 
of this occasion, in general:  
 
EXPLANATION  
Having explained the causes for attaining and not attaining in that way; the complete 
purity of this occasion, in general: 
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2B2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
2.28 The results are pure. Forms and so forth  
Are just pure. Because of what?  
Since those two are not different and  
They are not delineated, they are described as purity.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
283  
EXPLANATION  
If the results of the modes of a trainee -in-virtue  are pure  in being free from their 
corresponding stains, then  their objects, forms and so forth are  also just pure  in being free 
from those very stains . Because of what? Since those two purities (that are devoid of the 
one object to be free from) are not different by means of different entities of specific 
characteristics  and they are not delineated  by means of different types , therefore they are 
described as being one type of purity.  
 Sutra says: “Subhuti, that which is the purity of forms is the purity of results.”  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2B3. Commentary 
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. That which is a result of the modes of a trainee -in-virtue of arya 
persons, that which is the purity by way of separation from all discordant classes, is the 
purity of forms and so  forth, by way of the purities of the results and forms and so forth 
being distinguished  by having separated from adherence to forms and so forth as self. 
Because of what? The purities of those are not different and are not delineated, their specific 
and general characteristics are not different. Because of that, purity is described in that way.  
 
EXPLANATION  
There is a reason for describing  the results and forms and so forth in that way  as being one 
type of purity  in being free of the one object to be free from, because their purities of being 
devoid of the one object to be free from  are not different by way of the entitiness of their 
specific and general characteristics not being different. Because of what reason ? 
Because the purities  of those  results and f orms and so forth are not different by way of 
entitiness and are not delineated as different types by valid cognition. That follows, 
because —by way of the purities  of the results , the liberated paths, and forms and so 
forth , their objects, being distinguis hed by having separated from the objects of 
abandonment of the corresponding liberated paths, the seeds of adherence and so forth to 
forms and so forth as a self of persons —they are pure in being devoid of the one object to 
be free from.  
 Hence, “That which is the purity of results itself is the purity of forms and so forth” is 
explained in sutra, because that which is a liberated path, a result of the modes of a 
trainee -in-virtue of arya persons  of the three vehicles  is the purity in being  free from also 
those very stains of their objects, forms and so forth, by way of separation from all its 
corresponding discordant classes, whereby it is explained  in that way.  
 The meaning is as follows. It is not indicated that when a yogi himself exhaus ts all stains, 
all his objects are devoid of all stains. If it were like that, there would be the consequence that when a being attains buddhahood, later ones would [attain buddhahood] without relying 
on the effort of meditating on the path.  
 Then what does it mean? When that very person becomes devoid of stains, his objects, 
forms and so forth also become devoid of those very objects of abandonment in his 
continuum. Therefore, when that very yogi observes forms and so forth, an appearance that 
is dissimil ar to the previous dawns, like  in the case of dependent- arisings appearing as 
illusions for a person who has realized dependent -arisings to be empty of true existence.  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2C. Results 
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2C1. Making a connection  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
284 2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2C2. Root text  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2C3. Commentary 
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2C1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
Having expressed purity in general, in particular:  
 
EXPLANATION  
Having expressed purity in general, in particular: 
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2C2.  Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
2.29 Because of the afflictive, the knowledge, and having diminished  
Those of the three paths, the purities of the learners,  
The rhinoceroses, and the v ictors ’ children.  
The buddhas’ is exceptional in all ways.   
 
EXPLANATION  
Hearers, solitary realizers, and bodhisattvas on the path of meditation have a purity that is 
the purity in being free126 of some stains, because hearer and solitary realizer foe -destroyers 
are devoid respectively of the afflictive obscurations and  the knowledge  obscurations that 
adhere to forms and so forth as external objects , and the latter [bodhisattvas on the path of 
meditation] have abandoned and diminished  some seeds that are obscurations of the three 
paths.  Those purities are called “ the purities of the learn ers, the rhinoceroses, and the 
victors’ children.”  
 The subject —the  purity of complete buddhas —is said to be “ exceptional in all ways,” 
because it is a final purity. Sutra says, respectively:  
• “These —the purity of attachment, hatred, and ignorance, and the purity of forms and so 
forth —are not dualistic and are not to be taken as dualistic.”  
• “By the purity of ignorance, the purity of compositional factors.”  
• “By the purity of the perfection of generosity, the purity of the perfection of ethics .”  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B-2B2B -2C3. Commentary 
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. Because of having abandoned: (1) t he afflictions of attachment and 
so forth, (2) that and one part of the knowledge obscurations, the conceptualizations of 
apprehended objects, and (3) the three  obscurations of the paths of the three vehicles, they 
are respectively the purities of (1) hearers, (2) solitary realizers, and (3) bodhisattvas.  
 Because of having abandoned the afflictive and knowledge obscurations as well as their 
imprints in all ways, the exceptional purity arisen from dharmadhatu is asserted to be that of 
unsurpassable buddhas.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The abandonments in the continua of hearer and solitary realizer foe -destroyers are called 
“purities of (1) hearers and (2) solitary realizers ,” because they are separations in their 
continua in which  (1) the afflictive  obscurations  of attachment and so forth, and (2) that 
                                              
126 Ci rigs pa  emended to read ci rigs pas.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
285 afflictive obscurations  and one part of the knowledge obscurations, the 
conceptualizations of apprehended objects  in which forms  and so forth are adhered to as 
external objects , have been abandoned respectively. The abandonment in the continua of 
(3) arya bodhisattvas on the path of meditation is the purity of bodhisattvas , because it is a 
separation in their continua in which some  of (3) the three obscurations —the afflictive 
obscurations and the two knowledge obscurations —of the paths of the three vehicles, have 
been abandoned.  The subject —the exceptional purity  in being free from all adventitious 
stains, that very pure nature  arisen from dharmadhatu —is asserted to be the purity  of 
unsurpassable buddhas, because it is a separation in which the afflictive and knowledge 
obscurations as well as their imprints have been abandoned in all ways.  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2D. Attribute of entity  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2D1. The difference between being and not being exceptionally pure 
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2D2. Proving the exceptional purity of buddhas  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2D1. The difference between being and not being exceptionally pure 
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2D1A. Question  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2D1B. Reply 
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2D1A. Question  
COMMENTARY 
QUALM: Incidental to mentioning purity on the occasion of the knower of paths, what is 
the explanation of the purity of the buddhas and hearers and so forth respectively as being 
exceptional and the other like?  
 
EXPLANATION  
QUALM: Incidental to mentioning purity on the occasion of the knower of paths, what 
is the explanation of the purity of the buddhas and hearers and so forth respectively as 
being exceptiona l and the other like ? On the occasion of explaining the purity of the 
bodhisattvas’ path of meditation, it is not time for the purities of the others.  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2D1B. Reply 
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2D1B -1. Root text  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2D1B -2. Commentary  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2D1B -1. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
2.30 On the nine levels, the antidotes to the stains,  
The great of the great and so forth,  
The paths that are the small of the small and so forth,  
Are pure.  
 
EXPLANATION  
By having made the divi sions of purity, which is the result, the divisions of a bodhisattva’s 
path of meditation, which are the causes that act to purify, are also established. Hence there 
is no fault that it is not time [to explain the purities of the others].  
 How are they [th e divisions of a bodhisattva’s path of meditation] established? The purity 
of buddhas is exceptional, whereas the purities of hearers and solitary realizers are not 
exceptional. The antidotes to the stains, that act to destroy  [stains] (from  the great of the 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
286 great, [until] the small of the small  and so forth conceptualizations of apprehendeds and 
apprehenders, the objects to be abandoned by the path of meditation that exist  on the nine 
levels  of the three realms), the paths that are the small of the small Mahayana path of 
meditation and so forth, are paths that act to purify  both obscurations . However, the paths 
of meditation127 of hearers and solitary realizers are not able to directly extinguish all stains.  
 Here [Haribhadra’s] Great Commentary explains the two: (i) our system which, having 
taken the nine levels to be the nine levels of the three realms, teaches them to be the mind  
support of paths, and (ii) others’ system , which teach es (a) the explanation that the mind  
support are the nine levels as referri ng to the six concentrations and the first three formless 
absorptions, and (b) the explanation here of the nine, the desire realm and so forth, as 
referring to the path Perfection of Wisdom not abiding ultimately in the three realms.  
 It is said that the explanation that [the path  of meditation ] are not supported on minds of 
the desire realm and of the Peak of Existence is in terms of hearers who are not skilled in 
method. According to what is overtly stated in this commentary, it is clear that the nine 
levels have been taken as supports of the objects of abandonment.  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2D1B -2. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
Because, as entities of antidotes to the nine types of discordant class, the great of the great 
and so forth on the nine levels —the desire re alm, the concentrations and the formless 
absorptions —respectively the nine types of path, the small of the small and so forth, are the 
causes that completely purify all types and the other, they are said to be exceptionally pure 
and the other. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The purity of the complete buddhas is  said to be exceptionally pure, and the other , the 
purities of hearers and solitary realizers , not exceptionally pure, because, as entities of 
antidotes to the nine types of discordant class,  the great of the great obj ects to be 
abandoned by the path of meditation  and so forth, which exist in dependence on the nine 
levels —the desire realm, the four concentrations and the four formless absorptions —
respectively the nine types of Mahayana path  of meditation , the small of the small and so 
forth, are the antidotes that purify  all types of obscurations, and the other, the paths of 
meditation of hearer and solitary realizers aryas, are the causes that completely purify the 
trifling objects of abandonment.   
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2D2. Proving the exceptional purity of buddhas  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2D2A. Making a connection  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2D2B. Root text  
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2D2C. Commentary 
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2D2A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
QUESTION: How is it exceptional?  
 
EXPLANATION  
QUESTION: How is the purity of the complete buddhas  exceptional?  
                                              
127 Sgom lam gyi  emended to read sgom lam gyis.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
287 2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2D2B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
2.31 By having dispelled dispute regarding those,  
The path —by way of comprehenders and the objects to be comprehend ed  
Being just equal —is asserted to be  
The very antidote of the three realms.  
 
EXPLANATION  
DISPUTANT: In your system, it follows that impure other- powered phenomena are truly 
existent, because the objects to be damaged are established as the nine division s of objects 
of abandonment; it follows that real other- powered phenomena also are truly existent, 
because those which act to damage are established as the nine divisions of antidotes.  
 
RESPONSE: That is a dispute that holds the two truths as contradictory . An argument about 
the sequence of generation of the antidotes and the sequence of cessation of the objects of 
abandonment is an argument that is based upon the conventional.  
 This follows from the previous root text, “The buddhas’ is exceptional in all ways.” 
[2.29d]. The subject —a bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise of the path  
of meditation —is asserted to be the very antidote that purifies all the obscurations of the 
three realms  without exception, because, by means of having dispelled  dispute regarding 
those  sequences of the antidotes and the objects of abandonment, it is established to be the 
antidote to those objects of abandonment. That follows, because it directly destroys those 
objects of abandonment by way of realizing with direc t cognition that consciousnesses that 
are comprehenders and the objects to be comprehended are  just equal  in not existing 
ultimately.   
2B2C -1B2B -3B2B -2B2B -2D2C. Commentary 
COMMENTARY 
By means of dispelling the dispute, “Regarding that, the antidotes that are the great of the great and so forth, the discordant classes that are the small of the small and so forth are 
reasonable,” through the analogy of a washerman’s prolonged effort to clean a subtle stain 
adhering to a cloth, because that exceptional path o f meditation itself which has been 
shown, consciousnesses and the objects to be known bearing the aspects of the three realms are just equal through just not observing them, is the very entity  of the antidotes to all, the 
purity of the buddhas is presented  as being exceptional.  
 
EXPLANATION  
DISPUTANT: The sequence of generation of the antidotes and the sequence of cessation of the objects of abandonment which have been explained are incorrect. Regarding that, in 
the way  a strong slayer is needed for a strong enemy, when the objects to be abandoned by 
the path of meditation are gradually ceased at first from the great of the great, it is correct 
for the antidotes  that are the great of the great path of meditation, and so forth  to be 
generated sequentially. In the way  a strong slayer is not needed for a weak enemy, in order 
to cease  the discordant classes that are the small of the small and so forth, the antidote 
that is the small of the small  is reasonable. Hence when ceas ing the small of the small 
object of abandonment of the path of meditation at the end, it is reasonable to generate the 
small of the small path of meditation at the end.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 2: The Knower of Paths  
 
288  (Alternatively, apply to the dispute: “It is correct to generate the antidotes from t he 
greater sequence, and it is reasonable to cease the discordant classes from the smaller 
sequence.”)  
 RESPONSE: That is an argument that is based upon the conventional. Like  it has been said 
in the commentary by Arya [Vimuktisena], arguing that if the objects of abandonment and 
the antidotes do not exist ultimately, then their sequence is incorrect is an argument about 
the two truths being contradictory.  
 The purity of the complete buddhas is presented as being exceptional , because that 
exceptio nal path of meditation  of the Mahayana aryas itself which has been shown is the 
very entity of the antidotes to all  obscurations. Even though the objects of abandonment 
and the antidotes do not exist ultimately, the sequences of the objects of abandonment and 
the antidotes are correct, because the path of meditation that has just been explained 
destroys the objects of abandonment by means of realizing with direct cognition that 
consciousnesses and the objects to be known bearing the aspects of the three rea lms 
are just equal in being empty of true existence through just not observing them as 
existing ultimately. Sutra says:  
• “Bhagavan, purity is not generated in the desire, form, and formless realms.”  
• “Bhagavan, complete purity is without seeking.”  
 
It fol lows that there is no fault that the sequence of cessation of the objects of abandonment 
and the sequence of generation of the antidotes which have been explained are incorrect, 
because the sequences of the objects of abandonment and the antidotes are esta blished by 
means of dispelling the dispute  which has been explained through the analogy of a 
washerman’s not needing effort for a long time to clean a coarse stain adhering to a cloth, 
but [needing] prolonged  effort to clean a subtle stain adhering to a cl oth.   
2B2C -1B3. Summarizing the chapter  
COMMENTARY 
The commentary on the second chapter from the Treatise of Quintessential Instructions 
of the Perfection of Wisdom: Ornament for Clear Realization . 
 
EXPLANATION  
The explanation of the commentary on the sec ond chapter  from  the Ornament of the 
Essence,  which is an explanation of the commentary on the Treatise of Quintessential 
Instructions of the Perfection of Wisdom: Ornament for Clear Realization . 
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 3: The Knower of Base s 
 
289  
Chapter 3: The Knower of Bases  
2B2C -1C. Explaining the branch that purifies the knower of paths, the knower of bases  
2B2C -1C1. Making a connection by stating the relationship  
2B2C -1C2. Explaining the  text of the chapter  
2B2C -1C3. Summarizing the chapter  
2B2C -1C1. Making a connection by stating the relationship  
COMMENTARY  
Without fully knowing all bases, there is no full knowing of the paths well, therefore the 
knower of all.  
 
EXPLANATION  
There is a reason for explaining the knower of all  after having explained the knower of 
paths, because, without fully knowing all bases , impermanence and so forth , there is no 
full knowing of the paths of the three vehicles well, therefore  it will be explained as a 
branch of the knower of paths.  
 
QUESTION: What is the knower of bases that is the main subject to be explained in this 
third chapter?  
• Is it the knower of bases bearing the aspects of the sixteen, impermanence and so forth, 
an object to be cultivated  also by  bodhisattvas?  
• Or, is it the knower of bases of the discordant class, since it has been explained that it is indicated for the sake of making known the corrupted causes of omniscience [propounded 
by] Acarya  Buddhajñana and so forth?  
• Or is it what has bee n imputed with the convention “antidotal knower of bases,” created 
by some for the realization that bases are devoid of nature?  
 
RESPONSE: That it is not the last [of the three cases] will be explained later on [under 
2B2C -1C2A -1C3B]. Although the knower of bases of the discordant class is also indicated 
for the sake of making known a corrupted knower of paths, the main subject to be explained 
is the first one itself. For, with respect to the qualm, “When a bodhisattva’s path of seeing 
and path of meditati on were previously indicated as paths that purify the two extremes, what 
creates the dissimilar imprints that stop the two extremes?”, “Through knowing, not abiding in cyclic existence; through compassion, not abiding in solitary peace; [0 .11ab]” the exalt ed 
wisdom realizing impermanence and so forth itself has been taught to be that which stops 
the extreme of cyclic existence. This very [exalted wisdom] is going to be explained here in 
the extensive explanation. [Haribhadra’s] Great Commentary  says: 
 
QUALM : Since the paths of hearers and so forth have been explained on the 
occasion of a knower of paths, has the knower of all not been explained? Why is the knower of all especially explained again separately?  
RESPONSE: That is to be described. With respect t o that, it has been described 
that “‘Regarding the mode of a knower of paths, by means of not observing the 
aspects of the four noble truths, these hearers’ paths are to be known. [2.2]’ By 
way of the stages of meditating and so forth without observing [th e aspects], the 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 3: The Knower of Base s 
 
290 paths of hearers and so forth are to be meditated on by bodhisattvas.” Hence, it is 
held that, in order to fully know all the bases (that are implied by the aspects, 
impermanence and so forth) without exception, the knower of all is especia lly 
explained separately. 
 
Thus, when that very bodhisattva’s path bearing the aspects of impermanence and so forth is 
posited as a knower of paths, it is to be understood as being conjoined with the three 
attributes. Further, the generated mind must be preceded by great compassion, which is 
contingent upon training well in the attitude of a being of middling capacity —
impermanence, suffering, and so forth.  
 Therefore, since it has been taught that a knower of bases is necessary prior to a knower 
of paths, the chapter on Special Deeds and so forth have been composed as a branch that 
acts to purify the knower of paths. Also, that very meaning implied and indicated by the 
sutra passage, “[Regarding this, does a bodhisattva mahasattva] pay attention to the 
impe rmanence of forms…” [under 2B2C -1B2B -1A3A] which was cited when explaining 
the nature of a knower of hearers’ paths previously, is emphasized and explained here. 
2B2C -1C2. Explaining the text of the chapter  
2B2C -1C2A. The nature of the  knower of bases  
2B2C -1C2B. Conclusion of the three knowers  
2B2C -1C2A. The nature of the knower of bases  
2B2C -1C2A -1. Explaining the near and distant paths  
2B2C -1C2A -2. Applications of the knower of bases  
2B2C -1C2A -3. The results of meditating on the applications 
2B2C -1C2A -1. Explaining the near and distant paths  
2B2C -1C2A -1A. The reason for near and distant paths  
2B2C -1C2A -1B. Proving that very reason  
2B2C -1C2A -1C. The divisions of the discordant classes and the antidotes 
2B2C -1C2A -1A. The reason for near and distant paths  
2B2C -1C2A -1A1. Root text  
2B2C -1C2A -1A2. Commentary  
2B2C -1C2A -1A1. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
3.1 Not abiding in the extremes of this side and that side,  
Not between these, 
Because it knows the times are just equal,  The Perfection of Wisdom is asserted. 
 
EXPLANATIO N 
These words of the root text have been explained by the commentary to [express] the near and distant paths. It has been explained that the reason itself is proven by the lines below.   
 The subject —the Perfection of Wisdom  that know s bases—is asserted  to be near to the 
continua of buddhas and bodhisattvas because it is an exalted wisdom that directly knows 
the phenomena of the three  times  are just equal  in being devoid of  the nature of true 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 3: The Knower of Base s 
 
291 existence. This implicitly indicates that it is distant from the hearers and solitary realizers, 
since they lack that reason.  
 It does not abide in the extreme of cyclic existence on this side, and the extreme of  
solitary peace on  that side, because it acts to stop those two extremes. It does not abide 
ultimately betwe en these  extremes, because it realizes emptiness. Although conventionally 
it abides in a middle that is neither of the extremes of cyclic existence and of solitary peace, 
this refutes that [the middle] between these exists ultimately. 
 Sutra says, “Bhagava n, the Perfection of Wisdom of the great bodhisattvas is not of this 
side, is not of that side, and also does not abide between them.”  
2B2C -1C2A -1A2. Commentary  
2B2C -1C2A -1A2A. The path that stops the extremes of existence and peace which is explicitly indicated  
2B2C -1C2A -1A2B. Indicating being separated from those paths of the hearers and solitary realizers which are 
implicitly indicated  
2B2C -1C2A -1A2A. The path that stops the extremes of existence and peace which is explicitly indicated  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. Due to realizing that the phenomena of the three times are just equal in the aspect of being devoid of  production, that which is the Perfection of Wisdom is 
asserted to be near to the buddhas and bodhisattvas, since it does not ab ide in the extreme of 
samsara on this side through wisdom, and the extreme of nirvana  on that side through 
compassion —respectively the characteristics of permanence and severance —nor between 
them, does not abide in cyclic existence or solitary peace.   
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —that which is the Perfection of Wisdom  that know s bases —is asserted to be 
near to the  continua of buddhas and bodhisattvas, due to directly realizing that the 
phenomena of the three times are just equal in the aspect of being devoid  of truly 
existent production . 
 The subject —the wisdom  in the continuum of a bodhisattva directly realizing 
impermanence and so forth (when dissimilar imprints are individually deposited on this path 
Perfection of Wisdom by the presence of many, the wisdom  realizing impermanence and so 
forth, great compassion, realization of emptiness, and so forth)—through  it, the extreme of  
permanence  (in which one transmigrates for a long time through the force of karma and 
afflictions included within the extreme of sams ara on this side ) is stopped, because it 
destroys the root of samsara.  
 The subject —the great compassion in the continuum of a bodhisattva —through  it, the 
extreme with the characteristic of severance  in which one attains the extreme of nirvana 
on that side  in dependence on having severed rebirths in cyclic existence is stopped, 
because, by taking rebirth again and again in cyclic existence through its force, it is a path 
that acts to achieve non -abiding nirvana.  
 Therefore, the subject —the Perfection of Wis dom that know s bases —does not abide in 
cyclic existence or solitary peace and does not abide  ultimately between them, since it 
stops the extreme s of cyclic existence and solitary peace relative to  the conventional, and, 
through realizing that cyclic existe nce and solitary peace are not truly existent, it does not 
abide ultimately between them.  
 Regarding the explanation by someone in this context —that what stops the extreme of 
cyclic existence relative to the conventional is the wisdom realizing emptiness —clearly is 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 3: The Knower of Base s 
 
292 an expression of not having realized in detail the dissimilar modes of engagement of minds 
of the stages of the path, because (i) both Acarya [Haribhadra] and Arya [Vimuktisena] say 
that the wisdom sees the faults of cyclic existence, and (ii) th e faults of cyclic existence are 
not found by a reasoning  consciousness that comprehends the ultimate.   
  “This side” is [posited] relative to ordinary beings; it means that they are on this side, not 
on the other side which is the severance of cyclic existence. “The extreme of permanence” 
has the significance of engaging for a long time due to transmigrating through the force of 
karma and afflictions; it is not an extreme of a permanent thing. The extreme of severance is 
a nirvana that is attained not only by severing rebirth through the force of karma and 
afflictions, but also by severing rebirth through the force of compassion and prayers. The 
Great Lama Lotsawa said:  
 
The main knowers of bases are [those] of hearers and solitary realizers, but the 
main perfections of wisdom are [those] of bodhisattvas. Therefore, the knower of 
bases that is a reflection of [that in] the continu a of bodhisattvas is the main 
subject to be explained here. It is generated on the eighth ground, and is 
explained here to be  a branch of the knower of paths knowing all three paths. 
This has been taken in terms of attaining a knower of the three paths naturally without effort. The explanation that it knows impermanence and so forth in the 
previous context of the path of seeing indicates the objects of a knower of paths. 
 
Through this passage he wished to indicate the attribute of compassion. In that manner it is correct in uncommon terms, but it is difficult for the time of generating a knower of bases 
and so forth to be correct . 
2B2C -1C2A -1A2B. Indicating being separated from those paths of the hearers and solitary realizers which are 
implicitly shown  
COMMENTARY 
Since they are  indicated  as the reverse of the context of the  knower of all, because the 
knowing of the three times a s just equal does not exist in hearers and so forth, by way of 
being distant  from the perfect Perfection of Wisdom, because the Perfection of Wisdom 
which is merely realized by themselves is separated from compassionate kindness  and 
wisdom, by just observing the property and the lack of the property, they are to be known as 
abiding in samsara and nirvana.  
 
EXPLANATION  
There is not the fault of not having presented the knower s of bases of hearers and solitary 
realizers in this context, since, as the reverse  of the context of the  knower of all  in the 
continuum of a bodhisattva explicitly indicated  in this context, they are  implicitly 
indicated . The knower s of bases of hearers and solitary realizers are presented on some 
occasion below, whereby [Haribhadra’s] Great Commentary says:  
 
Some are shown by means of reverse, some by means of accompaniment.  
 
The subject —hearer  aryas, solitary realizers and so forth—abide by way of being distant 
from the perfect Perfection of Wisdom, because, due to adhering to the ex tremes of 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 3: The Knower of Base s 
 
293 cyclic existence and solitary peace as truly existent, the knowing of the three times as just 
equal does not exist in them.  
 The subject —hearers who , for the time being , abide in a reflection of the Perfection of 
Wisdom  that know s bases,  which is merely realized in a trifling manner by hearers and 
solitary realizers themselves —abide in  the extreme of samsara, because they apprehend 
the mere property  of rebirth in cyclic existence as an object to be discarded categorically. 
That follows, be cause —since they desire to stop not only rebirth through the force of karma 
and afflictions, but also rebirth through the force of compassion and prayers —they are 
separated from compassionate kindness , a cause of taking rebirth in samsara. They are to 
be k nown as not abiding in the extreme of nirvana by just observing the lack of the 
property of rebirth in cyclic existence that is attained from severing mere rebirth in cyclic 
existence as an object to be adopted. That follows because, although they desire t o attain the 
severance of rebirth in cyclic existence and they have stopped rebirth through the force of 
karma and afflictions, they are separated from the  wisdom  that knows the method for 
accomplishing nirvana in dependence on taking rebirth in cyclic exi stence. (i) That they lack 
the wisdom realizing emptiness and (ii) correlation by reversing the above  two reasons —is 
not the meaning of this passage occurs in the teachings of the Foremost Being [Lama 
Tsongkhapa].  
2B2C -1C2A -1B. Proving that very reason  
2B2C -1C2A -1B1. Dispute 
2B2C -1C2A -1B2. Reply 
2B2C -1C2A -1B1. Dispute 
COMMENTARY 
DISPUTANT: Because it occurs in the system that “Whatever arises dependently, that itself 
is accepted as empty,” the knower of the three times as just equal only realizes bases. 
Furthermore, does it not exist in all? Why do hearers, bodhisattvas and so forth become 
distant and otherwise with respect to  the perfect Perfection of Wisdom?  
 
EXPLANATION  
DISPUTANT: Why  do hearers, bodhisattvas and so forth become distant and 
otherwise with respect to  the perfect Perfection of Wisdom by the difference of knowing 
or not knowing the three times as just equal ? It follows that it is incorrect, because a knower 
of the three times as just equal exists also in hearers and solitary realizers. That follows, 
because the knower of the three times as just equal only realizes the mode of abidance of 
bases ; furthermore, does  the realization of the mode of abidance of bases not exist in all  
aryas ? It does. It follows that the realization of the mode of abidance of bases exists in 
hearer and solitary realizer aryas, (i) because  it occurs in the scripture of the great 
trailblazer Protector Nagarjuna  that emptiness is [the meaning] of dependent -arising, 
“Whatever arises dependently, that itself is accepted as empty,”  in the Praise to the 
Supramundane, and (ii) because the realization  of the mode of abidance of dependent -
arising exists also in hearers and solitary realizers.  
  This is a dispute created by those who accept that the realizations of the selflessnesses of 
persons and of phenomena exist in hearer and solitary realizer aryas , in accordance with the 
indication by that citation that emptiness is the meaning of the term “dependent -arising.”  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 3: The Knower of Base s 
 
294  By way of the assertions of the Acarya, a reply is given by means of [saying that], 
although the citation indicates that dependent -arisings  are pervaded by being empty of true 
existence, that realization does not exist in hearers and solitary realizers.  
2B2C -1C2A -1B2. Reply 
2B2C -1C2A -1B2A. Root text  
2B2C -1C2A -1B2B. Commentary  
2B2C -1C2A -1B2C. Summary  
2B2C -1C2A -1B2A. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
3.2 That, by means of observing signs  
With incorrect means, is distant.  
That, with skill in means,  
Is explained as correctly near. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —hearer and solitary realizer aryas —that  Perfection of Wisdom that know s 
bases is distant from them, becau se they , by means of observing signs  of true existence 
with respect to bases , are conjoined with incorrect skill in the  means for generating the 
resultant Mother. That follows, because they are separated from a spiritual guide who 
teaches the mode of abida nce, and they also practice a reflection of the Perfection of 
Wisdom.    Sutra says: “Bhagavan, if one were to know by way of observing the perfection of 
wisdom of sons or daughters of the lineage of the bodhisattva vehicle who are not skilled in means, on e would discard this perfection of wisdom and become distant from it.”  
 The subject —bodhisattvas —there is a reason for explaining that Perfection of Wisdom 
as correctly near  to them, because they are conjoined with skill in the  means  for 
generating the res ultant Mother.  
 Sutra says: “Furthermore, Bhagavan, explaining well this perfection of wisdom, u ntil 
extracting it well is amazing.”  
2B2C -1C2A -1B2B. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. With regard  to the things emanated by a magician appearing, due to 
adherence to them as things by those who do not know the self- entity of those, they do not 
appear as being devoid of  the very entity. Likewise, because they are separated from skill in 
means, a spiritu al guide and so forth, since they realize things as possessing signs, the 
hearers and so forth who do not know the entity of things do not have the exalted wisdom of 
equality. Because of that, the Mother of the victors is distant from them.  
 In bodhisattvas bearing the non -erroneous instructions of a spiritual guide whom they 
have correctly pleased for a long time, who have eliminated the mistaken signs of adherence 
to things, due to skill in the means of generating a knower of hearing and so forth that is 
supported on the two truths, that very full knowing of phenomena, forms and so forth, is the 
full knowing of the three times as just equal. Because of that, they are correctly close to this Mother. 
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 3: The Knower of Base s 
 
295 EXPLANATION  
The Mother of the victors is di stant from those  hearer and solitary realizer aryas, because 
the hearers and so forth who do not know that the entity of things  is empty of true 
existence and free from elaborations do not have the exalted wisdom of equality of the 
three times. That follow s, since they realize things as possessing  the signs  of true 
existence. That follows, because, simply realizing the mere selflessness of persons, they 
are separated from skill in means, a spiritual guide  who teaches subtle selflessness and 
so forth . 
 It is not that there is no analogy for adherence in that manner, because, with regard to 
the things  that are horses and elephants emanated by a magician appearing, due to 
adherence to them as things  that are horses and elephants  by those who do not know the 
self-entity of those  that are illusions, they are not realized and do not appear as being 
devoid of  the very entity  of horses and elephants. Likewise,  they adhere to things as being 
truly existent. 
 The meaning of the analogy as explained above should be real ized by relating it to 
falsities that are renowned in the world, and further, it should be realized from having 
pleased the spiritual guide for a long time, because one adheres to signs with respect to things by not being conjoined with it, and it is taugh t that one will be distant from the 
Perfection of Wisdom due to just that.  The subject —those bodhisattva  aryas —are correctly close to this Mother , because 
they know that the three times are just equal. That follows, because they know that phenomena, forms  and so forth, are empty of true existence and free from elaborations. It 
follows that there is pervasion, because  that very full knowing of phenomena, forms and 
so forth,  as empty of true existence and free from elaborations is the full knowing of the 
three times as just equal. The former sign follows, because they have eliminated 
mistaken signs of adherence to  things  as truly existent, due to skill in the means of 
generating a knower of hearing and so forth that is supported on  skill in the divisions of 
the two truths . That follows, because they bear the non- erroneous instructions of a 
spiritual guide skilled in the divisions of the two truths whom they have correctly pleased 
for a long time.  
2B2C -1C2A -1B2C. Summary  
COMMENTARY 
Hence, they are distant due to incorrect means; they are not distant due to means. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The difference of the Perfection of Wisdom being near to or distant from the hearers and 
solitary realizers and the bodhisattvas is correct, because hearers and solitary realizers  are 
distant due to  incorrect skill in the means of meditating on the Mother; bodhisattvas are 
not distant due to skill in means.  
 The meaning of this is to be known in this way: if the two —those who are temporally 
definite in the hearers’ lineage and those definite in the bodhisattvas’ lineage —were to enter 
at the same time their respective paths, and accomplish their respective enlightenments with effort, know that the former would need a longer time to attain unsurpassable 
enlightenment. 
 
OPINION: A hearer’s enlightenment is attained in three lifetimes if it is accomplished with 
effort. Then, by entering from the seventh Mahayana ground and so forth, the time to attain 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 3: The Knower of Base s 
 
296 unsurpassable enlightenment will be very much shorter than that of the other [definite in th e 
bodhisattvas’ lineage].  
RESPONSE: In that case, if one wishes to quickly attain buddhahood, it would be 
appropriate to initially enter into a hearer’s path. Entry from a high path has already been 
refuted.128   
 
Therefore, although the attainment of a hearers’ enlightenment is quick —through the force 
of (i) not having familiarized with principally striving for others’ welfare and (ii) having 
single -pointedly familiarized with the mind that observes the faults of cyclic existence in the 
past—they attain the state of a foe -destroyer due to an intense awareness that contemplates 
the benefits of the happiness of pacification, after which they enter absorption in the sphere 
of peace for eons. Although they are urged by the light rays of buddhas and are awakened, 
they enter absorption in the sphere of peace again and again. And also, after having 
generated the mind towards supreme enlightenment, even though they know that they 
should not enter into the meditative equipoise of the sphere of peace for a long time, 
through the force of previous familiarity, they enter that state again and again. For this very 
reason, they are very much slower compared to those definite in the bodhisattvas’ lineage. There is a great difference of being near to  or distant from  the result  since they have to start 
collecting the infinite accumulation of merit from the beginning. Know that [the  path  of 
those who are definite in the Mahayana lineage ] is a quick path relative to that of those 
definite in the hearers’ lineage. 
2B2C -1C2A -1C. Th e divisions of the discordant classes and the antidotes 
2B2C -1C2A -1C1. Object of abandonment and antidote of the apprehension of signs in bases and paths  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2. Object of abandonment and antidote of the apprehension of signs in results  
2B2C -1C2A -1C3. Conclusion  
2B2C -1C2A -1C1. Object of abandonment and antidote of the apprehension of signs in bases and paths  
2B2C -1C2A -1C1A. Object of abandonment  
2B2C -1C2A -1C1B. Antidote  
2B2C -1C2A -1C1A. Object of abandonment  
2B2C -1C2A -1C1A -1. Making a connection  
2B2C -1C2A -1C1A -2. Root text  
2B2C -1C2A -1C1A -3. Commentary 
2B2C -1C2A -1C1A -1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
The very achievement of the hearers and so forth which is distant from the Mother in that way is a discordant class.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The very action of achievement of the hearers and so forth ( which is distant from the 
Mother Perfection of Wisdom in that way explained above) separated from special 
compassion and bound by the conception of true existence is  proven to be  a discordant 
                                              
128 See the section  2B2C -1B2A -2C2D : Analyzing from which of the paths of hearers, solitary realizers, and 
Mahayana one enters  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 3: The Knower of Base s 
 
297 class  that is a corrupte d path from the point of view of those definite in the bodhisattvas’ 
lineage.   
2B2C -1C2A -1C1A -2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
3.3 The emptiness of the aggregates, forms and so forth;  
Phenomena belonging to the three times;  
The harmonies with enlightenment, gener osity and so forth — 
The discrimination of the practice regarding them is a discordant class.  
 
EXPLANATION  
A path that is bound by  the discrimination of the practice —regarding  (i-ii) the objects of 
knowledge which are the bases: the emptiness in being devoid of  a self of persons of the 
aggregates, forms and so forth  included within modes , and phenomena belonging to the 
three times  included within varieties , and (iii) paths: the harmonies with enlightenment, 
generosity and so forth —as truly existent is a discordant class  that is a corrupted path for 
those definite in the bodhisattvas’ lineage, because it is a distant path for achieving the 
resultant Perfection of Wisdom . 
 Sutra says, “When those not skilled in means practice that called ‘the emptiness of 
forms’”... “the discrimination [of phenomena] until the practice regarding an exalted knower 
of all aspects.”  
 Someone asserts that a meditative equipoise of hearer and solitary realizer aryas is a 
conception of true existence. These are words unpleasant to the ears. It follows it would be similar to a conception of self of persons in not being able to destroy the seeds that are the 
afflictive obscurations, because it would be similar in being a wrong consciousness that is 
mistaken with respect to its objec t of adherence. If that is accepted, since that has been 
explained as “Holding that ‘Grasping and so forth will not be abandoned by the learners’ 
vehicle,’” if that propounder has bodhisattva vows, a root downfall will be incurred.  
 If it were not free from the conception which apprehends a sound -generality and a 
meaning -generality as suitable to be mixed, it follows that it would not be a yogic direct 
perceiver. If that is so, then, like a sense consciousness to which two moons appear, it would 
not be a path to liberation. Therefore, do not deprecate the hearers’ paths as well as their 
result. It is clear that the explanation of the meaning of the commentary in this way by this person muddled in words is [an explanation of someone] of very dull faculty. 
2B2C-1C2A -1C1A -3. Commentary 
COMMENTARY 
By just observing all which are not things as things, phenomena of the three times, forms 
and so forth, (the entities of the contaminated, the uncontaminated and both,) to view the 
self which is thoroughly imputed by others and so forth as just empty and the discrimination of the achievings . Although it is the antidote to those, because it is an object to be 
abandoned by erroneous engagement, it is a discordant class.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the dharma forbearance of true sufferings of a hearer’s path of seeing that is 
bound by (i) the wisdom that directly  views the self of persons which is thoroughly  
imputed by others and so forth as just empty and (ii) the discrimination of the 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 3: The Knower of Base s 
 
298 achiev ings that realize only the close placement of mindfulness and so forth, while being 
bound by just observing all which are not truly existent things as truly existent things, 
phenomena of the three times, forms and so forth, (the entities of the contaminated in 
the continuum of an ordinary  being , the uncontaminated , the branches of enlightenment 
and so forth, and both) —is the antidote to its corresponding objects of abandonment, 
because it is a path that directly harms the seeds of acquired (thoroughly imputed) afflictive 
obscurations.   
 Although it is the antidote to the objects of abandonment of those hearers , it is a 
discordant class  that is a corrupted bodhisattvas’ path, because its generation in one’s 
continuum  is an object to be abandoned. That follows, because it is a path that is bound by 
erroneous engagement  towards the mode of abidance of things .  
 It is not indicated that it is to be abandoned by means of apprehending the opposite of the 
observed object and aspect of this path. If one  were to apprehend the opposite of those, there 
would be a wrong consciousness that is mistaken with respect to its object of adherence.  
 To be “bound by a conception of true existence” means that, when one investigates 
whether the bases and paths exist t ruly or not, one does not transcend adherence to them as 
truly existent; this is in terms of not having previously determined the mode of abidance of 
phenomena by way of hearing and contemplation. Since it is a long (distant) path relative to 
that of bodhi sattvas, entering it is to be abandoned. 
2B2C -1C2A -1C1B. Antidote  
2B2C -1C2A -1C1B -1. Making a connection  
2B2C -1C2A -1C1B -2. Root text  
2B2C -1C2A -1C1B -3. Commentary 
2B2C -1C2A -1C1B -1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
The bodhisattvas ’ reverse [of that] is the a ntidote. 
 
EXPLANATION  
That reverse of the bodhisattvas is the antidote.  
2B2C -1C2A -1C1B -2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
3.4abc  That which, without apprehension of I regarding generosity and so forth,  
Connects others to that, 
Ceases the extreme of grasping129.  
 
EXPLA NATION  
The subject —by he himself abiding without the apprehension of I that adheres to the three 
circles regarding generosity and so forth  as truly existent, that exalted wisdom directly 
realizing bases and paths are devoid of true existence in the continu um of a bodhisattva that  
connects other  trainees  to that —ceases the extreme of grasping to bases and paths as 
truly existent, because it is the direct antidote to that. Sutra says, “There would not be signs 
with respect to the paths of oneself and others.”  
                                              
129 Chags pa  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 3: The Knower of Base s 
 
299 2B2C -1C2A -1C1B -3. Commentary 
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. By having realized generosity and so forth as selfless through the 
purity of the three circles, he connects others to himself, because he has perfectly entered. 
And because it is an object to be adopted, through having ceased all abiding of the 
accumulation  of grasping, it is an antidote in all ways. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —that [as above] —is an antidote in all ways  without being [merely] an 
enumeration, because it is an object to be adopted , since it is just the direct antidote to that 
grasping through having ceased all abiding of the accumulation of grasping to bases and 
paths as truly existent. The bodhisattva who connects others to  his state, by having directly 
realized  the bases a nd paths of generosity and so forth as selfless through the purity of 
the three circles , has entered a near path, (i) because he has  directly and perfectly entered  
the mode of abidance of phenomena, and (ii) because he has entered the practice of 
extensive  deeds. Alternatively, that which was explained as the reason above has a similar 
meaning..  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2. Object of abandonment and antidote of the apprehension of signs in results  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2A. Entity of the apprehension of signs in results  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2B. The antidotes which act to abandon  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2C. Subsidiary  topics   
2B2C -1C2A -1C2A. Entity of the apprehension of signs in results  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2A -1. Root text  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2A -2. Commentary 
2B2C -1C2A -1C2A -1. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
3.4d It is subtle g rasping to the victors and so forth.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —paying homage and so forth to the victors and so forth  while being bound by 
the subtle grasping to them as truly existent —is a discordant class of bodhisattvas’ paths, 
because it is a corruption . Sutra says: “Subhuti, regarding this, if a bodhisattva takes the 
tathagata to mind as a sign...”  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2A -2. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
Although paying homage and so forth to the tathagatas and so forth are an antidote through 
just being a cause of th e accumulation of merit, by the very entity of subtle grasping, as they 
are not in all ways, they are a discordant class.  
EXPLANATION  
The subject —paying homage and so forth  by the hearers to the tathagatas and so forth 
motivated by faith —are included in t he antidotal class , through just being a cause of the 
accumulation of merit.  
 Although they are  an antidote  to non -faith and so forth , as they are  not an antidote that 
is separated from faults  in all ways  without being [merely] an enumeration , they are  a 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 3: The Knower of Base s 
 
300 discordant class  of bodhisattvas’ paths , because, although they are an antidotal class , they 
are bound by the very entity of subtle grasping to results as truly existent.    
2B2C -1C2A -1C2B. The antidotes which act to abandon  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2B -1. Reason for being a discordant class  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2B -2. The antidotes which act to abandon  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2B -1. Reason for being a discordant class  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2B -1A. Question  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2B -1B. Reply  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2B -1A. Question  
COMMENTARY 
Third bundle.  
 
QUALM: Further, how is subtle grasping a discordant class?  
 
EXPLANATION  
QUALM: Further, how is subtle grasping a discordant class?  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2B -1B. Reply  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2B -1B1. Root text  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2B -1B2. Commentary  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2B -1B1. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
3.5ab  Because t he path of phenomena is  
Devoid of nature, it is the profound itself.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The final mode of abidance that is the path of phenomena is the profound itself, because 
it is dharmata that is devoid of nature . 
 Sutra says: “The perfection of wisdom is profound” and “Subhuti, because all phenomena 
are devoid of nature.”  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2B -1B2. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. Because of what? Since the types of phenomena are empty of just 
entitiness, it is the profound itself. Because of that, e ven observing the tathagatas is a 
discordant class.   
 
EXPLANATION  
Even observing the tathagatas  as an ultimately existent refuge is a discordant class, 
because  the mode of abidance of those phenomena is the profound that is the emptiness of 
true existence. Because of what?  That follows, since the types of phenomena are empty 
of just the entitiness  of existence in suchness.  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2B -2. The antidotes which act to abandon  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2B -2A. Question  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2B -2B. Reply  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 3: The Knower of Base s 
 
301 2B2C -1C2A -1C2B -2A. Question  
COMMENTARY  
QUESTION: Well then, how is it abandoned?  
 
EXPLANATION  
QUESTION: Well then, how is it abandoned?  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2B -2B. Reply  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2B -2B1. Root text  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2B -2B2. Commentary  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2B -2B1. Ro ot text  
ROOT TEXT  
3.5cd  The knowing of phenomena as being of one nature  
Abandons grasping.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the exalted wisdom that is the bodhisattva aryas’ direct knowing of 
phenomena as being of one nature in being empty of true existence —abandons grasping 
to results as truly existent, because it is the direct antidote to that.  
 Sutra says, “Furthermore, Subhuti, the nature of phenomena is not two; the nature of 
phenomena is simply one.”  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2B -2B2. Commentary  
COMMENTARY  
So the root text is said. All phenomena, forms and so forth, are only of one nature: “Like this, without nature.” The full knowing that knowers and the objects to be known are one in 
being just equal abandons grasping.   
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the path of seeing that directly and  fully knows that knowers and the 
objects to be known are one in being just equal in not being existent in suchness —
abandons grasping to results as truly existent, because it is the direct antidote to that.  
 It follows that the modes of a bidance of phenomena are of one taste, since the modes of 
abidance of all phenomena, forms and so forth, are only of one nature  and taste is the 
meaning of ascertaining  “Like this, without nature.”  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2C. Subsidiary  topics  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2C -1. The r eason for that  being profound  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2C -2. The reason for that  being difficult to realize  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2C -1. The reason for it being profound  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2C -1A. Question  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2C -1B. Reply  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2C -1A. Question  
COMMENTARY  
QUESTION: Further , how are phenomena profound by nature?  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 3: The Knower of Base s 
 
302 EXPLANATION  
QUESTION: Further, how are phenomena profound by nature?  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2C -1B. Reply  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2C -1B1. Root text  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2C -1B2. Commentary  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2C -1B1. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
3.6ab  Since seeing a nd so forth is refuted ,  
That is explained to be difficult to realize.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —that ultimate truth —there is a reason for explaining it to be difficult to 
realize, since  it is to be realized by only a reasoning consciousness that analyzes t he 
ultimate;  realizing it by a valid cognizer of conventionalities seeing  forms  and so forth is 
refuted .  
 Sutra says, “Subhuti, that is like this; the Mother is not seen, not heard, not ascertained, 
not known, and not manifestly enlightened by anyone.” That is the reason for it being 
profound.  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2C -1B2. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. Because of what? Since an object observed by all consciousnesses is 
eliminated, that nature is explained as that difficult to understand itself. Because of that, it is 
the profound itself.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —that nature of phenomena —is the profound itself, because  it is to be seen 
by an arya’s meditative equipoise; it is explained as that difficult to understand by a 
knower of conventionaliti es itself. Because of what? The latter follows, since that it is an 
object observed by all consciousnesses  of conventionalities, sense consciousnesses 
apprehending forms and so forth,  is eliminated  by valid cognition . 
2B2C -1C2A -1C2C -2. The reason for it be ing difficult to realize  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2C -2A. Question  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2C -2B. Reply  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2C -2A. Question  
COMMENTARY 
QUESTION: Further, what is that difficult to realize itself like?  
 
EXPLANATION  
QUESTION: Further, what is that difficult to realize itsel f like?  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2C -2B. Reply  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2C -2B1. Root text  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2C -2B2. Commentary  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 3: The Knower of Base s 
 
303 2B2C -1C2A -1C2C -2B1. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
3.6cd  Because it does not know forms and so forth  
That is asserted to be inconceivable.   
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —that  ultimate truth —is difficult to realize by an awareness of 
conventionalities, because it is reasonable that it [that ultimate truth] is asserted to be 
inconceivable  for it [an awareness of conventionalities]. That follows, because it [an 
awareness of conven tionalities] does not know that forms and so forth  are conventional 
truths . 
 Sutra says, “Subhuti, that is like this; the Mother is not known by anyone. Forms, 
feelings, discriminations, compositional factors, and consciousnesses are not known.”  
2B2C -1C2A -1C2C -2B2. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. Because of what? Since it does not fully know the nature of forms 
and so forth until  the aspects of the unmixed qualities of a buddha, it is asserted to be just 
beyond thought. Because of that, it is that difficult to understand itself.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —that [as before] —is that difficult to understand by a valid cognizer of 
conven tionalities  itself , because it is asserted to be just beyond  thought  for it. Because of 
what? That follows, since it [a valid cognizer of conventionalities]  does not fully know  the 
nature of conventionalities —forms and so forth until  the aspects of the unm ixed 
qualities of a buddha —and the meaning of the mode of abidance is seen by an arya’s 
meditative equipoise. 
2B2C -1C2A -1C3. Conclusion  
2B2C -1C2A -1C3A. Making a connection  
2B2C -1C2A -1C3B. Root text  
2B2C -1C2A -1C3C. Commentary  
2B2C -1C2A -1C3A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY  
Having described the discordant class and so forth in that way, in conclusion:  
 
EXPLANATION  
Having described the discordant class and so forth in that way, in conclusion:   
2B2C -1C2A -1C3B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
3.7 In that way, in the syste m of a knower of all, 
All the divisions without exception  
Of the discordant and antidotal class es 
Are to be known here as they have been explained.  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 3: The Knower of Base s 
 
304 EXPLANATION  
All the divisions  without exception of a knower of bases of the discordant and antidotal 
class es in the system , that is, on the occasion of a knower of all, are to be known here as 
they have been explained in sutra, because they are to be known here in that way  
explained above.  
 What directly acts to stop the apprehension of true existence with resp ect to the bases, 
paths, and results is the wisdom that directly realizes emptiness. Nevertheless, the knower of 
bases is divided into two [types] —that of the discordant class and that of the antidotal 
class —because that very exalted wisdom knowing the six teen attributes is divided into two 
from the point of view of whether or not it is  conjoined with special compassion and the 
wisdom realizing emptiness; with respect to that very wisdom realizing emptiness, the 
convention “antidotal knower of bases” has never been taught anywhere, either above or 
below.  
 The perfection of wisdom that know s bases, that realizes impermanence and so forth, in 
the continuum of a bodhisattva does not act to directly damage the conception of true existence, yet it is called “a knower of bases of the antidotal class ” because of being 
conjoined with fully complete method and wisdom.  
 A knower of bases of the discordant class, as explained above, is not shown to be an 
object to be abandoned categorically; the significance that is to be known is that, if those who are definite in the bodhisattva lineage were to be led through that path, it would be a 
hindrance to attaining buddhahood quickly and would  be a corrupted path.   
 An ignorant person holds that the paths of the hearers and solitary realizers are 
hindrances to attaining buddhahood categorically. He is co nfused about the divisions of the 
path. I pay homage to anyone who is able to generate those very hindrances in the continuum! 
2B2C -1C2A -1C3C. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. On the occasion of a knower of all, in that manner by the way explained, respectively the classifications of the discordant class and the antidote of hearers, 
bodhisattvas, and so forth should be known.  
 
EXPLANATION  
On the occasion of a knower of all, respectively the classifications of (i) a knower of 
bases of the disc ordant class , a knower of bases in the continu a of hearer  aryas, and (ii) a 
knower of bases of the antidotal class , a knower of bases  in the continu a of bodhisattvas 
and so forth,  should be known, because they should be known in that manner  by the 
way expl ained above.  
2B2C -1C2A -2. Applications of a knower of bases  
2B2C -1C2A -2A. Divisions of the applications  
2B2C -1C2A -2B. Nature  
2B2C -1C2A -2A. Divisions of the applications  
2B2C -1C2A -2A1. Making a connection  
2B2C -1C2A -2A2. Root text  
2B2C -1C2A -2A3. Commentary  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 3: The Knower of Base s 
 
305 2B2C -1C2A -2A1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
QUALM: Having described the discordant class and so forth in that way, what are the 
applications which meditate on them?  
RESPONSE: Applications:  
 
EXPLANATION  
QUALM: Having described the discordant class and so forth in that way, what are the applications which meditate on them?  
RESPONSE: Applications: 
 
The applications are of ten types, because there are: four divisions by way of object, three 
by way of entity, two by way of action, and one by way of indicator e xample.  
2B2C -1C2A -2A2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
3.8 The applications that stop forms and so forth,  
The practice with respect to their impermanence and so forth, and  
The incomplete and the thoroughly complete, and  
The non- grasping to that and  
 
EXPLANATION  
The first [i.e. that there are four divisions by way of object] is established, because there are 
three objects of observation with respect to the conventional and one object of observation with respect to the ultimate. That follows, because there are four applications  by way of (i) 
stopping adherence to the bases of characterization, forms and so forth , as truly existent, 
(ii-iii) stopping the practice with respect to the non -grasping to the characterizing 
attributes, impermanence and so forth, and  the incomplete and the thoroughly 
complete  (as supports of of excellent qualities) as truly existent, and  (iv) stopping the 
practice that, having abided in the non -grasping to the ultimate as a truly existent object of 
observation, adheres to it as truly exist ent. Respectively, sutra says:  
• “Subhuti, with regard to this, when a great bodhisattva practices the perfection of 
wisdom, if he does not utilize forms, he practices the perfection of wisdom.”  
• “Furthermore, if [a great bodhisattva] neither utilizes ‘form i s permanent’ nor ‘form is 
impermanent’, he practices the perfection of wisdom.”  
• “In addition, Subhuti, when a great bodhisattva practices the perfection of wisdom, if he neither utilizes ‘form is complete’ nor ‘form is incomplete’, he practices the perfect ion of 
wisdom.”  
• “Furthermore, when [a great bodhisattva] practices the perfection of wisdom, if he neither utilizes ‘grasping to form’ nor ‘not grasping to form’, he practices the perfection of 
wisdom.”   
 
ROOT TEXT  
3.9ab  Unchanging, the non -existence of the agent,  
The applications of the three types of difficult activities,  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 3: The Knower of Base s 
 
306 EXPLANATION  
There are three by way of entity, because there are three: the stopping of the adherence to 
the action, agent, and the result ant activities  as truly existent : (i) unchanging,  (ii) not being 
the agent , and (iii) the applications of the three types of difficult activities . The three 
difficult activities are the difficult activity of object of intent, the difficult activity of 
application, and the difficult activity of actio n. Respectively, sutra says:  
• “When a great bodhisattva practices the perfection of wisdom, if the perfection of 
wisdom is presented, there are difficulties: the mind not becoming discouraged and 
distracted, undertaking this perfection of wisdom, and being irreversible from 
unsurpassable complete enlightenment.”  
• “Bhagavan, those who seek armor for the sake of sentient beings are those who seek 
levitation in space.”  
• “Bhagavan, by that enumeration, those who seek clear complete buddhahood in 
unsurpassable comp lete enlightenment for the sake of sentient beings seek the full 
freedom of space.”   
 
ROOT TEXT  
3.9cd  Due to attaining the results according to the fortunes,  
That asserted to be fruitful, and  
 
3.10a  That which is not contingent on others, and  
 
EXPLANATION  
There are two by way of action, because there are two: (i) that asserted to be fruitful due to attaining the results according to the fortune s by means of performing the activity that 
will produce the result , and (ii) that which is not continge nt on others  by means of 
possessing benefit. Sutra says:  
• “Tathagata, another bhiksu thinks this, ‘There is neither production nor cessation in any phenomena anywhere; I pay homage to the Bhagavati Perfection of Wisdom of 
designations of phenomena from the aggregate of ethics .’” 
• “Koushika, likewise, the great bod hisattvas who practice the perfection of wisdom will 
not accomplish the intentions of whatever guarding, protecting and hiding as they have intended, and will bear the fortune of tiredness.”  
 
ROOT TEXT  
3.10b Seven types of appearances are indicators. 
 
EXPLANATION  
While [they] are not established as truly existent by means of indicators , they are indicated 
(made known) by means of seven types of appearances.  
 Sutra says, “At any time, a great bodhisattva does not generate a clinging mind for 
dreams; he doe s not generate a clinging mind due to dreams; he does not generate a clinging 
mind with respect to dreams. Likewise, he does not generate a clinging mind with respect to 
[the rest] until  emanations. At that time the great bodhisattva will fully know all ph enomena 
as being like illusions, until  being like emanations.”  
2B2C -1C2A -2A3. Commentary  
2B2C -1C2A -2A3A. Th ose explicitly indicated  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 3: The Knower of Base s 
 
307 2B2C -1C2A -2A3B. Th ose implicitly indicated , the applications of hearers and solitary realizers  
2B2C -1C2A -2A3A. Those expli citly indicated  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. (1) All phenomena, forms and so forth, (2) the impermanence and 
the emptiness es of those themselves, (3), the incomplete and the complete individually, (4) 
the non -grasping, (5) not changing into another , (6) the non -existence of the agent, (7) 
respectively, the difficult activities of the object of intent, the application, and the action, of 
the nature of the three exalted knowers of all, (8) by attaining the results according to the 
fortunes; non -depriv ation, (9) mere non -progression through the condition of others, (10)(a) 
complete transformation, (b) assembled together,  (c) contradicting, (d) conditions, (e) not 
transferred, (f) without support, and (g) not being the agent; by means of eliminating, the  
full knowings that accomplish with respect to the seven appearances to consciousness, the applications with respect to the various [objects] of the bodhisattvas are of ten types.   
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the applications  that stop the adherence to the various objects of the  
applications  of the bodhisattvas as truly existent —are of ten types , because there are full 
knowings —that  accomplish with respect to  the seven types of appearance by the entity 
and attributes of the bases —differentiated by means of el iminating  the conception of true 
existence. What are they?  
 
There are four divisions by way of object, because:  
• there are three that stop the adherence to —(1) the bases of characterization, all 
phenomena, forms and so forth, (2) the characterizing attribut es, the impermanence 
and the emptiness of those [forms and so forth]  themselves, (3) the attributes of the 
support, the incomplete and the complete individually as supports of excellent 
qualities, and varieties —as truly existent, and  
• the stopping of the adherence to —(4) the grasping and the non- grasping to modes as 
ultimate objects of observation —as truly existent.  
 
The realization of other- powered phenomena as being empty of true existence, like 
illusions, is complete as a support of excellent qualities , because , in dependence on it , one 
would be able to abandon discordant classes , and excellent qualities would increase more 
and more. The adherence to other- powered phenomena as truly existent is incomplete as a 
support of excellent qualities, because it hinders the generation of excellent qualities.  
 There are three divisions by way of entity because there are:  
• [the application] realizing that action, the Perfection of Wisdom, (5) does not change 
into another  through increasing or decreasing ultimately,  
• in terms of doer, [the application realizing] (6) the very non-existence of the agent  
ultimately, and  
• in terms of the result, respectively  the applications of (7) the  three types of difficult  
activities  that: 
(i) although not observing the object of intent , the exalted knower of all aspects of the 
nature of the three exalted knowers  of all, as existing ultimately, realizes the object of 
intent as existing conventionally,  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 3: The Knower of Base s 
 
308 (ii) although not observing the knower of paths of the time of the cause as existing 
ultimately, realizes the application  which is the cause of an exalted knower of all aspects as 
existing conventionally, and  
(iii) although not observing the knower of bases as existing ultimately, realizes it possesses 
the action  of being a method for takin g care of other trainees as existing conventionally.   
 
The subject —an application of a knower of bases indicated here —possesses a special action 
because, (8) by [causing them to]  attain the results according to  the fortunes  of the three 
types of lineage -bearers, it does not deprive  them [of the results] . It holds a special benefit, 
because (9) one possesses (i) the attainment of enlightenment not contingent on only others , 
but by one’s own strength, and (ii) not progressing through the conditions of others  due 
to oneself being able to protect, guard, and so forth.  
 (10) The subject —these contaminated dependent -arisings —do not exist truly:  
(a) because they are mere appearances that are complete transformations  of the latencies 
of adherence; for example, lik e a dream :  
(b) because they are appearances which are the assembling together  of causes and 
conditions; for example, like an illusion : 
(c) because they are appearances that are contradictory  to true existence; for example, like 
a mirage : 
(d) because they are appearances that are contingent on conditions ; for example, like an 
echo : 
(e) because they are appearances that are not transferred  from the aspect that deposits 
latencies; for example, like a reflection : 
(f) because they are appearances that are devoi d of a truly existent support ; for example, 
like a city of smell -eaters ; and  
(g) because they are appearances that are not established as a truly existent agent ; for 
example, like an emanation.  
 
The stopping of adherence to the seven appearances to consci ousness as truly existent in 
this way is the reason for being able to meditate on the entity, the attributes, and so forth of the bases by way of negating true existence.  
2B2C -1C2A -2A3B. Those implicitly indicated , the applications of hearers and solitary  realizers  
COMMENTARY 
Through having indicated  by means of accompaniment, implicitly, [that] of hearers and so 
forth are the reverse of what has been explained, applications.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The paths of preparation of hearers and so forth are the reverse of what has been 
explained, applications that cultivate without stopping the adherence to true existence, 
because, through having indicated  an explicit indication of the bodhisattvas’ applications  
by means of accompaniment, they are  to be known implicitly  in this way.  
 It is to be known in this way, because the application of the  knower of bases, the 
principal object to be explained here, is that very bodhisattva’s path of preparation bearing 
the aspects of the sixteen, impermanence and so forth, which is the cause for the clear 
realization that is to be passed through in the continuum of a bodhisattva on the occasion of 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 3: The Knower of Base s 
 
309 the path of seeing. The path of preparation bearing the aspect of emptiness that is cultivated 
by having been conjoined with the wisdom realizing those bases as empty of true existence 
is a cause that is similar in type to that very path of seeing that acts to pass through, which 
will be explained below. That very path bearing the aspects of the sixteen, impermanence 
and so forth, is explicitly indicated  to be cultivated  by bodhisattvas through stopping the 
conception of true existence on the occasion of the path of preparation. Implicitly, it is 
indicated  that it is cultivated on  the paths of preparation of hearers and  solitary realizers 
without stopping the conception of true existence. 
2B2C -1C2A -2B. Nature  
2B2C -1C2A -2B1. Making a connection  
2B2C -1C2A -2B2. Root text  
2B2C -1C2A -2B3. Commentary  
2B2C -1C2A -2B1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
As it is necessary to meditate o n the applications by means of equality, after the 
applications, equality:  
 
EXPLANATION  
As it is necessary to meditate on the applications of a knower of bases bearing the aspects 
of impermanence and so forth by means of being conjoined with the wisdom of the 
equality of objects and object -possessors in not existing in suchness, after the 
applications, equality:  
2B2C -1C2A -2B2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
3.10cd  Not clinging to forms and so forth,  The equality of those is of four types. 
 
EXPLANATION  
There are four [types of] equality of those  applications that meditate conjoined with those 
very applications of a knower of bases, because there are  four types  of applications of not 
clinging to the entities, signs, divisions and object -possessors of forms and so forth  as 
truly existent. Sutra says, “Do not generate a clinging mind for forms; do not generate a 
clinging mind due to forms; do not generate a clinging mind thinking ‘forms are mine’; do 
not generate a clinging mind with respect to forms.”  
2B2C -1C2A -2B3. Commentary 
COMMENTARY  
So the root text is said. (1) Adhering to forms and so forth, and (2 -4) the clinging to the 
signs of blue and so forth, the elaborations, and the realizations, in all ways not observing, 
since it is an equality of the applications, it is  equality.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the meditative equipoise of the path of preparation of a bodhisattva realizing 
emptiness —is an equality of the applications since it is an equality  in realizing that the 
objects and the object -possessors of applications do not exist truly, because it is an 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 3: The Knower of Base s 
 
310 application of a knower of bases that, by means of realizing that the objects and the object -
possessors do not exist truly, in all ways does not observe (1) Adherence to the entities of 
forms and so forth, and (2 -4) the clinging to  the uncommon signs of blue and so forth, 
the elaborations  of divisions , and the realizations  that are the object -possessors as truly 
existent. 
2B2C -1C2A -3. The results of  meditating on the applications  
2B2C -1C2A -3A. The instants indicated  in brief  
2B2C -1C2A -3B. Extensive explanation of the aspects  
2B2C -1C2A -3A. The instants indicated  in brief  
2B2C -1C2A -3A1. Making a connection  
2B2C -1C2A -3A2. Root text  
2B2C -1C2A -3A3. Comme ntary 
2B2C -1C2A -3A1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
Having individually realized the equality of applications, as it is necessary to meditate on 
the path of seeing, the path of seeing:   
 
EXPLANATION  
Having individually realized the equality of applicatio ns, as it is necessary to meditate 
on the path of seeing, the path of seeing:  
2B2C -1C2A -3A2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
3.11 With respect to the truths, sufferings and so forth,  
This nature of the instants —the forbearances and knowledges [of]  
Dharma knowledge a nd subsequent knowledge –  
Is the path that sees the mode of a knower of all.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —this nature of the instants —forbearance of dharma knowledge , 
forbearance of subsequent knowledge, and the  dharma and subsequent knowledges  
[dharma  forbearance, subsequent  forbearance, dharma  knowledge, and subsequent  
knowledge] —by way of observing the  four truths, sufferings and so forth , explicitly 
indicated  here—is the path that sees the mode of a knower of all , because it is a clear 
realization of the truth that acts to pass through, which implies a path of seeing that is to be 
passed through.  
2B2C -1C2A -3A3. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. The nature of the sixteen instants —with respect to the individual 
truths, the forbearance of dharma  knowledge and dharma knowledge , and  the forbearance of 
subsequent knowledge and subsequent knowledge—in that way, is the path of seeing in the 
context of a knower of all.  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 3: The Knower of Base s 
 
311 EXPLANATION  
The nature of the sixteen instants —with respect to the individual truths, the 
forbearance of dharma knowledge and dharma knowledge , and the forbearance of 
subsequent knowledge and subsequent knowledge [dharma  forbearance, dharma  
knowledge, subsequent forbearance, and subsequent  knowledge] —in that way, is the path 
of seei ng in the context of a knower of all . They are as said in the root text.  
2B2C -1C2A -3B. Extensive explanation of the aspects  
2B2C -1C2A -3B1. Question  
2B2C -1C2A -3B2. Reply 
2B2C -1C2A -3B1. Question  
COMMENTARY 
QUESTION: What are the aspects of the truths?   
 
EXPLANATION  
QUESTION: What are the aspects of the truths?  
2B2C -1C2A -3B2. Reply 
2B2C -1C2A -3B2A. Root text  
2B2C -1C2A -3B2B. Commentary  
2B2C -1C2A -3B2A. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
3.12 Forms as not permanent, not impermanent,  
Passed beyond extremes, purity,  
Not produced, not ceased, and so forth,  
Like space, abandoned grasping,  
 
3.13 Freedom from being fully held,  
Not expressible by entitiness,  
Because of that, the meaning of this  
Is not imparted to others by expressing, 
 
3.14 Acting without object of observation ,  
Exceptional purity, disease not occurring,  
Bad migrations severed, not conceiving  
With respect to actualizing the results, 
 
3.15 Not being related to signs,  
Not producing the knower  
With respect to the two, things and names:  
These are the instants of a kn ower of all.   
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the path of seeing that acts to pass through that is explicitly indicated  here, 
“forms as not permanent ” and so forth —are of sixteen, because there are (i) eight 
divisions by way of isolates included within uninterrupted paths, that, by way of observing the aspects of the four truths, directly and newly realize emptiness of true existence and 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 3: The Knower of Base s 
 
312 freedom from elaborations, and (ii) eight divisions by way of isolates included within 
liberated paths.  
2B2C -1C2A -3B2B. Comme ntary 
2B2C -1C2A -3B2B -1. The path of seeing that is explicitly indicated  
2B2C -1C2A -3B2B -2. The path of seeing that is implicitly indicated  
2B2C -1C2A -3B2B -3. The reason for not indicat the path of meditation  
2B2C -1C2A -3B2B -1. The path of seeing that is explicitly indicated  
2B2C -1C2A -3B2B -1A. Individual explanations  
2B2C -1C2A -3B2B -1B. Summarized and indicated  
2B2C -1C2A -3B2B -1A. Individual explanations  
2B2C -1C2A -3B2B -1A1. The aspects of the forbearances and know ledges of sufferings 
2B2C -1C2A -3B2B -1A2. The aspects of the forbearances and knowledges of origins  
2B2C -1C2A -3B2B -1A3. The aspects of the forbearances and knowledges of cessations 
2B2C -1C2A -3B2B -1A4. The aspects of the forbearances and knowledges of paths  
2B2C -1C2A -3B2B -1A1. The aspects of the forbearances and knowledges of sufferings 
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. Because of being devoid of  entitiness, (1) since forms and so forth 
are free from being permanent and impermanent, neither permanent nor impermanent, (2) 
since it is free from being suffering and non -suffering, free from the extremes of 
permanence and severance, (3) because it is free from being empty and non -empty, purity, 
and (4) since the very entities of self and non -self are not [established], not produced and 
not ceased, and not the thoroughly afflicted and not the completely pure —and so forth, are 
the aspects of the true sufferings. 
 
EXPLANATION  
(1) The subject —impermanent forms and so forth—are neither permanent nor 
impermanent ultimately, since they are free from being permanent and impermanent 
ultimately. That follows because  they are devoid of  entitiness  ultimately. The di rect 
realization in that manner is the aspect of the forbearances and knowledges of true 
sufferings. Apply in that manner also to all those below. The reason of being devoid of  
entitiness is also to be applied to all.   
(2) The subject —the aspect of suffering —is free from the extremes of permanence and 
severance  ultimately, since it is free from being suffering and non -suffering  ultimately.  
(3) The subject —sufferings’ emptiness of a self that is a different object —is purity  by way 
of nature , because it is free from being empty and non -empty  ultimately.  
(4) The subject —sufferings’ not being established in the entity of a self—is not produced 
and not ceased, and not the thoroughly afflicted,  grasping and so forth , and not the 
completely pure , faith and so fo rth, ultimately, since the very entities of self and non -self 
are not  established  ultimately.  
The exalted wisdoms that realize with direct cognition in this way are “the aspects  of the 
forbearances and knowledges of true sufferings .”  
 
Sutra says:  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 3: The Knower of Base s 
 
313 • “Subhut i, the great bodhisattva Maitreya, upon attaining clear complete  buddhahood in 
unsurpassable complete enlightenment, will not teach the Dharma saying, ‘Form is 
permanent’ or ‘Form is impermanent.’”  
• “‘What Dharma will Maitreya teach upon attaining buddhahoo d?’ ‘He will teach the very 
pure Dharma saying, “Form is very pure.”’”   
• “Subhuti, because forms are completely pure, the Perfection of Wisdom is completely 
pure.”  
• “Subhuti, form’s absence  of production, cessation, being thoroughly afflicted and being 
completely pure is form’s complete purity.”  
2B2C -1C2A -3B2B -1A2. The aspects of the forbearances and knowledges of origins  
COMMENTARY 
(1) Because of the insubstantiality  of cause and non -cause, like space, (2) because of not 
possessing origins and non -origins, having abandoned all afflictions and secondary 
afflictions, (3) by non -relation with strong production and non -strong -production, liberated 
from full holding, and (4) because of complete l iberation from conditions and non -
conditions, not expressible by its entity, are true origins. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —karma and craving – : 
(1) do not exist ultimately, like space, because of the  insubstantiality , the absence  of 
ultimate  existence of caus e and non- cause  of sufferings, 
(2) have abandoned all  ultimately existent afflictions and secondary afflictions, because 
of not possessing ultimately existent origins and non- origins ,  
(3) are liberated from full holding  to ultimate existence, by non -relation with  ultimately 
existent strong production and non- strong -production  of intense sufferings, and   
(4) not expressible by its entity  ultimately, because of complete liberation  as existing 
ultimately from conditions and non- conditions  of sufferings;   
 
The new realizations with direct cognition in this way are  the aspects of the forbearances 
and knowledges of  true origins. Respectively, sutra says:  
• “Subhuti, furthermore, due to space being completely pure, the perfection of wisdom is completely pure.”  
• “Subhuti, due to space being unpolluted, the perfection of wisdom is completely pure.”  
• “Subhuti, furthermore, due to space not being held, the perfection of wisdom is 
completely pure.”  
• “Subhuti, due to conventionalities not existing, the perfection of wisdom  is completely 
pure.”  
2B2C -1C2A -3B2B -1A3. The aspects of the forbearances and knowledges of cessations 
COMMENTARY 
(1) Because of what? Not related with cessation and non -cessation; because of that, the 
meaning of true cessations articulated in words cannot  be imparted to others’ continua, (2) 
since pacification and non -pacification do not exist, it acts without an object of observation, 
(3) because of freedom from the sublime and the non -sublime, it has transcended the two 
extremes and is purity, and (4) be cause definite emergence and also non -definite emergence 
do not exist, all diseases are not produced, are true cessations.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 3: The Knower of Base s 
 
314  
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the meaning of true cessations , a separation in which sufferings have been 
abandoned –:  
(1) cannot be imparted to the others’ continua  ultimately by being articulated in words; 
because of what? Because it is not related with cessation and non -cessation  ultimately; 
alternatively, apply “it cannot be imparted to others’ continua immediately by merely being 
articulated in words,”  
(2) it acts without a truly existent  object of observation , since pacification and non -
pacification  of suffering s do not exist ultimately, 
(3) has transcended the two extremes  of permanence and severance, and is purity  by way 
of nature, because the sublime liberation and the non- sublime are free from ultimate 
existence, and  
(4) possesses the benefit that all diseases are not produced, because  of having realized 
with direct cognition that definite emergence and also non -definite -emerge nce do not 
exist ultimately. 
 
The realizations in this way are  the aspects of the forbearances and knowledges of true 
cessations. Sutra says respectively:  
• “Due to space being inexpressible, the perfection of wisdom is completely pure.”  
• “Due to space being unobservable, the perfection of wisdom is completely pure.”   
• “Subhuti, due to all phenomena being not produced, ceased, thoroughly afflicted, and 
completely pure, the perfection of wisdom is completely pure.”  
• “Bhagavan, when any son or daughter of good li neage holds, clasps, reads, understands, 
and pays proper attention to this Perfection of Wisdom, Bhagavan, he or she will not have 
eye diseases.”  
2B2C -1C2A -3B2B -1A4. The aspects of the forbearances and knowledges of paths  
COMMENTARY 
(1) Because of freedom from paths and non -paths, severance of bad migrations, (2) because 
it is not mixed with those that are suitable or unsuitable, non -conceptualization of the 
method with the aim of actualizing the results, (3) by complete liberation from 
accomplishment  and non-  accomplishment, not related with the signs of all phenomena, and 
(4) by the non- existence of deliverance and non -deliverance, the characteristics of the 
entities of that to be expressed and that which expresses, regarding the two, that to be 
known and the term, without production of a knower, are true paths. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the exalted wisdom that realizes newly with direct cognition that paths are 
empty of true existence – :  
(1) possesses severance of bad migrations  such as the hells, because of realizing with 
direct cognition that paths and non- paths are free from  ultimate existence ,  
(2) is non-conceptualization of the method with the aim of actualizing the results  such 
as stream -enterers as ultimately existent, because  of directly realizing that it is not mixed 
with those that are suitable or unsuitable as antidotes to afflictions ultimately,   
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 3: The Knower of Base s 
 
315 (3) not related with the signs of  true existence of all phenomena, by complete liberation 
from  achieving the accomplishment and non -accomplishment  of the non- erroneous 
measure of abidance of the mind ultimately, and  
 
The subject —the subsequent knowledge with respect to a Mahayana path of seeing —(4) is 
without  the production of a knower  that observes the two, the meaning that is to be 
known , that which is to be expressed, and the term, the characteristic of the entity that 
expresses , by way of being together with dualistic appearances, because it is an exalted 
wisdom distinguished by newly realizing with direct cognition the non- existence of 
delivera nce and non- deliverance  to nirvana ultimately.  
 The meaning is as follows. In the perspective of a direct realization of the ultimate, 
[phenomena] do not appear as if they are expressed by terms. This is the meaning of 
dualistic appearance having vanished. The explanation of the above has been made in that 
way in accordance with the measure of abidance of objects since it is easy to understand. The meaning should be applied to all in the way  it has been explained here. Respectively, 
sutra says:  
• “Subhuti, if one were to teach this precious perfection of wisdom, one would be 
completely liberated from the hells.”  
• “Subhuti, regarding this perfection of wisdom, phenomena are not produced, ceased, thoroughly afflicted, completely pure, to be fully held, and to be discarded.”  
• “Subhuti, this precious perfection of wisdom is unpolluted by any phenomenon.”  
• “Subhuti, when a great bodhisattva practices the perfection of wisdom, if he does not conceptualize in that way, does not observe in that way, and does not give rise  to thoughts 
in that way, he practices the perfection of wisdom.”  
2B2C -1C2A -3B2B -1B. Summarized and indicated  
COMMENTARY 
Those instants of a knower of all bearing such aspects are the path of seeing of bodhisattvas.  
EXPLANATION  
The subject —those instants of forbearances and knowledges of a knower of all bearing 
such aspects —are the path of seeing of bodhisattvas,  because they are their clear 
realizations of the truth . 
2B2C -1C2A -3B2B -2. The path of seeing that is implicitly indicated  
COMMENTARY  
The reverse  of that, that to be meditated on by the hearers in the aspects of impermanence 
and so forth, is the path of seeing with respect to the  knower of all. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The reverse of that bearing the aspect of freedom from  elaborations , that to be meditated 
on through newly realizing with direct cognition by130 the hearers in the aspects of 
impermanence , suffering, and so forth, is the path of seeing  that is to be passed through 
and is implicitly indicated  on the occasion of  the knower of  all. 
 Because of being such clear realizations of the truth, through this, both —(i) the path of 
seeing in the continua of hearers and solitary realizers, and (ii) the path of seeing that is to 
                                              
130 Kyi emended to read kyis in accordance with the commentary above.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 3: The Knower of Base s 
 
316 be passed through having been viewed by knowing and seeing, that is to be meditated on in 
the continua of bodhisattvas —are summarized  and indicated .  
2B2C -1C2A -3B2B -3. The reason for not indicating  the path of meditation  
2B2C -1C2A -3B2B -3A. Meaning of the words  
2B2C -1C2A -3B2B -3B. Decisive analysis  
2B2C -1C2A -3B2B -3A. Meaning of the words  
COMMENTARY 
Since hearers’ paths are objects to be fully known, not to be actualized, by bodhisattvas, the 
path of meditation is not indicated . 
 
EXPLANATION  
The path of meditation in the continu a of bodhisattvas that acts to familiarize  with those 
very sixteen, impermanence and so forth, which have been already newly realized with direct cognition by means of diligent familiarization is not indicated . If I were to indicate 
the purpose for that, it is  since,  apart from  being what will tra nsform into the clear 
realizations that are to be actualized by bodhisattvas, they are  not clear realizations to be 
actualized by bodhisattvas.  That follows, because hearers’ paths bearing the aspects of 
the sixteen, impermanence and so forth, are merely objects to be fully known  having been 
viewed by knowing and seeing by bodhisattvas, and are objects to be passed through having 
been viewed by knowing and seeing, for, the latter is set apart from the path of seeing by 
way of observation .  
2B2C -1C2A -3B2B -3B. Decisive analysis  
[Haribhadra’s] Great Commentary  explains:  
 
QUALM: Why is there no separate explanation of the path of meditation for the 
knower of all, in the way  it has been indicated  for a knower of paths?  
RESPONSE: The excellences of hearers and  solitary realizers have been 
indicated  as those to be passed through having been viewed by knowing and 
seeing of bodhisattvas, whereby they are not to be actualized. Therefore, they are not indicated  with respect to bodhisattvas. Since acting to actualize  again and 
again that very meaning in accordance with how it is fully seen in hearers and so 
forth is the path of meditation, it is easy to understand, so it is not indicated . 
Know that the partial concordance with definite discrimination of bodhisattvas i s 
just that explained previously. It is held that it is clear that when hearers and so 
forth take the four noble truths as objects of observation by way of the aspects of 
impermanence and so forth, it is the heat level and so forth with the nature of 
conta minated meditation, therefore it is not taught.  
 
The path of preparation that is similar in type to this path of seeing that acts to pass through 
should be understood from the explanation in the first chapter; although the path of 
meditation that is simila r in type to this path of seeing that is to be passed through needs to 
be indicated  to hearers and solitary realizers, as it is easy to understand, it is not indicated  
here.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 3: The Knower of Base s 
 
317  In this context, the reason —given by someone to prove that this text does not in dicate  the 
path of meditation in the continua of hearers themselves —is not even slightly relevant, 
because it is taught in [Vimuktisena’s] Illuminating the Twenty Thousand that: 
 
Because for a knower of all , there is no path of meditation.  
 
Therefore it is  not right that there is no path of meditation in the continua of hearer aryas 
that diligently familiarizes with that bearing the aspects of impermanence and so forth. 
Otherwise, it would follow that even the implicitly indicated  path of seeing in this [co ntext] 
is only [generated] in the continua of hearers and solitary realizers; however, this is not right because it has been taught that it is a clear realization that is viewed by knowing and seeing 
by a yogic direct perceiver in the continua of bodhisatt vas and is to be passed through 
having been viewed.  
 The reason —given by someone else to prove that the path of meditation bearing the 
aspect of freedom from elaborations in the continua of bodhisattvas is not indicated  —is 
even more irrelevant tha n the p revious one, because that is clear from the reason explicitly 
stated in this text, and there is no reason to wonder why the path of meditation that is a clear 
realization and is a bodhisattvas’ object of actualization is not indicated  here.  
 DISPUTANT: Th at is not established. I wonder why, having explicitly indicated  the path of 
seeing here, the path of meditation is not indicated  after that —in the way  the path of 
meditation has been indicated  after the path of seeing in the second chapter?  
 RESPONSE: That is because the path of seeing that is explicitly indicated  here is indicated  
for the sake of understanding the path that acts to pass through, rather than the clear 
realization that is to be passed through; there is no purpose in  indicat ing the path of 
meditation that is similar in type to that to any person whether of the Mahayana or the 
Hinayana  here.  
 
Therefore, the following doubts have been eliminated:  
• When the path of seeing in the continuum of a bodhisattva bearing the aspects of 
impermanence and so forth is indicated , why is the path of meditation that familiarizes by 
means of diligently familiarizing with the continuity of a similar type to that not indicated ?  
• Why are the two —the path of seeing and the path of meditation —not indicated  with 
respect to the knower of bases that is to be known by bodhisattvas , in the way  the two —
the path of seeing and the path of meditation —are indicated  with respect to the knower of 
paths that is a bodhisattva’s object of actualization ?  
 Such a path of meditation is not indicated , since bodhisattvas themselves do not need to 
diligently familiarize with that path (i) in order to generate disillusionment for cyclic 
existe nce, and abandon the afflictive obscurations and knowledge obscurations, and (ii) in 
order to take care of the hearer and solitary realize r lineage -bearers; it is not that that very 
knower of bases do es not exist in the continua of bodhisattvas on the path  of meditation. 
They are able to take care of others by just generating the path of seeing.  
 The meaning of the teaching in [Vimuktisena’s] Illuminating the Twenty Thousand  that—
the functions of the abandonments and realizations of hearers and solitary rea lizers  are 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 3: The Knower of Base s 
 
318 subsumed under the Mahayana path of seeing in this context —has already been explained 
before.131 
2B2C -1C2B. Conclusion of the three knowers  
2B2C -1C2B -1. Making a connection  
2B2C -1C2B -2. Root text  
2B2C -1C2B -3. Commentary  
2B2C -1C2B -1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
Having shown extensively in that way, by summarizing all the meanings, as a conclusion of 
the three exalted knowers of all:  
 
EXPLANATION  
Having shown  the three exalted knowers extensively in that way  explained a bove, I set 
down a conclusion of the three exalted knowers of all . 
 There is a reason for setting down a conclusion of the three exalted knowers, because, by 
summarizing all the meanings  of the clear realizations, the meaning of the others will also 
be sum marized and realized. 
2B2C -1C2B -2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
3.16 Thus, these, also these,  
And also these: these three types  
Are the complete thorough presentation  
Of the three chapters. 
 
EXPLANATION  
Having shown the three exalted knowers extensively in that wa y, 
• the sutra statements beginning from “Subhuti, this Mother does not attain any quality” 
until “Not past, not future, not arising in the present,” until  the three condensed into one, 
these  nineteen lines which indicate the conclusion of a knower of bases;   
• also the statements “Subhuti, thus the Mother is not a means of transcending the three 
realms” and so forth, these  lines [which indicate] the conclusion of a knower of paths;  
• and also the statements “Subhuti, this Mother is not a means of bestowing and a means 
of discarding the qualities of the buddhas and so forth until  the qualities of the solitary 
realizers” and so forth, these  lines [which indicate the conclusion of an exalted knower of 
all aspects];  
the subject —these three types  of lines from sutra —are the complete thorough 
presentation  of the conclusion of the three chapters  that have taken the three exalted 
knowers as their subject matter above, because they are lines that present the conclusions of 
those three exalted knowers completely presented above. 
 
                                              
131 The citation appeared under the outline 2B2A -1B2A -2B2B -2: Explaining the meaning of the teaching that 
bodhisattvas complete the abandonments and realizations of hearers and solitary realizers  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 3: The Knower of Base s 
 
319 • The first [type of sutra passage s] concludes the knower of bases because it is a conclusion 
by way of stopping the two extremes that are opposing counterparts: permanence and 
impermanence, suffering and non -suffering, and so forth, with respect to all bases.  
• The second [ type of sutra passage s] is a conclusion of the knower of paths by way of 
stopping the two extremes that are the discordant and the antidote with respect to all phen omena.  
• The third [type of sutra passage s] is a conclusion of the exalted knower of all aspects by 
means of presenting the exalted knower of all aspects that is included within the fulfillment of the two welfares, and the exalted knower of all aspects, the  cause of the 
teachings, a result concordant with the cause that is the realization of dharmadhatu. 
2B2C -1C2B -3. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. In the manner just explained, this exalted knower of all aspects, this 
knower of paths and this  knower of all, fully complete in that way the three types of the 
three chapters.  
 
EXPLANATION  
In the manner the three exalted knowers have been just explained extensively , they are 
summarized and shown. Sutra says:  
• “Subhuti, this Perfection of Wisdom does  not engage any phenomen on, does not correctly 
act to indicate, does not definitely act to indicate, does not thoroughly act to attain, and does not definitely act to attain,” these lines of the conclusion of an exalted knower of 
all aspects ; 
• “Bhagavan, wi th respect to this, no one will grasp to any phenomena,” and so forth, these  
lines of the conclusion of a knower of paths ; 
• “Subhuti, with respect to emptiness, one neither thoroughly engages nor turns away,” and so forth, these  lines of the conclusion of a  knower of all bases ; 
The subject —in that way the three types of sets of meanings of the lines of conclusions of 
the three chapters —fully complete the conclusions of the three exalted knowers, because 
they are lines from sutra that indicate the conclusions  of the three exalted knowers explained 
extensively above. 
 The explanation by someone that —the three chapters thoroughly present the three exalted 
knowers—is a wrong explanation of the meaning due to having encountered an incorrect text. What is explained  in the root text accords with the order that occurs in the medium 
Perfection of Wisdom Sutra , and this [order] accords with the order from the Eight 
Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom Sutra .   
2B2C -1C3. Summarizing the chapter  
COMMENTARY 
The commentary on the third chapter from the Treatise of Quintessential Instructions of 
the Perfection of Wisdom: Ornament for Clear Realization . 
 
EXPLANATION  
The explanation of the commentary on the third chapter from the Ornament of the 
Essence, which is an explanation of the commentary on the Treatise of Quintessential 
Instructions of the Perfection of Wisdom: Ornament for Clear Realization . 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
320 2B2C -2. Explaining the four applications extensively   
2B2C -2A. The controlling  cause and effect  
2B2C -2B. The stabilizing cause and effect  
2B2C -2A. The controlling  cause and effect  
2B2C -2A1. [The application of clear complete realization of] all aspects: the causes that act to control  
2B2C -2A2. Peak application: the effect  
 
Chapter 4: The Application i n Complete Aspects  
2B2C -2A1. [The application of clear complete realization of] all aspects: the causes that act to gain  control  
2B2C -2A1A. Making a connection by st ating the relationship  
2B2C -2A1B. Explaining the text of the chapter  
2B2C -2A1C. Summarizing the chapter  
2B2C -2A1A. Making a connection by stating the relationship  
[Haribhadra’s] Great Commentary  says:  
 
QUALM: Further, what is the difference between the three exalted knowers of all 
and the clear complete realization of all aspects?  
 
SOMEONE’S ASSERTION: The three exalted knowers of all individually 
ascertain the objects that are the aspects by way of the  aspects that have been 
explained, whereas the clear complete realization of all aspects is an object-
possessor of all aspects without exception.  
 ANOTHER SAYS: The three exalted knowers of all are presented as being fully -
qualified, whereas the clear com plete realization of all aspects is an applicator.  
 
SOME PEOPLE’S EXPLANATION: The clear complete realization of all 
aspects is distinguished by the positing of discordant classes and antidotal 
class es, whereas the three exalted knowers of all, due to bei ng the very aspect of 
pacification by nature, are not like that. 
 The meaning of that which has been explained above is to be understood in this context as 
follows. The clear complete realization of all aspects and the three exalted knowers (i) have 
dissimilar modes of indication by means of their objects, and (ii) have dissimilar modes of 
description by means of entity and by means of function. Having indicated the three exalted 
knowers in the first three chapters, there is not the fault of repetition in explaining the three 
exalted knowers here again, …  
 
COMMENTARY 
The complete knowing of the three exalted knowers of all is the clear complete realization 
of all aspects, since the three exalted knowers of all are cultivated , by means of further 
collect ing the knowers of all aspects, of paths, and of bases, for the sake o f gaining control . 
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
321 EXPLANATION  
… because  the complete knowing of the three exalted knowers of all  that are objects to 
be cultivated in one’s continuum by means of individually ascertaining the aspects 
previously is explained in this chapter to be the clea r complete realization of all aspects,  
by means of further collecting  all the 110 aspects of the  exalted knower of all aspects, 
the thirty -six aspects of the knower of paths, the twenty -seven  aspects of the  knower of 
bases , and all aspects without exceptio n, whereby the modes of description and purposes 
are dissimilar. 
 There is a purpose for collect ing all the aspects of the three exalted knowers without 
exception and indicating them, because, since all the aspects of the three exalted knowers 
of all  without exception  are cultivated,  they are explained in that way. There is a purpose 
for cultivating all [these aspects] without exception, because it is for the sake of gaining 
control over the aspects of the three exalted knowers. Since both [the aspect s of the three 
exalted knowers indicated in the first three chapters and in this chapter] are to be known by way of hearing and contemplation, and are to be meditated upon, it is inappropriate in any way to delineate as separate the passages for hearing an d contemplation and those for 
practice.  
 
OPINION: It is sufficient to indicate just the later one. 
RESPONSE: It is taught that there are also other purposes, because, regarding the above 
predicate of the probandum that there is not the fault of  repetition , (i) [the indication] in the 
first three chapters is for the sake of making completely known the uncommon self- entities 
and characteristics of the three exalted knowers of all, and (ii) [the indication] in this chapter 
is for the sake of [making] known th at one cultivates all the aspects of the knowers of all 
aspects, of paths and of bases without exception through the application that is a union of 
calm abiding  and special insight . Further, the purpose for cultivation in this manner is for 
the sake of gai ning control [over these aspects].  
 (i) [The aspects of the three exalted knowers] are indicated in the first three chapters for 
the sake of cultivation through having understood the characteristics of the three exalted 
knowers, and (ii) they are indicated  in this chapter for the sake of cultivation through  having 
understood the applications that act to cultivate them. Therefore, know that delineating as 
separate the passages for hearing and contemplation and those for practice acts as a 
condition for the d ecline of the great texts [and] are words unpleasant to the ears.  
 Also, regarding the above predicate of the probandum that there is not the fault of 
repetition, (i) the explanation of the three exalted knowers is indicated in this [chapter on] 
the clear complete realization in all aspects for the sake of cultivating the antidotes by 
having understood the classifications of the discordant classes and the antidotes , and (ii) it is 
indicated in the first three chapters for the sake of cultivation by having fully understood the 
three exalted knowers of all that are distinguished by having pacified some objects of 
abandonment.  
 Having understood the classifications of the discordant classes and the antidotes, one 
cultivates the three exalted knowers of all by  means of collect ing the knowers of all aspects, 
of paths, and of bases through the application that is a union of calm abiding  and special 
insight . Thus a special purpose is established, because it is for the sake of gaining control 
over the cultivation o f the aspects of the three exalted knowers. 
 (a) Having individually indicated the aspects of the three exalted knowers in the first 
three chapters, indicating them here collectively
, (b) having indicated the uncommon 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
322 natures of the three exalted knowers i n the first three chapters, indicating the applications 
that practice them here, (c) having indicated the cultivation of all the aspects without 
exception for the sake of abandoning all the discordant classes without exception here, 
indicating the three ex alted knowers that are free from some of the discordant classes in the 
first three chapters —are simply dissimilar modes of description and purposes; one knows all 
of them by way of hearing and contemplation, and also meditates on them by way of the 
wisdom arisen from meditation. Therefore, delineating the passages for hearing and 
contemplation and those for practice as separate dissimilar sections are words that cause the 
degeneration of the Buddha’s teachings. Hence it is only suitable to discard them.  
  “For the sake of gaining control” and “cultivated” [in the commentary above] indicate 
that, even in order to attain mastery over cultivation and familiarization of the three exalted 
knowers that have been explained in the first three chapters, one must cult ivate them 
through the application that is a union of calm abiding  and special insight  for the sake of 
abandoning all the discordant classes without exception; it is not held that the meanings indicated here are for the sake of attaining mastery over famil iarization and those explained 
previously are for the sake of mere comprehension of hearing and contemplation, because a path that (i) cultivates through application any one aspect of the three exalted knowers that 
have been indicated in the first three ch apters and (ii) does not cultivate through application 
the aspects indicated here, and a path that is the reverse of that [a path that (a) does not cultivate through application any one aspect of the three exalted knowers that have been 
indicated in the first three chapters and (b) cultivates through application the aspects 
indicated here] are impossible.  
 Regarding the meaning of “collectively”  cultivati ng the aspects of the three exalted 
knowers, a previous Tibetan scholar said:  
 
The seventy -one aspects o f truths that bear the aspect of being selfless and the 
102 aspects of conventionalities that exist are the bases that are to be cultivated. 
A basis upon which superimpositions are to be eliminated, [through establishing 
it] as being devoid of  true existen ce, is, for instance, the aggregates. The meaning 
of collective  cultivation through collecting them is to collect the seventy -one 
aspects into the three common doors of liberation. However, the principal 
[meaning] is, having collect ed the entities of the 1 73 aspects into the three —(1) 
the liberation that is the emptiness door of liberation called “the application that stops abidance,” that realizes them to be empty of true existence and free from 
elaborations, (2) the signlessness door of liberation called “stopping application,” 
that stops adherence to object -possessors as truly existent, and (3) the 
wishlessness door of liberation that stops adherence to results as truly existent —
each of [the aspects] is  differentiated into the three latter ones, and the latter ones 
are divided into the three applications: the profound, the difficult to fathom , and 
the immeasurable. Therefore, cultivation through collect ing them into the three 
doors of liberation by way of the application that is a union of calm abiding  and 
special insight  in meditative equipoise is the meaning of collectively cultivating 
[the aspects of] the three exalted knowers. 
 
I do not think such an assertion can bear analysis. Does one perform cultivation by having taken even the aspects that are varieties from among the objects of knowledge, such as 
impermanence and suffering, as the mode of apprehension of the aspect of the application in 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
323 complete aspects that is a union of calm abiding  and special insight  or not? The latter is 
unreasonable, because  (i) it contradicts the proof by Arya [Vimuktisena] and Acarya 
[Haribhadra] that, as the antidote to the conception of the aggregates as permanent and so 
forth, one causes the aspects of impermanent aggregates and so forth to dawn and cultivates 
them, and (ii) the divisions of the aspects which are 173 that have been made would be 
meaningless. 
  In the first case, if a bodhisattva causes all the aspects without exception to dawn and 
cultivates them in his continuum through the application of a union of calm  abiding  and 
special insight , [this is unreasonable], (i) because it is inappropriate not to set down those 
divisions, and (ii) because it is inappropriate for Acarya Haribhadra to refute the explanation 
that a knower of bases includes the clear realizatio ns of solitary realizer aryas.  
 Having divided the yoga that is a union of calm abiding  and special insight  observing 
emptiness into the three doors of liberation, asserting that it exists from the path of 
accumulation until the tenth ground is a very grea t mistake, because a fully qualified special 
insight  observing emptiness, except for existing from the heat level of the path of 
preparation and above, cannot possibly be generated on the path of accumulation by those 
who are definite in the Mahayana linea ge. [The assertor], due to not understanding well 
even the demarcation where one transfers to the heat level of the Mahayana path of preparation, is simply imagining that he is making a presentation of the Mahayana paths.  
  Also, I do not think that the a ssertion that the aspects of the three exalted knowers are 
clearly presented in this chapter but not clearly presented in the first three chapters is correct, because (i) in the first chapter the aspects that are the topics of the principal cause and resul t are clarified, (ii) in the second chapter the aspects of the three paths are clarified, 
and (iii) in the third chapter the aspects of the knower of bases are clarified. Therefore, the 
meaning of collective cultivation is, as it has occurred in [the secti on 2B2C -2A1A above 
on] making a connection, collect ing all the aspects of the three exalted knowers in a practice 
that is a yoga by way of a union of calm abiding  and special insight .  
2B2C -2A1B. Explaining the text of the chapter  
2B2C -2A1B -1. Presentation  of the generality, the application in complete aspects  
2B2C -2A1B -2. Explanation of the stages in which [the paths], beginning from the partial concordance with 
liberation, are produced in the continuum  
2B2C -2A1B -1. Presentation of the generality, the application in complete aspects  
2B2C -2A1B -1A. Entity of the application in complete aspects  
2B2C -2A1B -1B. Faults and excellent qualities with respect to cultivating the applications  
2B2C -2A1B -1C. The characteristics of the applications  
2B2C -2A1B -1A. Entity of the application in complete aspects  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1. Divisions of the aspects, the branches of knowers, the antidotes to all the discordant 
classes without exception  
2B2C -2A1B -1A2. Identifying the speci al applications that actually destroy the conception of true existence  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1. Divisions of the aspects, branches of the knowers, the antidotes to all the discordant classes 
without exception  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1A. Brief indication  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B. Extensi ve explanation  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1C. Summary  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
324 2B2C -2A1B -1A1A. Brief indication  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1A- 1. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1A- 2. Commentary 
2B2C -2A1B -1A1A- 1. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
4.1  The instances that know the bases, 
Called  “aspects” are the characteristics.  
Because the exalted knowers of all are of three types, 
Those are asserted to be of three types.   
 
EXPLANATION  
The instances of the exalted wisdom that know impermanence and so forth, the  bases  
included within the four noble truths, are exalted wisdoms tha t destroy the discordant 
classes by means of the dawning of the aspects opposite to the various discordant classes. 
Therefore, those called  “a bodhisattva’s exalted wisdoms that, through the aspects  of any of 
the three exalted knowers dawning well, cultiva te them ” are the antidotal characteristics  
in this context . Those  aspects that are exalted wisdoms posited as antidotes, when 
condensed into classes, are asserted to be of three types, because the exalted knowers of 
all are  definite in being of three types . 
 In this context, [Vimuktisena’s]  Illuminating the Twenty Thousand  explains:  
 
The instances are the characteristics that are antidotes to the discordant classes, for example, as in the case of impermanence [being an antidote] with respect to 
the conception of permanence, and so forth.  
 
Therefore, explaining [the instances] to be characteristics of the aspects is a wrong 
explanation of the meaning of the text by someone who has not understood what to do with 
this extensive explanation of the divisi ons of the aspects in this chapter, because [if his 
explanation were correct], the contextual meaning of the reply (that, since all three —bases, 
antidotes, and aspects —are included as the subject matter, through being characterized, the 
three exalted knowe rs are included as the subject matter) in the previous section on the  
rejections  of dispute regarding the statement of the purpose -and-relationship
132 would 
become lost. 
 Therefore, it means that “the exalted wisdom in the continuum of a bodhisattva that 
directly realizes the aggregates to be impermanent is an antidote to the superimposition that 
apprehends the aggregates as permanent, because, by means of the aspect of impermanent 
aggregates dawning well, it directly damages the other [the superimposition th at apprehends 
the aggregates as permanent].” This is to be similarly applied to all the aspects.    The antidote directly damaging the seeds that are objects of abandonment is the wisdom 
directly realizing emptiness. However, as the antidotes to as many su perimpositions which 
have erroneously engaged the aspects of the three exalted knowers as there are, one should 
cultivate all the apprehender aspects that are opposite classes of the aspects of the objects of 
                                             
 
132 See the dispute and reply under the section 2B2A -1: Having individually rejected doubts concerning a 
lack of purpose in  composing the treatise, explaining the general presentation of the subject matter, the three 
exalted knowers  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
325 observation of those [superimpositions] by mean s of a union of calm abiding  and special 
insight . 
 Someone asserts that what are to be cultivated through differentiation into the two —the 
object -aspects and the knower- aspects —are discordant and separate. This is without the 
slightest essence, because someone who asserts that the exalted wisdom realizing 
impermanence is to be familiarized with133 must also assert that impermanence is [to be] 
familiarized with; if someone asserts that impermanence is to be familiarized with but does 
not assert that the exa lted wisdom realizing that is [to be] familiarized with, then the bases 
would become empty.  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1A- 2. Commentary 
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. The entitinesses that are of the nature of the antidotes to the 
discordant classes apprehending p ermanence and so forth, the instances of the exalted 
wisdom observing impermanence and so forth, presented as the aspects themselves, are the characteristics. Furthermore, those, by way of the instances of the three exalted knowers of 
all, are asserted to be only of three types. 
 
EXPLANATION  
There is a purpose for extensively explaining the divisions of the aspects in this chapter, 
because it is for the sake of knowing the antidotal characteristics. The subject —presenting 
the instances of the exalted wisdom  observing the aggregates as impermanent and so 
forth as the knower -aspects themselves —has a purpose, because it is for the sake of 
knowing the antidotal characteristics , the entitinesses that are of the nature of the 
antidotes to the discordant classes ap prehending the aggregates as permanent and so 
forth . The subject —furthermore, those knower -aspects, branches that are the antidotal 
characteristics —are asserted to be only of three types , because there are only three types  
by way of the instances of the three types of exalted knowers of all.   
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B. Extensive explanation  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -1. Aspects of the knower of bases  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -2. Aspects of the knower of paths  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3. Aspects of the  exalted knower of all aspects  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -1. Aspects of the knower of bases  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -1A. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -1B. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -1C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -1A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
Having shown the aspects in general, now in particular:  
 
EXPLANATION  
Having s hown the aspects , the antidotal characteristics  in general, now in particular , 
through differentiating them : 
                                              
133 Bsgom pa, rendered as “familiarized with ” here, is also translated elsewhere as “meditated on” or 
“cultivated” depending on the context.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
326 2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -1B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
4.2 Ranging from the aspect of non -existence until 
The aspect of the immovable , 
Those are explained as four with respect to each truth  
And as fifteen with respect to paths. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the sutra passages that indicate [the aspects] ranging from the aspect of non -
existence , “Bhagavan, this perfection of wisdom has gone to the other side that is non -
existence,”  until  the aspect of immovability , “this perfection of wisdom has gone to the 
other side that is immovability” —indicate the twenty -seven  aspects of a knower of bases, 
because those aspects of a knower of bases  are explained as four each with resp ect to 
each  of the first three  truths and as fifteen with respect to true paths.    
 Through these aspects, one should understand that the contemplations on (i) the 
drawbacks of impermanent aggregates that are sufferings of cyclic existence and (ii) the 
drawbacks of being tormented by the three types of sufferings and the like a re branches for 
training in the mentality of a being of middling capacity.  
 Regarding the exalted wisdom directly realizing the emptiness of a self of persons, there 
are divisions in to the first four aspects of true paths; from between (a) the exalted wisdom 
directly realizing the emptiness of apprehenders and apprehendeds being different substances and (b) the knowers of dualistic appearances as mistaken during subsequent 
attainment, there are divisions into the last eleven aspects of paths.  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -1C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -1C1. Aspects of the first three truths 
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -1C2. Aspects of true paths 
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -1C3. Summary of the enumeration [of the aspects]  
2B2C -2A1B-1A1B -1C1. Aspects of the first three truths 
COMMENTARY  
So the root text is said.  Regarding that, in terms of the knower of all, the twelve aspects —
(1) not existing, (2) not produced, (3) devoid, (4) not oppressed, (5) non -abiding, (6) space, 
(7) not e xpressible, (8) without name, (9) without progression, (10) not appropriated, (11) 
not exhaustible, and (12) without production —are respectively the characteristics of 
impermanence and so forth of the three truths, sufferings and so forth. 
 
EXPLANATION  
Regarding  the three types of knower- aspects that exist, there are twenty -seven  in terms of 
the knower of all . Sutra says: “ (1) Not existing  permanently, (2) true sufferings are not 
produced  ultimately, (3) devoid of a self that is a different object, and (4) not oppressed  
by a self that is its own entity.” These words indicating the four teach the aspects of true sufferings, because they teach respectively the four characteristics of true sufferings, impermanence and so forth.  
 The sutra words indicating the four —(5) non- abiding  in which craving, a cause of 
suffering , does not exist ultimately , (6) origins being like space  ultimately , (7) the causes of 
sufferings not being expressible  ultimately [through] investigation and analysis , (8) craving  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
327 and feelings, t he conditions for rebirth being  without name  ultimately —teach the aspects of 
true origins, because they teach respectively the four aspects of [true origins].  
 The sutra words indicating the aspects —(9) cessations being without progression  
ultimately , (10 ) the pacification of sufferings not being appropriated  by conditions , (11) 
sublime liberation not being exhaustible, and (12) cessation that is the dharmata free from 
stains being without production —teach the aspects of true cessations, because they teach  
respectively the four aspects of [true cessations].  
 
The twelve are  respectively the aspects of the three truths, sufferings and so forth , 
because, by way of the sutra passages, the knower- aspects are implied by the object -aspects, 
therefore both the obje ct-aspects and the knower- aspects are taught in sutra; regarding the 
assertion that only the object -aspects are indicated, it has been taught that it is well refuted 
by the Acarya Arya, because if that were to be the case, the contextual meaning would 
dege nerate . 
 The subject —the exalted wisdom of a bodhisattva directly realizing that sufferings do not 
exist permanently —is an aspect that observes the impermanent sufferings, because it is an 
exalted wisdom realizing that sufferings are impermanent.  Therefore, take the predicate 
of the probandum above as the sign for “It is an antidote to the superimposition that 
apprehends permanent sufferings.” Apply similarly to each [of the rest]. These [points] 
teach that these very knowers  of bases indicated on the occasion of the third chapter are 
cultivated by the applications in the continuum of a bodhisattva.  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -1C2. Aspects of true paths 
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -1C2A. Brief indication of the divisions of true paths  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -1C2B. Extensive explanation [of the divisions of true paths]  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -1C2C. Summary [of the divisions of true paths]  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -1C2A. Brief indication of the divisions of true paths  
COMMENTARY 
Because, as antidote to the afflictiv e obscurations, there is one uncontaminated path and, 
since solitary realizers are also included within the knower of all, as antidote to the knowledge obscurations there are the two: the contaminated path of meditation and the 
uncontaminated, there are th ree types of paths.  
 
EXPLANATION  
There are three types of true paths  of a knower of bases in this context, because, as 
antidote to the afflictive obscurations, there is one uncontaminated path of seeing and, 
as antidote to the knowledge obscurations of th ose solitary realizers, there are the two: 
the contaminated path of meditation and the uncontaminated path of seeing  
 There is no contradiction that the antidote to the knowledge obscuration s is taught in the 
context of indicating the aspects of the knower of bases, because, since the paths of solitary 
realizers are also included within the knower of all, it is necessary to indicate the antidote 
to the conception of apprehendeds [as external objects], which is a knowledge obscuration .  
 Since all the aspect s of the knower of bases are to be cultivated by bodhisattvas, the true 
path that is an antidote to the conception of apprehendeds [as external objects], which is a knowledge obscuration , is indicated in these true paths, and is explained here for the sake  of 
[making known that] bodhisattvas have generated it in their continua. However, for the sake 
of definitely understanding that the support of presentation of a knower of bases directly 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
328 realizing that apprehendeds are devoid of true existence is different , solitary realizers are 
mentioned; it is not for the sake of indicating that it is only a clear realization in the 
continuum of solitary realizers.  
 If one has not understood that the divisions of the path of the individual aryas are 
separate, one would n ot understand the existence of the many dissimilar purposes of 
cultivation for the sake of which bodhisattvas cultivate the aspects of the three exalted 
knowers.  
 Regarding this assertion of the great being Acarya [Haribhadra], a previous Tibetan 
asserted  that the clear realizations of solitary realizers are included within the knower of 
bases. This is unrelated, because these [points] indicate the objects of observation of a 
knower of bases that are included within true paths; there  is not even the slight est purpose  
for including the objects of observation of a knower of bases in a knower of bases; if such 
an inclusion in [a knower of bases] is necessary, then even the eight object- aspects of 
suffering s and origins belonging to [the objects of observation of a knower of bases] must 
be included in a knower of bases, [but] it cannot [include them].  
 
OPINION: If one takes these to explicitly indicate the entity of a knower of bases observing 
the aspects of true paths, then the aspects of true paths that are th e observed objects of a 
knower of bases would not have been explicitly indicated; if one were to accept that, it would contradict the contextual meaning, because this is the context of indicating the 
aspects of the four truths, the observed objects of a kn ower of bases. If all the paths that are 
the observed objects of a knower of bases are indicated, then it follows that the paths 
existing in the continua of the buddhas would also have been indicated.  
 
RESPONSE: The teaching that [the reply] “It is only t o be accepted” is to be analyzed. For, 
if the twenty -seven  knower -aspects that are in the entity of a bodhisattva’s knower of bases 
have not been explicitly indicated in this chapter, one would have to accept that all the 
aspects without exception of the k nowers of bases that are applications in complete aspects 
have not been explicitly indicated in the other chapters too; hence, in that case, if a 
bodhisattva has not cultivated all the aspects of the knower of bases without exception by 
means of the applic ations, then he would not generate in his continuum the clear realizations 
that are to be passed through having been viewed by knowing and seeing. That is included within the source of many fallacies, the branches of a knower of paths being incomplete and 
so forth. Therefore, it is outrageous to fling [such] a counterfeit repudiation to someone who 
possesses the non -erroneous instructions of the Ornament for Clear Realization  that has 
been transmitted from Venerable [Maitreya].  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -1C2B.  Extensive explanation [of the divisions of true paths]  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -1C2B -1. Dividing the antidotes to the afflictive obscurations into four  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -1C2B -2. The contaminated antidotes to the knowledge obscurations  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -1C2B -3. The uncont aminated antidotes to the knowledge obscurations  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -1C2B -1. Dividing the antidotes to the afflictive obscurations into four  
COMMENTARY 
Regarding those, for the first, the four aspects of (1) absence  of agent, (2) absence  of 
knower, (3) absence  of transferer, and (4) absence  of taming  are respectively the 
characteristics of paths and so forth.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
329  
EXPLANATION  
Regarding those  three paths that exist , for the first path, there are four aspects ; the 
bodhisattva’s path of seeing that realizes with direc t cognition (1) the absence of a self of 
persons who is an agent  is the aspect of path of true paths, because it is a true path that 
proceeds to the city of nirvana.  
 Likewise, the bodhisattva’s paths of seeing, the aspects that directly realize (2) the 
absence  of a self of persons who is a  knower  of objects, (3) the absence  of a self of persons 
who is a transferer  from inferior states, and (4) the absence  of a self of persons who is a 
tamer  of afflictions, are respectively the characteristics of suitabil ity, achievement and 
deliverance of true paths and so forth , because they act as the direct antidotes to those 
conceptions of self of persons that have been explained. Similarly, apply as above to these the proof that they are the antidotes to the superimp ositions that wrongly engage the aspects 
of true paths. 
 Although the afflictive obscurations in the continuum of a bodhisattva are abandoned by 
the wisdom realizing emptiness, [the above aspects have been explained] for the sake of 
understanding the culti vation of the divisions of the classes of antidotes to the afflictive 
obscurations.  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -1C2B -2. The contaminated antidotes to the knowledge obscurations  
COMMENTARY 
For the second, the five aspects of (1) a dream, (2) an echo, (3) a double imag e, (4) a 
mirage, and (5) an illusion —respectively the characteristics of (1) being devoid of  
entitiness, (2) not having been produced, (3) not ceasing, (4) pacified from the beginning, 
and (5) having passed beyond sorrow by nature —are the antidotes to the knowledge 
obscurations in general . 
 
EXPLANATION  
For the second  path, the subject —the exalted wisdoms (realizing that apprehendeds are not 
external objects) which are included within a bodhisattva’s knower of subsequent 
attainment o f the path of meditation —are the antidotes to the knowledge obscurations 
that adhere to external objects, because (a) they realize tha t (1) forms and so forth being 
devoid of  entitiness  of external objects, like a dream, bear the characteristic of being a 
mere appearance that is a complete transformation of latencies; (2) forms and so forth, like 
an echo,  bear the characteristic of external objects not having been produced;  (3) [forms 
and so forth,] like a double  image, bear the characteristic of [external] objects not 
ceasing ; (4) [ forms and so forth,] like a mirage, bear the characteristic of [external] 
objects being pacified from the beginning ; and (5) [ forms and so forth,] like the aspect of 
an illusion , bear the characteristic of [external] objects  having passed beyond sorrow by 
nature , and (b) they realize through the force  of those awarenesses that, while the [external] 
objects do not exist, there are mere mistaken appearances as [external] objects.  
 The words “ in general ” [in the commentary above ] cause one to understand that each of 
them is also the antidote to the general conception of apprehendeds [as external objects].  
 
OPINION: If this path of meditation, the antidote to the conception of apprehendeds [as 
external objects] explained here , were included within the continua of solitary realizers, it 
would contradict the earlier explanation that it is generated in the continua of bodhisattvas. 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
330 On the other hand, if it were included within the continua of bodhisattvas, since it has been 
explained above as a clear realization that is to be passed through having been viewed by 
knowing and seeing, it would be unreasonable to indicate its continuity, a path of meditation that acts to familiarize with it through diligent familiarization; otherwise, it w ould be similar 
with respect to a path bearing the aspect of impermanence and so forth.   
RESPONSE: There is no fault; it is merely explained that, although it is not familiarized 
with by means of diligent familiarization by a bodhisattva on the occasion o f the path of 
meditation, that path is produced in the continua of a bodhisattva on the path of meditation in general.  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -1C2B -3. The uncontaminated antidotes to the knowledge obscurations  
COMMENTARY 
For the third, the six aspects of (1) the absence  of being thoroughly afflicted, (2) the absence  
of being completely pure, (3) the absence  of being sullied, (4) the absence  of elaborations, 
(5) the absence  of clinging, and (6) the immovable are respectively the individually 
ascertaining antidotes t o the conceptualizations, the knowledge obscurations: (1) the 
thoroughly afflicted, (2) the completely pure, (3) the latencies of afflictions, (4) the 
elaborations of forms and so forth, (5) one’s own realization, and (6) the degenerated. 
 
EXPLANATION  
For the third  path that is related to the explanation of the antidotes to the afflictive 
obscurations above , the six are respectively the individually ascertaining antidotes to 
the conceptualizations  of apprehendeds. The subject —the exalted wisdoms (directly 
realizing that apprehendeds are not external objects) in the continuum of a bodhisattva on 
the path of seeing —abandon the knowledge obscurations  that are  conceptions  of 
apprehendeds: having observed [apprehendeds] as external objects, adhering to (1) the 
thoroughly afflicted  due to grasping and so forth, (2) the completely pure  due to faith and 
so forth , (3) the latencies of afflictions, (4) the elaborations that are divisions of [external] 
objects, forms and so forth, (5) clinging that relishes the taste of one’s own realization  
that adheres [to them] as [external] objects , and (6) that very realization that was attained 
but has  degenerated , respectively (i) because they directly realize (1) the absence of being  
thoroughly afflicted  by external objects , and (ii) because they are aspects  that newly 
realize with direct cognition:  (2) the absence  of being  completely pure  due to external 
objects , (3) the absence  of being  sullied  by the latencies that are included within [external] 
objects , (4) the absence  of el aborations  that are divisions of [external] objects , (5) the 
absence  of clinging  that relishes the taste by a realization that adheres [to them] as objects , 
and (6) the absence  of other [external] objects, apprehendeds  of the immovable in which 
realization s attained do not  degenerate.  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -1C2C.  Summary [of the divisions of true paths]  
COMMENTARY 
In that way, these are the fifteen aspects regarding true paths. 
 
EXPLANATION  
In that way, there are fifteen aspects regarding true paths. 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
331 2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -1C3. Summary of the enumeration [of the aspects]  
COMMENTARY 
These are the twenty -seven aspects of the knower of all in general. 
 
EXPLANATION  
These are the twenty -seven aspects of the knower of all in general. 
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -2. Aspects of the knower of paths  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -2A. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -2B. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -2C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -2A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
After those, the aspects of the knower of paths:  
 EXPLANATION  
After those  aspects of the knower of bases, the aspects of the knower of paths:  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -2B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
4.3  With respect to the causes and paths, sufferings and  
Cessations, “Respectively  
Those are eight, seven,  
Five, and sixteen” is declared.  
 
EXPLANATIO N 
There are thirty -six aspects of true paths, because with respect to  the paths of the causes, 
true origins and true paths,  and the results, true sufferings and  true cessations, 
“Respectively those  aspects are eight, seven, five, and sixteen” is declared  in sutra . It is 
taught in general in sutra: “Subhuti said, ‘Bhagavan, it is like this; this perfection of wisdom 
is a perfection that is separated from attachment’” until  “This perfection of wisdom is a 
perfection of the emptiness, the entitiness of non -things.”  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -2C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -2C1. General indication  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -2C2. Individual explanations  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -2C3. Summary  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -2C1. General indication  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. That true origins and paths are the causes, and true sufferings and 
cessations the results (based upon the thoroughly afflicted and the other class) are indicated 
by means of the meaning. One should understand that true origins, paths, sufferings, and 
cessations are respectively “eig ht aspects” and so forth.   
 
EXPLANATION  
There are thirty -six aspects of the knower of paths, because one should understand that 
the aspects of the knower of paths that are based upon true origins, paths, sufferings, and 
cessations are respectively “eight, seven, five and sixteen aspects” and so forth.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
332 QUALM: The sequence of the four truths here disagrees with explanations elsewhere. 
Hence it is flawed. 
RESPONSE: There is a special purpose for having indicated the sequence of the four truths 
in this manner, because they are indicated by means of  the stages of the  meaning of cause 
and result (i) for the sake of understanding the stages of entering cyclic existence, that true 
origins are the causes and sufferings are the results  based upon  the thoroughly 
afflicted  class,  and (ii) for the sake of understanding the stages of turning away from cyclic 
existence, that true paths are the causes and true cessations are the  results based upon 
the other class, the completely pure. Regarding the indication of sufferings  first elsewhere, 
[the four truths] are indicated in accordance with the stages of the object -possessors, the 
clear realizations, whereas here they are indicated in accordance with the stages of generation. Hence you should understand the purposes of the t wo [types of indication] from 
the respective points of view.  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -2C2. Individual explanations  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -2C2A. Indicating true origins by way of objects of abandonment and antidotes  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -2C2B. Indicating true paths by way of the sis and proof  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -2C2C. Explaining true sufferings by way of specific and general characteristics 
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -2C2D. Explaining true cessations by way of benefits 
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -2C2A.  Indicating true origins by way of objects of abandonment a nd antidotes  
COMMENTARY 
With respect to that, regarding the aspects of (1) separated from attachment, (2) not abiding, (3) pacified, (4) the non -existence of attachment, (5) the non -existence of hatred, (6) the 
non-existence of ignorance, (7) the non -existence of the afflicted, and (8) the non -existence 
of sentient beings, respectively, there are three, three, one , and one serving as antidotes to:  
• those which are cause: (1) aspiration, (2) attachment, and (3) joy;  
• those which are origin: (4) attachment, (5) hatred, and (6) ignorance;  
• that which is strong production: (7) ideations
134; and  
• that which is condition: (8) strong adherence to sentient beings.  
In that way these are the  eight aspects of true causes.  
 
EXPLANATION  
With respect to that, the subject —the exalted wisdom directly realizing selflessness of 
persons in the continuum of a bodhisattva on the path of seeing —respectively:  
• is the antidote to those which are  the aspects of cause  of origins : (1) aspiration  that 
craves for future objects , (2) attachment that craves not to be separated , and (3) craving 
that takes joy in rebirth, because it is an exalted wisdom of a bodhisattva that: (1) is 
separated from the attachment of craving that desires to obtain the attributes of the 
desire realm , (2) doe s not abide  in the manner of adhering to not being separated from 
the attributes of the desire realm , and (3) has pacified  craving that takes joy in the body ;  
• serves as the antidote to those which are the aspects of origin: (4) attachment, (5) 
hatred, and  (6) ignorance, because it is a bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom directly 
realizing: (4) the non -existence of the object of adherence of attachment, (5) the non-
existence of the object of adherence of hatred, and (6) the non- existence of the object 
of adherenc e of ignorance; 
                                              
134 Tibetan: kun tu rtog pa  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
333 • is the antidote to that which is the aspect of strong production: (7) the ideations  that 
adhere to what are improper— cleanness, happiness, permanence, self, and so forth —
because it directly realizes: (7) the non -existence of the object of a dherence of the  
thoroughly afflicted  that is improper attention ; and  
• is the antidote to that which is condition: (8) adherence to independent sentient 
beings , because it is the aspect of newly realizing with direct cognition: (8) the non -
existence of inde pendent sentient beings.  
 
These are the eight aspects that are based upon  true causes , because there are three, 
three, one , and one serving as antidotes to those eight adherences  in that way.  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -2C2B. Indicating true paths by way of thesis and  proof  
COMMENTARY 
The aspects of (1) immeasurable, (2) without being associated with  the two extremes, (3) 
not different, (4) without holding as supreme, (5) not conceptualizing, (6) without measurement, and (7) without  grasping are respectively:  
(1) the path that grants the opportunity to all sentient beings,  (2) how it grants the opportunity to all sentient beings,  
(3) that which is suitable,  
(4) how it is suitable,  
(5) that which is achievement,  
(6) how it is achievement, and  
(7) that which is del iverance.  
There are two, two, two , and one entitinesses of those. In that way these are the  seven 
aspects of true paths.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject—the path of seeing of bodhisattvas —is superior to the true paths of hearers, 
because it is a path that grants  the opportunity of liberation  to all sentient beings . 
Alternatively, the subject —that [as above] —is the aspect of (1) a path that grants the 
opportunity of liberation  to all sentient beings , because it is a path that grants the 
opportunity of liberation t o (1) immeasurable  sentient beings.  
 
QUALM: (2) How  does that [path] grant the opportunity  of liberation to all sentient 
beings ?  
RESPONSE: It grants the opportunity of liberation to immeasurable sentient beings, 
because it grants the opportunity of libera tion to immeasurable sentient beings (2) without 
being associated with the two extremes  of samsara and nirvana. It is the aspect of (3) that 
which is suitable , because it is an exalted wisdom directly realizing that all phenomena are 
(3) not different in being empty of true existence. 
 
QUALM: (4) How is it suitable?  
RESPONSE: Taking the sign above as the predicate, [i.e. it is an exalted wisdom directly 
realizing that all phenomena are not different in being empty of true existence], because it is 
an exalted wisdom directly realizing freedom from elaborations (4) without holding the 
paths of hearers and solitary realizers as supreme.  It is the aspect of (5) that which is 
achievement, because it is an exalted wisdom directly realizing that all phenomena are 
devoid of  true existence and (5) does not conceptualize  them as truly existent. 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
334  
QUALM: (6) How is it achievement?  
RESPONSE: It does not conceptualize them as truly existent, because it is an exalted wisdom directly realizing that all phenomena are (6) without measurement by valid 
cognition.  
 
It is the aspect of (7) that which is deliverance, because it is an exalted wisdom directly 
realizing the aspect of being  (7) without grasping  to all phenomena as existing ultimately.  
These are the seven aspects o f true paths , because there are two, two, two , and one 
entitinesses  of those  four aspects of paths  in that way.   
 They are explained like that, in a manner for the ease of understanding; actually the 
former seven are those which are to be explained while t he latter seven are those which act 
to explain. For the first three aspects of true paths, a thesis as well as a reason indicating 
each of path, suitability, and achievement have been explained, but for the aspect of 
deliverance merely a thesis ha s been ex plained ; a reason has not been indicated. This i s 
related to the mentality of the proximate trainees; it is not that a reason does not exist.  
 The seven aspects of true paths which have been explained in sutra  are: (i) the entities of 
the former [of each pair] of the first three [pairs] from among those which act to explain (in 
the explanation in that way by Acarya  Haribhadra), the questions, (ii) the reasons that are 
the latter [of each pair of the first three pairs from among those which act to explain], the 
explanations with respect to [those] questions, and (iii) the entity of the aspect of deliverance, a question. In summary, the following is explained:  
 
QUESTION: What is the aspect of path?  
ANSWER: “Immeasurable.”  
QUESTION: How is that the aspect of path?  
ANSWER: “Without being associated with the two extremes.”  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -2C2C. Explaining true sufferings by way of specific and general characteristics 
COMMENTARY 
The aspects of (1) impermanent, (2) suffering, (3) empty, (4) selfless, and (5) the fifth, the entitiness that is an aspect being devoid of  characteristics; in that way the aspects of true 
sufferings are five.  
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the five appropriated aggregates — 
(1) are impermanent because they disintegrate from the point of view of continuity as well 
as from the point of view of an instant of time, (2) are suffering  because they are objects to be discarded that do not concord with the 
aryas, (3) are empty  because they are devoid of a self who is an agent that is a different object, 
(4) are the aspect of selfless  because they are phenomena that are not established as the 
entity of a self of persons, and 
(5) are the fifth, the entitiness that is an aspect being devoid of  characteristi cs, because 
they are an aspect that is empty of a truly existent entity ultimately.  
In that way the aspects of true sufferings are five. A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom that 
directly realizes [each of] those aspects is an aspect of the knower of paths. 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
335 2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -2C2D. Explaining true cessations by way of benefits 
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -2C2D -1. Aspect of cessation  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -2C2D -2. Aspect of pacification  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -2C2D -3. Aspect of sublimity 
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -2C2D -4. Aspect of definite emergence 
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -2C2D -1. Aspect of cessation  
COMMENTARY 
The entitiness that is the aspect of cessation by ceasing the things that are (1) the inner, (2) 
the outer, and (3) both is of the three aspects of the emptinesses of: (1) the inner, (2) the 
outer, and (3) both.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the entitiness that is the aspect of cessation included within a separation in 
which the seeds of the knowledge obscurations have been abandoned —is of  the three 
aspects of cessations that are the emptinesses of: (1) the inner, (2) the outer, and (3) 
both, because it is a separation that is distinguished by ceasing adherence to the things that 
are (1) the inner, (2) the outer, and (3) both  as truly existent . 
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -2C2D -2. Aspect of pacification  
COMMENTARY 
The enti tiness that is the aspect of pacification by ceasing adherence to (1) the empty 
imputed self, (2) the world of the environment, (3) the ultimate, (4) the compounded, (5) the uncompounded, (6) the extremes of permanence and severance, (7) cyclic existence w ithout 
beginning or end, and (8) the Dharma  of realizations not discarded, is of the eight aspects of 
the emptinesses of (1) the empty, (2) the great, (3) the ultimate, (4) the compounded, (5) the 
uncompounded, (6) that passed beyond extremes, (7) that wit hout beginning or end, and (8) 
that not discarded.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the cessation that is of the entitiness that is the aspect of pacification of the 
seeds that are knowledge obscurations —is of the eight aspects of the emptinesses of (1) 
the empty  emptiness , until (8) that not discarded , because (i) it is separated from 
adherence to (1) the emptiness  of the  self that is  imputed  by others as truly existent , and 
(ii) it is a separation that is distinguished by ceasing adherence to (2) the world of th e 
environment, (3) the ultimate, (4) the compounded, (5) the uncompounded, (6) the extremes of permanence and severance, (7) cyclic existence without beginning or end, 
and (8) the Dharma  of realizations  not discarded as truly existent .  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -2C2D -3. Aspect of sublimity 
COMMENTARY  
The aspect of sublimity by ceasing (1) the agent that is imputed  by others is (1) the aspect of 
emptiness  of nature.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the aspect of sublimity of true cessations —is (1) the aspect of emptiness  of 
nature , because it is a separation that is distinguished by ceasing adherence to (1) the 
agent that is imputed by other  agents . 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
336 2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -2C2D -4. Aspect of definite emergence 
COMMENTARY  
The aspect of definite emergence by ceasing (1) imputing natures that are mistaken as 
objects, (2) definitions, and (3) mistaking  time, is of the three aspects of the emptinesses of 
(1) all phenomena, (2) the specifically -characterized135, and (3) that  not observed; and…  
 
EXPLANATION  
QUALM:  How does one definitely emerge to an eternal nirvana in an irreversible manner?   
RESPONSE: The subject —the aspect of definite emergence —is of the three modes in 
which one definitely emerges , aspects of the emptinesses of (1) all phenomena, (2) the 
specifi cally -characterized, and (3) that not observed , because it is a separation that is 
distinguished by ceasing (1) imputing  natures  that are  mistaken as objects , from form 
untiluntil the  exalted knower of all aspects, as truly existent , (2) mistakes due to 
apprehending definitions , such as that which is suitable to be form , as truly existent, and 
(3) mistaking time , such as the past and the future , as truly existent.  
 
COMMENTARY  
… the only aspect of definite emergence by ceasing (4) the entitiness is one aspect of (4) the 
emptiness of the entitiness of non -thing.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the only aspect  of where one  definite ly emerges —is one aspect of (4) the 
emptiness of the entitiness of non -thing, because it is not the liberation as imputed by 
others; it is a separation that is distinguished  by ceasing (4) the entitiness  in which 
phenomena are adhered to as truly existent . 
 
The mention of “[the modes] in which one definitely em erges” and “where one definite ly 
emerges” refers to the aspect of definitely emerging only to liberation in which the adherence to phenomena as truly existent has been ceased; it means that, with respect to 
acting to attain that definite emergence, one att ains it by ceasing the adherence to the true 
existence, which is mistaken regarding definitions, definienda , and time, and then 
familiarizing with that. 
  By taking the four aspects of true cessations as a basis, one can distinguish the sixteen 
types of em ptinesses, and one can establish that the sixteen emptinesses are aspects of 
cessations, separations from adventitious stains. It is obvious that the meanings are similar 
regardless of whichever is done.   
 
COMMENTARY 
In that way, these are the sixteen aspects of true cessations.  
 
EXPLANATION  
In that way, these are the sixteen aspects of true cessations.  
                                              
135 Tibetan: rang gi mtshan nyid. It can also be translated as “self -characteristic” or “own definition.” 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
337 2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -2C3. Summary  
COMMENTARY 
These are the thirty -six aspects of the knower of paths in general.  
 
EXPLANATION  
These are the thirty -six aspects of the knower of paths in general. 
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3. Aspects of the  exalted knower of all aspects  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3A. Brief indication  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B. Extensive explanation  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3A. Brief indication  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3A1. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3A2. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3A3. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3A1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
After that, the aspects of the  exalted knower of all aspects.  
 
EXPLANATION  
After that, the aspects of the  exalted knower of all aspects.  
2B2C -2A1B-1A1B -3A2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
4.4  Those ranging from the close placements of mindfulness  
[Until ] the final aspect of buddha, 
Are divided into three [types of] exalted knowers of all  
In accordance with true paths ; therefore  
 
4.5  For learners, bodhisa ttvas, and  
Buddhas respectively, 
Thirty -seven, thirty -four, and  
Thirty -nine are asserted.   
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the final knower- aspects  ranging from the close placements of mindfulness , 
“Subhuti said, ‘Bhagavan, this perfection of wisdom has gone to the other side that is the 
close placements of mindfulness’; the Bhagavan says, ‘Because body, feelings, minds, and phenomena are unobservable,” until the final aspects of a buddha, “‘This Mot her has gone 
to the other side that is enlightenment; the Bhagavan says, ‘Because of being enlightened with respect to all phenomena in all ways,” —are the aspects of the  exalted knower of all 
aspects, because that there are divisions into thirty -seven, thi rty-four, and thirty -nine is  
asserted in sutra . 
  Even though [the aspects of the exalted knower of all aspects] are exalted wisdoms that 
are exalted knowers of all aspects, it is appropriate to divide them into three [types] by 
means of sets, because the supports of presentation are posited from the point of view of 
being respectively related to the learner  hearers, the bodhisattvas  and the buddhas . It is 
appropriate for the [aspects of the] exalted knowers of all aspects to be divided into three 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
338 [types] b y means of divisions of the lineage of the persons who are the supports, because the 
exalted knowers of all aspects are divided into three [types of] exalted knowers of all by 
means of lineage, therefore  there are three [types]. The reason is that the exal ted knowers 
of all aspects are divided into three [types] in accordance with the three [types of] 
dissimilar true paths  (that are included within the exalted knowers in the continua of the 
three [types of] persons) that exist.  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3A3. Commentar y 
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. It is said that those ranging from the close placements of 
mindfulness [ until] the final aspect of buddha, by means of being paths included within the 
three [types of] exalted knowers of all, because all arya persons  are included within the 
exalted knowers of all aspects, according to the enumeration are asserted to be thirty -seven 
aspects for hearers, thirty -four for bodhisattvas, and thirty -nine for buddhas.  
 
EXPLANATION  
It is said that the culminated exalted wisdoms  ranging from the close placements of 
mindfulness until  the final aspect of buddha, by means of being paths of the three 
[types of] exalted knowers of all, are asserted to be one hundred and ten in accordance 
with the thirty -seven aspects for hearers, thir ty-four for bodhisattvas, and thirty -nine 
for buddhas  that exist, because they are divided into the three [types of] exalted knowers of 
all by means of the different supports of presentation. It is appropriate for the exalted 
knowers of all aspects to be d ivided into the three [types of] exalted knowers of all, because 
the exalted knowers of all arya persons are included within  the exalted knowers of all 
aspects, in the manner of possession of progressive excellent qualities.  
 QUALM: Are not the close placements of mindfulness and the like explained to be the 
excellent qualities of the path of accumulation in the context of the extensive explanation? 
Why are the aspects of the  exalted knower of all aspects divided into three [ty pes]?  
RESPONSE: There is no fault. The  thirty -seven  harmonies with enlightenment are posited 
for the sake of understanding that these are in common with th ose of  hearers, since they are 
concordant in property in being paths of the seven sets, the paths th at fully investigate things 
and so forth. The six [sets], the path of antidotes and so forth, are posited as knowers of 
paths from the point of view of bodhisattvas, the persons who are the support, for the sake 
of understanding that they are concordant in  property with those of bodhisattvas.  
 Therefore, if the 110 aspects of the  exalted knower of all aspects had not been divided in 
accordance with the lower arya persons, one would not understand on which occasions of 
the lower paths those three exalted kn owers existing in the continuum of a buddha are 
initially generated, the reason for differentiating three exalted knowers, and so forth. Hence, they are divided into three sets from the point of view of the three persons.  
 At the time of making presentati on of three different exalted knowers from the point of 
view of different supports, although it is appropriate to posit the  thirty -seven  harmonies with 
enlightenment as a class of hearer’s realizations, in this context these modes of cultivating 
the close placements of mindfulness initially on the occasion of the path of accumulation are 
to be cultivated by bodhisattvas.  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B. Extensive explanation  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B1. Aspects of the knower of bases concordant with [those existing in] hearers 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
339 2B2C-2A1B -1A1B -3B2. Aspects of the knower of paths concordant with those existing in bodhisattvas  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B3. Uncommon aspects of the  exalted knower of all aspects  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B1. Aspects of the knower of bases concordant with [those existing in]  hearers 
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B1A. Individual explanations  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B1B. Summary  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B1A.  Individual explanations  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B1A -1. Close placements of mindfulness 
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B1A -2. Four correct abandonings  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B1A -3. Four aspects of the legs of magical emanation  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B1A -4. Five aspects of the powers  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B1A -5. Aspects of the strengths 
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B1A -6. Aspects of the branches of enlightenment  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B1A -7. Aspects of the branches of  aryas’ paths  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B1A -1. Close placements of mindfulness 
COMMENTARY 
Regarding those, for the knower of all, the paths that fully investigate things because one 
should engage in the four truths: full examination of body, feelings, minds, and phenomena, 
by way of specific and general characteristics, the four aspects of the close placements of mindfulness.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Regarding those  three [types of] aspects of the three exalted knowers with respect to the 
exalted knower of all aspects , for th e knower of all, there are seven sets. First of all, 
regarding the paths that fully investigate  things, the body, minds, and so forth, there are  
the four aspects of the close placements of mindfulness , because with respect to that full 
examination  with wisdom by way of (i) specific characteristics: the  body  being unclean , 
feelings  being suffering , minds  being impermanent , and phenomena being selfless, and 
(ii) general characteristics : impermanence, suffering, emptiness, selflessness, and 
emptiness of true existence, there are four [types] acting to focus again and again through 
mindfulness . There is a purpose for examining them in that manner, because , having 
understood the reality of the four noble truths , one should engage in meditating on them . 
 By closely placing oneself through mindfulness on the body , one will engage true 
sufferings, because having understood that the body is in the nature of pervasive compounded suffering through that, one will generate the wish to be free from it. By closely 
placing oneself through mindfulness on feelings , one will engage true origins, because, 
having seen that craving is induced by feelings, one will generate the wish to abandon craving. By closely placing oneself through mindfulness on minds , one will engage  true 
cessations, because, having realized that the mind (that is free from a self) is produced and 
ceases momentarily through that, one will not have the fear that the self will be severed, so 
one will generate the wish to actualize cessations. By closely  placing oneself through 
mindfulness on phenomena , one will engage true paths, because, having realized that 
phenomena of the thoroughly afflicted class are to be abandoned and phenomena of the 
completely pure class are to be relied upon, one will develop the wish to cultivate the paths. 
 The reason for observing these, the body and so forth, at first is that childish beings 
conceptualize (i) the body as a thing which is the abode of a self, (ii) feelings as the [bases 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
340 of]136 utilizations of a self, (iii) min ds as a thing that is a self, and (iv) phenomena as the 
bases of a thoroughly afflicted [self] and a completely pure self. Therefore, for the sake of 
overcoming these, they —having realized with wisdom the specific characteristics, the body 
being unclean an d so forth, and the general characteristics, the body being impermanent and 
so forth, and empty of true existence —place themselves single -pointedly on them through 
mindfulness.   
 These are cultivated by bodhisattvas beginning from the occasion of the smal l level of the 
path of accumulation. Since the culmination of these are the aspects of the exalted knower 
of all aspects, there are many purposes for positing the close placements of mindfulness 
here: (i) to make known that the  thirty -seven  harmonies with enlightenment are generated in 
the continua of bodhisattvas, (ii) to make known that they belong to the class of hearer’s realizations at the time of differentiating among the classes of clear realizations from the point of view of the persons who are the supports, and (iii) having known that they 
transform into exalted knowers of all aspects at the time of culmination due to cultivation 
concordant with those by bodhisattvas, to realize that in an exalted knower of all aspects 
there is a knower of bases con cordant with that generated in hearers. The principal purposes 
are just these.  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B1A -2. Four correct abandonings  
COMMENTARY  
After that, because joyous effort with regard to engagement will arise, regarding the paths 
that arise from exertion:  non-virtue and virtue, that which has been generated and that which 
has not been generated, respectively the joyous effort that is the cause of: (1) correct 
abandonment, (2) non -generation, (3) increase, and (4) generation, the four aspects of the 
correct  abandonings.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Having explained the close placements of mindfulness, after these, regarding the paths that arise from exertion, there are  the four aspects of the correct abandonings. There is 
a reason for indicating them in such an order, becau se the joyous effort that is enthusiasm 
for discarding the objects of abandonment and adopting the antidotes with regard to 
engagement in discarding and adoption with respect to the four truths will arise. 
 Correct abandoning has four aspects, because there are four that are in the entity of the 
joyous effort that is the cause of: (1 -2) correct abandonment of  non-virtue , the 
thoroughly afflicted class that has been generated, and non -generation of that which has 
not been generated, and (3-4) increase and generation, respectively , of virtue , the 
completely pure class , that has been generated and that  has not been generated.   
 Further, it has been taught in sutra that, for the sake of (i) abandoning non -virtuous 
qualities that have been generated, and not g enerating those that have not been generated, 
and (ii) increasing the virtuous qualities that have been generated, and generating those that 
have not been generated, one generates aspiration, makes effort, initiates joyous effort, 
strongly holds the mind, and sets the mind. “Aspiration” refers to the foundation for joyous 
effort. “Effort” refers to joyous effort that pays attention to the reasons for calm abiding , 
strong holding and equanimity. “Initiating joyous effort” refers to initiating joyous effort i n 
generating the antidotes that act to eliminate laxity and excitement. The actual antidotes are 
                                             
 
136 Annotated in accordance with Jetsun Chokyi Gyeltsen’s Ocean of Sport . 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
341 indicated by the last two: when there is laxity within the mind, as an antidote to that, one 
holds an uplifted mind through an attention that has become lucid, such as the 
contemplation on the excellent qualities of the buddhas; and when there is excitement, one sets the mind on the object of observation by withdrawing inwards the outwardly scattered 
mind through an attention that has become despondent, such as the contemplation on the 
drawbacks of samsara.  
 For the sake of understanding (i) the gaining of the four correct abandonings that have a 
special potency , and (ii) the results of cultivating the close placements of mindfulness, the 
four correct abandonings  are correlated with the middling level of the path of accumulation. 
However, the fully -qualified [correct abandonings] are generated even on the small level of 
the path of accumulation.  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B1A -3. Four aspects of the legs of magical emanation  
COMMENTARY 
Because possessing joyous effort makes the mind serviceable, regarding the paths that thoroughly train in meditative stabilization: the meditative stabilizations of (1) aspiration, 
(2) joyous effort, (3) intention, and (4) analysis are the four aspects of the legs of magical 
emanation possessing the applications that abandon.   
 
EXPLANATION  
The paths that thoroughly train137 in meditative stabilization are the four aspects of the 
legs of magical emanation. The reason for explaining them after the c orrect abandonings is 
because possessing joyous effort in discarding the objects of abandonment and adopting 
the antidotes  makes the mind serviceable  through meditative stabilization. There are four 
legs of magical emanation, because, as antidotes to the five faults, there are meditative 
stabilizations  possessing the eight applications  that abandon [the five faults] : [the 
meditative stabilizations of]  (1) contact with a single -pointed mind in dependence on the 
meditative stabilization of aspiration, (2) con tact with a single -pointed mind in dependence 
on joyous effort, (3) contact with a single -pointed mind in dependence on that attained 
from birth [due to] having previously cultivated meditative stabilization, the meditative 
stabilization of intention, and (4) contact with a single -pointed mind in dependence on 
discernment of phenomena that have been taught by others, the meditative stabilization of  
analysis.  
 The eight applications that abandon [the five faults] are:  
(1) aspiration,  
(2) exertion, (3) faith, 
(4) pliancy, 
(5) mindfulness, 
(6) introspection,  
(7) intention, and  
(8) equanimity. 
 
From among the five faults, that which acts as the hindrance to initially applying oneself in 
cultivation is laziness. Hence, the actual antidote acting to eliminate that  is exertion. Its 
foundation is aspiration; the cause of aspiration is faith; and the result of exertion is pliancy.  
                                             
 
137 Spyod emended to read sbyong  in accordance with the commentary above.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
342  At the time of applying oneself in the cultivation of meditative stabilization, since there is 
the fault of forgetting the instructions, a s antidote to it, there is mindfulness. When one 
engages in the actual [cultivation], since there are the faults of laxity and excitement, as the 
antidote to them, mainly there is mindfulness; however there is introspection which realizes 
[the presence of] laxity and excitement. When laxity and excitement occur, since there is the 
fault of not applying the antidote, as antidote to it, there is intention. When one engages in 
meditative stabilization naturally without needing to employ exertion, since there i s the fault 
of applying [the antidote], as antidote to it, there is equanimity [in which the mind is] set 
without exertion.  
  Since these meditative stabilizations are the main bases for accomplishing magical 
emanation, they are [known as] the legs of magi cal emanation. For the sake of 
understanding that these become more and more outstanding progessively over the three 
[levels of the] path [of accumulation], they are correlated with the great level of the path of 
accumulation. However, know that they are a ccomplished even from the occasion of the 
small level of the path of accumulation.  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B1A -4. Five aspects of the powers  
COMMENTARY 
Because, having thoroughly trained the mind, the preparations of the heat and the peak will 
arise, regarding the  paths that prepare for clear realization, the entitiness es of the heat and 
the peak: (1) faith, (2) joyous effort, (3) mindfulness, (4) meditative stabilization, and (5) 
wisdom, the five aspects of the powers. 
  
EXPLANATION  
After the legs of magical emana tion, regarding  the paths that prepare for clear 
realization  of the truth, there are  the five aspects of the powers . The reason for indicating 
them in such an order is because, having thoroughly trained the mind  by way of 
meditative stabilization , the prep arations of the heat and the peak that empower one with 
respect to the clear realization of the truth will arise. The subject —the powers that are the 
entitiness es of the heat and the peak —are of five, because there are the powers of: (1) 
faith  of convictio n in the truths , (2) joyous effort that is an enthusiasm for discarding [the 
objects of abandonment] and adopting [the antidotes] , (3) mindfulness  that does not forget 
the object of observation and aspect , (4) meditative stabilization  that is a single -pointed 
mind , and (5) wisdom  that acts to discern the mode of abidance of the truth . The rest will 
be explained below.  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B1A -5. Aspects of the strengths 
COMMENTARY  
Because having attained the heat and so forth, the forbearance and the supreme mu ndane 
quality will arise, regarding the paths that connect to clear realization, the entitinesses of the forbearance and the supreme mundane quality: (1) faith, (2) joyous effort, (3) mindfulness, 
(4) meditative stabilization, and (5) wisdom, the five aspe cts of the strengths.  
 
EXPLANATION  
After the powers , regarding  the paths that connect to clear realization , there are  the five 
aspects of the strengths . The reason for indicating them in such an order is because, 
having attained the heat and so forth that are in the entity of the powers , the entity of the 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
343 strengths, the forbearance and the supreme mundane quality will arise. This is because 
the five, faith and so forth, that are the entitinesses of the forbearance and the supreme 
mundane quality will arise. Further, they are the five  strengths of: (1) faith  of conviction 
in the truth s, (2) joyous effort for the sake of quickly realizing the truth , (3) mindfulness  
that does not forget the objects of observation and aspects of the truth , (4) meditative 
stabilization  that is a single -pointed mind , and (5) wisdom that individually discerns the 
aspects of the truth . 
 These five are governing factors that empower one with respect to clear realization of the 
truth. However, the difference between them and the  former [powers] is that, since manifest 
non-faith, laziness, forgetfulness, distraction, and corrupt wisdom are suppressed on this 
occasion, even during subsequent attainment when one does not cultivate faith and so forth, 
strong manifest non -faith and so  forth will not arise. During the occasions of the heat and 
the peak, although the discordant classes will not arise at the time when the five powers are 
manifest, they arise manifestly in a frequent manner during subsequent attainment. 
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B1A -6. Aspects of the branches of enlightenment  
COMMENTARY 
Because having realized the four, the heat and so forth, the path that sees the truths will 
arise, regarding  the paths of clear realization: correct (1) mindfulness, (2) discernment of 
phenomena, (3) joyous effort, (4) joy, (5) pliancy, (6) meditative stabilization, and (7) equanimity, the seven aspects of the branches of enlightenment. 
 
EXPLANATION  
After the powers and strengths , regarding the paths of clear realization of the truth there 
are the seven aspects of the branches of enlightenment. The reason for indicating them in 
such an order is because, having realized and attained the four, the heat and so forth, the 
entities of the powers and the strengths, the path that sees the truths, the entity of the 
branches of enlightenment  will arise. Further, they are the branches of enlightenment  of: 
correct (1) mindfulness, the branch of abidance that acts not to be distracted to anything 
other than the observation of the truth, (2) discernment of p henomena  that newly realizes 
with direct cognition selflessness, the branch of nature , (3) joyous effort, the branch of 
definite emergence, (4) joy, the branch of benefit, benefitting the body and mind, and (5-7) 
pliancy, meditative stabilization, and equa nimity, the branches of basis, foundation and 
entity that are without affliction. 
 Further, by way of the branch of enlightenment of correct mindfulness: (i) through 
observing sufferings, one seeks to become devoid of them and abides in mindfulness without  forgetfulness; (ii) through observing origins, one seeks to be free from attachment 
to them and abides [in mindfulness without forgetfulness]; (iii) through observing cessations, one seeks to actualize them and abides [in mindfulness without forgetfulness ]; 
and (iv) through observing paths that act to cease sufferings, one seeks to cultivate them and 
abides in mindfulness without forgetfulness. Know the mode of cultivation in that way 
accordingly also for the remaining six.  
  Understand that, through observing the four noble truths by means of the seven branches 
in that manner, the branches that are the causes for hearer lineage -bearers and so forth to 
achieve their respective enlightenment are of seven types. Here, however, they are mainly to 
be cultivated  by bodhisattvas.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
344 2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B1A -7. Aspects of the branches of aryas’ paths  
COMMENTARY 
Because, having thoroughly known the seeing of the truth, the path of meditation will arise, 
regarding  the paths of pure deliverance: right  (1) view, (2) thought, (3) speech, (4) aim of 
actions, (5) livelihood, (6) exertion, (7) mindfulness, and (8) meditative stabilization, the eight aspects of the eight branches of aryas’ paths. 
 
EXPLANATION  
After having explained the branches of enlightenment , regarding the paths  of pure 
deliverance, the eight aspects of the eight branches of aryas’ paths  will be explained. 
The reason is because, having thoroughly known the seeing of the truth newly with 
direct cognition , the path of meditation will arise. 
 Further, these are the branches of aryas’ paths of: (1) right view, affirmation during 
subsequent attainment of the dharmata realized during meditative equipoise, (2) right  
thought,  the motivation for speech that reveals to others that which one has realized, (3) 
[right ] speech, teaching others the realizations as they have been realized by oneself,  and 
pure actions of speech, (4) right  aim of actions,  pure actions of body, abandoning killing 
and so forth,  (5) right  livelihood, pure actions of body and speech, abandoning  hypocrisy, 
flattery, and so forth, (6) right  exertion, exertion in the antidotes that abandon the objects to 
be abandoned by the path of meditation, (7) right  mindfulness that does not forget the 
reasons for calm abiding , strong holding and equanimity , an d (8) right  meditative 
stabilization , cultivation for the sake of achieving special excellent qualities, the 
clairvoyances and so forth .  
 Know that these eight branches are subsumed under (i) the four branches of affirmation, 
engendering of understanding,  engendering of belief in others, and antidote to the discordant 
classes, and (ii) also the three: training in ethics, training in the mind, and training in wisdom.  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B1B.  Summary  
COMMENTARY 
In that way, in the learners, these are the thirty -seven aspects that bear the support of the 
paths of the knower of all.  
 
EXPLANATION  
In that way, these are the thirty -seven (i) aspects of the exalted knower of all aspects, the 
final exalted wisdoms concordant with the true paths existing in the learners in terms of the 
supports of presentation, and (ii) aspects that bear the support of the paths of the knower 
of all that are to be cultivated also by bodhisattvas temporarily .  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B2. Aspects of the knower of paths concordant with those existing in bodhisattvas  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B2A. Individual explanations  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B2B. Summary  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B2A.  Individual explanations  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B2A -1. Paths of antidotes  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B2A -2. Paths of emanation  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B2A -3. Paths  of abiding happily in the present life  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B2A -4. Supramundane paths  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B2A -5. Paths of abandonment  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
345 2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B2A -6. Paths of buddhas  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B2A -1. Paths of antidotes  
COMMENTARY  
Regarding the knower of paths, the paths of antidotes are: (1) the antidote to that produced 
by view, (2) the antidote to conceptualizations of the signs of that, and (3) the antidote to 
wishing for the three realms. Regarding the entitinesses that are lik e the aforesaid, 
respectively: (1) the entitinesses of the aspects of emptiness and selflessness are the first door of liberation, (2) the entitinesses of true cessations and paths are the second; and (3) 
the entitinesses of the aspects of impermanence and  suffering and of true origins are the 
third. In that way, these are the three aspects of the three doors of liberation.   
 
EXPLANATION  
From among the six regarding the knower of paths, the paths of antidotes are  divided 
into the three aspects of the three  doors of liberation , [and] also the three antidotes to the 
discordant classes. In that way: (1) the entitinesses of the aspects of emptiness and 
selflessness, the exalted wisdom directly realizing selflessness in the continuum of a 
bodhisattva arya  are th e first door of liberation , because they are (1) the direct antidotes 
to that produced by the view  of self by means of realizing with direct cognition the non -
existence of a self that is a different entity and object; the subject —the exalted wisdom 
directl y realizing (2) the eight entitinesses of the aspects of true cessations and paths —
are the second door of liberation, because they are (2) the direct antidotes to the 
conceptualizations that are improper apprehensions of the signs that bear the reason of 
that view of self; the subject —the exalted wisdom directly realizing (3) impermanence 
and suffering of true sufferings and the four entitinesses of the aspects of true origins —
are the third door of liberation, because they are (3) the antidotes to wishing for the 
three realms  as final objects to be attained .  
 Although the three doors of liberation are final exalted wisdoms that are exalted knowers 
of all aspects concordant with the true paths of bodhisattvas, classes of these exist in hearers and solitary realizers; they are included in the knower of paths for the sake of bodhisattvas 
cultivating the full complete path.  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B2A -2. Paths of emanation  
COMMENTARY 
Regarding the paths of emanation: “Because of (1) not destroying and (2) destroying th e 
discrimination of form, respectively the internal (1) having form and (2) not having form 
views external forms,” these two liberations as antidotes to the obscurations to emanation, 
and (3) as antidotes to those thorough afflictions of respectively likin g and disliking to 
emanate attractive and unattractive forms, the door of liberation of the attractive, “Having manifested with  the body, having made it complete, one abides,” one liberation. In that way, 
these are the three aspects of the doors of liberat ion. 
 
EXPLANATION  
Regarding the paths of emanation, the three aspects of the doors of liberation are  the 
three: (1 -2) these two, the liberation in which that having form views forms, and the 
liberation in which that not having form views forms, and (3) one  liberation  of the 
attractive in that way.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
346  “In dependence on the mind of a concentration or a formless absorption, the internal 
yogi having closely placed himself in the discrimination of himself having form , 
[generates] a concomitant meditative stabiliza tion that imagines forms —good and bad, big 
and small, and so forth —wherever he desires to emanate them; and the yogi having placed 
himself in the discrimination of himself not  having form , of merely the aggregates of the 
four names, emanates  external forms  as he desires, and  views them ”; these two 
liberations as antidotes to the obscurations to emanation  that [cause one to be] unable to 
emanate as one desires; in dependence on the mind of either a concentration or a formless 
absorption,  as antidotes to thos e thorough afflictions of respectively liking to emanate  
attractive forms and disliking to emanate unattractive forms , having familiarized with 
the relativeness of attractive and unattractive forms and with how they are subsequently 
related in the sense of  being mutually one essence, by eliminating the discrimination of the 
attractive and the unattractive as being absolutes and the discrimination of them as being 
established as different by entitiness, eventually imagining all appearances of forms as 
being one taste in being attractive is the door of liberation of the attractive. “Having 
manifested with the body  of wisdom , through having become freed from the obscurations 
to the first three liberations, having  made  it complete, one abides.”  
 Aryas frequently  abide by way of the two, this [door of liberation of the attractive] and 
the liberation of cessation. Hence with respect to these two, it has been taught in sutra, 
“Having manifested with the body , one abides completely”; the others are not taught.  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B2A -3. Paths of abiding happily in the present life  
COMMENTARY 
With respect to the paths of abiding happily in the present life, regarding the nature of the 
path that abides in accordance with liberation, there are four aspects of the formless 
absorptions; and regarding the nature of the path that abides in peace, there is one aspect 
that ceases discrimination and feeling. In that way, there are five aspects.  
 
EXPLANATION  
With respect to the paths in which the body and mind abide happily in this present life, 
there are five aspects. There are four formless liberations and one liberation of cessation in 
that way. Regarding the nature of the path that acts as the cause for a path of liberation 
and abides in accordance with  uncontaminated liberation  without being polluted by the 
afflictions of its own level, there are four formless liberations, because they are objects that are freed from the obscurations to relishing the taste of their own levels. This in turn is 
because there are four aspects of the  formless absorptions  included within the actual 
[absorptions].  
 Regarding this, although bodhisattvas actually enter absorption for the sake of themselves 
abiding happily in that life for others’ welfare, the object of intent, they never actualize the 
fruitions of these [absorptions], (i) because bodhisattva aryas have  fully exhausted the 
branches for taking rebirth in cyclic existence through the force of contaminated karma of 
the formless realm, and (ii) because the formless realm is not a place for subduing sentient 
beings.  
 Regarding the nature of the path that abi des in peace  by having pacified coarse 
discrimination and feeling, the one liberation  that ceases discrimination and feeling  is 
actualized for the sake of becoming free from the obscurations to ceasing discrimination and 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
347 feeling. Regarding this, even heare r and solitary realizer aryas enter the absorption only for 
the sake of abiding happily in the present life.  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B2A -4. Supramundane paths  
COMMENTARY  
Regarding the supramundane paths, there are nine: the four concentrations, the formless 
absorptions, and the absorption of cessation.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Regarding the supramundane paths, there are nine  serial absorptions, because there are 
the nine : the four concentrations, the four  formless absorptions, and the absorption of 
cessation  that are in the  entity of supramundane paths. The eight liberations can be 
generated into the entity of supramundane paths of bodhisattva aryas, while the absorption of cessation is posited as a supramundane path since it is attained through the force of a 
supramundane p ath. 
 Regarding the explanation of the expression “serial absorptions,” they are called such 
because one enters absorption into the later one immediately after the previous one; later on 
when one has attained mastery over them, one enters them also in a le aping manner.   
 Other great trailblazers, interpreting the meaning of the Sutra on the Ten Grounds  
(Dasabhumikasutra ), assert that the absorption of cessation is one specific exalted wisdom 
of meditative equipoise that is placed in equipoise on dharmata, but it is clear that both 
Acarya  [Haribhadra] and Arya [Vimuktisena] assert that it is an attribute that is a non -
associated compositional factor in which the six collections of coarse [primary 
consciousnesses] along with their retinues have been stopped; someone’s assertion that it is 
the [state of] having stopped the seven collections along with their retinues upon the mind -
basis -of-all is unreasonable, because in Acarya [Haribhadra’s] Great Commentary , the 
citation from Descent into Lanka Sutra ( Lankavat arasutra), “The eight primary 
consciousnesses and” has been explained; besides just that there is not even a hint of 
explanation that there is a mind -basis -of-all that is a different entity from the six collections. 
I shall explain the other meanings of th e absorption of cessation elsewhere.  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B2A -5. Paths of abandonment  
COMMENTARY 
Regarding the paths of abandonment, there are the aspects of the uninterrupted path 
included within the four truths, the four characteristics that do not possess a fflictions. 
 
EXPLANATION  
Regarding the paths of abandonment, there are  four aspects, because there are the 
aspects of the uninterrupted path , dharma forbearance, the object- possessors included 
within the objects, the four truths, the four characteristics that do not possess thorough 
afflictions.  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B2A -6. Paths of buddhas 
COMMENTARY 
Regarding the paths of buddhas, there are the ten aspects of the perfections of generosity 
and so forth.   
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
348 EXPLANATION  
Regarding the paths of buddhas, there are t en, because there are the ten aspects of the 
perfections of generosity and so forth  as antidotes to miserliness and so forth . 
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B2B.  Summary  
COMMENTARY 
In that way, there are thirty -four aspects bearing the support of the paths of the knower of 
paths in bodhisattvas. 
 
EXPLANATION  
In that way, there are thirty -four aspects bearing the support of the paths of the 
knower of paths concordant with those existing in bodhisattvas.  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B3. Uncommon aspects of the  exalted knower of all aspects  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B3A. Brief indication  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B3B. Extensive explanation  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B3C. Summary  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B3A. Brief indication  
COMMENTARY 
The aspects of the  exalted knower of all aspects are only unique paths that are not in 
common because they are magnificent. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the thirty -nine aspects of the  exalted knower of all aspects —are only  
unique paths  that are  not in common with those of  lower aryas, because they are 
magnificent aspects that cannot be ameliorat ed. 
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B3B. Extensive explanation  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B3B -1. Divisions of the excellent qualities  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B3B -2. Entity  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B3B -3. Support  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B3B -4. Objects of intent  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B3B -1. Divisions of the excell ent qualities  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B3B -1A. Ten strengths  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B3B -1B. Four fearlessnesses  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B3B -1C. Four individual correct knowledges  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B3B -1D. Eighteen unmixed qualities of a buddha  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B3B -1A. Ten strengths  
COMMENTARY 
Regarding those, the ten aspects of the strengths that know: (1) sources and non -sources, (2) 
the fruition of actions, (3) the varieties of interests, (4) the many world systems, (5) superior 
and inferior faculties, (6) the paths that proceed e verywhere (7) the thoroughly afflicted and 
the completely pure, (8) the memory of former states, (9) death -transference and rebirth, and 
(10) the exhaustion of contaminations.  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
349 EXPLANATION  
Regarding those  aspects of the  exalted knower of all aspects, there are the ten aspects of 
the strengths. What are they? The ten aspects of: (1) the strength that knows sources and 
the opposites of those, non -sources, the arisal of happiness and suffering results from 
actions of virtue and non -virtue, (2) the strength that knows  the fruition of actions, the 
direct realization of all results without exception of minute actions, (3) the strength that 
knows the varieties of interests : interests regarding high status and interests regarding the 
paths of the three vehicles , (4) the strength that knows  the many classes that abide naturally 
and are transformed through  accomplishment  in the world systems, (5) the strength that 
knows superior and inferior faculties  that are the best, the middling, and trifling powers of 
faith and so forth , (6) the strength that is a knower that engages without grasping and 
obstruction138 in (i) the paths that proceed everywhere  to high status, such as meritorious 
and immovable actions, and to definite goodness, such as the three vehicles, and (ii) that 
which is opposite to those, (7) the strength that is a knower without grasping and obstruction 
with respect to (i) the thoroughly afflicted that are obscurations to the absorptions in the 
concentrations, liberations, an d so forth, and (ii) the completely pure, definite emergence 
from those, (8) the strength that remembers former states, all the past lives of oneself and 
others , (9) the strength that knows  death- transference and rebirth  that engages the future 
birth place s of all sentient beings , and (10) the strength that knows  the exhaustion of 
contaminations  that is the hearers’ and solitary realizers’ exhaustion of afflictive 
obscurations and the buddhas’ exhaustion of all stains .   
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B3B -1B. Four fearlessnesses  
COMMENTARY 
The four aspects of the fearlessnesses: oneself (1) attesting “I am enlightened”, (2) stating 
that attachment and so forth act as hindrances, (3) fully revealing the paths of the knower of 
all and so forth as definite emergence, and (4) attesting that one’s own contaminations have 
been exhausted, since there is no disputant.  
 
EXPLANATION  
There are four aspects of the fearlessnesses:  
(1) in terms of one’s own welfare, the fearlessness regarding perfect realizations, oneself 
attesting “I am clearly and  completely  enlightened  in all ways with respect to all 
phenomena ” in the midst of a retinue, without  there being a dispute concordant with the 
Dharma  stating “You have not realized this phenomenon,”  
(2) in terms of others’ welfare, the fearlessness regarding revealing the hindering 
phenomena, stating that the afflictive obscurations, attachment and so forth , and the 
knowledge obscurations  act as hindrances  to liberation and omniscience, without  there 
being a dispute concordant with the Dharma  stating “Even though this object of 
abandonment is relied upon, it will not become a hindrance,”  
(3) [in terms of others’ welfare,] the fearlessness regarding revealing the path of definite 
emergence, fully revealing  the paths of the knower of all , the knower of paths, and so 
forth as definitely emerging  to liberation and omniscience, without  there being a dispute 
concordant with the Dharma  stating “Even though this path is relied upon, it is unable to 
cause definite emergence,”  and  
                                              
138 Chags thogs  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
350 (4) in terms of one’s own welfare, the fearlessness regarding perfect abandonment, attesting 
that all of one’s own contaminations without exception have been exhausted, since there 
is no dispute  concordant with the Dharma .   
 
Through [the Buddha] himself having attained happiness, and having attained intrepidity 
and fearlessness, that abode is pledged as an abode of the great hero. Also in the manner of 
a lion’s roar in the midst of a retinue, sutra says, “Having pledged that ‘O, I am clearly and  
completely enlightened with respect to these phenomena,’ I do not subsequently see the 
correct cause of such that will become a dispute concordant with the Dharma  in the world 
by a trainee -in-virtue, a brahmin, a god, a demon, or Brahma, or anyone e lse, saying that I 
am not clearly and  completely enlightened with respect to these phenomena  here.”  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B3B -1C. Four individual correct knowledges  
COMMENTARY 
Regarding (1) enumerations, (2) the characteristics of phenomena,139 (3) the languages of 
places, and (4) the objects of the classification of phenomena, respectively: (1) phenomena, 
(2) meaning, (3) terminology (definitive words), and (4) confidence, the four aspects of 
individual correct knowledges. 
 
EXPLANATION  
There are  the four aspects of individual correct knowledges , because there are the first 
two that are unobstructed regarding the objects to be known, and there are the later two that 
are unobstructed regarding that which explains : 
the meditative stabilizations and wisdoms that engage without grasping and obstruction the exalted knowers regarding (1) the many enumerations  of names of thoroughly afflicted and 
completely pure phenomena, and  (2) the specific and general characteristics of 
phenomena, are the individual correct knowledges of phenomena and meaning ; and  
the meditative stabilizations and wisdoms that engage without grasping and obstruction the 
exalted knowers regarding (3) the languages of places of all sentient beings that utters the 
language concordant with each place, and (4) the objects of the classification of the 
entities and aspects of phenomena, are respectively  the individual correct knowledges of 
terminology (definitive words) and confidence .   
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B3B -1D. Eighteen unm ixed qualities of a buddha  
In that way, the purities that are the eighteen qualities of a buddha unmixed with lower 
supports are the eighteen: (1) six included within behavior, (2) six included within 
realizations, (3) three included within exalted activit ies, and (4) three included within 
exalted wisdom.  
 
The six included within behavior:  
 
COMMENTARY 
The six aspects of not possessing (1) mistakes, (2) senseless sounds, (3) the degeneration of mindfulness, (4) non -equipoise of mind, (5) the discrimination o f difference, (6) the 
indifference of not examining individually;  
 
                                             
 
139 “Don dang” deleted.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
351 EXPLANATION  
the six aspects of a tathagata not possessing  (1) mistaken  behavior of body, such as 
keeping company with a fierce elephant , (2) senseless sounds regarding  speech, such as  
uttering meaningless noises in a thick forest , (3) the degeneration of mindfulness , such as 
missing out on certain tasks or exceeding a time limit due to forgetfulness , (4) non -
equipoise of mind  regarding the meaning of emptiness , (5) the discrimination of a 
difference  between samsara and nirvana that is their being established by way of their 
entitiness es as an object to be adopted and an object to be discarded , (6) the indifference of 
not examining individually whether or not the time has arrived to enact  exalted activities 
in the continua of trainees .  
 
The six included within realizations:  
 
COMMENTARY 
the six aspects of not possessing degeneration from (7) aspiration, (8) joyous effort, (9) 
mindfulness, (10) meditative stabilization, (11) wisdom, (12) liberation;  
 
EXPLANATION  
the six aspects of not possessing degeneration from (7) aspiration  that seeks  to enact the 
welfare of sentient beings and so forth , (8) joyous effort that is enthusiastic about going to 
places where there are trainees , (9) mindfulness  that does not forget the method for 
subduing sentient beings , (10) meditative stabilization  that i s set in equipoise on the 
thusness of phenomena , (11) wisdom  that  discerns all phenomena , (12) liberation  in which 
the obscurations have been abandoned.   
 
The three included within exalted activity:  
 
COMMENTARY 
the three aspects preceded by exalted wisdom and followed by exalted wisdom —the exalted 
activities of (13) the exalted  body, (14) the exalted  speech, and (15) the exalted  mind;  
 
EXPLANATION  
the exalted activities of a perfect complete buddha are superior to those of hearers and solitary realizers, b ecause (13) the exalted activities of the exalted body, subduing trainees 
through the four types of behavior
140, (14) the exalted activities of the exalted speech,  
speaking that which possesses the Dharma  and is meaningful , and (15) the exalted activities 
of the exalted mind, love, compassion, and so forth, are  (i) preceded by exalted wisdom 
and (ii) followed by exalted wisdom  due to moving along together with exalted wisdom in 
the middle .  
 
The three included within exalted wisdom:  
 
COMMENTARY 
and the three aspects of exalted wisdoms that do not grasp and are not obstructed regarding 
the arising of the (16) past, (17) future, and (18) present: thus, these are the aspects of the 
eighteen unmixed attributes of a buddha. 
                                              
140 These are standing, sitting, walking , and lying down.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
352  
EXPLANATION  
they are exalted wisdoms unm ixed with those of hearers and solitary realizers, because, by 
way of mere acceptance  regarding the arising of the (16) past, (17) future, and (18) 
present, [a tathagata] possesses exalted knowers that are  exalted wisdoms that (i) do not 
grasp due to engaging in knowing through mere wishing and (ii) are not obstructed  due to 
directly knowing all aspects . 
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B3B -2. Entity  
COMMENTARY  
The thusness explained by all the buddhas,   
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the dharmata in the continua of the perfect  complete buddhas —is the aspect 
of thusness, because the thusness explained by all the buddhas  of the three times is 
distinguished by having extinguished all stains. 
 In terms of the object -possessor, the exalted wisdom that knows the modes in the 
continuu m of a buddha is the aspect of thusness, because it is an exalted wisdom that is set 
in equipoise on thusness in a manner of not arising again. Since a buddhas’s coming into the 
world is for the sake of clarifying the suchness of things to trainees, a budd ha who does not 
teach thusness does not exist at all. Therefore [thusness] is “explained by all the buddhas.”  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B3B -3. Support  
COMMENTARY 
the self- arisen that has mastered all Dharma , and  
 
EXPLANATION  
The very culminated principal perfection  of wisdom  is the aspect of the self- arisen that has 
mastered all Dharma , because it is an exalted wisdom that has attained mastery over 
turning all the wheels of Dharma  without exception to trainees. Further, the subject —those 
excellent qualities, the strengths and so forth explained above —are not based upon [just] 
anything that is self- arisen, because they are excellent qualities based upon the self- arisen 
that has mastered all Dharma . 
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B3B -4. Objects of intent  
COMMENTARY 
the aspect of budd ha itself that is clear complete  enlightenment in all aspects —the three.   
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the exalted knower of all aspects —is the aspect of buddha itself, because it 
is the realization of clear complete  enlightenment in all aspects  with respect to all 
phenomena . 
2B2C -2A1B -1A1B -3B3C. Summary  
COMMENTARY 
In that way, the aspects that bear the support of the paths of the exalted knower of all 
aspects of the buddhas are thirty -nine. 
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
353 EXPLANATION  
In that way, the aspects that bear the support of the paths of the exalted knower of all 
aspects of the buddhas are thirty -nine. 
2B2C -2A1B -1A1C. Summary [of the divisions of the aspects, the branches of knowers, the antidotes to all the 
discordant classes without exception]  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1C -1. Summary of the enti ties 
2B2C -2A1B -1A1C -2. Summary of the enumeration  
2B2C -2A1B -1A1C -1. Summary of the entities 
COMMENTARY 
With regard to that, the aspects of the knower of all, by the instances of hearers and 
bodhisattvas, are respectively without contaminations and also wit h contaminations.  
 
EXPLANATION  
With regard to that, the twenty -seven aspects of the knower of all, by the instances of 
those existing in the continua of hearers  and solitary realizers and those existing in the 
continua of bodhisattvas,  are respectively without  the contaminations  that are afflictions 
(due to [hearers and solitary realizers] having specifically  sought out the afflictive obscurations 
and intended to abandon them) and also with contaminations  (due to [hearers and solitary 
realizers] having specifically  sought out the afflictive obscurations and intended to abandon 
them) and also with contaminations (due to the opposite of the reason above). Regarding the 
above explanation of the solitary realizers’ paths as contaminated, they are with the 
contaminations (of the conception s of apprehendeds that are knowledge obscurations ) during 
subsequent attainment; bodhisattvas also cultivate in accordance with those.  
 
COMMENTARY 
The aspects of the knower of paths are only with contaminations because it is very much the 
case that bodhisattvas have not abandoned the afflictions.   
 
EXPLANATION  
That “ the thirty -six aspects of the knower of paths are only with the contaminations  that 
are categories of afflictions” is presented, because it is very much the case that bodhisattvas 
have not abandoned the afflictions  by way of taking the afflictions as the principal objects of 
abandonment . Although bodhisattvas have not abandoned the afflictions, they do not generate 
even the slightest fault of afflictions. Therefore  they are presented as being with the 
contaminations that are afflictions. Since hearers and solitary realizers take the afflictions as 
their principal objects of abandonment and abandon them, the knowers of bases in their 
continua are said to be uncontami nated.  
 
COMMENTARY 
The aspects of the paths of the exalted knower of all aspects are only uncontaminated because 
they have mastery over all phenomena  since the perfect complete buddhas have abandoned in 
all ways the afflictive and knowledge obscurations a long with their latencies.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the one hundred and ten final aspects of the paths of the exalted knower of all 
aspects —are only uncontaminated, because they have mastery over all phenomena.  That 
follows  since the perfect complete buddh as have abandoned in all ways the afflictive and 
knowledge obscurations along with their latencies.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
354 2B2C -2A1B -1A1C -2. Summary of the enumeration  
COMMENTARY  
If the aspects are added together, there are 173.  
 
EXPLANATION  
If the aspects are added together, t here are 173.  
2B2C -2A1B -1A2. Identifying the special applications that actually destroy the conception of true existence  
2B2C -2A1B -1A2A. The supports who collect the roots of virtue  
2B2C -2A1B -1A2B. The actual applications   
2B2C -2A1B -1A2A. The supports who  collect the roots of virtue  
2B2C -2A1B -1A2A- 1. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A1B -1A2A- 2. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -1A2A- 3. Commentary 
2B2C -2A1B -1A2A- 1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
If the aspects must be cultivated  by way of special applications, because also those cannot 
be described in the absence of those who apply them, the vessels who listen and so forth, 
those who apply those:  
 
EXPLANATION  
Through mainly indicating the vessels who listen to the Mothers and so forth, the  supports 
who collect the roots of v irtue, the persons who ripen the roots of virtue and so forth, those 
who apply them,  will be explained. The reason is  because , if the special applications 
realizing emptiness (which will be explained immediately) that are superior to the 
applications of he arers and so forth must be meditated upon in meditative equipoise and the 
173 aspects must be meditated upon by way of being conjoined with the special 
applications, also those applications cannot be described in the absence of the 
explanation of those who apply those  applications : 
2B2C -2A1B -1A2A- 2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
4.6  Those who have acted exceptionally towards buddhas,  
Have planted roots of virtue with regard to them,  
And have been under the protection of spiritual guides  
Are vessels for listening to these. 
 
4.7 Because they have served buddhas, questioned, and  
The conduct of generosity, ethics, and so forth,  
The vessels who take, hold, and so forth  
Are asserted to be excellent beings.  
   
EXPLANATION  
The subject —bodhisattvas on the path of accumulati on who possess the characteristics 
which will be explained below —are vessels for listening to  these  three Perfection of 
Wisdom [Sutras] of the Mahayana, (i) because they have acted exceptionally towards 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
355 numberless buddhas  in the past, such as honoring them , (ii) because they have planted 
roots of virtue, such as offering alms, with regard to them, and (iii) because they have 
been under the protection of Mahayana  spiritual guides . The vessels who take  to mind 
the words of the Mothers , hold  the meanings witho ut forgetting them , complete the 
accomplishments, and so forth are asserted to be excellent beings, because , for the sake 
of those, they have served countless  buddhas, questioned all the words and meanings that 
they have doubts about , and practiced through the  proper  conduct of generosity, ethics, 
and so forth.  
2B2C -2A1B -1A2A- 3. Commentary 
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. Those who (1) have generally planted roots of virtue with respect to 
the buddhas who have arisen in the past and pre sent and trained in them, (2) have pleased 
the tathagatas by honoring them with body and so forth, (3) have fully questioned the meanings that they have doubts about, and (4) have practiced the ten perfections, generosity 
and so forth— having been blessed by the spiritual guides
—are accepted by the buddhas and 
so forth, respectively, as the very vessels (1) to listen to the scriptures of these Mothers bearing the characteristics of the aspects, (2) to hold, (3) to not forget the meaning, and (4) 
to proper ly take to mind . 
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —those [bodhisattvas on the path of accumulation who possess the 
characteristics which will be explained below] —(1) have generally planted roots of virtue  
initially, offering temples and so forth, with respect to the buddhas who have arisen in 
the past and present and trained in them  higher and higher , because of having been  
blessed by the spiritual guides . Respectively, they are accepted by  the buddhas and 
bodhisattvas  as the very vessels (1) to l isten to the scriptures of these Mothers  bearing 
the characteristics of the aspects  included within the 173 knower -aspects. “Having been 
blessed by the spiritual guides” is to be joined to the end of the three below, because it is to 
make known that the fu lly complete qualities of a buddha are contingent upon pleasing the 
spiritual guide.  Those accepted by the buddhas, great bodhisattvas, and so forth as the very vessels (2) to 
hold  in mind the words of these scriptures , (3) to not forget the meaning, and (4) to 
properly take to mind  acting to complete the achievings, respectively (2) have pleased the 
past tathagatas by honoring them with body and so forth,  because of having been 
blessed by the spiritual guides , (3) have fully questioned past buddhas regard ing the 
meanings that they have doubts  about,  [because of having been blessed by the spiritual 
guides] , and (4) have practiced the ten perfections, generosity and so forth  by having 
practiced the meanings that have been questioned , because of having been b lessed by the 
spiritual guides . By having taken the supports who collect the roots of virtue as the principal 
objects to be explained, the supports who act to  complete the achievings have also been 
indicated.  
2B2C -2A1B -1A2B. The actual applications  
2B2C -2A1B -1A2B -1. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A1B -1A2B -2. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -1A2B -3. Commentary 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
356 2B2C -2A1B -1A2B -1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
In that way, having shown the cultivators of the applications, the applications:  
 
EXPLANATION  
In that way, havi ng shown the persons who are the cultivators of the applications, the 
entities and divisions of the applications:   
2B2C -2A1B -1A2B -2. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -1A2B -2A. Entities of the applications themselves  
2B2C -2A1B -1A2B -2B. Divisions by way of the persons wh o are the supports 
2B2C -2A1B -1A2B -2C. Divisions by way of the applications [that are] the methods for completion  
2B2C -2A1B -1A2B -2D. Those posited by way of the result  
2B2C -2A1B -1A2B -2E. That posited by way of time  
2B2C -2A1B -1A2B -2A. Entities of the applications themselves  
ROOT TEXT  
4.8  Because of not abiding in forms and so forth;  
Because of stopping the application to that;  
Because the thusnesses of those are profound;  
Because those are difficult to fathom; 
 4.9a  Because those are immeasurable;  
 
EXPLANATION  
The entities of the applications are as follows. By way of those two —(1) the application of 
not abiding in forms and so forth, cultivation through realizing that phenomena included 
within bases, paths, and aspects are not truly existent, and (2 ) the application of stopping 
the application , cultivation by way of  stopping the adherence  to that application stopping 
abidance as truly existent —(i) because of realizing the  thusnesses of those  bases, forms 
and so forth,  are profound, (ii) because of realizing that the dharmatas of those  phenomena 
included within paths are difficult to fathom, and (iii) because of realizing that the 
dharmatas of those  phenomena included within aspects  are immeasurable , [the latter three 
applications] are called (3 –5) “applications of the profound, of the difficult to fathom and of 
the immeasurable .” 
 Sutra says:  
“When a great bodhisattva practices the perfection of wisdom, at the time of not abiding in forms, he performs the yoga with respect to forms.”  
“Whenever a great bodhisattva does not perform the application with respect to forms, at the 
time of not performing the application with respect to forms, he performs the yoga with 
respect to forms.”  
“Sariputra , because the thusness of forms is profound the perfection of wi sdom is 
profound.”  
“Sariputra , because forms are difficult to fathom the perfection of wisdom is difficult to 
fathom.”  
“Sariputra , because forms are immeasurable the perfection of wisdom is immeasurable.”  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
357 These very five applications are divided into the remaining [applications] by way of 
occasion and time. As explained above, a wisdom arisen from meditation observing 
emptiness does not exist prior to the heat level of the path of preparation. The repeated 
analysis of emptiness and being set single -pointedly on it while being set in equipoise on a 
fully -qualified calm abiding  exists even on the path of accumulation. Thus, know that both 
are included here.  
2B2C -2A1B -1A2B -2B. Divisions by way of the persons wh o are the supports 
The eight divisions by way of the  cultivators of the applications are as follows:  
 
ROOT TEXT  
4.9b  Because of being difficult to realize over a long time with great hardship;  
 
EXPLANATION  
In terms of those who generate great fear due to not attaining a clear appearance of a 
wisdom arisen from meditation regarding dharmata, since the realizations of the Mothers are generated after a long time, there is (6) the application of realizing over a long time 
with great hardship.  
 Sutra says, “The  Bhagavan does not express this Perfection of Wisdom before those who 
have newly entered the vehicle of the great bodhisattva; upon hearing this profound 
Perfection of Wisdom, they will get a fright.”
  
 In terms of the supports  in whom great fear does not arise, there are:  
(a) the applications possessing one’s own welfare  
(b) the applications possessing others’ welfare  
 
With respect to the first, [(a) the applications possessing one’s own welfare]:  
 
ROOT TEXT  
4.9cd  Prediction;  irreversibility;  
Definite emergence;  being w ithout hindrances;  
 4.10a  Close to enlightenment; quickly;  
 
EXPLANATION  
Due to having attained a clear appearance regarding dharmata on the occasion of the heat level, one will quickly be predicted by the buddhas, [therefore] there is (7) the application of 
receiving prediction . 
 Sutra says, “Koushika, a great bodhisattva, upon hearing this profound perfection of 
wisdom, will not get a fright, will not be seized by fear. He will receive prediction to unsurpassable complete enlightenment b efore long.”   
 On the occasion of the peak level, due to having attained a special realization from the 
heat level and ripened one’s roots of virtue, there is (8) the application of i rreversibility . 
 “Bhagavan, those sons of the lineage or daughters of th e lineage will generate that with 
respect to this very perfection of wisdom; even upon having generated it, they will hold it, 
uphold it, read it, understand it, and pay proper attention. They will be predicted to 
unsurpassable complete enlightenment or will become irreversible.”  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
358  Due to having attained a stable realization of method and wisdom on the occasion of the 
forbearance level, passing beyond the hindrances of hearers, solitary realizers, and so forth, 
there is (9) the application of definite emerge nce. 
 Due to having seen the quick entry into the ocean of dharmadhatu on the occasion of the 
supreme mundane quality level, there is (10) the application of being without hindrances ; 
accomplishing well in one’s continuum the ability to be suitable to gene rate produce 
uncontaminated qualities, the causes of omniscience, there is (11) the application of being  
close to enlightenment;  and quickly issuing forth the result, there is (12) the application of  
quickly  attaining enlightenment. 
 With respect to the second, [(b) the applications possessing others’ welfare]:  
 
ROOT TEXT  
4.10b  Others’ welfare;   
 
EXPLANATION  
Engaging in the turning of the wheels of Dharma  for others’ welfare out of compassion is 
(13) the application of others’ welfare .  
 Sutra says, “I too practice the perfection of generosity; I also correctly set others in the 
perfection of generosity.”  
2B2C -2A1B -1A2B -2C. Divisions by way of the applications [that are] the methods for completion  
The applications that are the methods for completing cu ltivation in the Mothers are as 
follows:  
 
ROOT TEXT  
4.10bcd  … because no increase and no decrease;  
Not seeing dharma, non -dharma, and so forth;  
Not seeing inconceivable forms and so forth;  
 4.11ab  Not conceptualizing forms and so forth,  
Their marks  and entities;  
 
EXPLANATION  
There is (14) the application realizing that there is no increase and no decrease  ultimately 
although conventionally faults and excellent qualities are increased and decreased;  sutra 
says, “Subhuti, when a great bodhisattva practices  the perfection of wisdom , at the time of 
perfectly not subsequently seeing phenomena ranging from forms until  the exalted knower 
of all aspects as increasing or decreasing, that great bodhisattva will thoroughly complete 
the cultivation of the perfection of wisdom.”   
 There is (15) the application of not seeing the wholesome, the unwholesome, and so 
forth as dharma, non- dharma, and so forth ultimately ; sutra says, “when a great 
bodhisattva practices the perfection of wisdom, he perfectly does not subseque ntly see that 
called ‘dharma’; he perfectly does not subsequently see that called ‘non -dharma’...”  
 Not clinging to the aspects of inconceivable forms and so forth as truly existent is (16) 
the application of not seeing inconceivable forms and so forth; sutra says, “Subhuti, 
because forms are inconceivable, [they] are taught to be inconceivable.”  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
359  There is (17) the application of not conceptualizing the bases of characterization, forms 
and so forth, their marks , that which is suitable to be a form and so f orth, and the entities  
of their objects of characterization as truly existent ; sutra says, “Subhuti, when a great 
bodhisattva practices the perfection of wisdom , he does not conceive forms, does not 
conceptualize  them. He does not conceive the marks of forms, does not conceptualize  them. 
He does not conceive the natures of forms, does not conceptualize  them.”  
2B2C -2A1B -1A2B -2D. Those posited by way of the result  
ROOT TEXT  
4.11cd  Bestowing the precious result;  
That is purity; …   
 
EXPLANATION  
Increasing ex cellent qualities is (18) the application of  bestowing the precious result; sutra 
says, “Bhagavan, this perfection of wisdom is a heap of jewels, because it bestows the 
jewels, from stream -enterer until the unsurpassable complete enlightenment141.” 
 That  application eliminating faults is  (19) the application of purity; sutra says,  
“Bhagavan, this perfection of wisdom is a heap of purity of all phenomena in every [way].”  
2B2C -2A1B -1A2B -2E. That posited by way of time  
ROOT TEXT  
4.11d  …; and being along with boundaries . 
 
EXPLANATION  
Cultivating the Mothers quickly is (20) the application of being along with boundaries;  
sutra says, “Even when a son of the lineage or daughter of the lineage asks a question, he or she will quickly write it down.”  
2B2C -2A1B -1A2B -3. Commentary 
The five actual applications:  
 
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. The five applications of: (1) not abiding in forms and so forth, (2) 
not applying, (3) the profound, (4) the difficult to fathom, and  (5) the immeasurable, 
respectively, realizing in that way: (1) “not abiding in forms and so forth through absence  of 
entitiness,” (2) “merely not applying with respect to  those is applying,” (3 -5) due to forms 
and so forth themselves being the entitiness of thusness, “profound,” “ difficult to fathom,” 
“immeasurable,” and…  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise of a bodhisattva on the path of 
preparation —is called, respectively, (1) the application of “not abiding in forms and so 
forth  ultimately , ” (2) the application of “ not applying, stopping adherence to object -
possessors as truly existent, (3 -5) the applications of “ the profound,  ” “the difficult to 
fathom, ” and “the immeasurable, ” respectively  (1) because it is an application realizing 
“not abiding in forms and so forth ultimately  through absence  of entitiness,” (2) 
                                              
141 Sbyang  emended to read byang.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
360 because it is a bodhisattva’s application “applying with respect to  the meaning of the mode 
of abidance by merely not applying with respect to those forms and so fo rth,” (3 -5) 
because it is a bodhisattva’s application realizing  in that way, due to forms and so forth 
themselves being the entitiness of thusness, “ the dharmatas of bases are profound,” “ the 
dharmatas of paths are difficult to fathom,” and “the dharmatas of aspects are 
immeasurable.”  
 
COMMENTARY 
…fifteen types of applications: (6) attaining clear complete  enlightenment with great 
hardship over a long time, (7) receiving a predication, (8) irreversibility, (9) definite 
emergence, (10) being without hindranc es, (11) being close to perfect clear complete  
enlightenment, (12) quickly attaining clear complete  enlightenment, (13) others’ welfare, 
(14) no increase or decrease, (15) not observing dharma, non -dharma, and so forth, (16) 
ceasing the aspects of inconcei vable forms and so forth, (17) not conceptualizing things that 
are forms and so forth, (18) bestowing the precious result, (19) purity, (20) with regard to 
the boundaries, which respectively possess the accomplishment of those called: (6) fear 
regarding th e perfection of wisdom, (7) absence  of fear, (8) correctly  upholds, (9) abandons 
hindering phenomena, (10) always cultivates the Dharma , (11) the very support of new 
uncontaminated qualities, (12) manifestly achieves the resultant truth body, (13) thorough ly 
turns the wheel of Dharma , (14) sees neither increase nor decrease, (15) does not observe 
the constituents of desire, (16) does not cling to the aspects of inconceivable forms and so 
forth, (17) does not conceptualize forms, their marks, and their entit inesses, (18) sees the 
first result, (19) pure forms, (20) not discard manifestly striving for years: the twenty applications.   
 
EXPLANATION  
The applications of occasions:  
 The subject —the application of a dull -faculty bodhisattva abiding on the path of 
accumulation —respectively  is an application in the continuum of one (6) attaining clear 
complete  enlightenment with  great hardship over a long time  because it is an application 
in the continuum of a beginner in whom great manifest (6) fear regarding the perfection of wisdom  that is a realization of the meaning of the mode of abidance occurs.  
 The subject —the heat level of the Mahayana path of preparation —is the application of 
(7) receiving a predication , because it is an application that is distinguished  by possessing 
(7) absence  of fear  regarding the Mothers.  
 The subject —the peak level —is the application of (8)  irreversibility , because it is an 
application that (8) correctly upholds  hearing of the Mothers and so forth due to being 
superior to the heat l evel.  
 The subject —the forbearance level of the Mahayana path of preparation —is the 
application of (9) definite emergence , because it is an achieving that (9) abandons 
hindering phenomena  such as the attention adopted by the hearers and solitary realizers for 
the sake of oneself alone, due to having attained a forbearance that is unafraid of emptiness 
and so forth.  
 The subject —the supreme mundane quality level of the path of preparation —is the 
application of (10) being without hindrances , because it is the  fourth partial concordance 
with definite discrimination that  (10) always cultivates the Dharma  due to acting as the 
direct cause of the path of seeing.   
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
361  The subject —the Mahayana path of seeing —is the application of (11) being close to 
perfect complete e nlightenment, because it is an application that is  (11) the very support 
of new uncontaminated qualities of the Mahayana paths. 
 The subject —the exalted wisdoms of the second ground until the seventh ground—are 
the applications of (12) quickly attaining clear complete  enlightenment, because they are 
applications that (12) manifestly achieve the resultant truth body  quickly.  
 The subject —the exalted wisdoms of the eighth ground —are the applications of (13) 
others’ welfare, (14) no increase or decrease, (15) not observing dharma, non -dharma, and 
so forth as existing ultimately, (16) ceasing the aspects of inconceivable forms and so forth, and (17) not conceptualizing the things th at are forms and so forth, because they are 
applications of the pure grounds that (13) thoroughly turn the wheel of Dharma  for others’ 
welfare due to having attained the ability to turn the wheel of Dharma  for all three lineage -
bearers, (14) see neither in crease nor decrease as existing ultimately, (15) do not observe 
any phenomena as the constituents of desire as existing ultimately, (16) do not cling to the aspects of inconceivable forms and so forth as truly existent, and (17) do not conceptualize 
the ba ses of characterization, forms, their marks, and the entitinesses of their objects of 
characterization as truly existent.  The subject —the exalted wisdom of the ninth ground —is the application of (18) 
bestowing the precious result, because it is a yoga of the pure grounds that (18) sees the 
first result of stream -enterer until unsurpassable enlightenment. 
 The subject —the exalted wisdom of the tenth ground —is the application of (19) purity , 
because it is a yoga of the pure grounds that cultivates (19) pure forms  until an exalted 
knower of all aspects.    The subject —a bodhisattva’s yoga that cultivates the Mothers quickly —is called an 
application (20) with regard to the boundaries , because it is an application that does (20) 
not discard manifestly striving i n cultivation through delineation of time into days, 
months, and years . The former five  and the later fifteen types  are the twenty applications . 
2B2C -2A1B -1B. Faults and excellent qualities with respect to cultivating the applications  
2B2C -2A1B -1B1. Excellent qualities of the applications  
2B2C -2A1B -1B2. Hindrances to cultivating the applications  
2B2C -2A1B -1B1.  Excellent qualities of the applications  
2B2C -2A1B -1B1A. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A1B -1B1B. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -1B1C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -1B1 A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
If one first sees the excellent qualities, one will strongly act to familiarize with the 
applications. Thus, after applications, their excellent qualities:  
 
EXPLANATION  
If one first sees the excellent qualities  of the appl ications , one will strongly act to 
familiarize with the applications. Thus, after applications, their excellent qualities: 
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
362 2B2C -2A1B -1B1B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
4.12ab  The fourteen types of excellent qualities:  
Overcoming the might of maras and so forth.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Through the force of cultivating the applications, the fourteen types of excellent 
qualities —overcoming the might of maras and so forth until definite attainment —will 
arise . 
2B2C -2A1B -1B1C. Commentary  
So the root text is said. The excellent qualities called: (1) overcoming the might of maras, 
(2) the buddhas paying attention and knowing, (3) directly perceived by the buddhas, (4) 
close to perfect complete enlightenment, (5) the great purpose, and so forth, (6) the place 
having been analyzed, (7) completing all uncontaminated excellent qualities, (8) a propounder being, (9) not being separated, (10) will produce roots of virtue not in common, 
(11) accomplishment of the meaning of the promise exactly, (12) full upholding of the 
extensive result, (13) accomplishment of the welfare of sentient beings, and (14) definite 
attainment —because, respectively, those called: (1) blessed by the buddhas, (2) attention, 
(3) seen by exalted wisdom, (4) become close, (5) g reat benefit, (6) enactment of the 
activities, (7) full completion of antidotal qualities, (8) expression of speech regarding the 
exalted knower of all aspects, (9) assist, (10) have generated extensive joy, (11) rejoice in 
the words of the promise of that , (12) stron g desire for the profound Dharma , (13) 
enactment of the welfare of sentient beings, and (14) finding the complete perfection of 
wisdom, will arise in those who take delight in the non -erroneous applications and will be 
attained —are the fourteen  excellent qualities.  
   
EXPLANATION  
The subject —in those  bodhisattvas who take delight in  cultivating the non -erroneous 
applications —the excellent quality of (1) overcoming the might of maras , without being 
harmed by hindrances with respect to cultivating  the applications, will arise , because, 
respectively, they are (1) blessed by the buddhas  with respect to cultivating the 
applications in that way . 
 Sutra says, “ Sariputra , as many countless, immeasurable buddhas as there are buddhas 
abiding and living in the countless, immeasurable world systems in all the ten directions pay 
attention to a great bodhisattva’s questioning, uphold ing, reading, teaching, recitation, 
proper attention, and cultivation of this profound perfection of wisdom. This is reality.”  
 (2) The  exalted minds of the buddhas  paying attention to  and knowing the cultivation 
of the applications will arise, because the exalted minds of the buddhas pay (2) attention  to 
the cultivation of the applications presently. In dependence on being  (3) dir ectly perceived 
by the buddhas , the applications become special, because the cultivation of the applications 
is (3) seen by exalted  wisdom  presently. They will (4) become very close to perfect 
complete enlightenment, because they (4) become close  to it pre sently.  
 Sutra says, “Know that: those sons or daughters of the Mahayana lineage will also 
become close to unsurpassable complete enlightenment.”  
  (5) The excellent qualities —the great purpose  of not being separated from the buddhas, 
the great benefit of being reborn in the happy migrations, the great result through becoming 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
363 a buddha, the great fruition through engaging in others’ welfare, and so forth— will arise, 
because they have attained the (5) great benefit of cultivating the applications presently. 
 Sutra says, “Whatever son or daughter of the lineage who writes and upholds this 
profound perfection of wisdom will attain the great purpose, the great result, and the great 
maturation.   
 (6) The benefit of the place having been analyzed,  such as the pla ce where they will be 
reborn having been predicted by the tathagatas, will arise, because they have attained the  (6) 
enactment of the activities  of the buddhas, such as teaching the Mothers to others.  
 Sutra says, “ Sariputra , after I pass into nirvana, thi s perfection of wisdom will spread to 
the southern ranges… By way of this profound perfection of wisdom  one will enact the 
activities of a buddha.”  
 (7) The benefit of completing all uncontaminated excellent qualities  will arise, 
because they have attained  the (7) full completion of some antidotal qualities  included 
within the path perfection of wisdom presently. 
 Sutra says, “Because those sons or daughters of the lineage will fully  complete the 
perfection of wisdom .”  
 (8) They will attain the state of a propounder being who teaches the Mothers to others, 
because they have attained the  (8) expression of speech regarding the exalted knower of 
all aspects  by the buddhas to them presently.   
 Sutra says, “Why? This is because I express speech regarding the po ssession of the 
exalted knower of all aspects to those sons or daughters of the lineage.”  
  (9) They will attain the state of not being separated from omniscience by the maras and 
so forth, because the buddhas (9) assist  them with respect to the cultivatio n of the 
applications presently.  Sutra says, “Those sons or daughters of the lineage will set themselves in meditative 
equipoise.”  
 (10) They will produce  roots of virtue not in common  with those of hearers and 
solitary realizers, such as setting many bei ngs in unsurpassable enlightenment, because they 
(10) have  generated extensive joy  with respect to the cultivation of the applications 
presently.  
 Sutra says,
 “Sariputra , those sons of the lineage or daughters of the lineage of the 
bodhisattva vehicle, upo n hearing this profound perfection of wisdom will generate great 
joy, faith, and satisfaction.”  
 (11) They will attain the accomplishment of the meaning of the promise to achieve 
others’ welfare exactly, because the buddhas (11) rejoice in the words of the  promise of that 
cultivation of the Mothers presently.  
 Sutra says, “I am subsequently pleased by the utterance of the words of those sons of the 
lineage or daughters of the lineage of the bodhisattva vehicle: view the mind with mind.  
  (12) They will atta in the full  upholding of the extensive result that is greater virtue in 
other lifetimes, because they have attained the (12) strong desire for the profound Mahayana Dharma  presently . 
 Sutra says, “They will fully uphold immense fruition by having manifestly composed 
immense roots of virtue.”  
 (13) They will attain the accomplishment of the welfare of sentient beings, such as 
giving away all possessions in other lifetimes, because they have attained the (13) 
enactment of the welfare of sentient bein gs, such as setting many creatures in 
enlightenment presently . 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
364  Sutra says, “Those sons of the lineage or daughters of the lineage, having remembered 
their rebirths, will find these six perfections.”   
 The excellent quality called (14) “definite attainmen t of the Mothers in other 
lifetimes” will arise, because  they will attain the excellent qualities called (14) “finding the 
complete words and meanings of the perfection of wisdom  in this life .” In that way these  
are the fourteen excellent qualities.  
2B2C -2A1B-1B2.  Hindrances to cultivating the applications  
2B2C -2A1B -1B2A. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A1B -1B2B. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -1B2C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -1B2A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
After that, since some have been abandoned, if it is asked, “What are the faults with respect 
to the applications that act to hinder the cultivation of the applications?” —the faults that 
will hinder them:  
 
EXPLANATION  
Having explained the excellent qualities of the applications, after that, since some  faults  
have been ab andoned, if it is asked, “What are the faults with respect to the 
applications that act to hinder the cultivation of the applications?” —the faults that will 
hinder them: 
2B2C -2A1B -1B2B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
4.12cd  The faults are to be definitely understood  as six  
Along with four sets of ten. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The faults , hindrances to producing the applications and hindrances to their continuities 
abiding  are to be definitely understood as six along with four sets of ten. 
2B2C -2A1B -1B2C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -1B2 C-1. Individual explanations  
2B2C -2A1B -1B2C -2. Summary of the enumeration [of the faults]  
2B2C -2A1B -1B2C -1. Individual explanations 
2B2C -2A1B -1B2C -1A. Twenty adverse conditions contradictory to the applications that are based upon 
oneself  
2B2C -2A1B -1B2C -1B. Twenty -three incomplete concordant conditions based upon either oneself or others  
2B2C -2A1B -1B2C -1C. Three adverse conditions based upon others   
2B2C -2A1B -1B2C -1A. Twenty adverse conditions contradictory to the applications that are based upon oneself  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. The first set of ten are: (1) Will be attained with great hardship, (2) 
excessively quick confidence, (3) adopting negative states of the body, (4) adopting 
negative states of the mind, (5) performing recitations that h ave been generated 
inappropriately  and so forth, (6) holding reasons for turning away, (7) adherence to the 
causes and degeneration, (8) degeneration of relishing the taste of the sublime, (9) 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
365 degeneration of always upholding the supreme vehicle in all way s, and (10) degeneration of 
the constant object of intent;  
 
EXPLANATION  
The first set of ten are:  
• the two from the point of view of confidence:  
(1) producing ascertainment regarding the words and meanings of the Mothers will be 
attained over a long time with great hardship and  
(2) excessively quick confidence  quickly producing an ascertainment without decisive 
analysis.  
 
• the three from the point of view of adopting negative states:  
(3) adopting negative states of the body, such as questioning about the  Mothers while 
yawning and stretching ,  
(4) adopting negative states of the mind , such as questioning [about the Mothers] out of 
grasping , and  
(5) performing recitations that have been generated inappropriately and so forth, such 
as performing recitations  through having been motivated by [craving for] gain, honor, and 
the like.  
 
• the seven causes for degenerating from the Mahayana:  
(6) holding reasons for turning away from the Mothers ,  
(7) adherence to the causes  of omniscience  and degeneration of faith ,  
(8) degeneration of relishing the taste of the sublime  Mothers ,  
(9) degeneration of always upholding the Mothers, the supreme vehicle in all ways, 
seeking omniscience from the lesser scriptural baskets , and  
(10) degeneration of the constant object of in tent, having discarded the Mothers that have 
been found, seeking omniscience from the lesser scriptural baskets  
 
COMMENTARY  
the second set of ten are: (11) degeneration of the relation of cause and effect, (12) 
degeneration of that of which there is no hi gher, (13) the arising of a confidence that 
conceptualizes objects in many ways, (14) adherence to writing in letters, (15) adherence to 
non-things, (16) adherence to letters, (17) adherence to non -letters, (18) paying attention to 
places and so forth, (19 ) relishing the taste of gain, honor, and verses, and (20) seeking 
skillful means through incorrect paths;  
 
EXPLANATION  
the second set of ten are:  
(11) degeneration of the relation of cause and effect, desiring to attain omniscience 
through having practic ed merely the meaning of the lesser scriptural baskets ,  
(12) degeneration from the causes of the three exalted bodies of which there is no higher , 
holding that the two —Mahayana scriptural baskets and those [lesser scriptural baskets]—
are similar , and  
 
• the eight causes of being distracted from the Mahayana:  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
366 • (13) the arising of a confidence that conceptualizes objects that are  attributes of the 
desire realm —forms, sounds , and so forth —in many ways,  
• (14) adherence to the mere writing of the  Mothers in letters  as the Mothers ,  
• (15) adherence to dependently arising non-things  as the meaning of the mode of 
abidance ,  
• (16) adherence to letters  as the Mothers ,  
• (17) adherence to non -letters  as the Mothers ,  
• (18) paying attention to places and so forth  out of desire relishing the taste of places ,  
• (19) relishing the taste of gain, honor, and verses  of praise , and  
• (20) seeking skillful means through incorrect paths,  the words taught by the maras ; 
2B2C -2A1B -1B2C -1B. Twenty -three incomplete concordant con ditions based upon either oneself or others  
2B2C -2A1B -1B2C -1B1.Those based upon the master  
2B2C -2A1B -1B2C -1B2.Those based upon oneself  
2B2C -2A1B -1B2C -1B3.Those based upon both  
2B2C -2A1B -1B2C -1B1.Those based upon the master   
COMMENTARY 
through the listeners and the explainers being strongly related with either the former or the 
latter142 respectively, the third set of ten are: (21) degeneration through aspiration and 
indolence, (22) degeneration through difference in aspired places, (23) degeneration through 
small yearning and yearning that is not small, (24) possessing and not possessing the 
qualities of training, (25) virtuous and non -virtuous characteristics, (26) giving away and 
being miserly, (27) being generous and not accepting, (28) understanding throu gh terse 
statements and understanding through elaborate ones, (29) clearly knowing and not clearly 
knowing the Dharma  that are the sutras and so forth, and (30) possessing and not possessing 
the six perfections;  
 
EXPLANATION  
through being strongly related  in either way—if the listeners are related with the former 
and the explainers with  the latter respectively, or even if they are related having reversed 
that—since faults will be incurred, the third set of ten are:  
(21) degeneration through  the listener having greater aspiration for the Mothers and the 
explainer having indolence,  
(22) degeneration through difference in aspired places  due to the listener desiring to listen 
at this place  but the explainer desiring to explain at another,  
(23) degeneration through the listener having small yearning and the explainer having 
yearning that is not small,  
(24) the listener possessing the qualities of training and the explainer not possessing  them ,  
(25) the listener possessing virtuous characteristics , faith and so forth,  and the explainer 
possessing non-virtuous  ones,  
(26) the listener giving away  all possessions and the explainer being miserly  regarding 
those ,  
(27) the listener being generous with wealth  and the explainer not accepting  that,   
                                              
142 This means that the former quality and the latter quality in each of the following pairs can either be 
applied re spectively to the listener and the explainer, or be applied respectively to the explainer and the 
listener.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
367 (28) the listener  understanding through terse statements and the explainer 
understanding through elaborate ones,  
(29) the listener clearly knowing the Dharma  that are the twelve branches of scriptures, 
the sutras and so forth, and the explainer not clearly knowing  them , and  
(30) the listener possessing the six perfections and the explainer not possessing  them ;  
 
COMMENTARY 
the fourth set of ten are: (31) being skilled in means and in incorrect means, (32) attaining 
and not attaining dharani (retention), (33) desiring and not desiring to write the letters, (34) 
being separated from and not being separated from aspiration for the desire realm, the four;  
 
EXPLANATION  
the fourth set of ten are:  
(31) the listener being skilled in suchness, the me ans for attain buddhahood, and the 
explainer in incorrect means,  
(32) the listener attaining the dharani (retention) of non- forgetfulness , and the explainer 
not attaining it, 
(33) the listener desiring to write the letters of the Mothers  and the explainer not desiring  
to write  the letters ,  
(34) the listener being separated from the five obscurations, aspiration for the desire 
realm and so forth, and the explainer not being separated from  them , the earlier ten and 
the later four making fourteen;    
2B2C -2A1B -1B2C -1B2.Those based upon oneself  
COMMENTARY  
the two: (35) turning away regarding going to bad migrations, (36) the mind being happy  
regarding going to happy migrations;  
 
EXPLANATION  
the two: (35) due to hearing disparagement regarding the hells  and so forth, the mind  
turning away regarding going to bad migrations  for others’ welfare , (36) due to hearing 
commendations regarding [the realms of] the gods and so forth, craving them, and the mind 
being happy regarding going to happy migrations;  these  do not rely on the master and 
the student getting together, so they are mentioned separately;  
2B2C -2A1B -1B2C -1B3.Those based upon both  
COMMENTARY 
through the explainers and listeners being related with either the former or the latter, 
respectively, there are the four: (37) taking delight  in solitude and in company, (38) not 
giving an opportunity and desiring to associate, (39) desiring only a few material belongings  
and not desiring to give, and (40) going where there will and will not be hindrances to lif e;  
 
EXPLANATION  
through being related in either way—the explainers are  related with the former and the 
listeners with the latter respectively, or the reverse of that —since faults will also be 
incurred, they should be applied also by reversing them; there are the four:  
(37) degeneration due to  the explainer being joyful in solitude and the listener taking 
delight in company,   
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
368 (38) the explainer not giving an opportunity to follow others and the listener desiring to 
associate  [with others] ,  
(39) the expla iner desiring only a few material belongings and the listener not desiring to 
give them , and  
(40) the explainer desiring to go where there will be hindrances to life  and the listener 
desiring to go where there  will not be hindrances to life;  
 
COMMENTARY 
similarly, there are the three: (41) going and not going where there is famine, (42) going and 
not going where there is trouble from bandits and so forth, and (43) being mentally unhappy 
due to householders looking;  
 
EXPLANATION  
similarly, through being st rongly related in either way, since faults will be incurred, there 
are the three:  
(41) the explainer going where there is famine and the listener not going there ,  
(42) the explainer going where there is trouble from bandits and so forth and the listener 
not going there , and  
(43) the explainer being happy due to householders who  give alms looking again and again 
at him and the listener being mentally unhappy.    
2B2C -2A1B -1B2C -1C. Three adverse conditions based upon others  
COMMENTARY  
there are another th ree: (44) application  of separation by the maras, (45) establishing the 
counterfeit, and (46) generation of joy towards an improper object. 
 
EXPLANATION  
There are another three:  
(44) application of separation  by the maras , the maras causing a rift between  the Dharma  
and the person, by coming to him in the guise of a trainee -in-virtue and saying, “The 
Mothers occur in my sutra scriptural basket ; they do not occur in the extensive, medium, 
and brief Perfection of Wisdom Sutras ,”  
(45) accomplishing  the count erfeit Mothers, teaching that meditating on ugliness and the 
like is meditating on the meaning of the mode of abidance , and  
(46) generation of joy towards an improper teacher, the  object of faith, producing faith in 
the maras (who have come in the guise o f buddhas) as buddhas.  
 If the master and the student were to get together by way of being free from these faults 
which have been explained, the proper way of relying upon a spiritual guide, the root of the 
path would  occur. Hence, the way to rely upon a s piritual guide is also indicated by 
implication. Indeed, having thought that the extensive explanation would be easy to understand, [Maitreya] did not include it in the explicit indication of the root text. This has 
been taught by the Acarya. 
2B2C -2A1B -1B2 C-2. Summary of the enumeration [of the faults]  
COMMENTARY 
In that way, those are the forty -six faults.  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
369 EXPLANATION  
Thus there are twenty -three states of adverse conditions and twenty -three incomplete 
concordant conditions.  In that way, those are the forty -six faults. 
2B2C -2A1B -1C. The characteristics of the applications  
2B2C -2A1B -1C1. Meaning of the generality 
2B2C -2A1B -1C2. Meaning of the branches 
2B2C -2A1B -1C1. Meaning of the generality 
2B2C -2A1B -1C1A. Stating the systems of past acaryas  
2B2C -2A1B -1C1B. Positing our own system   
2B2C -2A1B -1C1A. Stating the systems of past acaryas  
QUALM: According to the assertions of the great Gomi, the characteristics of the 
applications are explained in the following manner. There are fo ur: the characterization143, 
the basis of characterization144, the object of characterization145, and the characteristic146. 
For example, fire arisen from hay is the basis of characterization; the entity attribute —the 
tangible object, heat —and the functional attri bute—that which burns —are the 
characteristics; that which is suitable to be affixed the convention “fire” is the object of characterization, and that very valid cognition which affirms the three —the characteristic, 
the object of characterization, and the b asis of characterization —is called “the 
characterization.” Likewise, here also the twenty applications themselves are the bases of 
characterization. Further, they are not factors of the knower of bases since they are 
uncommon [factors] that act to accomplish the truth body, and they are also not factors of 
the exalted knower of all aspects since they exist on the occasions of learners; they can only 
be either factors of the actual knower of paths or factors of a similitude of the knower of 
paths. If they are factors of only the knower of paths, what is the reason for dividing them 
into applications of the three exalted knowers?  
 
RESPONSE: They are divided into three from the point of view of the objects that observe the aspects of the three exalted knowers:   
• That observing emptiness and selflessness that are aspects of the knower of bases is (1)
147 
the application of stopping abidance. That observing the nineteen, the four aspects of cessations and the fifteen of paths of the knower of bases is (2) the applica tion that stops 
yoga. That observing the six: impermanence and suffering, and the four of origins of the 
knower of bases is (3) the application of the profound. The divisions of occasions of 
these three are the eight [applications]: (6 -13) [the application s of] realizing over a long 
time with great hardship, and so forth. The complete cultivations of these three are the 
four: (14 -17) [the applications of] no increase or decrease, and so forth. The results of 
these three are the two: (18 -19) [the application s of] bestowing the precious result and 
purity. The times of these three are: (20) the application of boundary. These eighteen  are  
                                              
 
143 Tibetan: mtshon pa. It is sometimes translated as “illustration .” 
144 Tibetan: mtshan gzhi . This is a  basis upon which the characterization takes place. It is sometimes 
translated as “illustration” or “bases of illustration.” 
145 Tibetan: mtshon bya.  This is the object to be characterized. It is sometimes translated as “definiendum.”  
146 Tibetan: mtshan nyid.  It is sometimes translated as “definition.”  
147 The numbering of the applications here has been applied in accordance with how the 20 applications have 
been set out in an earlier section “2B2C -2A1B -1A2B. The actual applications ”. 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
370 the applications of the knower of bases. 
• That observing the three, emptiness, selflessness and one portion of non -entitines s that 
are aspects of the knower of paths is (1) the application of stopping abidance. That 
observing the twenty- three, the seven of paths and the sixteen of cessations, is (2) the 
application that stops yoga. That observing the six —impermanence, suffering  and the 
four of origins —and one portion of non- entitiness is (4) the application of the difficult to 
fathom. The eighteen  by way of the divisions as above are the applications of the knower 
of paths.  
• That observing the 102 aspects that are property -possessors included within the aspects 
of the exalted knower of all aspects, the aspect of emptiness, the uninterrupted path with 
respect to sufferings, and a portion of the aspect of thusness is (1) the application of 
stopping abidance. That observing the three —the aspect of signlessness that is the 
dharmata of the 102 aspects of object -possessors, and the uninterrupted paths with 
respect to cessations and paths —and a portion of the aspect of thusness, is (2) the 
application that stops yoga. That observing the aspect of wishlessness that is the 102 aspects of the property -possessors, a portion of the uninterrupted path with respect to 
true sufferings, the uninterrupted path with respect to origins, and a portion of the aspect of thusness is (5) the applicati on of the immeasurable. The eighteen  [by way of] 
divisions of the three as above are the applications of an exalted knower of all aspects.  
 
The distinguishing characteristics and the functional characteristics do not characterize the 
object of characteriz ation as an application in complete aspects; they characterize it as an 
application that is an uncommon cause of the truth body. Further, it is indicated by the sixteen entitiness characteristics.  
 The characteristics of the applications characterize it as  an application that is an 
uncommon cause of the truth body; it is characterized by the collection of (i) the 
distinguishing characteristics that act to accomplish the fulfillment of one’s welfare and (ii) 
the functional characteristics that act to accompl ish the fulfillment of others’ welfare. When 
those are divided, there are sixteen distinguishing characteristics and the eleven functional characteristics.  
 The awareness that ascertains (a) the three —the characteristic, the object of 
characterization, and  the basis of characterization —and (b) the characteristic with respect to 
the basis of characterization is called the “characterization.” It exists either as a wisdom of 
hearing and contemplation prior to having engaged in the applications or as a knower 
subsequent to the applications. Having taken the twenty applications as the bases of 
characterization, and stated the distinguishing characteristics and the functional characteristics as reasons, it characterizes: “This is an application that is an uncommon  
cause of the truth body.”  
 The characterization is not a factor of the knower of bases or the exalted knower of all 
aspects; it is a factor of a similitude of the knower of paths. That characterization itself is 
indicated through implication by the three sets of sixteen knowledge characteristics; those 
are not actual characterization exalted wisdoms, because a characterization exalted wisdom 
observes the distinguishing characteristics and the functional characteristics, but the three 
sets of sixteen knowers do not observe them.  
 Therefore, the object -possessor is indicated by the objects through implication. It is said 
that a characterization exalted wisdom observes the two [types of] characteristics of the 
applications and the three sets of sixteen aspects  of knowledge.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
371  
It is also appropriate to take the twenty applications explained above to be the bases of 
characterization. However, according to the Acarya Haribhadra’s commentary on the 
intention of the root text, it is clear that both the bases of chara cterization and the objects of 
characterization are indicated by the sixteen entitiness characteristics, and likewise, it is very clear that the characteristics of the applications of the three exalted knowers are 
indicated by the three sets of sixteen asp ects of knowledge. Hence I do not think that the 
explanations —that a valid cognizer (that ascertains the characteristics with respect to the 
basis of characterization) is indicated and the like —are correct.  
 A past scholar, having taken the three exalted k nowers (in the continuum of a buddha that 
have been generated) as the characteristics, [explains] that they characterize the applications 
of the three exalted knowers as acting to generate buddhahood and so forth. However, he is unclear about the meaning o f the words of the commentaries of both Arya Vimuktisena and 
Acarya Haribhadra. Even though the three —knowledge, distinguishing and functional 
[characteristics] —have been taken as the reason for engaging the convention “Mahayana 
applications,” and so forth , it is difficult to posit what the purpose for explaining the 
characteristics is, what the mode of characterization is, and so forth.   
2B2C -2A1B -1C1B. Positing our own system  
2B2C -2A1B -1C1B -1. Bases of characterization  
2B2C -2A1B -1C1B -2. Objects of characterization  
2B2C -2A1B -1C1B -3. Characteristics  
2B2C -2A1B -1C1B -4. Modes of characterization  
2B2C -2A1B -1C1B -5. Boundaries  
2B2C -2A1B -1C1B -1. Bases of characterization  
The bases of characterization are the sixteen yogas that are devoid of afflictions, sign s, and 
so forth.  
2B2C -2A1B -1C1B -2. Objects of characterization  
[With respect to the objects of characterization], from between the two, the generality and the instances, the first is the object that is the principal [object of characterization]. That, 
further, as explained above, has been indicated by the name “perfection of wisdom”; it has 
been indicated again and again in sutra by the three: textual, path and resultant Perfections 
of Wisdom, and its meaning has also been commentated on in the treatises. T he path and 
resultant Perfections of Wisdom themselves are differentiated into eight clear realizations.  The final object of attainment for a Mahayana lineage -bearer, from among the 
Perfections of Wisdom, is that very resultant perfection of wisdom, as it  has been taught, “ In 
that way , among wisdoms, the exalted knower of all aspects.” In order to proceed to it, the 
path perfection of wisdom itself must be well characterized as an object of valid cognition ; 
otherwise, one will enter a mistaken path. Hence, the applications referred to in the 
explanation of “the characteristics of the applications” here are the yogas of the path perfection of wisdom themselves. Their characteristics are called “the characteristics of the 
applications.”  
 Regarding the particu larities, the applications of the three exalted knowers are objects of 
characterization, also the applications that are superior to the applications of hearers and 
solitary realizers are objects of characterization, and the applications of the three exalte d 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
372 knowers possessing the special function of accomplishing others’ welfare are objects of 
characterization.   
2B2C -2A1B -1C1B -3. Characteristics  
The characteristics are: (i) the knowers that are in the entities of the applications, (ii) the 
distinctions, an d (iii) the functions. 
2B2C -2A1B -1C1B -4. Modes of characterization  
2B2C -2A1B -1C1B -4A. Mode of characterization of the generality 
2B2C -2A1B -1C1B -4B. Mode of characterization of the instances  
2B2C -2A1B -1C1B -4A. Mode of characterization of the generality 
The bases of characterization —the sixteen bodhisattvas’ yogas that are devoid of afflictions, 
signs, and so forth —are characterized as the yogas of the path perfection of wisdom 
[because] they are bodhisattvas’ exalted wisdoms conjoined with a complete class o f special 
method and wisdom, such as great compassion and the wisdom realizing emptiness. 
2B2C -2A1B -1C1B -4B. Mode of characterization of the instances  
The bases of characterization —the bodhisattvas’ yogas that have abandoned the four, the 
afflictions, sign s, and so forth, and that bear the aspect of observing any of the aspects of the 
knower of bases, knowing the arisal of a tathagata and so forth —are characterized as the 
bodhisattvas’ applications of the knower of bases, [because] they are bodhisattvas’ ex alted 
wisdoms bearing any of the aspects, knowing the arisal of a tathagata and so forth.  
 The bases of characterization —the bodhisattvas’ applications that are distinguished by 
the accomplishment of the difficult task of the armor of others’ welfare, and  so forth, and 
bear the aspect of observing any of the aspects of the knower of paths, emptiness, 
signlessness, and so forth —are characterized as the applications of the knower of paths, 
[because] they are bodhisattvas’ exalted wisdoms distinguished by any  of the aspects of 
knowledge of a knower of paths, emptiness, signlessness, and so forth.  
 The bases of characterization —the seven bodhisattvas’ yogas that observe the attributes 
included within bases and paths and so forth—are characterized as the applica tions of an 
exalted knower of all aspects, because they are bodhisattvas’ exalted wisdoms bearing the aspect of observing any of the aspects of the exalted knower of all aspects,
 the abiding in 
happiness of the present life of the tathagatas and so forth. Those are the ways in which the 
applications of the three exalted knowers are characterized by the three sets of sixteen 
knowledge characteristics.   
 The bases of characterization —the sixteen yogas of entitiness —are characterized as the 
applications that are superior to the applications of hearers and solitary realizers, because 
they are bodhisattvas’ exalted wisdoms distinguished by the inconceivable and so forth. 
That is the mode of characterization of the distinguishing characteristics.  
 Further, the ba ses of characterization —that [i.e. the sixteen yogas of entitiness] —are 
characterized as the applications possessing the special function of accomplishing others’ 
welfare, [because] they are bodhisattvas’ exalted wisdoms possessing the special functions of benefit, happiness, protection, and so forth.  
 Also the divisions should be known in that way: [the four entitiness yogas] are 
characterized as the applications of the knower of bases possessing the special function of 
accomplishing others’ welfare, [beca use they are] bodhisattvas’ exalted wisdoms possessing 
the special functions of benefit, happiness, protection; [the five entitiness yogas and the 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
373 seven entitiness yogas respectively] are characterized as the applications of the knower of 
paths and the app lications of the exalted knower of all aspects possessing those such 
functions, [because they are] bodhisattvas’ exalted wisdoms distinguished by the seven [functions] and the one function.  
 Therefore, through the knowledge characteristics characterizing t hem in general as the 
applications of the three exalted knowers, [the respective bases of characterization] have 
been indicated; they have not been indicated through their having been distinguished by the 
isolates of being superior to the applications of h earers and solitary realizers. However, by 
having indicated the mode in which they are characterized by the distinguishing characteristics through having been distinguished by those [i.e. the isolates of being superior 
to the applications of hearers and solitary realizers], they are characterized in the manner of precluding that they [i.e. the distinguishing characteristics] are possessed by others.  
 The mere applications of the knower of bases cannot be distinguished by way of the self-
isolates [to be superior] to the applications of hearers and solitary realizers. Having indicated the mode of superiority of the two other [types of] applications [i.e. the 
applications of the knower of path s and of an exalted knower of all aspects] for the sake of 
realizing that they are superior also by way of the self- isolates of those two, that of the other 
one [ i.e. the mode of superiority of the applications of the knower of bases] is not indicated; 
from the point of view of substance, since the applications of the knower of bases in the 
continua of bodhisattvas are superior to the applications of hearers and solitary realizers, 
understand that they can be characterized as being superior.   
  Although th e functional characteristics along with the bases of characterization act to 
generate the buddhas’ fulfillment of others’ welfare, they do not characterize them  in that 
manner, because having ascertained with valid cognition the mere yogas of the path perfection of wisdom and the applications of the three exalted knowers, after that one 
decides that they are causes of omniscience.  In brief, having understood the divisions of the three, textual, path, and resultant 
Perfections of Wisdom, first a mere seeking [aspiration] that is a correct assumption regarding the resultant perfection of wisdom is generated. However, in order to ascertain 
with valid cognition the cause and result relationship, one must first ascertain with valid 
cognition the path perfection of wisdom prior to that. Know that, for the sake of understanding that, these characteristics of the generality and the instances  are explained.  
2B2C -2A1B -1C1B -5. Boundaries  
The boundaries [of the characteristics of the applications] are: they exist from the Mahayana 
path of accumulation until the end of the continuum; the assertion that distinguishing 
characteristics exist on buddh a ground and the like are clearly expressions of not having 
realized the contextual meaning of these characteristics. From those topics  characterizing 
the three exalted knowers that have been explained above [in the first three chapters], one is 
able to kn ow the mere three exalted knowers; in order to understand non -erroneously the 
self-isolates of the applications of the three exalted knowers, one must definitely know them 
in dependence on these [characteristics] that have been indicated in this chapter. 
2B2C-2A1B -1C2. Meaning of the branches 
2B2C -2A1B -1C2A. Making a connection for the generality  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B. Explaining the individual meanings  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2C. Condensed enumeration of the generality 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
374 2B2C -2A1B -1C2A. Making a connection for the generality  
COMMENTARY 
Cultivating the applications by adopting and discarding respectively the excellent qualities 
and the faults is to be preceded by knowing the characteristics ; thus, after the faults, the 
characteristics of those:   
 
EXPLANATION  
After the faults  that act to hinder the cultivation of the applications , the characteristics  of 
those applications will be explained, because the reason is that, in order to cultivate the 
applications by adopting the excellent qualities and discarding the faults of the applications respectively , the applications must be known, and in order for that to occur, it 
is to be preceded by knowing the characteristics:  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B. Explaining the individual meanings  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -1. Brief indication   
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2. Extensive explanation  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -1. Brief indication   
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -1A. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -1B. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -1A. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
4.13  That which characterizes is made known  
To be a characteristic. Moreover, those are of three types:  
The knowledge, distinguishing, and functional.  
That which is an entitiness is also an object of characterization. 
 
EXPLANATION  
There is a purpose for explaining the characteristics of the yogas of the path perfection of wisdom here, because it is for the sake of making known that that characterizer
148 which is 
able to characterize  the yogas of the path perfection of wisdom  is a characteristic  of those. 
Moreover, those characteristics indicated here are divided into  three types, because the 
knowledge  characteristics which characterize them [as] applications of the three exalted 
knowers, the distinguishing characteristics whi ch characterize them as applications that are 
superior to the applications of hearers and solitary realizers , and the functional  
characteristics which characterize them as applications possessing the special function of 
accomplishing others’ welfare —are th ose.  
 There is a purpose for indicating the sixteen entitinesses of the applications, because it is 
for the sake of making known by means of indication through the term “characteristic of the 
applications” that that which is an entitiness  of an applicatio n is also an object of 
characterization  that is to be  characterized  and a basis of characterization.  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -1B. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. Since these characterize [them as] the applications by establishing 
them as the agents , (1) knowledge, (2) distinction, (3) functional. And since they are objects 
                                              
148 Tibetan: mtshon by ed. 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
375 to be characterized, by establishing them as the objects of action, (4) the entitiness 
characteristics —the characteristics are to be known as four types.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Since these characterize [them as] the generality or the instances [of]  the applications , 
they are called “characteristics of the applications”;  by the term “characteristics” 
establishing them  as the agents, the term “characteristics” engage these (1) knowledge, 
(2) d istinction, (3) functional  characteristics, because they characterize [them as] either the 
generality or the instances of the applications of the three exalted knowers. Since these  are 
objects to be characterized , by the term “characteristics” establishing  them as the 
objects of action , it is appropriate to affix the term “characteristics” to (4) the entitiness 
characteristics  of the applications, because those sixteen yogas are the bases of 
characterization and the objects to be characterized . The characte ristics , the bases for 
affixing the term “characteristics,” are to be known as four types , because there are those 
four as explained above . 
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2. Extensive explanation  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2A. Knowledge characteristics  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2B. Distinguis hing characteristics  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2C. Functional characteristics  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2D. Entitiness characteristics  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2A. Knowledge characteristics  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2A1. Characteristics of the applications of the knower of bases  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2A2. Characteristics of the applications of the knower of paths  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2A3. Characteristics of the applications of the exalted knower of all aspects  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2A1. Characteristics of the applications of the knower of bases  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2A1A. Making a connection for the generality and the instances  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2A1B. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2A1C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2A1A. Making a connection for the generality and the instances  
COMMENTARY 
With respect to those, the knowledge characteri stics are different by way of the divisions of 
the three exalted knowers of all. For the time being, by means of the knower of all:  
 
EXPLANATION  
With respect to those, the knowledge characteristics are different by way of the 
divisions of the three exalted  knowers of all. For the time being, by means of the 
knower of all: 
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2A1B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
4.14  The arisal of a tathagata;  
The world without disintegration, the nature;  
The mental activities of sentient beings;  
Withdrawn and directed ou twards;  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
376 4.15  The aspect of inexhaustible;  
Together with attachment and so forth ; extensive ; 
That has become great; cannot be measured ; 
Consciousnesses cannot be indicat ed; 
 
4.16  Consciousnesses cannot be viewed;  
Knower, that called ‘fluctuating and so forth;’ 
Knowing also those that are other than them  
As the aspect of thusness;  
 4.17  And the Subduer teaches  
The realization of thusness to others :  
These aforesaid encompass the  knowledge characteristics  
In the context of a knower of all. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The characteristics that are applications knowing the bases in the context of a knower of 
all are included. What are they? The bodhisattvas’ exalted wisdoms knowing the arisal of 
a tathagata and so forth. 
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2A1C. Commentary  
So the root text is said. (1) The arisal of a tathagata, (2) the world is without disintegration, 
(3) the mental activities of sentient beings, (4) minds withdrawn and minds distracted, (5) 
the aspect of inexhaustible minds, (6 -8) minds together with attachment and so forth, and 
that included within the expression “and so forth”, minds free from attachment , (9) the 
extensive mind, (10) the mind that has become great, (11) the mind  cannot be measured , 
(12) the mind cannot be indicated, (13) the mind cannot be viewed, (14) fluct uating minds 
and so forth, (15) fluctuating and so forth bearing the aspect of thusness, (16) the realization 
of thusness by the Tathagata is taught to others and is imputed —through the applications of 
the knower of all being properly characterized by the sixteen instances that are the aspects 
of knowledge exactly, which are these aforesaid, these are the knowledge characteristics 
included within the knower of all.  
EXPLANATION  
These are the knowledge characteristics included within the knower of all. The bases of 
characterization —the four bodhisattvas’ yogas that are devoid of afflictions, signs, and so 
forth —are characterized as the applications of the knower of all  in the continuum of a 
bodhisattva. By what? By  the sixteen instances that are the aspects of knowledge  which 
are in the entities of the applications. How? Through being properly characterized by the 
characteristics [as] the objects of characterization; they are characterized exactly. 
 What are these characteristics? (1) A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom knowing the arisal of 
a tathagata in dependence on a perfection of wisdom that is an application of the knower of 
bases. (2) A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom conjoined with the exalted wisdom realizing that 
the world  is without disintegration  ultimate ly. Regarding the explanation [of the 
characteristics] bearing the aspect of emptiness in this context, that very path with which 
they are conjoined is indicated; know that the characterizers of the applications of the 
knower of bases bear the aspects of t he knower of bases.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
377  [A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom knowing]: (3) the many mental activities of sentient 
beings, (4) minds withdrawn into the selflessness of persons, and minds  distracted from 
that [selflessness of persons] , (5) the aspect of inexhaustibl e minds  like space , a 
bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom knowing:  (6-8) minds together with attachment, aversion, 
ignorance, and so forth, and that included within the expression  “and so forth” in the 
root text [4.15b] , minds free from attachment, and free from  aversion and ignorance , (9) 
the extensive mode of abidance of the mind, (10) the mind that has become great due to 
appearing like an illusion conventionally , (11) the mind  cannot be measured since 
supports that are individually ascertained do not exist  ultimately , (12) the mind cannot be 
indicated , saying “The sense consciousness is this ,” (13) the mind cannot be viewed  by 
the five eyes , (14) the  views of the (i) fluctuating, and so forth—(ii) collecting , (iii) 
spreading out, and (iv) gathering —of minds, arise in dependence on the basis of mistakes, 
the aggregates. The subject —a bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom knowing selflessness of 
persons —is a characteristic of the application of the knower of bases bearing such aspects in 
the continuum of a bodhisattva, b ecause it is an uncommon characterizer of that.   
 
Sutra says:  
(1) “Subhuti, this profound perfection of wisdom generates the ten strengths of the tathagatas.”  
(2) “The perfection of wisdom does not teach that these five aggregates disintegrate; it does 
not teach that they strongly disintegrate.”  
(3) “Subhuti, [the tathagatas] clearly know the minds and activities of immeasurable, 
countless sentient beings. They also are supported on and strongly know these Mothers.”  
(4) “The tathagatas clearly know, perfec tly and exactly, the minds of those sentient beings 
with the characteristics of being withdrawn and distracted.”  
(5) “The tathagatas clearly know, perfectly and exactly, the minds of those sentient beings in the aspects of being free from attachment, cessa tion and abandonment.”  
(6-8) “In dependence on the Mothers, [the tathagatas] clearly know, perfectly and exactly, 
the minds of those sentient beings that are with attachment are those called ‘minds with 
attachment. ’” “[The tathagatas] clearly know, perfect ly and exactly, those called ‘minds that 
are free from attachment .’”   
(9) “The tathagatas know, perfectly and exactly, the extensive minds of other sentient 
beings and persons are those called ‘extensive minds.’”  
(10) “[The tathagatas] know perfectly the great minds are those called ‘minds that have 
become great.’”  
(11) “[The tathagatas know] the immeasurable minds are those called ‘immeasurable 
minds.’”  
(12) “[The tathagatas know] the minds that cannot be indicated are those called ‘minds that cannot be  indicated.’”  
(13) “[The tathagatas know] the minds that cannot be viewed are those called ‘minds that 
cannot be viewed.’”  
(14) “The tathagatas, in dependence on these Mothers, (i) know the fluctuating, collected, 
spread out, and gathered minds of other persons and other sentient beings, and also those in 
that way, and (ii) clearly know ‘All of those varieties of scattered, collected, spread out, or 
gathered minds that will be produced and will arise will depend on forms, and will depend on feelings, disc riminations, compositional factors and primary consciousnesses, and will 
arise.’”   
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
378  
With respect to decisive analysis here, some non -Buddhist sages, having summarized sixty -
two bad views into fourteen sections, posed questions to the Teacher [Buddha]. The y asked 
the questions based upon a self of persons, the basis of the attribute. They were not s uitable 
as vessels for teaching  the selflessness of persons if the Buddha had negated the basis of the 
attribute, and an attribute of a non -existent basis of the  attribute is not feasible. Therefore, 
[the Buddha] did not specify the answers to those questions. Hence they are called the “fourteen unspecified views.” There are four views each —based upon the past limit, based 
upon the future limit, and based upon nirvana—and two based upon the body and life.  
 
(1-4) The first [four based upon the past limit] are the views of the self of person s and the 
world as permanent, impermanent, both, and neither.  
(5-8) The second [four based upon the future limit] are the views  of [the self of person s and 
the world ] as possessi ng a limit, no tpossessing a limit, both, and neither. 
(9-12) The third [four based upon nirvana] are the views that a liberated self, after dying, 
will arise, will not arise, both and neither.  
(13-14) The fourth [two based upon the body and life] are the view of the body and life as 
one substance and the view of them as different substances.  
 
The view that the self of persons and the world are permanent, do not possess a limit, and 
enter a future rebirth, and the view that the Tathagata, after dying, will arise —are the views 
of the Samkyas, called the ‘fluctuating views’ since they engage their objects through an 
affirmative aspect.  
 The view that [the self of persons and the world] are impermanent, posses s a limit, and 
do not enter a future rebirth, and the Tathagata, after dying, will not arise —are the views of 
the Ayatas (Charvakas), called the “ collected views ” since they engage their objects through 
a negative aspect.   
 The views of both of those extr emes are the views of the Nirgranthas, called “spread  out 
views ” since they engage the affirmative and the negative in equal portions.  
 The views of inexpressibility as any of those extremes are the views of the Vatsiputriyas, 
called the “ gathered views ” since they engage through an aspect that negates both the 
affirmative and the negative. If one thinks about the mode of engagement of all of these, they are subsumed under the two, the fluctuating views and the collected views, since they 
are subsumed under  those bearing the aspects of either the affirmative or the negative. 
 Viewing the body and life as one substance is the view of the Vaisheshikas; viewing 
them as different substances is the view of the Samkyas. Those who view [the self of 
person s and the world] as both permanent and impermanent also view the nature as abiding 
permanently but its states as im permanent. The elimination of other qualms is of little 
necessity on this occasion, so I will not elaborate on it.   (15) A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom bearing the aspect of thusness,  the emptiness of 
true existence of the  fluctuating minds and so forth.  (16) A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom 
realizing that the realization of thusness by the Tathagata is taught to others as he
149 had 
understood it and is imputed . The natures of these aforesaid [exalted wisdoms ] are the 
knowledge characteristics of a knower of bases. 
 
                                              
149 Gyi emended to read gyis.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
379 Sutra says respectively:  
(15) “How does the Tathagata know forms in dependence on these Mothers? Thusness and 
unmis taken thusness and…”  
(16) “Having taken it as a basis of the realization of thusness, the understanding of thusness, the supreme knowing of thusness, and the correct indication of thusness, it is designated as 
thusness.” “In dependence on these Mothers, on e will attain clear complete  enlightenment 
[with respect to] this thusness.” “Due to having attained clear complete  enlightenment [with 
respect to] this thusness, one is called a ‘tathagata’ (‘one -gone -thus’).” “He taught it after 
having attained clear com plete  enlightenment.”  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2A2. Characteristics of the applications of the knower of paths  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2A2A. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2A2B. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2A2C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2A2A.  Making a connection  
COMMENTAR Y  
After that, by means of the knower of paths:  
 
EXPLANATION  
After that, by means of the knower of paths: 
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2A2B.  Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
4.18  Emptiness; along with the signless;  
The thorough abandonment of wishing;  
Production  does not exist; ces sation does not exist and so forth ; 
Undisturbed dharmata ; 
 
4.19  Not composed; not conceptualized;  
Classified; and without characteristics:  
These are asserted to be knowledge characteristics  
In the context of a knower of paths.   
 
EXPLANATION  
Having explained [the characteristics] by way of the six lines, “Emptiness, along with the 
signless,” and so forth, they are summarized and indicated by way of the last two lines. 
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2A2C.  Commentary  
So the root text is said. (1) The empty, (2) signs do not exist, (3) wishes do not exist, (4) production does not exist, (5) cessation does not exist; and the six included in the expression 
“and so forth,” (6) the thoroughly afflicted does not exist, (7) the completely pure does not exist, (8) things do no t exist, (9) entitiness, (10) a support does not exist, (11) the 
characteristic of space; (12) undisturbed dharmata, (13) not composed, (14) not conceptualized, (15) classified, and (16) without characteristics —through the applications 
of the knower of pat hs being characterized by the sixteen attributes  that are the aspects of 
knowledge exactly, which are these aforesaid, these are the knowledge characteristics included within the knower of paths. 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
380  
EXPLANATION  
These are the knowledge characteristics included within the knower of paths. The 
bases of characterization are the five entitiness yogas. They are characterized by the  
bodhisattva’s exalted wisdoms included within the  sixteen attributes that are the aspects 
of knowledge, which are these  characteristics that have been explained above; further, that 
is exactly  as fire is characterized by the tangible object, heat. [As] what are they 
characterized? They are characterized [as] the applications of the knower of paths.  
Therefore, what are those characteristics?  
 
• A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom knowing in dependence on the path perfection of 
wisdom: (1) the  emptiness  of a truly existent entity , (2) signs that are truly existent  
causes do not exist, (3) wishes  for truly existent  results do not exist,  
• a bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom realizing the eight: (4) production  does not exist  
ultimately , (5) cessation does not exist ultimately ; and the six included in the 
expression  “and so forth” in the root text  [4.18c] , (6) the thoroughly afflicted, such as 
grasping, does not exist  [ultimately] , (7) the completely pure, such as faith, does not 
exist [ultimately] , (8) things  that are objects of abandonment do not exist  ultimately , (9) 
entitiness  that is not established by way of [its] nature  [ultimately], (10) a  support  that 
is established ultimately  does not exist, (11) the nature of thusness, the characteristic 
of space; and 
• a bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom knowing  (12) undisturbed dharmata since it does not 
transform into some thing else , (13) not composed  by first having an idea , (14) the 
definitions and the divisions of the bases of characterization not existing truly, not conceptualized, (15) classified, and (16) those characteristics are also without 
characteristics  [ultimately] — 
are the characteristics of the applications of the knower of paths. They are not indicated 
individually as meaning -isolates; they are divisions of those which have been posited as the 
characteristics.  
 Sutra says:  
“Sons of the gods, the cha racteristic of this profound perfection of wisdom is the 
characteristic of emptiness; it is signless; it is wishless.”  
“The characteristic of this profound perfection of wisdom is without production, without cessation … the characteristic of space.”  
“The se characteristics cannot be disturbed by the world of gods, humans, as well as anti -
gods.”  
“The characteristic is not composed of form.”   
“These characteristics of space are not [characteristics] of either humans or non -humans, 
either the contaminated o r the uncontaminated, either the mundane or the supramundane, or 
either the composed or the uncomposed.”   
“Regardless of whether a tathagata come s or does not come, this dharmadhatu just abides.”  
“Regarding those phenomena from forms until the exalted knower of all aspects, the 
tathagatas have attained clear complete  buddhahood without characteristics.”  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2A3.  Characteristics of the applications of the exalted knower of all aspects  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2A3A. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2A3B. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2A3C. Commentary  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
381 2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2A3A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
After that, by means of the exalted knower of all aspects:  
 
EXPLANATION  
After that, by means of the exalted knower of all aspects:  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2A3B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
4.20  Abiding in dependence on  
The quality of thusness; to be respected;  
Higher; pleased; and  
Making offerings to him; a doer does not exist;   
 
4.21  That which is an exalted knower engaging all;  
Teaching not seeing;  
The aspect  of the emptiness of the world ; 
Describing; making known; making direct;  
 
4.22  Teaching the inconceivable and the pacification;  
And refuting the world and discrimination:  
These are explained to be “the knowledge characteristics  
In the mode of an exalted knower of all aspects.”  
 
EXPLANATION  
Having explained [the characteristics] by way of the earlier lines, “Abiding in dependence 
on the quality of thusness,” and so forth, they are summarized and indicated by way of the 
last two lines.  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2A3C. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. (1) Abiding in dependence on the qualities of the state of tathagata, 
(2) to be respected, (3) to be taken as higher, (4) to be pleased, (5) made offerings, (6) a doer does not exist, (7) goes to all, (8) tea ching the meaning not seen, (9) the aspect of the 
emptiness of the world, (10) describing the emptiness of the world, (11) making known the 
emptiness of the world, (12) making [the trainees ] directly see the emptiness of the world, 
(13) teaching  as not conceivable, (14) teaching  the pacification, (15) refuting the world, and 
(16) stopping discrimination —through the applications of an exalted knower of all aspects 
being characterized by the sixteen instances that are aspects of knowledge exactly, w hich 
are these aforesaid, these are the knowledge characteristics included within an exalted 
knower of all aspects.   
 
EXPLANATION  
These are the knowledge characteristics included within an exalted knower of all 
aspects. The bases of characterization are t he seven entitinesses of the applications of an 
exalted knower of all aspects. By what are they characterized ? By bodhisattva’s exalted 
wisdoms included within the  sixteen instances that are aspects of knowledge, which are 
these  explained above; further, t hat is exactly  as fire is characterized by the tangible object, 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
382 heat, through characterizing them [as] the applications of an exalted knower of all 
aspects . What are they?  
• A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom (1) abiding in the happiness of the present life in 
dependence on  the qualities of the state of tathagata  (one-gone -thus) , in dependence 
on the applications of an exalted knower of all aspects; (sutra says, “The tathagatas 
depend on and abide in this perfection of wisdom”);  
• [a bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom] k nowing that the spiritual guide is (2) to be respected, 
(3) to be taken as higher  without transgressing his words , (4) to be pleased  through 
gain and honor , (5) to be  made offerings to with flowers;  (sutra says, “In that way, 
revere, take as higher, serve, make offerings to, admire, and honor the Dharma. Subhuti, 
this dharmata is the perfection of wisdom”); 
• [a bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom] knowing  (6) a doer  does not exist ultimately; (sutra 
says, “Because an agent does not exist, the tathagatas ‘without ha ving taken all 
phenomena,’ attain clear complete  enlightenment”);   
• [a bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom] (7) [knowing]  the exalted wisdom that goes to all  
objects of knowledge , and (8) teaching suchness, the meaning not seen  anywhere 
ultimately; (sutra says, “At that time when the primary consciousness observing an exalted knower of all aspects does not arise, because there is no seeing by an exalted 
knower of all aspects, I teach”);  
• [a bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom] (9) knowi ng the aspect of the emptiness of the world, 
and (10) describing the emptiness of the world  to trainees; (sutra says, “Subhuti, the 
perfection of wisdom describes, ‘The world is empty’”);  
• [a bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom] (11) making  known the emptiness of the world  with a 
mundane wisdom arisen from meditation; (sutra says, “The perfection of wisdom makes known, ‘The world is empty’”);   
• [a bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom] (12) making  the trainees  see with direct cognition the 
emptiness of the world ; (sutra say s, “To the tathagatas, the perfection of wisdom 
teaches, ‘The world is empty’”);  
• [a bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom]  (13) knowing the teaching of the dharmata of 
phenomena as not conceivable  by the minds of the dialecticians and (14) teaching  the 
pacification  of elaborations, the ultimate; (sutra says, “To the tathagatas, the perfection 
of wisdom teaches , ‘The world is inconceivable’”);  
• [a bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom]  (15) refuting the establishment of the world  in 
suchness; (sutra says, “To the tathagatas, t he perfection of wisdom shows, ‘The world is 
emptiness’”);  and 
• [a bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom]  (16) stopping discrimination  of the objects to be 
adopted and the objects to be discarded as existing ultimately in this and other worlds; 
(sutra says, “To the tathagatas, the perfection of wisdom shows the world in this way, ‘It 
will transform into neither the discrimination of this world nor the discrimination of 
other worlds.’”)  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2B. Distinguishing characteristics  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2B1. Making a co nnection  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2B2. Brief indication  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2B3. Extensive explanation  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
383 2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2B1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
In that way, having described by means of the nine interceding stanzas the knowledge 
characteristics in the entitiness of generalities, since the distinctions of those affirmed by the 
aspects of knowledge are to be known, after the knowledge characteristics, by means of 
interceding stanzas, the distinguishing characteristics:  
 
EXPLANATION  
In that way, having des cribed by means of the nine interceding stanzas the knowledge 
characteristics that act to  characterize [them as] the applications of the three exalted 
knowers in the entitiness of generalities, without having explicitly indicated the mode in 
which they are  superior to the applications of hearers and solitary realizers , since the 
distinctions of being superior to which  of those applications of the three exalted knowers 
individually affirmed with valid cognition by the aspects of knowledge  that are included 
within the three sets of sixteen knowledge characteristics are to be known , after the 
knowledge characteristics, by means of interceding stanzas, the  distinguishing 
characteristics : 
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2B2. Brief indication  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2B2A. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2B2B. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2B2A. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
4.23  Through the distinctions of the inconceivable and so forth, 
By way of the sixteen instants, 
The possessors of objects of utilization of the truths, superior, 
The distinguishin g characteristics are explained. 
 
EXPLANATION  
Through  the distinctions of the inconceivable and so forth  that will be explained below , 
the distinguishing characteristics are explained by way of the sixteen instants, the 
possessors of objects of utilizatio n of the truths  that characterize them as being  superior  
to the applications of hearers and solitary realizers . 
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2B2B. Commentary  
COMMENTARY  
So the root text is said. Because the object -possessors of true sufferings and so forth that are 
distinguished by the distinctions of the inconceivable, unequaled, and so forth —the sixteen 
characteristics of forbearances and knowledges of dharma and of subsequent knowledge —
characterize the applications of the knower of paths and so forth, they are disti nguishing 
characteristics.   
 
EXPLANATION  
They are distinguishing characteristics because they characterize the applications of 
the knower of paths , an exalted knower of all aspects, and so forth as applications that are 
superior to the applications of hea rers and solitary realizers.  By what are they [the 
applications of the knower of paths and the exalted knower of all aspects] characterized? 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
384 They are characterized by  the object- possessors of true sufferings and so forth that are 
distinguished by the disti nctions of understanding the inconceivable  dharmata of true 
sufferings , unequaled, and so forth—the sixteen characteristics of forbearances and 
knowledges of dharma and of subsequent knowledge  [dharma forbearance, dharma 
knowledge, subsequent forbearance, and subsequent knowledge] . Here the bases of the 
attributes are simply correlated with the path of seeing and indicated; know that the sixteen 
isolates of the attributes exist from the path of accumulation until  the end of [a sentient 
being’s] continuum.  
  Even the applications of the knower of bases in the continua of bodhisattvas are 
established to be greatly superior to the applications of hearers and solitary realizers. 
However, the manner of superiority has not been explicitly indicated here because, s ince the 
applications of the knower of bases exist also in hearers and solitary realizers, it should be 
known that they are not appropriate as the bases of attributes that are superior to any [of the 
applications of the three exalted knowers].  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B-2B3. Extensive explanation  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2B3A. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2B3B. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2B3C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2B3A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
QUALM: Further, what are the distinctions of the inconceivable and so forth?  
RESPONSE: Three interceding stanzas:  
 
EXPLANATION  
QUALM: Further, what are the distinctions of the inconceivable and so forth?  
RESPONSE: Three interceding stanzas: 
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2B3B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
4.24  The inconceivable; unequaled;  
Perfectly transcending comprehension and enumeration;  
Incorporating all aryas; those that  are known  
By the wise; knowing the uncommon;  
 
4.25  Knowing quickly; not decreasing or increasing;  
Accomplishing; correctly accomplishing;  
Observing along with support;  
All; being taken care of;  
 
4.26  And not relishing the taste :  
Through knowing the nature of the sixteen distinctions,  
The paths are paths of distinction  
Because they are superior to others.  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
385 EXPLANATION  
The paths that are included within the applications of the knower of paths and the  exalted 
knower of all aspects are paths of distinction because they are superior to the other  
paths of hearers and solitary realizers . Through what? Through knowing the nature of the 
sixteen distinctions. What are they? The inconceivable  and so forth.  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2B3C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2B3C -1. Extensive explanation  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2B3C -2. The reason for not explicitly indicat ing the objects to which they are superior  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2B3C -1. Extensive explanation  
COMMENTARY  
So the root text is said. (1) The inconceivable due to the strength of wisdom, well taken care 
of by the perfect complete buddhas and so forth, (2) unequa lled, (3) transcends 
comprehension, (4) transcends enumeration, (5) incorporating all arya persons, (6) those 
that are to be known by the wise beings, (7) thoroughly knowing the things that are not the 
objects of utility of the hearers and so forth, (8) kno wing very quickly the manifest 
knowledge that relies on one’s own system, (9) the entity of no decrease and no increase of 
all phenomena based upon the conventional and ultimate truths, (10) strongly accomplish ing 
the six perfections of generosity and so forth through purity of the three spheres, (11) correctly accomplishing  merit and exalted wisdom practiced over many eons by way of 
correct  application, (12) observing all phenomena without conceptualizing, (13) the support 
of bodhisattvas, the entitiness o f dharmadhatu, (14) the collection of causes that fully 
complete the perfections of prayer and so forth, (15) being taken care of by the method of a 
spiritual guide, and (16) not relishing adherence —the aforesaid natures of the sixteen are 
respectively the  distinctions that are the instants of true sufferings and so forth, by which the 
two—the knowers of paths and so forth of bodhisattvas and so forth —are superior to the 
paths of hearers and so forth, in being paths of distinction.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The applic ations of the knower of paths and the  exalted knower of all aspects that cultivate 
the two —the knowers of paths and so forth of bodhisattvas , buddhas,  and so forth —are 
the bases of characterization, applications superior to the lesser paths of hearers and so 
forth, in being paths of distinction. Further, they are characterized by the sixteen 
distinctions that are the instants , the object -possessors of true sufferings and so forth 
respectively.  
 Further, what are they? The four object -possessors of true sufferings are the four instants 
of forbearances and knowledges: (1) understanding the inconceivable dharmata of 
sufferings due to the strength of wisdom, well taken care of by the spiritual guides, the 
perfect complete buddhas , bodhisattv as and so forth, the empowering conditions , (2) 
realizing that it is unequaled due to the absence of anything alike , (3) realizing that 
dharmata perfectly transcends comprehension  by a valid cognizer of conventionalities , 
and (4) realizing that dharmata pe rfectly transcends enumeration  through counting. Sutra 
says, “Bhagavan, this perfection of wisdom abides closely due to being an inconceivable 
object, an unequaled object, an incomprehensible object, a non -enumerable object, and an 
object equal to the uneq ualed.”  
 The four object -possessors of true origins: (5) incorporating all  excellent qualities of all 
arya persons, (6) knowing those that are to be known by the wise beings  who know the 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
386 modes and varieties , (7) thoroughly knowing the vast and profound things that are not 
the objects of utility of the hearers and so forth, and (8) knowing very quickly the 
manifest knowledge that relies on one’s own system , the Mahayana — having taken the 
four forbearances and knowledges of origins as the bases of the attribu tes, are the 
characterizers of superiority over the applications of hearers and solitary realizers .  
 Respectively, sutra says:  
• “Subhuti, this profound perfection of wisdom perfectly possesses the five perfections.”  
• “Bhagavan, this perfection of wisdom w ill be understood by those who are precise , fine, 
clever, and skilled.”  
• “That which is an abandonment and a knowledge of [persons] until  solitary realizers is a 
forbearance of a bodhisattva who has attained a forbearance with respect to the 
phenomenon that is not produced.”  
• “Those sons of the lineage or daughters of the lineage who, having heard this profound 
perfection of wisdom, asks questions about it, and having written it, gives its oral transmission and pays proper attention to it, should be asserted to attain nirvana very 
quickly.”  
 
 The four object -possessors of cessations: (9) realizing the entity of no decrease and no 
increase ultimately of all phenomena based upon the conventional and ultimate truths ; 
(sutra says, “This profoun d perfection of wisdom [does not] seek either decrease or 
increase.”); (10) strongly accomplish ing the six perfections of generosity and so forth 
through purity of the three spheres , the object of generosity, the act of generosity, and so 
forth being free from existing ultimately , (11) correctly  accomplishing  merit and exalted 
wisdom practiced over many eons by way of respectful continuous correct application ; 
(sutra says, “That bodhisattva having died and transferred from another buddha land or 
Tushita has  been born here.”),  and the exalted wisdom (12) observing all phenomena 
without conceptualizing  that is conjoined with method —characterize the four forbearances 
and knowledges of cessations as being superior to the applications of hearers and solitary 
realizers . 
 
The four of paths: (13)  possessing the lineage, the support of bodhisattvas’  paths , the 
entitiness of dharmadhatu, (14) possessing the collection of causes that fully complete 
the ten perfections of prayer and so forth, (15) being taken care of by the method of a 
spiritual guide  who reveals the complete path , and (16) not relishing adherence to any 
phenomenon of samsara or nirvana as truly existent. These four characterize the four 
forbearances and knowledges with respect to the Mahayana path as bei ng superior to the 
applications of hearers and solitary realizers . 
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2B3C -2. The reason for not explicitly indicating the objects to which they are superior  
COMMENTARY 
Because of that, [those] that are those are not explained because they are easy to understand by way of the characteristics of adherence and so forth being produced, which are separated 
from the distinctions that have been explained.  
 
EXPLANATION  
There is a reason for not explicitly indicating the paths that are those  applications of 
hearers and solitary realizers here because they are easy to understand . The reason for that is 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
387 because they are easy to understand by way of the characteristics of being produced 
along with  adherence to true existence and so forth, which are separated from the 
distinctions  that have been explained.  Further, that is because the Mahayana path of 
seeing is explicitly indicated as possessing those attributes for the sake of proving that it is 
superior to the paths of hearers and solitary realizers.  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2C. Functional characteristics  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2C1. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2C2. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2C3. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2C1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY  
QUALM: What are the functions of those delinea ted by the distinguishing characteristics?  
RESPONSE: By means of two interceding stanzas, the functional characteristics:  
 
EXPLANATION  
QUALM: What are the functions of those distinctions (in which the bodhisattvas’ 
applications are superior to those of hea rers and solitary realizers) delineated by the 
distinguishing characteristics?  
RESPONSE: By means of two interceding stanzas, the functional characteristics:  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2C2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
4.27  Benefit; happiness; protection;  
A refuge for human beings;  
Abode; friend; island;  
Known as “ a leader; ” 
 
4.28  Spontaneously accomplishing; not actualizing  
The result of the three vehicles;  
And the last, the deed of support : 
These are the functional characteristics.  
 
EXPLANATION  
These eleven entities of the applications are the functional characteristics. What are they?  
Benefit [and so forth].   
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2C3. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. With the aim of accomplishing the natures of (1) future benefit, (2) 
the ha ppiness of this life, and (3) the non -ripened state that is without suffering, there are the 
three functions of benefit and so forth of the knower of all.  
  With the aim of correctly accomplishing : (1) the perpetual benefit, (2) the opposite of the 
cause o f suffering, (3) realizing the equality of samsara and nirvana, (4) the entity of the 
support that realizes one’s and others’ welfare, (5) accomplishing others’ welfare, (6) 
engaging in spontaneous accomplishment of  the welfare of sentient beings, and (7) these 
aforesaid exactly according to the time, “not actualizing  the result of definite emergence of 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
388 the three vehicles” —there are the seven functions of refuge and so forth of the knower of 
paths.  
 With the aim of accomplishing the revealing of all phenome na by150 an exalted knower of 
all aspects, there is the one deed that is supported on the exalted knower of all aspects.  
 In that way, the applications of the three exalted knowers of all are characterized by the 
aspects of function exactly; therefore they a re the functional characteristics.  
 
EXPLANATION  
In that way, the applications of the three exalted knowers of all are characterized by 
the bodhisattva’s exalted wisdoms included within the eleven aspects of function ( exactly  
as fire is characterized by tan gible object, heat) as applications that possess the special 
function of observing others’ welfare ; therefore they are the functional characteristics.  
 The functional characteristics of the applications of the knower of bases are the three 
functions of ben efit and so forth characterizing the applications of the knower of all  as 
being applications that possess special functions. What are they?  The functions of 
benefitting others with the aim of accomplishing the natures of (1) future benefit , 
placing sentient beings in the happiness of liberation , (2) the happiness of this life , such as 
pacifying suffering and mental unhappiness , and (3) the non -ripened state that is without 
suffering  by protecting them from the sufferings of samsara and causing them n ot to ripen 
[the sufferings of samsara] again. 
 Respectively, sutra says:  
• “Subhuti, the bodhisattvas will correctly engage in order to benefit the world.”  
• “The great bodhisattvas desiring unsurpassable complete enlightenment will liberate 
sentient beings  from suffering, mental unhappiness, and disturbance, and place them in 
nirvana, the truth of fearlessness.”  
• “The great bodhisattvas, having attained clear complete  buddhahood in the unsurpassable 
complete enlightenment will thoroughly protect sentient be ings from whatever 
sufferings that are experienced in cyclic existence.”  
 
The functions of the applications of the knower of paths  are the seven functions of refuge 
and so forth.  What are they?  The functions of benefitting others  with151 the aim of 
correctl y accomplishing : (1) the function of a refuge that places [sentient beings] in 
nirvana, the perpetual benefit, (2) the function of an abode that places [sentient beings] in 
the state that is  the opposite of the cause of suffering, (3) the function of a fri end that 
places [sentient beings] in realizing the equality of samsara and nirvana, (4) the function 
of an island, the entity of the support that realizes one’s and others’ welfare  by placing 
[sentient beings] in the liberation that is free from the moistu re of craving, which is 
concordant in property with dry [land] that is surrounded by water, (5) the function of a 
leader, accomplishing others’ temporal and final welfare, (6) the function of engaging in 
spontaneous accomplishment of the welfare of sentien t beings, and (7) these aforesaid 
exactly according to the time, “not actualizing  the perfect end, the result of definite 
emergence of the three vehicles , at an improper time .” 
 With the aim of accomplishing the revealing of all phenomena by an exalted kno wer 
of all aspects  in accordance with the mentality [of sentient beings] , there is the one deed 
                                              
150 Kyi emended to read kyis in accordance with Gyeltsab’s explanation below.  
151 Gyi emended to read gyis in accordance with Haribhadra’s commentary above.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
389 that is transitorily supported on an exalted knower of all aspects.  These are the eleven 
functions.  
 Respectively, sutra says:  
• “The great bodhisattvas, by atta ining clear complete  buddhahood in complete 
enlightenment, will thoroughly liberate [sentient beings] from birth, aging, and so forth, 
and place them in the nirvana in the sphere of nirvana without the aggregates 
remaining.”  
• “The great bodhisattvas, by at taining buddhahood, will teach sentient beings all 
phenomena without questions. In that way they will become the abode of those sentient 
beings.”  
• “Subhuti, in that way the great bodhisattvas, by attaining buddhahood in unsurpassable 
complete enlightenment , is a friend to the world.”  
• “Subhuti, in that way the great bodhisattva, by attaining buddhahood in unsurpassable 
complete enlightenment, is a helmsman of sentient beings.”   
• “The great bodhisattva, by attaining clear complete  buddhahood in unsurpassable  
complete enlightenment, is a guide of sentient beings.”  
• “Subhuti, the great bodhisattva, by attaining buddhahood in unsurpassable complete 
enlightenment, act as supports of sentient beings, teaching the Dharma, ‘Forms bear the 
nature of space’.”  
• “Subhuti, all phenomena bear the nature of not being produced; they do not transcend 
that nature.”  
• “Subhuti, all phenomena bear the nature of forms; they do not transcend that nature.”  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2D. Entitiness characteristics  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2D1. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2D2. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2D3. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2D1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY  
QUALM: What are the entitinesses of those made known  by the functional characteristics?”  
RESPONSE: By means of three interceding stanzas, the entitiness characteristics:  
 
EXPLANATION  
QUALM: What are the entitinesses of the bases of characterization and the objects of 
characterization of152 those functions of the three exalted knowers made known by the 
functional characteristics ?”  
RESPONSE: By means of three interceding stanzas, the entitiness characteristics:  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2D2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
4.29  Devoid of a fflictions , signs , marks , 
And the discordant class es and   
Antidotes; hardship; certainty ; 
Objects of intent; not  observed;  
 
                                              
152 Kyi emended to read kyis in accordance with Haribhadra’s commentary above.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
390 4.30  Stopping adherence;  
That known as “ observing; ” 
Discordance; without obstruction;  
No basis; no  going ; no production; 
 
4.31  And not observing t husness:  
The natures that are the sixteen entitinesses,  
Because they are characterized like objects of characterization, 
Are asserted to be the fourth type of characteristics.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The natures that are the sixteen entitinesses  of the applications of the three exalted 
knowers, since these are to be characterized , are asserted to be the fou rth type of 
characteristics, because they also are characterized like objects of characterization.  
What are they? Devoid of a fflictions; signs; [and so forth].  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2D3. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2D3A. Individual explanations  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2D3B. Summary  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2D3A. Individual explanations  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. (1) The afflictions, attachment and so forth, (2) their signs, adoption 
of negative body states, (3) their marks, improper attention and so forth , and (4) attachment 
and non -attachment and so forth, the discordant classes and the antidotes —by emptiness, 
there are the four entitinesses of being devoid of the knower of all. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The entitinesses of the applications of the knower of bases are the four entitinesses ( of 
being devoid of some afflictive obscurations) of the applications  of the knower of all.  
They are the applications:  (1) abandoning the afflictions, attachment and so forth, (2) 
abandoning their  signs, adoption of negative body stat es, (3) abandoning their  marks  
that are the causes , improper attention and so forth, and (4) distinguished by emptiness  
of conceptualizations of the objects to be adopted and objects to be discarded —the 
discordant classes, attachment and so forth, and the antidotes, non -attachment and so 
forth.  
  Respectively, sutra says:  
• “Subhuti, these great bodhisattvas will become the nature of being devoid of the 
instances of attachment, aversion , and ignorance.”  
• “Those great bodhisattvas will become the nature of b eing devoid of the signs of 
attachment, aversion , and ignorance.”  
• “Those great bodhisattvas will become the nature of being devoid of the marks of 
attachment, aversion , and ignorance.”  
• “Subhuti, those great bodhisattvas who believe in this profound perfe ction of wisdom 
will become the nature of being devoid of the signs of attachment, aversion , and 
ignorance.”   
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
391 COMMENTARY 
(1) Hardship for sentient beings, who do not exist ultimately, to attain nirvana, (2) certainty 
unequivocally with the characteristic  of not falling into other vehicles, (3) the objects of 
intent that are the supreme objects to be accomplished over a long time, (4) phenomena that 
are the object of cultivation and the cultivator are not observed, and (5) stopping all 
adherence to things —those like the aforesaid are the five entitinesses of the knower of 
paths.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The entitinesses of the applications of the knower of paths are the five entitinesses of the 
applications of the knower of paths. What are they?  
 (1) The application t hat undergoes hardship for infinite sentient beings, who do not exist 
ultimately, to attain nirvana  conventionally, (2) the application that accomplishes the 
certainty  of attaining buddhahood unequivocally with the characteristic of not falling 
into other vehicles, (3) the application that accomplishes  the three great objects of intent 
that are the supreme objects to be accomplished over a long time, (4) the application that realizes  phenomena that are the object of cultivation and the cultivator are not 
observed as existing ultimately , and (5) stopping all adherence to truly existent things —
five applications  like the aforesaid.  
 Respectively, sutra says:  
(1) “Although the great bodh isattvas seek the armor, saying, ‘I shall cause all sentient 
beings to fully attain nirvana,’ regarding that, they will undergo hardship with respect to 
sentient beings and those not observed as being imputed as sentient beings.”   
(2) “Those great bodhisa ttvas who seek the armor for sentient beings to attain nirvana do 
not fear the two states by way of hearers and solitary realizers.”  
(3) “The great bodhisattvas do not seek the armor for the sake of a trifling [number of] 
sentient beings. They seek the armor for the sake of all sentient beings fully attaining 
nirvana and the exalted wisdom that is an exalted knower of all aspects.”  
(4) “Bhagavan, the perfection of wisdom is profound; nobody meditates on it, nothing is meditated, and it is not meditated on in any way.”  
(5) “Some great irreversible bodhisattvas do not adhere to this profound perfection of wisdom. One should thoroughly investigate the great irreversible bodhisattvas.”  
 
COMMENTARY  
(1) observing the attributes of things that are included within  the knower of all and the 
knower of paths, (2) discordan ce through teaching what is the reverse of apprehension 
established in the world and so forth, (3) knowing that form and so forth are without obstruction, (4) no basis due to not observing objects of knowledge and knowers, (5) no 
going due to thusness, (6) no production due to the absence  of entitiness of forms and so 
forth, and (7) not observing thusness, the entity of the three, things, non -things, and so 
forth —those like the aforesaid are the seven  entitinesses of the exalted knower of all 
aspects.   
 
EXPLANATION  
The entitinesses of the applications of the exalted knower of all aspects are the seven 
entitinesses of the applications of the exalted knower of all aspects. There are seven,  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
392 because there  are those like the applications realizing:  (1) observing  paths and bases, the 
attributes of things that are included as objects within the  knower of all and the  
knower of paths, (2) discordance  with the childish  through teaching what is the reverse 
of apprehension established in the world  and so forth , adhering to things as truly 
existent, adhering to non -things as truly existent, and so forth , (3) knowing that forms and 
so forth are without obstruction, (4) no  truly existent basis  of mistake  due to not 
observing objects of knowledge and knowers  as existing ultimately , (5) no going 
anywhere ultimately due to thusness , the emptiness of true existence , (6) no production 
[ultimately ] due to the absence of entitiness of forms and so forth  ultimately , and (7) no t 
observing thusness, the entity of the three, things, non -things , both , and so forth  as 
existing ultimately; (in the context of this [point], Acarya [Haribhadra]’s Great Commentary  
says, “Since I wish to explain the extensive determination of the presenta tion of the two 
truths elsewhere by following Acarya Santaraksita, I have not elaborated on it here”).  
 Respectively, sutra says:  
(1) “The great bodhisattvas should investigate this profound perfection of wisdom with the 
attitude of striving for omniscien ce.” 
(2) “Sons of the gods, because space is profound, this Dharma is profound.”   
(3) “These phenomena are also without obstruction with regard to anything; they are 
without obstruction with regard to forms.”  
(4) “These phenomena possess non- basis. For th e sake of non -basis of forms…”  
(5) “This Elder Subhuti is produced subsequent to the Bhagavan, because he teaches the Dharma by basing all, whatever he teaches, upon emptiness, the absence  of signs, and the 
absence  of wishes.”  
(6) “Sons of the gods, the Elder Subhuti is not produced subsequent to forms, is not produced subsequent to the thusness of forms, is not produced subsequent to that other than 
the thusness of forms.”  (7) “Bhagavan, these [phenomena] ranging from thusness  until the perfect end is profound. 
Regarding that, one does not observe forms and the thusness of forms; at any time when forms are not observed, how can the thusness of forms be viewed in observation?”  
2B2C -2A1B -1C2B -2D3B. Summary  
COMMENTARY 
In that way, because in that way the applications of the three exalted knowers of all are characterized by the sixteen entitinesses exactly according to the possession of 
characteristics, the fourth is asserted to be the entitiness characteristics.   
 
EXPL ANATION  
In that way, the fourth  type of characteristics  is asserted to be the entitiness 
characteristics, because in that way explained above , the applications of the three 
exalted knowers of all are characterized by the sixteen entitinesses  of the applica tions 
exactly  as in the basis of characterization in which fire is characterized by the tangible 
object, heat, according to the possession of characteristics : the three —knowledge, 
distinguishing and functional . 
2B2C -2A1B -1C2C. Condensed enumeration of the generality 
COMMENTARY  
In that way, if they are added together as a generality, there will be ninety -one 
characteristics.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
393  
EXPLANATION  
In that way, since there exist  forty -eight  knowledge characteristics, eighteen  distinguishing 
characteristics, eleven functional characteristic s, and sixteen  entitiness characteristics, if 
they are added together as a generality, there will be ninety -one characteristics.  
2B2C -2A1B -2. Explanation of the stages in which [the paths], beginning from the partial concordance with 
liberation, are produced in the continuum  
2B2C -2A1B -2A. Identifying the intended trainees of the Ornament for Clear Realization by means of 
explaining the beginning of the path of attaining enlightenment over three countless eons  
2B2C -2A1B -2B. Explanation of the stages in which the paths that  ripen the continuum are produced  
2B2C -2A1B -2C. Explanation of the stages in which the special clear realizations are produced in the 
continuum in dependence on those [previous stages]  
2B2C -2A1B -2A. Identifying the intended trainees of the Ornament for Clear Realization by means of explaining 
the beginning of the path of attaining enlightenment over three countless eons  
2B2C -2A1B -2A1. Characteristics of the path as a generality 
2B2C -2A1B -2A2. Through condensing [the characteristics] into the five bindings of the path, identifying the 
trainees who are skilled in them  
2B2C -2A1B -2A1. Characteristics of the path as a generality 
2B2C -2A1B -2A1A. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A1B -2A1B. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -2A1C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -2A1A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
Since fully knowing the explained applications will occur only in those who possess the 
roots of virtue of the partial concordance with liberation, the partial concordance with 
liberati on: 
 
EXPLANATION  
Since fully knowing the explained applications characterized as objects of valid cognition by means of the characteristics will occur only in those who possess the roots of virtue of 
the partial concordance with liberation  that will be explained , the partial concordance 
with liberation:   
2B2C -2A1B -2A1B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
4.32  No signs, skilled in perfectly accomplishing  
Generosity and so forth;  
On this realizing all aspects,  
The partial concordance with liberation is a sserted. 
 
EXPLANATION  
On this occasion of indicating  the application that clearly and  completely  realizes all 
aspects , the partial concordance with liberation  that is the beginning of the path of 
attaining enlightenment over three countless eons  is asserte d to be this: it is the clear 
realization of the doctrine in the continuum of a person who is  skilled in perfectly 
accomplishing in his continuum those ranging from generosity and so forth until the 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
394 exalted knower of all aspects, conjoined with the wisdom realizing that there are no signs 
ultimately . 
2B2C -2A1B -2A1C. Commentary  
COMMENTARY  
So the root text is said. Skill in generating  in his continuum those ranging from the 
perfections of generosity and so forth until the exalted knower of all aspects, by wa y of 
knower -aspects observing [phenomena] as being devoid of  signs , is asserted as the partial 
concordance with liberation in this clearly and  completely  realizing all aspects.  
 
EXPLANATION  
It is asserted as the partial concordance with liberation that completes the type of path of 
attaining enlightenment over three countless eons  in this context of teaching the application 
that clearly and  completely realizes all aspects.  What [is asserted  as that partial 
concordance with liberation]?  
  It is the clear realization of the doctrine in the continuum of a person who is skilled 
in generating in his continuum those ranging from the perfections of generosity and so 
forth until  the exalted knower of all aspects due to practicing the achievings through 
realizati on with valid cognition, by way of knower -aspects that are  conjoined with the 
wisdom observing [phenomena] as being devoid of  signs of elaborations ultimately.  
 Having eliminated superimpositions by way of hearing and thinking regarding all types 
of clear realizations that are the twenty -one sets of uncontaminated exalted wisdom, which 
will be explained below, after that s by having practiced them, an experience with respect to 
all the clear realizations will be  produced. From then onwards, one is known to have 
initiated the beginning of the path of attaining enlightenment over three countless eons, 
entered the Mahayana path, and produced in the continuum a Mahayana partial concordance with liberation.  
 
QUALM: What is the criterion for having produced an exp erience like?  
RESPONSE: Through observing all sentient beings, one spontaneously engages in 
compassion bearing the aspect of desiring them to be utterly released from suffering. By 
having produced, for instance, that which is like kindness of a mother for her only son, it is 
said that one has elicited the experience of compassion. Inferring from this, one should 
understand the boundaries where one has elicited experience with respect to other paths.  
 With regard to the meaning of emptiness one familiarizes  oneself with it by way of a 
wisdom arisen from contemplation. Due to the imprint of that, when one views these things, 
they appear to the mental consciousness  like the reflection of a face in a mirror. By having 
attained stability [in it] with respect to the appearance to the mental consciousness , as 
though this present appearance would vanish if one were to blow on it, it is said that one has 
elicited an experience of the meditation on emptiness with a wisdom arisen from contemplation. However, a fully qu alified special insight observing emptiness exists [only] 
from the heat level of the path of preparation. For the sake of understanding that all the clear realizations in one’s continuum must be conjoined with the wisdom realizing emptiness, “ by 
way of kno wer-aspects observing [phenomena] as being devoid of  signs ” was mentioned 
[above].   
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
395 2B2C -2A1B -2A2. Through condensing [the characteristics] into the five bindings of the path, identifying the 
trainees who are skilled in them  
2B2C -2A1B -2A2A. Making a conne ction  
2B2C -2A1B -2A2B. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -2A2C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -2A2A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
QUALM: What are  those skills? 
RESPONSE: In order to indicate that, the interceding stanzas:  
 
EXPLANATION  
QUALM: What are those skills in accomplishing generosity and so forth in one’s 
continuum ? 
RESPONSE: In order to indicate that, the interceding stanzas: 
2B2C -2A1B -2A2B. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -2A2B -1. The criterion for skill in the bindings of the path as a generality 
2B2C -2A1B -2A2B -2. Identifying the trainees of the Ornament for Clear Realization who are skilled in them  
2B2C -2A1B -2A2B -1. The criterion for skill in the bindings of the path as a generality 
2B2C -2A1B -2A2B -1A. Indicating that the entrance to the Mahayana is the generated mind  
2B2C -2A1B -2A2B -1B. How to train in the deeds  
2B2C -2A1B -2A2B -1A. Indicating that the entrance to the Mahayana is the generated mind  
2B2C -2A1B -2A2B -1A1. The uncommon Mahayana going for refuge   
2B2C -2A1B -2A2B -1A2. The actual meaning   
2B2C -2A1B -2A2B -1A1. The  uncommon Mahayana going for refuge   
ROOT TEXT  
4.33a  Faith observing the buddhas and so forth;  
 
EXPLANATION  
Having initially generated a faith of conviction and a lucid faith observing all the causes of 
the Mahayana path as well as their results, the budd has and so forth, being skilled in them is 
called “skill in faith.” Like it has been said, “Furthermore, faith comes first, like a mother 
who gives birth,” know that faith is the root of all excellent qualities, and know that, having 
taken all the Mahayana  paths and results as objects of faith in one’s continuum, repeatedly 
familiarizing oneself with them establishes the root of the Mahayana path. Although refuge has been indicated as the principal meaning, skill in faith has been indicated first for the 
sake of identifying it as the root of the Mahayana path.   
 Sutra says, “Without separating from the perfection of wisdom and skillful means , 
contemplate in the mind the buddhas of the three times, their aggregates of ethics , and so 
forth, but do not take th em as signs. Know that if a great bodhisattva does not take the three 
doors of liberation as signs, he will attain the unsurpassable complete enlightenment without 
falling into those two, [the hearer’s vehicle and the solitary realizer’s vehicle], and with out 
dishonoring or degenerating [the bodhisattva vehicle].”  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
396 2B2C -2A1B -2A2B -1A2. The actual meaning  
ROOT TEXT  
4.33b  A mindfulness, the excellent attitude;  
 
EXPLANATION  
It has been mentioned that the excellent Mahayana attitude , the Mahayana generated mind, 
is “a mindfulness that is qualified by being a mindfulness that serves as an owner of 
omniscience.” For the sake of understanding that this is the criterion for being skilled in the entrance for entering into the Mahayana, the branch of skill in the specific mindfulness that 
is mindful of omniscience again and again has been mentioned. Sutra says: “Bhagavan, there is no doubt that any great bodhisattva who is not separated from the perfection of 
wisdom and skillful means will attain unsurpassable comp lete enlightenment.”  
2B2C -2A1B -2A2B -1B. How to train in the deeds  
2B2C -2A1B -2A2B -1B1. Training in the deeds as a generality 
2B2C -2A1B -2A2B -1B2. Training in the last two perfections   
2B2C -2A1B -2A2B -1B1. Training in the deeds as a generality  
ROOT TEXT  
4.33c Joyous effort in the objects of utilization, generosity and so forth;  
 
EXPLANATION  
That qualified by (i) initiating joyous effort that takes the six perfections , generosity and 
so forth, as the objects of utilization, and (ii) initiating joyous effort in all Mahayana paths 
is called “skill in joyous effort.” Sutra says, “The great bodhisattvas, having initially generated the mind [of enlightenment], from then onwards, even though they perform 
generosity, do not take it  as a sign.”  
 The meaning of indicating “ training in the deeds through being qualified by joyous 
effort ” is as follows. It has been taught that even though one may have generated the mind, 
if one does not diligently initiate joyous effort in the deeds, the n that is simply a mere noble 
thought; one will not attain unsurpassable enlightenment. Therefore one should know that, when one trains in every division that is an instance of the deeds, one must qualify it with 
joyous effort.  
2B2C -2A1B -2A2B -1B2. Training  in the last two perfections  
2B2C -2A1B -2A2B -1B2A. Training in the perfection of concentration  
2B2C -2A1B -2A2B -1B2B. Training in the perfection of wisdom  
2B2C -2A1B -2A2B -1B2A. Training in the perfection of concentration  
ROOT TEXT  
4.33d  Non-conceptualizing meditative stabilization, and  
 
EXPLANATION  
With respect to common calm abiding, having observed any non -conceptual ized image, 
such as that of the exalted body of the Tathagata, by having familiarized with it in 
dependence on the nine steps of mental abidin gs, one practices until (i) one engages in it 
without exertion without need to rely upon the antidotes to laxity and excitement, and (ii) the bliss of physical and mental pliancy has been produced.   
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
397  Uncommon concentration refers to meditative stabilizati on such as the Sky Treasury that 
does not conceptualize “It is this” with respect to the object of observation , in dependence 
on having previously achieved the above [common calm abiding], the perfection of 
concentration that is attained on the fifth groun d, and so forth. Sutra says, “Bhagavan, that is 
like this: the great bodhisattva, having generated the first mind [of enlightenment], from then onwards, does not observe that which will attain clear complete  enlightenment, that by 
which one will attain cle ar complete  enlightenment, and where one will attain clear 
complete  enlightenment —any phenomenon  ranging from forms [until ] the exalted knower 
of all aspects.”  
2B2C -2A1B -2A2B -1B2B. Training in the perfection of wisdom  
ROOT TEXT  
4.34ab  The wisdom that kno ws  
Phenomena in all ways and the five types. 
 
EXPLANATION  
In dependence on having attained a fully qualified calm abiding, one will be skilled in (i) the wisdom that knows the objects of knowledge, phenomena that are the modes and 
varieties, in all ways and (ii) the five types of objects . Both the special insights observing 
modes and observing varieties have been indicated here; the special insight observing 
varieties exists even from the path of accumulation and the special insight observing modes 
is attained from the heat level of the path of preparation. Know that it is attained once one is 
able to induce the bliss of pliancy through analysis with the wisdom that individually 
investigates the meaning of emptiness.  
 Sutra says, “Sons of the g ods, I have attained clear complete  enlightenment in all ways 
with regard to all phenomena; I have not observed any phenomena —that which will attain 
clear complete  enlightenment, that by which one will attain clear complete  enlightenment, 
and where one wil l attain clear complete  enlightenment.” Know the extensive presentation 
of these points from the stages of the paths of the perfections composed by  Je Rinpoche 
[Lama Tsongkhapa]. 
2B2C -2A1B -2A2B -2. Identifying the trainees of the Ornament for Clear Realizat ion who are skilled in them  
ROOT TEXT  
4.34cd  Complete enlightenment is asserted to be  
Easy to realize by the sharp, but difficult to realize by the dull.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Regarding the intended trainees of the Ornament for Clear Realization , there are two types 
by way of level of faculty, because complete enlightenment is asserted to be easy to 
realize  and attain  by the sharp faculty bodhisattvas , but difficult to realize by the dull  
faculty bodhisattvas . 
 Sutra says, “In case I seek and contemplate the meaning of that taught by the Bhagavan 
in the teaching ‘It will be difficult for unsurpassable complete enlightenment to arise,’ then, Bhagavan, it will not be difficult to attain clear complete  enlightenment  in unsurpassable 
complete enlightenment” and “Venerable Subhuti, by that enumeration, it will be difficult to attain clear complete  enlightenment in unsurpassable complete enlightenment.”   
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
398  The intended trainees of the Ornament for Clear Realization  are presented here as being 
definite as the two types: followers of faith and followers of Dharma; know that [the 
assertions that] those of middling faculty are explained separately, those of dull faculty 
apply themselves in the Hinayana, and the like have exp lained the meaning of this passage 
erroneously. The distinction in being dull or sharp in faculty, as explained above, lies in whether or not they have completed a fully qualified wisdom due to the degree of the force 
of their faith and the strength of joy ous effort observing all the stages of the Mahayana path.  
2B2C -2A1B -2A2C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -2A2C -1. Distinctions in skill in  the five objects  
2B2C -2A1B -2A2C -2. Differences in progression on the paths of those of sharp and dull faculties  
2B2C -2A1B -2A2 C-3. Meanings that have been implied i mplicitly  
2B2C -2A1B -2A2C -1. Distinctions in skill in  the five objects  
COMMENTARY  
So the root text is said. Those that are not the entitinesses of the powers  bearing distinctions 
in: (1) faith, (2) joyous effort, (3) mindfulness, (4) meditative stabilization, and (5) wisdom, 
respectively are skilled in the five types  of objects: (1) the buddhas, (2) generosity, (3) 
perfect attitude, (4) not conceptualizing, and (5) full knowing of all aspects of all 
phenomena and so forth.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the bodhisattvas who are intended trainees of the Ornament for Clear 
Realization —are skilled in the five types  of objects, because respectively  they are skilled 
in the five types  of objects: (1) faith  observing all of the Maha yana path s and their results, 
the buddhas  and so forth , (2) joyous effort that is enthusiastic about all, generosity  and so 
forth , (3) mindfulness included within the generated mind, the perfect attitude, (4) the 
meditative stabilization that does not conc eptualize  with respect to all phenomena , and 
(5) full knowing exactly of all aspects of all phenomena that are modes and varieties and 
so forth.   
2B2C -2A1B -2A2C -2. Differences in progression on the paths of those of sharp and dull faculties  
COMMENTARY  
Although indeed in that way, all are not attaining unsurpassable enlightenment, because this 
is the nature: in this way, unsurpassable perfect complete enlightenment is easy to realize by 
the sharp ones, great faith and so forth, but it is difficult to rea lize by those dull ones.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Although both [types of] trainees of the Ornament for Clear Realization are indeed similar 
in being skilled in the five objects, faith and so forth, in that way, all trainees of the 
Ornament for Clear Realization are not similar in easily attaining unsurpassable 
enlightenment, because this is the nature: in this way, unsurpassable perfect complete 
enlightenment is easy to realize  and attain by the sharp ones  who abide in the  great  
vehicle, faith and so forth, but i t is difficult to realize and attain by those dull ones who 
abide in the  great vehicle .  
 Great faith and so forth is the great vehicle, while small and middling faith and so forth 
are the small and middling vehicles; know that, in dependence on the mere i mputation of the 
name “bodhisattva” to hearers in what is overtly seen in the sutras, delineating divisions of 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
399 the three lineage -bearers who abide on the Mahayana path of accumulation is an erroneous 
explanation of the meaning of the passage.  
2B2C -2A1B -2A2C-3. Meanings that have been implied i mplicitly  
COMMENTARY 
Implicitly this is implied: “The middling realize the enlightenment of solitary realizers and 
the small realize the enlightenment of hearers.”   
 
EXPLANATION  
Implicit to what has been explicitly i ndicated in the root text, this is implied: “ Those on 
the path of accumulation abiding i n the  middling vehicle, middling faith and so forth,  
realize and attain the enlightenment of solitary realizers and those on the path of 
accumulation abiding in the  small vehicle, small faith and so forth, realize and attain the 
enlightenment of hearers.”  The meaning that has been explained is implicitly implied by 
the root text, because the superiority of difficult and easy attainment of unsurpassable 
enlightenment by t he sharp and dull bodhisattvas who abide in the great faith and so forth 
has been explicitly indicated and the attributes of the other two have not been explicitly 
indicated.  Know that it is erroneous and at variance with the Acarya’s intention to explain 
the explicit and implicit meanings differently  [from those presented above] .  
2B2C -2A1B -2B. Explanation of the stages in which the paths that  ripen the continuum are produced  
2B2C -2A1B -2B1. Actual meaning  
2B2C -2A1B -2B2. Refuting wrong conceptions concernin g the sequence of the six clear realizations  
2B2C -2A1B -2B1.  Actual meaning  
2B2C -2A1B -2B1A. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A1B -2B1B. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -2B1C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -2B1A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
Since a partial concordance with definite discrimination arises in the enthusiastic ones who 
have generated a partial concordance with liberation:  
 
EXPLANATION  
Since a partial concordance with definite discrimination arises in the enthusiastic ones 
who have generated a partial concordance with liberation , correlating the clear 
realization indicated here with the pure grounds is not even slightly related, because there is 
not the slightest purpose in making a connection here, saying “An exalted wisdom of the 
eighth ground is generated on the path of  accumulation.”  
2B2C -2A1B -2B1B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
4.35  Here, that the objects of observation of the heat levels  
Are all sentient beings is praised.  
The types, equal mind toward those  
And so forth, are explained to be ten.   
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
400 EXPLANATION  
In this context , that the objects of observation of the three heat levels of the Mahayana 
path of preparation are all sentient beings  is praised and described in sutra, because  the 
types, the mind viewing those  sentient beings as  equal through observing them and s o 
forth, are explained in sutra to be ten. 
  Sutra says, “Subhuti, the great bodhisattvas, out of the desire to attain manifest 
enlightenment in the unsurpassable complete enlightenment, should abide before those 
sentient beings; they should generate great  love; they should generate great compassion ;” 
“Regarding benefit, non -anger, and non -harmfulness, they should generate a mind of benefit 
before all sentient beings; they should not generate a mind of harm; they should generate a 
mind of non- harmfulness be fore all sentient beings ;” and “The great bodhisattvas, out of the 
desire to definitely attain unsurpassable complete enlightenment, should generate the mind of father and mother,… relatives and kinsmen before all sentient beings.”  
 
ROOT TEXT  
4.36  Throug h oneself turning away from negativities and  
Abiding in generosity and so forth,  
Setting others in them,  Expressing praise, and concordance:   
 
4.37a  Transformed -into-peak ; … 
 
EXPLANATION  
Transformed -into-peak  also observes all sentient beings, because it observes them by way 
of (i) oneself who abides on the peak level, through turning away from negativities , the 
ten non-virtues, and abiding in generosity and so forth, setting other  sentient beings in 
them, and (ii) expressing praise  for those who have e ngaged [in turning away from 
negativities and abiding in generosity and so forth] without being urged , and taking  joy in 
concordance.  
 Sutra says:  
(1) “Oneself should turn away from killing. One should correctly urge others to also turn away from killing. One should describe the excellence of turning away from it. One should 
describe the excellence of any other who turns away from it and take  joy in concordance.”  
(2) “Oneself should also fully complete the perfection of generosity. One should correctly 
urge others also to the perfection of generosity.”  
(3) “Oneself should also meditate on inner emptiness. One should correctly urge others also to inner emptiness.”  
 
ROOT TEXT  
4.37ab  …; likewise , the forbearance level is  
Oneself, those bearing the supports w ho are others knowing the truths. 
 
EXPLANATION  
Likewise, the forbearance level observes all sentient beings,  because it observes them by 
way of oneself, having abided in knowing the four truths , placing  those bearing the 
supports who are other  sentient beings in that . 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
401   Sutra says, “Oneself should also thoroughly know suffering; one should abandon 
origins.”  
 
ROOT TEXT  
4.37cd  The supreme mundane quality level is to be likewise understood  
By way of acting to ripen sentient beings and so forth. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The supreme mundane quality level similarly also observes sentient beings, because it is 
to be understood that it observes them by way of acting to ripen and acting to liberate  
sentient beings and so forth.c  
 Sutra says, “Through oneself also abiding in the faultlessness of the bodhisattvas, one 
should also generate the clairvoyances; one should also generate the exalted wisdom that is an exalted knower of all aspects.”  
2B2C -2A1B -2B1C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -2B1C -1. Individual explanations 
2B2C -2A1B-2B1C -2. Summary 
2B2C -2A1B -2B1C -1. Individual explanations 
2B2C -2A1B -2B1C -1A. Heat  
2B2C -2A1B -2B1C -1B. Peak  
2B2C -2A1B -2B1C -1C. Forbearance  
2B2C -2A1B -2B1C -1D. Supreme mundane quality  
2B2C -2A1B -2B1C -1A. Heat  
COMMENTARY  
So the root text is said. With re spect to this [application that] clearly  and completely  realizes 
all aspects, to observe sentient beings with five aspects: the minds of (1) equality, (2) love, 
(3) benefit, (4) absence of anger, and (5) non -harmfulness, and five other aspects: (6) the 
mind of father and mother, (7) the mind of brother and sister, (8) the mind of son and 
daughter, (9) the mind of friend and companion, and (10) the mind of relatives and kinsmen —is asserted as transformed -into-heat. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —with respect to th is application that  clearly  and completely  realizes all 
aspects, transformed -into-heat—is asserted to observe sentient beings, because it 
observes sentient beings with five aspects: (1) the mind of equality  cultivating 
equanimity that, observing all sentie nt beings, stops prejudice due to grasping and aversion , 
(2) love  that bears the aspect of affection toward s all, (3) long -term benefit, (4) the absence 
of anger  due to a deluded mind, and (5) non- harmfulness due to being non- injurious , and 
because it observes sentient beings with  five other aspects: (6) the mind of father  and 
mother towards elderly men and women , (7) the mind of brother and sister  towards 
peers , (8) the mind of son and daughter  towards the juvenile , (9) the mind of mutually 
agreeable  friend and trustworthy companion, and (10) the mind of paternal relatives and 
maternal  kinsmen.  The individual delineations into small, middling, and great are merely a 
characterization; know that all observes all  
 These indicate (i) the cultivation of love bearing the aspect of affection prior to 
cultivating compassion, (ii) recognizing all sentient beings as having been one’s mother, 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
402 remembering their kindness, and wanting to reciprocate, as its causes, and (iii) t he 
cultivation of equanimity prior to the three.   
2B2C -2A1B -2B1C -1B. Peak  
COMMENTARY 
In brief, by way of abandoning and adopting non -virtue and virtue respectively, by means of 
that bearing the essence of having turned  away and having engaged, there are t wo aspects 
connecting others to turning away from negativity and to abiding in virtue, and the two 
aspects  expressing praise for others who have engaged  similarly and concordant actions. 
Observing sentient beings with these “infinite aspects” by way of the  classification of 
properties is transformed -into-peak.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Transformed -into-peak  observes sentient beings . In brief, there are (i) two aspects : 
connecting others to turning away from negativity respectively through oneself abiding 
in having turne d away by way of abandoning non- virtue and connecting  others to 
abiding in virtue through oneself abiding by means of that  bearing the essence of having 
engaged by way of adopting virtue, and (ii) the two aspects : expressing praise for other  
persons  who ha ve engaged similar  to oneself without being urged  and cultivating joy in 
concordant  actions. Observing sentient beings  with these “infinite aspects” by way of 
the classification of properties  that are isolates  is peak . 
2B2C -2A1B -2B1C -1C. Forbearance  
COMMENTARY 
Due to the divisions of the supports who are oneself and others on transformed -into-peak, 
by the aspects that connect exactly in accordance with the objects of observation and 
aspects, expression of praise, and concordance, observing the truths of suffering s and so 
forth of the supports of self and others is forbearance.   
 
EXPLANATION  
Due to the divisions of the supports who are oneself, the one acting to place, and others , 
the objects to be placed, on transformed -into-peak, by the aspects that connect others to 
virtue exactly in accordance with the objects of observation and aspects  that have been 
explained , expression of praise  of those who have engaged  without being urged , and 
concordance  due to being very joyous , observing all sentient beings  by means of placing 
the supports of others in knowing the four truths, through oneself abiding in knowing the 
four truths of suffering s and so forth is forbearance.  
 Although the divisions of the small, middling, and great have not been clearly correlated  
for the later three occasions, the complete meanings of objects of observation and aspects 
that are to be cultivated on all three occasions have been indicated.  
2B2C -2A1B -2B1C -1D. Supreme mundane quality  
COMMENTARY 
As before, observing sentient beings, o nly those bearing the supports who are oneself and 
others by the aspects of ripening and liberating and so forth is supreme mundane quality.  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
403 EXPLANATION  
As before, observing all sentient beings, only those bearing the supports who are 
oneself and others b y the aspects of placing others in ripening and liberating  sentient 
beings  and so forth through abiding in them oneself  is supreme mundane quality.  
2B2C -2A1B -2B1C -2. Summary 
COMMENTARY 
In that way, [those] are the partial concordances with definite discrim ination.  
 
EXPLANATION  
In that way, [those] are the partial concordances with definite discrimination.  
2B2C -2A1B -2B2. Refuting wrong conceptions concerning the sequence of the six clear realizations  
2B2C -2A1B -2B2A. Repudiating incorrect positions  
2B2C -2A1B -2B2B. Presenting the accurate position  
2B2C -2A1B -2B2C. Rejecting contradictions  
2B2C -2A1B -2B2A. Repudiating incorrect positions  
Although it is suitable to slightly apply this passage as a rejection of [the criticism of] 
repetition of the three paths, explaining it as solely that is an explanation that has cast away 
the context meaning, because qualms regarding the last two of the e ight clear realizations, 
the subject matter of the eight chapters, are minor, and this is set forth by the Acarya for the sake of refuting wrong conceptions concerning the sequence of the first six clear 
realizations. This is because: (i) although it appea rs as though the sequence of the clear 
realizations in terms of unitary paths has been posited as our own system in the Condensed 
Commentary , having refute that system here, another sequence was asserted, and (ii) 
although it appears as though the system o f unitary paths with respect to the eight clear 
realizations has been asserted in the section on making a connection at the [explanation] of 
the truth body in [Haribhadra’s] Great Commentary, that [each of the eight clear realizations 
] has the same meanin g as the full path explained here has been taught many times on other 
occasions of the Great Commentary. Further, I think that perhaps that explanation from the 
Condensed Commentary, not being the assertion of the Acarya himself, has been written 
merely as  a statement of the assertion of another previous master, because that system has 
been specifically  refuted in the two, the Great Commentary and the Small  Commentary.  
 Someone, having taken this passage solely as a rejection of [the criticism of] repetiti on, 
explained that, in this [chapter] and what comes below, the path of preparation and the path 
of seeing are imputed only to the exalted wisdom of the pure grounds. This is clearly either 
a repudiation of the Acarya’s assertion or an expression of not ha ving even slightly realized 
the explanation in the Great Commentary, because the refutation will be explained. When 
explaining the path of preparation explained in this [chapter] and that of the chapter on peak [application], if the path of preparation wer e designated by way of the mere explanation 
placing others in the finality of all excellences, destroying all dormancies, and fully completing the qualities of the three exalted knowers, then also the path of preparation of 
the first chapter would be  simil ar, because the purity of the three doors, pure signs, pure 
lands, the meditative stabilization of going heroically, prediction, the exhaustion of clinging, a non -conceptual meditative stabilization, and so forth have been explained.
  
 If one were to expla in those as merely abiding in the cause, cultivation through belief and 
conviction, hidden prediction and so forth, then the reply that the other is also similar would 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
404 have been eaten by a crow —non-existent! The conceptions that have been explained in the 
context of the path of preparation in the Great Commentary  have been explained to be the 
objects of abandonment of the path of seeing and path of meditation included within the 
peak application, (i) because, according to the assertion that it is designated , it follows that 
the objects of abandonment and the antidotes of peak application between the first and the seventh grounds would not be explicitly indicated on any occasion; if that were the case, it 
would contradict the Acarya’s assertion that has just been explained, and (ii) because, in the 
context of the supreme mundane quality that has just been explained, in response to the 
dispute that it contradicts the explanation (in the Hinayana scriptural baskets as well as the 
commentaries on their intention) that the supreme mundane quality is only one instant, the 
reply that there is a difference between the hearers’ accomplishment of their own welfare and the bodhisattvas’ accomplishment of others’ welfare through stages is given in [Haribhadra’s] Great Com mentary ; it has not been taught that “What has been explained in 
this chapter is not the path of preparation,” and at the juncture of complete irreversibility, the irreversible learner sangha has already been explained.  
 Now, also the teaching in [Haribhad ra’s] Great Commentary  that the characteristics of 
the non -learner sangha are to be explained would also be inappropriate, because it is 
incorrect to differentiate those who abide on the eighth ground into learners and non -
learners. There would be infinite  contradictions with the assertions of Acarya [Haribhadra], 
such as contradiction with the teaching that even in the context of the someone on the path 
of seeing who is irreversible, the instant of forbearance of subsequent knowledge with 
respect to true s ufferings is related to the subsequent knowledge.   
 In this [chapter] and what comes below, besides the Acarya proving that the path of 
preparation and path of seeing are fully qualified, there is not a mere bit of explanation by him explaining them to be  imputed. All these erroneous explanations are mistaken on 
account of not having understood how to explain well the meaning of the words of this passage; these will be explained.  
2B2C -2A1B -2B2B. Presenting the accurate position  
COMMENTARY  
By divisions of cultivating all aspects, paths, and bases, respectively regarding the three 
types of clear realizations, the exalted knower of all aspects and so forth , they are realized, 
the supramundane paths of seeing and meditation, through having been preceded by 
realizing the mundane partial concordance with definite discrimination. On the three, clearly  
completely realizing all aspects and so forth, through the distinctions of the occasions of higher and higher cultivation, since the uncontaminated exalted wisdoms i ncluded within 
the paths of distinction in all ways, are produced through the stages of the small, the  
middling, and the  great, in order to refute that they are produced together, that they have 
been taught with the convention “partial [concordance] with d efinite discrimination” and so 
forth should be known.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Since these refute wrong conceptions concerning the sequence of the six clear realizations, 
they should be known in this way; they should be known in the way  Guru Suvarnadvipa (i) 
has taugh t that the conventions of the earlier preceding mundane partial concordance with 
definite discrimination and the later partial [concordance with] definite [discrimination] and so forth are to be applied mutually to both the earlier and the later, and (ii) has taught that 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
405 the uncontaminated is empty of attachment and so forth. Having taught the convention 
“partial [concordance] with definite discrimination”  and so forth in the chapter on the 
exalted knower of all aspects  should be known as being purposeful , because it is in order 
to refute that the exalted knowers of all aspects that are the topics of principal causes and 
results are produced together —in which they are cultivated on a single continuity only 
during the occasions of the path of accumulation and  the path of preparation, and not 
cultivated from then onwards. One is able to refute that they are produced together, since 
they are produced through the stages of the small, the middling, and the great on the 
occasions of the three [paths of] preparation , seeing and meditation . That follows, because 
they are cultivated and  realized  on all three —the supramundane paths of seeing and 
meditation through having been preceded by realizing and attaining the mundane 
partial concordance with definite discriminatio n with respect to the occasion of the 
exalted knower of all aspects that are the topics of principal causes and results . Similarly, 
having taught the conventions “[paths of] preparation, seeing and meditation” in the chapters on the two types of clear real izations that are the knower of paths and the knower 
of bases —“and so forth” [in the commentary above] —is purposeful, because all three paths 
have been indicated  by divisions of cultivating all aspects  of the knowers  of paths and 
bases , impermanence and so  forth, on the occasions of all three paths. [The path of 
meditation] is the path of meditation implied in the chapter on the knower of bases.  
 Furthermore, that is also for the sake of refuting that a knower of paths is produced only 
from the first until  the sixth grounds and a knower of bases only on the seventh ground, 
together in one continuity. One should know that having taught the conventions that are the actual names, “partial [concordance] with definite discrimination” and so forth, on the 
three  occasions of types of clear realizations , clearly  completely realizing all aspects and 
so forth, is purposeful , because it is in order to refute production together in a single 
continuity in which the application in complete aspects is cultivated only on the  eight 
ground, and not cultivated elsewhere. It follows that one is able to refute production 
together on only those occasions, since the applications in complete aspects (that are 
without the contamination  of the afflictions with respect to the mode of ap prehension, 
exalted wisdoms included within the paths of distinction  that are superior in all factors 
and ways  to the paths of hearers and solitary realizers through the distinctions of the 
occasions of higher and higher cultivation  of the application in c omplete aspects)  are 
produced through the stages of the small, the middling, and the great included within 
the three [paths of] preparation, seeing, and meditation . 
  Likewise, the purpose of having taught all three fully qualified paths in the chapters of  
the peak application and the serial application is also for the sake of making known that they 
are cultivated on the occasions of all three paths, through refuting the wrong conception that 
the peak application is cultivated only on the ninth ground and t he first part of the tenth, 
while the serial application is cultivated only on the later part of the tenth ground, together 
in one continuity. Since there are no points of doubt regarding the instantaneous application 
and the truth body, they have not been mentioned.  
2B2C -2A1B -2B2C. Rejecting contradictions  
[Haribhadra’s] Great Commentary  says:  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
406 OPINION: Since conceptualizations that are of such aspects would have been abandoned 
previously, why are they indicated as objects to be abandoned on this occasion  of realizing 
the excellent finality?  RESPONSE: There is no fault, because the sutras such as the Sutra Unraveling the Thought  
teach that the thorough confusions (that hinder (i) the subsequent engagement in the subtle secrets and (ii) the great clairvoya nces) and their seeds are abandoned on the tenth ground.”  
 For this reason, masters of the past say that, since the causes of the latencies of the thorough 
confusions explained above are perfectly severed, due to being the entitiness that realizes 
the exc ellent finality, the bearers of the causes, such types of the four conceptualizations of 
apprehende ds and apprehende rs, are definitely abandoned on the clear realizations of peak 
application related to the ten grounds; on other occasions, [the abandonments ] are temporal 
abandonments. 
 It is clear that others have not even slightly understood the meaning of that passage, 
because each of the two thorough confusions is abandoned on each of the ten grounds, but 
the seeds of the two —the thorough confusion regard ing the state of the subtle secrets, and 
the thorough confusion that hinder the actions of the great clairvoyances —are the 
corresponding objects of abandonment of the tenth ground, and since they have been 
indicated to be exhaustively abandoned on that occ asion, there would not be even the 
slightest reason to explain that the peak application is only an exalted wisdom of the pure 
grounds. In some corrupted versions of the Great Commentary , it is said that “Both the 
earlier and the later, the tenth ground” and in some, “With respect to the former, it is also 
abandoned on the ten grounds.” These are not accurate. The version that says “the former is 
related to the tenth ground and the latter to the ten grounds” is correct.  
 Hence the meaning of this passage is as follows. The conceptualizations explained in the 
context of peak application were explained through being distinguished by the object of 
observation and the apprehension of an aspect . Therefore, these conceptualizations are 
simply just the manifest ones. The dispute is: “Have not most of these already been abandoned on the occasion  of the path of preparation? How are they presented here as 
objects of abandonment of the excellent final ity, the peak application of the path of seeing 
and the peak application of the path of meditation that are the excellent culmination? 
Because only the seeds are abandoned there.” The reply to that is as follows. The 
abandonment merely of the manifest [con ceptualizations by] the paths that are those is a 
temporal abandonment; it is not an abandonment by means of having come to bear the 
property of not being appropriate to be produced again. The peak applications of the path of 
seeing and of the path of medi tation act to destroy also the manifest [conceptualizations] by 
means of having abandoned the seeds of the conceptions. Further,  they are sequentially 
abandoned by the peak applications of the ten grounds, and the seeds of the last two 
thorough confusions are abandoned on the occasion of the tenth ground.  
 If the conceptualizations of the apprehendeds and the apprehenders have not been 
indicated through having been distinguished by the objects of observation and aspects, then 
one would not even realize of w hich object of abandonment they are seeds. Therefore, they 
are explained in that way.  
 The “excellent finality” is said with respect to the mere peak application; explaining it as 
solely an exalted wisdom of the tenth ground is inaccurate.   
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
407 2B2C -2A1B -2C. Explanation of the stages in which the special clear realizations are produced in the continuum 
in dependence on those [previous stages]  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1. Explanation of the signs of irreversibility from unsurpassable enlightenment  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2. Explanation  of the special paths that act to achieve the three exalted bodies 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1. Explanation of the signs of irreversibility from unsurpassable enlightenment  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1A. Meaning of the generality  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B. Meaning of the branches  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1A.  Meaning of the generality  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1A -1. Divisions of irreversible persons 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1A -2. Meaning of irreversibility  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1A -3. The mode of inference from the signs  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1A -1. Divisions of irreversible persons 
Even though s ome particular persons are of indefinite lineage, they  will not proceed to 
another path even slightly beginning from the Mahayana path of accumulation onwards, 
and, since it is not possible for them  to degenerate from the Mahayana generated mind, they  
will definitely attain unsurpassable enlightenment. Still, they  are not posited as possessing 
the signs of irreversibility. Likewise, [Maitreya’s  Ornament for the Great Vehicle Sutras 
(Mahayanasutralamkara )] says:  
 
Those who correctly practice  
Compassion, patience, beli ef and virtue  
Prior to the applications  
Are to be known as [possessing] the signs of lineage.  
 
Like it has been said, one who, prior to cultivating the applications, (i) possesses great 
compassion and vast patience observing sentient beings, and (ii) poss esses belief in the 
extensive Mahayana Dharma and the practice of extensive virtue such as generosity is one 
possessing the Mahayana lineage. Nevertheless, one is not posited to have attained a sign of 
irreversibility. Therefore, one is posited to have att ained irreversibility upon possessing 
those signs that will be explained. Regarding those, those of sharp faculty are presented to attain a sign of irreversibility from the heat level of the path of preparation, those of 
middling faculty from the path of s eeing, and those  [of dull faculty ], no matter how dull in 
faculty, from the eighth ground.  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1A -2. Meaning of irreversibility  
The meaning of irreversibility is: (i) from the point of view of attitude, one has destroyed the opportunity for the production of a manifest attitude seeking liberation for the welfare of 
oneself alone, and (ii) from the point of view of application, one possesses a stable 
realization of special method and wisdom.  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1A -3. The mode of inference from the signs  
From the sign of possessing special conventions of speech that reveal the complete class of 
Mahayana paths such as emptiness, one infers the presence of a special wisdom. From the 
sign of possessing special conventions of body that cannot bear the sufferings  of sentient 
beings, such as the body hairs standing on end and tears coming to their eyes, one infers the 
possession of a special Mahayana method in persons who possess them. From the sign of 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
408 possessing those special method and wisdom, one infers that com plete enlightenment is 
suitable to arise due to the powerful potentiality of the cause by means of having destroyed 
the opportunity for the production of the manifest attitude explained above.  
 In relation to the sutra passage “A bodhisattva who possesses  those aspects, signs , and 
marks is to be held as one who is irreversible,” [Haribhadra’s] Great Commentary  says:  
 
“[A bodhisattva who possesses those aspects, signs , and marks is] to be held [as 
one who is irreversible]” teaches inference in the manner of [Dharmakirti's] 
Commentary on [Dignaga's] 'Compendium of Valid Cognition'  
(Pramanavarttikakarika , stanza 1.9 ): 
 
That which is inferred to produce a result  
By way of a cause that is a potentiality, 
Because of not relying upon another object,  
Is described as being the nature.   
 
I shall explain the other  remaining oneselsewhere. 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B. Meaning of the branches  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -1. Brief indication   
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2. Extensive explanation  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -3. Summary 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -1. Brief indication   
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -1A. Making a connection for the generality  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -1B. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -1C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -1A. Making a connection for the gen erality  
COMMENTARY 
Since the partial concordance with definite discrimination that  has been explained arises in 
the irreversible bodhisattva sangha, the characteristics of the irreversible bodhisattva 
sangha: 
 
EXPLANATION  
Since the partial concordance with definite discrimination that  has been explained 
arises in the continu um of the bodhisattva sangha who possesses the signs of 
irreversibility, the characteristics of the irreversible bodhisattva sangha  will be 
explained : 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -1B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
4.38  Those bodhisattvas abiding  
Beginning from the branches of definite discrimination,  On the paths of seeing and meditation  
Are the assemblies of the irreversible here.  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
409 EXPLANATION  
There are three types of assemblies of the irreversible  sangha, because there are three 
types  abiding on definite discrimination  included within the continua of those of sharp 
faculty and so forth.  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -1C. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. Those heroes, who abide in a manner of having  realized  this and that 
on the four partial concordances with definite discrimination, the path of seeing, and the 
path of meditation that will be explained, are the irreversible learner bodhisattva sangha. 
Fourth bundle.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —those  heroes  victorious over the foes of [cyclic] existence and [solitary] 
peace , who abide  in a manner of having realized and attained this and that  signs on the 
four partial concordances with definite discrimination, the path of seeing, and the path 
of meditation that will be explained —are the irreversible learner bodhisattva sangha, 
because they are bodhisattvas who have attained those signs that  will be explained . 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2. Extensive explanation  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2A. Signs of irreversibility of one on th e path of preparation  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2B. Signs of irreversibility of one on the path of seeing  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C. Signs of irreversibility of one on the path of meditation  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2A. Signs of irreversibility of one on the path of preparation  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2A1. Brief indication  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2A2. Extensive explanation  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2A1. Brief indication  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2A1A. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2A1B. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2A1C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2A1A.  Making a connecti on 
COMMENTARY 
QUESTION: What are the unmixed characteristics of those?  
RESPONSE : For the time being, by an interceding stanza, the characteristics of those 
abiding on the partial concordance with definite discrimination:  
 
EXPLANATION  
QUESTION REGARDING THE  GENERALITY : What are The unmixed 
characteristics of those?  
RESPONSE  REGARDING A PARTICULARITY:  For the time being, by an interceding 
stanza, the characteristics of those abiding on the partial concordance with definite discrimination:  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2A1B.  Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
4.39 By way of the description of the twenty types of signs, 
Such as having turned away from forms and so forth,  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
410 The characteristics of irreversibility  
Of those abiding on the branches of definite discrimination are these.   
 
EXPLANAT ION 
That the characteristics that are signs of irreversibility from complete enlightenment of 
sharp faculty bodhisattvas abiding on the branches of definite discrimination are these 
should be known, because they should be known by way of the description of  the twenty 
types of signs, such as having turned away the adherence to forms and so forth as truly 
existent . 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2A1C.  Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. By way of the twenty types, the aspects of having turned away from 
forms and so forth, non- doubt, and so forth, that those are the characteristics of 
irreversibility of those abiding on the partial concordance with definite discrimination 
should be known.  
 
EXPLANATION  
That those are the characteristics of irreversibility of sharp faculty bodhisattvas abiding 
on the partial concordance with definite discrimination should be known , because they 
should be known by way of the twenty types, having turned away from adherence to  
forms and so forth  as truly existent , non -doubt regarding the  objects of refuge , and so 
forth.  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2A2. Extensive explanation  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2A2A. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2A2B. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2A2C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2A2A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
QUESTION: Further, wh at are those characteristics of having turned away and so forth?  
RESPONSE : In order to indicate them, six interceding stanzas:  
 
EXPLANATION  
QUESTION: Further, what are those characteristics of having turned away and so 
forth?  
RESPONSE:  In order to indicate  them, six interceding stanzas: 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2A2B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
4.40  Having turned away from forms and so forth;  
Extinguished doubt and the non- freedom ;   
Oneself abiding in virtue and  Placing others in it;   
 
4.41  Generosity and so forth beari ng the support of others ;  
Without a qualm even concerning the meaning of the profound ;  
Loving body and so forth ; not being associated with  
The five types of obscurations ;  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
411  
4.42  Having destroyed all dormancies ; 
Mindfulness and introspection ;  
Clean clot hing and so forth ;  
Non-occurrence of micro -organisms in the body;   
 
4.43  Absence of a  crooked mind;  training,  
Adopting, absence  of miserliness and so forth ;  
Progressing toward the truth of dharmata ;  
Seeking hell for the welfare of sentient beings ;  
 
4.44  Insusceptibility to being led by others ;  
Realizing the maras  
Who teach other paths as “maras ;” 
And activities that please the buddhas:   
 4.45  By way of those twenty signs ,  
Irreversib ility from complete enlightenment  
Of those abiding on the heat, the peak, the forbearance , 
As well as the supreme mundane quality. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The signs of irreversibility from complete enlightenment  of sharp faculty bodhisattvas 
abiding on the heat, the peak, the forbearance as well as the supreme mundane quali ty 
should be known, because they should be known by way of those twenty signs.  That 
follows because they should be known by way of having turned away from adherence to  
forms and so forth  as truly existent , until the activities that please the buddhas . 
 Sutra says:  
Subhuti asked, “Bhagavan, through how many aspects, signs and marks is a great 
bodhisattva irreversible from complete enlightenment?” In reply, [the Bhagavan said,] 
“Subhuti, you should know that when a great bodhisattva is irreversible with respe ct to 
[phenomena], from turning away from forms until unsurpassable complete enlightenment, 
he is irreversible.”  
“Subhuti, when a great bodhisattva practices the perfection of wisdom, thinking this, he is 
not separated from those activities with respect t o training similarly to what has been taught 
by the tathagatas and, through those attentions possessing the perfection of wisdom, those activities do not degenerate from the perfection of generosity… regarding thinking not 
degenerating with respect to omni science, which bodhisattva is aware of the action of the 
maras? Thinking that he does not degenerate from unsurpassable complete enlightenment, 
Subhuti, you should know that the great bodhisattva who possesses those aspects, signs, and 
marks is irreversibl e. 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2A2C. Commentary  
COMMENTARY  
So the root text is said. (1) Having turned away from phenomena, forms and so forth, due to  
absence  of entitiness, (2) extinguishing doubt through having attained faith due to having 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
412 understood, (3) due to ha ving fulfilled prayers one extinguishes the eight states of non -
freedom, namely, birth (a) with wrong views, (b) in the hells, (c) as a hungry ghost, (d) as 
an animal; and birth (e) not hearing a buddha’s words, and (f) in a remote land; and birth (g) 
with incomplete faculties, with the properties of being stupid and mute, and (h) as a long -
life god, (4) connection of oneself and others to  virtuous qualities through compassion, (5) 
generosity and so forth thoroughly dedicated as objects of other sentient be ings through 
exchanging self and others, (6) not having a qualm even concerning  the profound meaning 
through having correctly realized phenomena, (7) loving actions of body, speech, and mind 
due to having engaged in benefitting others, (8) not being associated with the five 
obscurations: (a) aspiration for the desire realm, (b) harmfu l intent, (c) sleep and lethargy, 
(d) excitement and regret, and (e) doubt, due to having fulfilled the applications, (9) destroying all dormancies of ignorance and so forth due to having cultivated the antidotes, (10) possessing mindfulness and introspect ion through constant equipoise, and (11) clean 
utilization of clothing and so forth through hygienic behavior—the eleven types;   
 (1) non -occurrence of the eighty thousand types of micro -organisms in the body through 
the roots of virtue superior to the mundane , (2) absence of a  crooked mind through pure 
roots of virtue, (3) correctly adopting the excellent qualities of training —wearing rags taken  
from the rubbish dump and so forth—through disregard for gain and honor and so forth, (4) through practicing sp ecial generosity and so forth, absence of miserliness, corrupted ethics , 
and the like contrary to those, (5) progressing to possess the perfection of wisdom, that 
which does not contradict dharmata, through correctly gathering  all phenomena, (6) through 
having taken migrators as one’s own, desiring hell for others’ welfare —the six types;  
 (1) insusceptibility to being led by others  through the nature
153 of conviction in the 
realization, and (2) through skill in knowing the methods of buddhahood, realizing tha t the 
maras who teach a fabricated counterfeit path are maras —the two types;  
 (1) the pleasing of the buddhas  in all activities through purity of the three spheres —the 
aforesaid one type; respectively, that those are the bodhisattvas abiding on the heat, t he 
peak, the  forbearance, and s the  upreme mundane quality [who are] irreversible from 
unsurpassable enlightenment should be known by way of these twenty signs. 
 
EXPLANATION  
That those are the signs of irreversible sharp faculty [bodhisattvas] on the path of preparation should be known by way of these twenty signs , because by the eleven types  of 
signs of one abiding on the heat , the six types  of one abiding on the peak, the two types  of 
one abiding on the forbearance , and the one type  of one abiding on the supreme mundane 
quality , respectively, that those  are the signs that the sharp faculty bodhisattvas abiding 
on the heat, the peak, the forbearance, and the supreme mundane quality are irreversible from unsurpassable enlightenment should be known.  
 The ele ven signs of one abiding on the heat are as follows. The subject —a sharp faculty 
bodhisattvas abiding on the heat —is irreversible from unsurpassable enlightenment, because 
he has attained the signs of (1) having turned away from  some manifest adherence to  
phenomena, forms and so forth as truly existent , due to having realized that all 
phenomena are devoid of  entitiness  ultimately , (2) extinguishing manifest doubt as to 
whether or not the correct objects of refuge are so through having attained faith in the  
Three Jewels due to having understood them by the force of the wisdom arisen from 
                                             
 
153 Dzong -kha-pa’s Golden Rosary explains that “nature” ( chos nyid ) refers to “reason” ( rgyu mtshan ). 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
413 meditation that observes emptiness , (3) due to having fulfilled prayers to be reborn 
according to one’s wishes by the force of compassion, possessing the extinguishment of 
the eight states of non -freedom, namely, birth (a) with wrong views  deprecating actions 
and their results , (b-d) in the hells, as a hungry ghost, as an animal  by the force of karma ; 
and birth (e) not hearing a buddha’s words, and (f) in a remote land where there is no 
movement of the four types of retinue ; and birth (g) with incomplete faculties  in which 
the mental power and tongue sense power are  defective , with the properties of being 
stupid and mute, and (h) as a long- life god , one who is absorbed in With out 
Discrimination , (4) possessing  connection of oneself and others to virtuous qualities  due 
to being a bodhisattva who is disheartened  through compassion  that has been attained by 
the force of experience , (5) possessing  generosity and so forth thoroughly dedicated , 
“May the results ripen as objects of other sentient beings ,” due to practicing generosity 
and so forth through exchanging self and others, (6) not having a qualm even 
concerning  the profound meaning through having correctly realized the mode of  
abidance of phenomena with a wisdom arisen from meditation , (7) possessing  actions of 
body, speech, and mind that are motivated by a loving attitude due to having engaged in 
benefitting others  through the attitude that wishes all sentient beings to posses s happiness 
not degenerating , (8) not being associated with the five obscurations  such as the 
aspiration for the desire realm, due to having  attained the  fulfillment of the applications  
that strive resolutely for others’ welfare , (9) possessing the destruc tion of all dormancies 
of ignorance , bad views, and so forth due to having cultivated the antidotes  to those by 
the force of a wisdom arisen from meditation realizing emptiness , (10) possessing 
mindfulness and introspection in all behavior through constant  equipoise  by means of 
the mind never becoming distracted by an erroneous object at any time , and (11) being  
irreproachable, clean due to excellent utilization of dwelling, clothing , and so forth 
through familiarization with non -erroneous hygienic behavior .  
 The six signs of the peak are as follows. The subject —a sharp faculty bodhisattva abiding 
on the peak level of the path of preparation —(1) possesses non- occurrence  of the eighty 
thousand types of micro- organisms in the body, through having attained the roots of 
virtue that serve as a cause for non -abiding nirvana, which are  superior to  those of 
bodhisattvas of middling faculty abiding on the peak of  the mundane  and those below , (2) 
possesses absence of a crooked mind that is an attention to one’s wel fare motivated by 
deceit and dissimilation through pure bodhisattva’s behavior, roots of virtue, (3) 
possesses correctly adopting the excellent qualities of training —wearing rags taken 
from the rubbish dump and so forth—through disregard for gain and honor  and so 
forth  by especially relying upon the antidotes to attachment to gain and honor, such as food 
and clothing, (4) possesses absence  of miserliness, corrupted ethics , and the like 
contrary to those  six perfections  through practicing the special deeds o f the six 
perfections, generosity and so forth, (5) progresses to possess the yoga of the perfection 
of wisdom, that which does not contradict dharmata due to emptiness of true existence through correctly gathering all phenomena  in the emptiness of true ex istence with a 
wisdom arisen from meditation realizing emptiness , (6) desires hell for others’ welfare 
through having taken all migratory sentient beings  as one’s own,  like an only child, due 
to having especially familiarized with equalizing self and others and exchange of self and 
others .   
 The two signs of one abiding on the forbearance are as follows.  The subject—a sharp 
faculty bodhisattva abiding on the forbearance level —(1) possesses insusceptibility to 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
414 being led by other  teachers to other paths  because of possessing it through the nature154 
of conviction in the realization of the meaning of the mode of abidance , and (2) realizes 
that the maras who teach a fabricated counterfeit path such as fasting and relying on the 
five fires are maras through sk ill in knowing the methods that act to attain  buddhahood;  
 The one sign of one abiding on the supreme mundane quality is as follows. The subject —
a sharp faculty bodhisattva abiding on that [supreme mundane quality] —has attained (1) the 
pleasing of the buddhas in all activities of the three doors because of practicing the special 
deeds of the six perfections through purity of the three spheres. 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2B. Signs of irreversibility of one on the path of seeing  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2B1. Brief indication  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2B2. Extensive explanation  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2B1. Brief indication  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2B1A. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2B1B. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2B1C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2B1A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
After the characteristi cs of irreversibility of the partial concordance with definite 
discrimination, the characteristics of irreversibility of one on the path of seeing, taught by an interceding stanza:  
 
EXPLANATION  
After the characteristics of irreversibility of the partial co ncordance with definite 
discrimination, the characteristics of irreversibility of one on the path of seeing, taught by an 
interceding stanza:  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2B1B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
4.46 The sixteen instants of the forbearances and  
Knowledges with respe ct to the path of seeing   
Should be known as the characteristics  
Of the irreversible bodhisattvas. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the special method and wisdom included within the sixteen instants of the 
forbearances and knowledges with respect to the path of seeing in the continua of 
middling faculty bodhisattvas and the special conventions of body and speech which are 
induced by them —should be known as the characteristics of those very  irreversible 
bodhisattvas, because they are the correct proof of that. 
                                              
154 Dzong -kha-pa’s Golden Rosary explains that “nature” ( chos nyid ) refers to “reason” ( rgyu mtshan ). 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
415 2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2B1C.  Commentary  
COMMENTARY  
So the root text is said. The sixteen instants of the forbearances and knowledges of dharma 
and subsequent knowledge by means of true sufferings and so forth are the characteristics of 
irreversibility of the bodhisattvas abiding on the path of seeing.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The sixteen instants of the forbearances and knowledges of dharma and subsequent 
knowledge by means of true sufferings and so forth are the characteristics of irreversibility 
of the bodhisattvas abid ing on the path of seeing. Apply as in the root text. 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2B2. Extensive explanation  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2B2A. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2B2B. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2B2C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2B2A.  Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
QUESTION: What kind of aspects of the instants are the characteristics?  
RESPONSE: The aspects are taught by five interceding stanzas:  
 
EXPLANATION  
QUESTION: What kind of aspects of the instants are the characteristics?  
RESPONSE: The aspects are taught by five interceding stanzas: 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2B2B.  Root text  
4.47  Having turned away from the discrimination of forms and so forth ;  
Stable mind s; having turned away from   
The lesser vehicles ; having thoroughly exhausted the link  
Of the concentrations and so fort h; 
 
4.48  Lightness of body and mind;  
Being skilled in means with respect to utilizing desires ;  
Always chaste conduct ;  
Pure livelihood ; 
 
4.49  Individually ceased the abidance  
Of involvement and subsequent involvement with  
The aggregates and so forth ; those that obstruct ;  
The accumulations ; the battle of the powers and so forth ; 
 
4.50  Miserliness and so forth ;  
Not observing a mere particle of the Dharma ;  
Abiding on the three grounds  
Certain of one’s own ground ; and  
 4.51 Forsaking life for the sa ke of the Dharma: 
Such sixteen instants  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
416 Are the signs of irreversibility  
Of an intelligent one abiding on the path of seeing.   
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the special method and wisdom included within such sixteen instants and the 
special conventions of bod y and speech induced by them —are the signs of irreversibility  
of a middling faculty intelligent one abiding on the path of seeing  because they are the 
complete three modes which prove that . What are they? Having turned away from the 
discrimination of forms  and so forth, … [forsaking life for the sake of the Dharma ]. 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2B1C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2B2C -1. Extensive explanation  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2B2C -2. Eliminating qualms  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2B2C -1. Extensive explanation  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2B2C -1A. Aspect s of the instants of true sufferings  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2B2C -1B. Aspects of the instants of true origins  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2B2C -1C. Aspects of the instants of true cessations 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2B2C -1D. Aspects of the instants of true paths 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2B2C -1A. Aspects of the instants of true sufferings 
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. (1) Through emptiness of [existence by way of] their own character, 
having turned away from the conceptions of  phenomena such as forms, (2) through having 
been blessed by buddh as and so forth, stability of the minds of unsurpassable 
enlightenment, (3) through having accomplished the special Mahayana Dharma, having 
turned the mind away from the vehicles of the hearers and solitary realizers, and (4) through 
the strength of discerning phenomena, has perfectly and completely exhausted the link of 
birth in the concentrations and formless absorptions and so forth —these four are the aspects 
of sufferings.  
EXPLANATION  
The subject —a middling faculty bodhisattva abiding on the path of se eing—(1) possesses 
having turned away from the  seeds of the acquired conceptions of phenomena such as 
forms  as truly existent , through having directly realized the emptiness of [existence by 
way of] their own character  ultimately , (2) possesses stability of the  ultimate and 
conventional minds of unsurpassable enlightenment, through having been blessed by 
buddhas and so forth to not degenerate from those two minds , (3) possesses having 
turned the mind away from the vehicles of the hearers and solitary reali zers, because 
he has destroyed the opportunity for producing an awareness seeking liberation for the sake of oneself alone through having accomplished the special Mahayana Dharma, and (4) 
has perfectly and thoroughly exhausted the link of potential that is  the cause for birth in 
the form realms and so forth through the force of that karma , even though he has attained 
the concentrations and formless absorptions, because he has exhausted it through the 
strength of discerning the mode of abidance of phenomena with a yogic direct 
perceiver— these four are the aspects of sufferings. 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
417 2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2B2C -1B. Aspects of the instants of true origins  
COMMENTARY 
(5) By having separated from non -virtue, a light body and mind, (6) through the force of 
skillful means in su bduing sentient beings, utilization of desires without adherence, (7) 
through having seen the shortcomings of objects, always chaste conduct, and (8) by the 
nature of an excellent being, perfectly pure articles of livelihood —these four are the aspects 
of origin.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —a middling faculty bodhisattva abiding on the path of seeing —(5) possesses a 
light body and mind, the special bliss of pliancy, because he is distinguished by having 
separated  from the seeds of non -virtue, the objects of aba ndonment of the path of seeing , 
(6) possesses utilization of desires without adherence  that is craving for the objects of 
desire even though he abides within the household , because he abides in that way through 
the force of skillful means in subduing senti ent beings, (7) possesses always chaste 
conduct, because he abides in chaste conduct  through directly having seen  the 
shortcomings of objects  that are included within the attributes of the desire realm , and (8) 
possesses perfectly pure articles of liveliho od, because he has abandoned all wrong 
livelihoods by the nature of an excellent being who is empowered with respect to not 
forgetting the mind of enlightenment —these four are the aspects of origin.   
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2B2C -1C. Aspects of the instants of true cessations 
COMMENTARY 
(9) Through abiding in emptiness, having individually ceased the abidance of involvement 
and subsequent involvement with respect to the aggregates, sources, and constituents, in that 
way “do not be involved or subsequently involved,”  (10) through eliminating the discordant 
class es, having individually ceased the abidance of involvement and subsequent 
involvement as above, with respect to phenomena that obstruct the realization, (11) through 
merely fully knowing the faults of conceptua lization, having individually ceased the 
abidance as above, with respect to talk that involves and subsequently involves generosity 
and so forth, the accumula tions of enlightenment, and (12) through the objects to be 
abandoned —the apprehendeds and apprehen ders, having individually155 ceased the 
abidance of involvement and subsequent involvement as above, with respect to the battle of 
the powers, the support, city, and so forth —these four are the aspects of cessation.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —that [middling fa culty bodhisattva abiding on the path of seeing] —(9) 
possesses having individually ceased the abidance of involvement that initially adheres to 
true existence and subsequent involvement  that subsequently adheres to true existence  
with respect to the aggreg ates, sources, and constituents, in that way  taught in sutra, 
“do not be involved or subsequently involved,” through abiding in the realization of 
emptiness  of all phenomena with direct cognition , (10) possesses having individually 
ceased the adherence to true existence  in that way as above, with respect to phenomena 
that obstruct the realization  by the dharma knowledge with respect to true cessations , 
through eliminating the discordant class es that are the seeds to be abandoned by the 
                                              
155 Rjes su  emended to read so sor in accordance with the explanation below.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
418 dharma forbearance wi th respect to true cessations , (11) possesses having ceased initial  
and subsequent  adherence to true existence  as above, with respect to generosity and so 
forth, the accumulations of enlightenment through merely fully knowing directly the 
faults of conceptu alization  that adhere to apprehendeds and apprehenders as truly existent 
(“talk” has the significance of having abandoned adherence to names as truly existent), and 
(12) possesses having individually ceased the abidance of involvement , initial adherence 
to true existence, and subsequent involvement , later adherence to true existence  as above, 
with respect to the objects of abandonment, the adherence to th e objects and object-
possessors—(i) the powers, eye and so forth that are indicated by the term “village ,” (ii) 
the support  of the powers indicated by the term “ city,” (iii) the objects of the powers that 
are indicated by the term “town” , (iv) the being who is the primary consciousness  and so 
forth —as truly existent, and (v) the battle of the objects of abandonment and the antidotes 
in which those [objects and object -possessors] are realized to be devoid of  true existence, 
through having abandoned the seeds (of adherence to the apprehendeds and 
apprehenders  as truly existent) included withi n acquired objects to be abandoned —these 
four are the aspects of cessation. 
 Sutra says, “He does not abide in the involvement and subsequent involvement of the 
battle, because, due to abiding in dharmata in this way, he does not subsequently correctly 
see subsequent attachment or anger to any phenomenon,” “He does not abide in the 
involvement and subsequent involvement of the talk of village. He does not abide in the 
involvement and subsequent involvement of the talk of city. He does not abide in the 
invol vement and subsequent involvement of the talk of town. He does not abide in the 
involvement and subsequent involvement of the talk of self.”  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2B2C -1D. Aspects of the instants of true paths 
COMMENTARY  
(13) Through having realized special gene rosity and so forth, individually having ceased the 
abidance of involvement and subsequent involvement with respect to  miserliness, corrupted 
ethics , and so forth, (14) through all phenomena being the entitiness of the three doors of 
liberation, not observ ing even a mere particle of the Dharma of realization, (15) through 
having attained conviction, abiding with certainty regarding one’s three grounds of the nature of the three exalted knowers of all exactly as they are, and (16) through striving 
unequivoca lly, forsaking life for the sake of the qualities of the exalted knower of all aspects 
and so forth—these four are the aspects of paths.  
EXPLANATION  
[The subject —a middling faculty bodhisattva abiding on the path of seeing] —(13) 
possesses individually having ceased the abidance of involvement,  initial adherence to 
true existence, and subsequent involvement , later adherence to true existence, with 
respect to  miserliness, corrupted ethics , and so forth, the objects of abandonment, 
through having attained and  realized special  generosity and so forth in which the 
tightfistedness of miserliness , the stains of corrupted ethics  even in dreams , and so forth  
have been abandoned,  (14) possesses  not observing even a mere particle  of the Dharma 
of realization, the paths, and the result enlightenment  as ultimately existent, through 
directly realizing all phenomena included within entity, cause and result being empty of 
true existence, the entitiness of the three doors of liberation, (15) possesses abiding with 
certainty (in which one has separated from doubt regarding one’s three grounds attained 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
419 by oneself of the nature of the three exalted knowers of all where one is abiding) exactly 
as they are, even though maras and so forth may cast doubts, through having at tained 
conviction  in the realizations of the exalted knowers attained by oneself, and (16) will not 
have the slightest miserliness or suffering with regard to forsaking life for the sake  of the 
qualities of the exalted knower of all aspects and so forth, through directly realizing the 
mode of abidance of phenomena and striving for omniscience unequivocally [—these four 
are the aspects of paths ]. 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2B2C -2. Eliminating qualms  
COMMENTARY  
In that way, when these instants of forbearances and knowledges which are included within 
the sixteen aspects have been correctly attained, since the pure mundane one bearing the 
aspect of not adhering to apprehendeds and apprehenders is included within th e mind of 
subsequent attainment, because the results concordant with it, having turned  away from 
discrimination of forms  and so forth, are generated, they are the characteristics of 
irreversibility of a bodhisattva abiding on the path of seeing. They are e xplained through 
designation  in order to make known that “the conventions of yogis are only concordant with 
these realizations at all [times] with the exception from the point of view of the purpose of taming sentient beings;” otherwise, how would the inst ants in the continua of yogis which 
are known by themselves be characteristics that produce conviction in others?  
 
EXPLANATION  
QUALM:  In that way, these instants of forbearances and knowledges  are the 
characteristics of irreversibility of a bodhisattva ab iding on the path of seeing.  Are 
these instants of forbearances and knowledges not meditative equipoise? How are they 
correct effect signs for inferring irreversibility in the perspective of the awareness of other 
persons?  
RESPONSE: The special conventions  of body and speech  are explained through 
designation  by the names “forbearances” and “knowledges.” There is a reason for imputing 
the special conventions of body and speech of a middling faculty bodhisattva abiding on the path of seeing in this manner, be cause they [the special conventions of body and speech] are 
generated in dependence on them [the forbearances and knowledges]. That follows because 
when these instants of forbearances and knowledges that are meditative equipoise which 
are included within the sixteen aspects have been correctly attained  during meditative 
equipoise , since the pure mundane subsequent attainment  bearing the aspect of not
156 
adhering to apprehendeds and apprehenders as truly existent even though  apprehendeds 
and apprehenders appear dualistically  is included within the mind of subsequent 
attainment, the results concordant with meditative equipoise itself, the special 
conventions of body and speech due to having turned away from discrimination that is 
the adherence of forms and so forth, are generated.    There is a purpose for imputing the special conventions of body and speech of one on the 
path of seeing with the name “meditative equipoise,” because it is in order to make known that “the conventions of body and speech of yogis who have attained a ground are only 
concordant with these realizations of meditative equipoise at all times  with the exception 
from the point of view of the purpose of taming sentient beings.”  
                                             
 
156 Ma added in accordance with Haribhadra’s commentary above.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
420  The damage to fact is as follows. The subject —the instants  of meditative equipoise that 
exist  in the continua of yogis which are known by themselves  individually —how would 
they be correct effect signs, characteristics that produce conviction regarding 
irreversibility in the perspective of other  persons of intelligen ce inferior to themselves ? It 
follows that that would not be feasible, because it is not that they become direct objects of utilization of persons of intelligence inferior to themselves. You asserted the sign and the 
predicate. Alternatively, it follows th at these signs explicitly indicated here would be 
unsuitable to be correct effect signs for inferring irreversibility in the perspective of persons 
of intelligence inferior to themselves, because they are the meditative equipoise of the path 
of seeing.  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C. Signs of irreversibility of one abiding on the path of meditation  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1. Mahayana path of meditation explained extensively 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C2. Explanation of the differences among  the signs of irreversibility  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1. Mahayana path of meditation explained extensively 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1A. Distinctive feature of the path of meditation  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1B. The basis of the distinction, the path of meditation  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C. Divisions of the path of meditation  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1A. Distinctive feature of the path of meditation  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1A -1. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1A -2. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1A -3. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1A -1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
After that are the characteristics of irreversibility of one abiding on the path of meditation. 
However, because it occurs in the system that “without apprehending the distinction, an 
awareness of the possessor of distinction will not be  produced,” for the time being, the 
distinctions of the path of meditation:   
 
EXPLANATION  
The signs of irreversibility of one abiding on the path of seeing hav e been explained. After 
that it is appropriate to explain  the characteristics of irreversibility of one abiding on the 
path of meditat ion. However, there is a reason for first explaining the  distinction of the 
path of meditation for the time being , because it occurs in the system of the yogi who 
has gained accomplishments, the great trailblazer, Acarya Dharmakirti, that “without 
apprehen ding the distinction, an awareness of  the possessor of distinction will not be 
produced,” therefore  the basis of distinction will be explained as a branch of realization.  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1A -2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
4.52  With respect to the path of meditation, profound,  
Profound emptiness and so forth.  
The profound is freedom from the extremes  
Of superimposition and deprecation.  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
421 EXPLANATION  
The subject —with respect to the path of meditation —its mode of abidance is  profound,  
because its mode of ab idance is thusness that is qualified by profound emptiness and so 
forth. The subject —that mode of abidance —is profound, because it is a dharmadhatu that  
is freedom from the extremes of superimposition and deprecation.  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1A -3. Commentary  
COM MENTARY  
So the root text is said. Since form does not exist in emptiness and so forth, and emptiness 
and so forth are not other than form, respectively that which is free from the extremes of 
superimposition and deprecation in emptiness and so forth is profound.  It is emptiness and 
so forth. Because of possessing the profound, the path of meditation is profound.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Respectively , [emptiness of form] is  free from the extreme of superimposition in 
emptiness and so forth, because form does not exist ultimately in emptiness and so 
forth ; [emptiness of form] is free from the extreme of deprecation, since emptiness and so 
forth are not an other that is a different entity than form. The subject —that which is 
thusness free from superimposition and deprecation —is profound , because  it is the sphere 
of emptiness and so forth. The subject —the Mahayana path of meditation —is profound, 
because of possessing the direct realization of the profound.  If thusness is profound, the 
exalted wisdom directly realizi ng it is [even] more profound . 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1B. The basis of the distinction, the path of meditation  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1B -1. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1B -2. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1B -3. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1B -1. Making a connectio n 
COMMENTARY 
In that way, having indicated the distinction, the basis of the distinction:  
 
EXPLANATION  
In that way, having indicated the distinction, the basis of the distinction: 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1B -2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
4.53  That which repeatedly cont emplates, assesses, and definitely investigates  
That on the branches of definite discrimination,  
The path of seeing, and the path of meditation itself  
Is the path of meditation.   
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the path of meditation  of a Mahayana arya —engages as a continu ity, 
because it is  a subsequent clear realization which repeatedly contemplates157, assesses, 
and definitely investigates the aspects of the three exalted knowers that have been 
previously seen by the branches of definite discrimination, the path of seeing, and the 
                                              
157 Sems dpa’  emended to read sems pa in accordance with the root text above . 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
422 path of meditation itself. This includes all meditative equipoise and subsequent attainment; 
it acts to repeatedly familiarize with that very meaning that has been previously realized by  
the earlier paths.  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1B -3. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. With the wisdoms arisen from hearing, contemplation, and 
meditation, or with the wisdoms arisen from the preparatory, actual, and subsequent 
meditative stabilization s, respectively to repeatedly contemplate, assess, and definitely 
investigate the meanings that have been  definitely seen on the three —the branches of 
definite discrimination and so forth —is the continuous path of meditation. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject—the p ath of meditation of a Mahayana arya—is a continuity , because it is 
a subsequent clear realization that, with the wisdoms arisen from hearing, 
contemplation, and meditation, or with the wisdoms arisen from the preparatory, actual, and subsequent meditative  stabilizations, respectively repeatedly contemplates, 
assesses with valid cognition, and definitely investigates through detailed 
differentiation the aspects of the three exalted knowers, the meanings that have been 
definitely seen on the occasions of the  three —the branches of definite discrimination 
and so forth.  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C. Divisions of the path of meditation  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -1. Actual divisions 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2. Dispelling objections  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -1. Actual divisions 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B-2C1C -1A. Question  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -1B. Reply 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -1A. Question   
COMMENTARY  
QUESTION: Of how many types is that?  
 
EXPLANATION  
QUESTION:  Of how many types is that path of meditation?  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -1B. Reply 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -1B1. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -1B2. Commentary 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -1B1. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
4.54  That, because of being a continuity,  
Through the small, the middling, and the great  
Being divided into the small of the small and so forth,  
Is asserted to be of nine types by way of aspects.  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
423 EXPLANATION  
That path of meditation of a Mahayana arya is asserted to be of nine types  by way of 
aspects through each of the small, the middling, and the great paths of meditation  being 
divided into the small of the small and so forth. It is suitable to divide it into nine , the 
small , the middling , [and so forth] , because it is a continuity  by way of the nine, the small , 
the middling , [and so forth] . 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -1B2. Commentary 
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. Because “the afflictions of the bodhisattvas are the 
conceptualizations” occurs, through the analogy “very great darkness is dispelled by small 
illumination while the small is dispelled by the great,” because of the differences by  way of 
instances of the great, middling, and small of each of the great, middling, and small conceptualizations; because of the differences by way of instances of the small, middling, 
and great of each of the small, middling, and great antidotes to those also. In that way, by 
means of types , that is of the characteristic of emptiness ultimately, but, due to the divisions 
of antidotes to the conceptualizations, because sequentially nine types arise as a continuity 
on the nine levels —the desire realm and so forth —the path of meditation [arises as a 
continuity].  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the path of meditation  of a Mahayana arya —arises as a continuity, because 
sequentially nine types of the path of meditation arise as a continuity on the nine 
levels —the desire  realm and so forth. That follows because conventionally there are nine  
due to the divisions of antidotes to the conceptualizations that adhere to apprehendeds 
and apprehenders as truly existent by means of types, even though there are no divisions 
ultimat ely, since they are the nature that is of the  characteristic of emptiness ultimately . 
That follows because of the different divisions  by way of instances of the great, 
middling, and small of each of the great, middling, and small conceptualizations that 
adhere to apprehendeds and apprehenders as truly existent , and because of the different 
divisions  by way of instances of the small, middling, and great of each of the small, 
middling, and great paths of meditation of a Mahayana arya, the  antidotes to those a lso in 
that way.  
 It follows that there is no fault that the mode of correlating the divisions of the great, 
middling, and small  antidotes and objects of abandonment that has been explained is 
incorrect, because through the analogy “very great darkness is dispelled by small 
illumination while the small is dispelled by the great,”  it is correct that the great objects 
of abandonment of the path of meditation are  destroyed by the small path s of meditation, 
and the small objects of abandonment of the path of me ditation are destroyed by the great 
paths of meditation. Positing by way of divisions of the antidotes to the knowledge 
obscurations here has a purpose, because , in concordance with what occurs in the system of 
the great trailblazers, “the afflictions  of the bodhisattvas are the conceptualizations,” 
[they are posited] in terms of the antidotes to the main objects of abandonment. 
“Afflictions” has the significance of one needing to make effort for the sake of abandoning 
them. 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2. Dispelling objections  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2A. Dispelling objection regarding definiteness in number   
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
424 2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B. Dispelling objection regarding action  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2A. Dispelling objection regarding definiteness in number  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2A1. Objection  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2A2. Reply 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2A1. Objection  
COMMENTARY 
QUALM: Because, from the point of view of each type, it has been taught that it produces  
countless, inestimable, and immeasurable merit in the various Mother of the v ictors, are 
there not more types of instances? How is it of nine types?  
 
EXPLANATION  
QUALM: How is the path of meditation of a Mahayana arya  of nine types? It follows that 
it is incorrect to say “They are definite as only those,” because are there not more than 
nine types of instances  of the path of meditation ? There are  more.  That follows because, 
from the point of view of each of the nine types  of the path of meditation , it has been 
taught that it produces countless, inestimable, and imm easurable merit, the result, in 
the various Mother of the v ictors , the extensive, medium, and brief.  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2A2. Reply 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2A2A. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2A2B. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2A2A. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
4.55  The teachings on countless and so forth  
Cannot bear up ultimately;  
The Subduer asserted those to be  
The concordant cause that is compassionate kindness  conventionally. 
 
EXPLANATION  
According to [Vimuktisena’s] Illuminating the Twenty Thousand , having s tated the 
objection, “ The teachings on the result, countless merit and so forth , cannot bear up 
ultimately ; hence they are incorrect,” [it states the reply that] it follows that there is no fault 
that they are incorrect conventionally, even though they are untenable ultimately, because 
the Subduer asserted those enumerations as indicated in the scriptures to be the  result of 
the concordant ca use that is the compassionate kindness  of the buddhas conventionally , 
even though they are untenable ultimately .   
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2A2B. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2A2B -1. The reply that the reason is not established relative to the ultimate 
2B2C -2A1B-2C1B -2C1C -2A2B -2. The reply that the pervasion is not established relative to the conventional  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2A2B -1.  The reply that the reason is not established relative to the ultimate 
COMMENTARY  
So the root text is said. Relative to isolates , in order to correlate to one object, the path of 
meditation bearing the characteristics explained, cannot bear up as an object to be divided as entities of the differences which have been proximately generated ultimately through the 
entities expressed in  the words that indicated  countless, inestimable, and immeasurable;  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
425  
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the path of meditation bearing the characteristics explained , repeatedly 
contemplates and so forth, the path of meditation that has produced countless merit relative 
to isolates  by way of one substance , in order to correlate  benefit to many results, even 
though, for instance, the  small of the small path of meditation  is one object —it follows 
that it  cannot bear up as an object to be divided by way of  entities of th e different  
results  which have been proximately generated by it ultimately  as taught  through the 
entities expressed in the sutra words that indicated countless, inestimable, and 
immeasurable  merit, the result , because it does not exist ultimately ; 
2B2C -2A1B-2C1B -2C1C -2A2B -2. The reply that the pervasion is not established relative to the conventional  
COMMENTARY  
those entities of the phenomena explained that have been explained and indicated, through 
clearly indicating  the production of great results to chi ldish beings, since that it is 
concordant with the cause that is  the dharmadhatu of the nature of non -observable 
compassion is asserted by the Tathagata —it does not follow that there would be many 
conventionally.   
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —those entities of the isolate phenomena explained above , that have been  
explained and indicated to produce infinite results also with respect to each path of 
meditation —there is a purpose, because they are for the sake of generating faith  through 
clearly indicating the production of great results to childish beings , the trainees. It does 
not follow that the Mahayana path of meditation would be many in number —more than 
nine—conventionally, since that it is indicated by the sutra words that the arisal of infinite 
merit, the result with respect to even one substance, the Mahayana path of meditation, is a 
result concordant with  the cause  that is  realizing the dharmadhatu of the nature of great 
non-observable compassion is asserted by the Tathag ata. 
  The meaning is as follows. It follows that the pervasion is indefinite conventionally, 
because it is indicated in sutra that the arisal of infinite results with respect to even one [substance], for instance, the small of the small path of meditation , is a result concordant 
with the cause that is  realizing the dharmadhatu of the buddhas. 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B. Dispelling objection regarding action  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B1. Dispelling the objection relative to the ultimate 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B2. Dispelling the objection relative to the conventional  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B1. Dispelling the objection relative to the ultimate 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B1A. Objection 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B1B. Reply 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B1A. Objection 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B1A -1. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B1A -2. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B1A -3. Commentary  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
426 2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B1A -1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
To anticipate the qualms of beings of inferior intelligence thinking, “Is it not that 
familiarizat ion does not exist as that to be brought to perfection due to the characteristic of 
emptiness? Therefore, they are only not done even slightly :”   
 
EXPLANATION  
To anticipate the qualms of beings of inferior intelligence who (i) hold that generation of 
a result and the emptiness of true existence are contradictory and (ii) have not understood 
the meaning of emptiness and dependent -arising thinking, “Is it not that familiarization 
of the path of meditation  does not exist as that to be brought to perfection?  It follows that 
it is so [that there is no bringing to perfection], because it is not truly existent  due to the 
characteristic of emptiness. If you accept that, then  therefore, benefit and damage are 
only not done even slightly”:  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B1A -2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
4.56  It is inappropriate for properties that are not expressible  
To diminish and increase.  
What is diminished and what is attained  
By way of the path called “ meditation? ” 
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —by way of the path called ‘meditation’—what object of abandonment is 
diminished and what antidote is attained? It follows that there is none, because it does not 
exist ultimately. It follows that there is pervasion, because it is inappropriate for 
properties of the path of meditati on that are not expressible  ultimately to diminish and 
increase.  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B1A -3. Commentary  
So the root text is said.  
OBJECTION: The property of the path that is asserted as the self- entity of dharmata, due to 
the mere absence  of entitiness, because it is not expressible as that itself, other, both, and 
neither correctly, so meditation does not exist as that to be brought to perfection; it is 
inappropriate for the discordant class es and the antidotes respectively to be separated from 
and to be  produced. Hence, what entity of the discordant class es is discarded by the path 
called “meditation? ” What completely pure is gained? Since they are only not done even 
slightly, it is only not to be established.    
EXPLANATION  
OBJECTION: The subject —the pr operty of the path of meditation  that is asserted as 
the self- entity of dharmata  that is the emptiness of true existence —it follows that it is 
inappropriate respectively for the discordant class to be separated from and the 
antidotes to be produced, due to  the mere absence  of entitiness  ultimately. It follows that 
there is pervasion , because it is not expressible as that itself, other, both, and neither 
correctly, so meditation does not exist as that to be brought to perfection. Hence, what 
entity of the di scordant class is discarded by the path called “ meditation? ” What 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
427 completely pure is gained? Since benefit and damage are not done even slightly, it is 
only not to be  established  as an antidote to the objects of abandonment . 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B1B. Reply 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B1B -1. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B1B -2. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B1B -3. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B1B -1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
It is not in that way; like this:  
 
EXPLANATION  
It is not that there is the fault explained in that way; like this:  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B1B -2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
4.57  Exactly just as enlightenment,  
This accomplishes the desired aims. 
Enlightenment is the characteristic of thusness;  
Also that is asserted to be the characte ristic of that. 
 
EXPLANATION  
It follows that increase and decrease are unsuitable ultimately, because they cannot be 
expressed as either one or many ultimately. This reply of acceptance [relative to] the 
ultimate, although not explicitly included within the root text, has been implied . It follows 
that there is no pervasion that the objects of abandonment and the antidotes are untenable if 
increase and decrease do not exist ultimately, because exactly just as  the uncontaminated 
exalted wisdom of unsurpassable enlightenment enacts the we lfare of the trainees 
conventionally , even though increase and decrease do not exist ultimately , this Mahayana 
path of meditation accomplishes the desired aims , damaging the objects of abandonment 
and so forth conventionally,  even though increase and decrease do not exist ultimately . It 
follows that there is no fault that enlightenment and the path of meditation are not similar as 
analogy and meaning, because they are similar in enacting the special welfare 
conventionally, [an d] in the way  enlightenment bears  the characteristic of thusness , also 
that path of meditation is asserted to bear the characteristic of that thusness.  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B1B -3. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B1B -3A. The pervasion is not established con ventionally  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B1B -3B. The reply of acceptance relative to the ultimate 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B1B -3A. The pervasion is not established conventionally  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B1B -3A1. Proving the analogy  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B1B -3A2. Applying it to the meaning  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B1B -3A1. Proving the analogy  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. Enlightenment of thusness that does not exist as an object to be 
qualified, the nature of exalted wisdom without elaboration, by the mere mastery of a 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
428 buddha that is the nature of the truth body and so forth , enacts the desired aims by means of 
having generated the mind that appears as the special welfare concordant with the merit and 
exalted wisdom of the beings who are the trainees.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Enlig htenment with the characteristic  of thusness that does not exist as an object to be 
qualified  by increase or decrease , the nature of exalted wisdom without elaboration, 
enacts the desired aims  of the trainees conventionally even though it does not exist 
ultimately , because it enacts the welfare conventionally , even though it does not exist 
ultimately , by means of having generated the mind that appears as the two form bodies, 
the special welfare concordant with the merit and exalted wisdom of the beings who 
are the trainees  ranging from ordinary beings with pure karma until bodhisattva aryas  by 
the mere mastery of a buddha that is the nature of the realization exalted wisdom truth 
body and so forth.  The expression “and so forth” subsumes the truth body  acting  as the 
actual empowering condition of the complete enjoyment body, and the complete enjoyment 
body [ acting as ] the empowering c ondition of the emanation body.  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B1B -3A2. Applying it to the meaning  
COMMENTARY 
Similarly, also this charact eristic of thusness, the path that is actualized by means of 
separating from adventitious stains through cultivation, enacts activities of the desired aims 
conventionally.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —similar  to the analogy , also this Mahayana path of meditation bearing the  
characteristic of thusness  that is the emptiness of true existence , the path that is 
actualized through cultivation —enacts activities of the desired aims conventionally  
even though it does not exist ultimately, because it enacts the activities of destroying stains 
by means of separating from adventitious stains  conventionally even though it does not 
exist ultimately .  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B1B -3B. The reply of acceptance relative to the ultimate 
COMMENTARY  
Since it is asserted in the manner of negating decrease and increase ultimately, because at 
that time the very absence  of application is application, there is no fault. 
 
EXPLANATION  
There is no fault that it follows that decrease and increase would be caused ultimately, because  at th at time while the meditative equipoise of the path of meditation is directly 
damaging the objects of abandonment , the very absence  of application ultimately  is 
application of the meaning of the mode of abidance. That follows , since at the time of 
directly damaging the objects of abandonment , it is asserted in the manner of negating 
decrease and increase ultimately.   
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B2. Dispelling the objection relative to the conventional  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B2A. Objection 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B2B. Reply 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
429 2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B2A. Objection 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B2A -1. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B2A -2. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B2A -3. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B2A -1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY  
To anticipate the qualm think ing, “Even if it is in that way, it is not suitable to enact 
purposes even conventionally.”  
 
EXPLANATION  
To anticipate the qualm of someone who holds that the two truths are contradictory, 
thinking, “Even if it is  not ultimately existent  in that way, it is  not suitable for the path of 
meditation to enact purposes even conventionally.”  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B2A -2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
4.58ab  Enlightenment is not  
By an earlier mind, nor by a later one.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the conventional and ultimate minds  of enlightenment —it follows that they 
are not suitable to generate enlightenment, because it is not  suitable that enlightenment is  
generated  by an earlier , by a later one, nor  by many earlier and later ones arising together 
or arising serially . 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B2A -3. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said.  
QUALM: Because all objects of the exalted knower of all aspects and so forth that  
accomplish the enlightenment of a buddha do not appear to a single earlier or later mind, it 
is not su itable that enlightenment is by a single one. It is also not by merely many minds (to 
which the accomplishing of the desired aim  appears) arising together, because it is 
impossible, since it occurs, ‘Sentient beings are separate continua  of consciousness.’  It is 
also not  by merely many earlier and later arisen minds, the self- entities of the close 
placement s of mindfulness and so forth until the eighteen unmixed qualities of a buddha 
accomplishing the unsurpassable enlightenment of a buddha, that will be re alized arising 
serially, because there is no mutual relation, since as soon as that arises, [the earlier] 
disintegrates without accompanying it. Therefore, how is the function (by means of having 
generated the mind to which the special purposes appear) performed?  
 
EXPLANATION  
QUALM: (1) It is not suitable that enlightenment is attained by just a single earlier or 
later conventional or ultimate mind of enlightenment, because all objects that are causes of 
an exalted knower of all aspects —the aspects of the exalted knower of all aspects , the 
knower of paths, the knower of bases, and so forth that accomplish the enlightenment of 
a buddha —do not appear  to just a single  earlier  or later mind.  
(2) It is also not generated by merely many minds (to which the accomplishing of the 
desired aim , omniscience , appears) arising together, because it is impossible for many to  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
430 arise together. That follows, since it occurs  in sutra, ‘Sentient beings are separate 
continua of consciousness.’  
 (3) It is also not  suitable for enlightenment to be generated  by merely many earlier  and 
later [instants of the]  two types of the mind  of enlightenment  arising , the self- entities of 
the close placements  of mindfulness and so forth until  the eighteen unmixed qualities 
of a buddha,  the causes accomplishing the unsurpassable enlightenment of a buddha, 
that will be realized  and attained  arising serially, because there is no mutual relation  
with respect to them generating a result. That follows, since as soon as that later one 
arises, the earlier one disintegrates without accompanying it. Therefore, how is the 
function  of generating enlightenment (by means of having generated the mind to which 
the special purposes , enlightenment and others’ welfare, appear) performed?  
 
SOMEONE FROM THE PAST: Although here [a n earlier mind and a later mind] arise 
serially, the earlier one abides until the later one is produced. Then , [by many earlier and 
later minds] gathering together, [enlightenment] is generated. That is the meaning of this 
third refuta tion.  
 A repudiation of that is as follows.  
A CERTAIN SCHOLAR:  If the modes of generating enlightenment are determined to be 
these three, since the three modes of generating enlightenment are untenable, it would be 
impossible to generate enlightenment; i f they are not determined [to be these three], then the 
Acarya would be unskilled in anticipating the above position.  
 
PROPONENT OF THE ABOVE POSITION: Are the proofs determined or not determined 
to be these three? If they are determined to be so, then the  generation of enlightenment 
would be untenable; if they are not determined to be so, then the Acarya would be unskilled in anticipating the above position.  
 This is solely a counterfeit repudiation, because (i) if the modes of generating enlightenment 
are determined to be these three, and none of the three is tenable, then it is necessary that 
enlightenment is not generated, and (ii) if the proofs for not generating enlightenment are determined to be these three, and none of the three is tenable, then it i s necessary that 
enlightenment is generated. 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B2B. Reply 
2B2C -2AB1 -2CB1 -2C1C -2B2B -1. Making a connection  
2B2C -2AB1 -2CB1 -2C1C -2B2B -2. Root text  
2B2C -2AB1 -2CB1 -2C1C -2B2B -3. Commentary  
2B2C -2AB1 -2CB1 -2C1C -2B2B -1. Making a connection  
COMMEN TARY  
Since that is not correct:  
 
EXPLANATION  
Since that objection that has been explained  is not correct:  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
431 2B2C -2AB1 -2CB1 -2C1C -2B2B -2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
4.58cd  Through the mode of the analogy of an oil lamp, 
The eight aspects of profound dharmata.   
 
EXPLANATION  
It follows that there is no fault that, due to many earlier and later instants of the Mahayana 
generated mind arising sequentially, their results, the three exalted bodies , would not be 
generated, because —through the mode of the analogy of an o il lamp  in which, due to 
each potent later instant of an oil lamp  arising sequentially from a n earlier one, the wick 
with oil is completely burned —(i) due to many earlier and later instants of the Mahayana 
generated mind arising sequentially, their results, the three exalted bodies , are generated and 
(ii) the eight aspects of profound dharmata are also to be understood as tenable . 
2B2C -2AB1 -2CB1 -2C1C -2B2B -3. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B2B -3A. Actual reply to the objection  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B2B -3B. The way in which it also characterizes another  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B2B -3A. Actual reply to the objection  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B2B -3A1. Proving the analogy  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B2B -3A2. Applying the analogy to the meaning  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B2B -3A1. Proving the analogy  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B2B -3A1A. Not burning without reliance  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B2B -3A1B. Burning in reliance  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B2B -3A1A. Not burning without reliance  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B2B -3A1A -1. The first instant does not burn without reliance  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B2B -3A1A -2. The second instant does not burn without reliance  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B2B -3A1A -1. The first instant does not burn without r eliance 
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. During the first instant of contact between the flame and the core, 
because they do not create a speciality by being mutually produced by their own causes [in] 
simultaneous contact, without the second instant th e characteristics of cause and result, what 
acts to burn and what is burned, do not exist.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the first instant of contact between the flame and the core  with oil —
during  it, without the second instant arising, the characteristic of c ause, what acts to 
burn, and the characteristic of result, what is burned, do not exist, because the two  do 
not create a special ability (to burn the wick) that is distinguished by being mutually 
produced by their own causes [in] simultaneous contact.     
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B2B -3A1A -2. The second instant does not burn without reliance  
COMMENTARY 
Similarly, also during the second instant , when the special flame and core are produced, 
because, since it follows that it would always exist and so forth, withou t the first instant it 
would not arise even conventionally.  The characteristics of cause and result, what acts to 
burn and what is burned, would not exist.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
432  
EXPLANATION  
The subject—similarly, also during the second instant,  when the special  ability of the  
flame and core are produced —it follows that  it would always exist, because it arises 
causelessly. Alternatively, it follows that it would always not exist, because of that. You 
asserted the sign. If you accept that, then , since it follows that there would be that fault and 
so forth  due to elimination by a direct valid cognizer, it follows that without the first 
instant of it, the characteristic of cause, what acts to burn, and the characteristic of 
result, what is burned, would not exist, becaus e without the first instant of it, it would 
not arise even conventionally.  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B2B -3A1B. [The analogy of] burning in reliance  
COMMENTARY 
Why? Because it is in that way. At any time, through the reality of dependent -arising of the 
nature of just this conditionality, by the strength of being related as  cause and result 
agreeably , solely without investigation, having relied on the first instant bearing the 
distinction of contact between both, if there is a second instant and so forth of specia l ability 
possessing culmination  created by that, then at that time although it has disintegrated 
without a cause, since the cause and the result are respectively observed by valid cognition to be  a result being produced and a cause disintegrating simultan eously, what acts to burn 
and what is burned exist.   
 
EXPLANATION  
Why? Because there is no burning without reliance on the earlier and later instants  in that 
way. However, what acts to burn and what is burned exist, since, ( at that time when the 
special a bility of the flame and core158 has been produced  in the second instant, although 
the first instant  has disintegrated without a cause  of disintegration arisen later), the cause, 
the flame,  and the result, the wick , are respectively observed  by valid cognitio n to be  a 
result  being produced and a  cause disintegrating simultaneously. That follows, because 
there is a second instant and so forth of special  ability possessing perfection created by 
that earlier [instant] having relied on the first instant bearing th e distinction of contact 
between  both  the flame and the wick . That follows, because what is burned and what acts 
to burn are tenable  at any time, through the reality of dependent- arising of the nature 
of159 just this appearing conditionality  that is not created by others such as Isvara , by the 
strength of being related as cause and result agreeably , solely without investigation  by 
a reasoning analyzing the ultimate.  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B2B -3A2. Applying the analogy to the meaning  
COMMENTARY  
That being the case, “the core is not burned by the first instant without relying upon the second instant of the flame, nor is the core burned by the second instant without relying 
upon the first instant of the flame.” Since the mode of the analogy of an  oil lamp 
emphatically makes known the correlation of the two earlierand later instants to a single object, through generating a later consciousness to which appears an object that is 
exceptionally  superior, devoid of the object that appeared to that, in d ependence on a n 
                                             
 
158 The core ( nying po) in this context refers to the wick.  
159 Gyis emended to read gyi  in accordance with Haribhadra’s commentary above.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
433 earlier consciousness —just like a n earlierinstant —to which appeared a measurable property 
acting to achieve enlightenment, the attainment of enlightenment is suitable.   
 
EXPLANATION  
That analogy being the case, the flame and the wick with oil do not burn without reliance 
on the earlierand later instants. Through the mode of the analogy of an oil lamp  that burns 
in reliance, the attainment of enlightenment in dependence on the Mahayana generated 
mind is suitable, through generating a later c onsciousness , a Mahayana generated mind,  
to which appears an object that is an exceptionally superior ability compared to the 
earlier, devoid of the object that appeared to that former one , in dependence on a n 
earlier consciousness —just like a n earlier  instant of the flame and the wick with oil —to 
which appeared a measurable property , a small ability, that is a cause acting to achieve 
enlightenment. That follows, since the reality of an oil lamp  emphatically makes known 
the correlation  of benefit to a single  object , enlightenment  in which the two earlier  and 
later instants of Mahayana generated mind operate as abilities . 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C1C -2B2B -3B. The way in which it also characterizes another  
COMMENTARY  
By just the analogy that has been mentioned, since the eight types of profound dharmata should also be understood : 
 
EXPLANATION  
It is not that only the generation of enlightenment by the Mahayana generated mind is characterized by just the analogy of the oil lamp that has been mentioned, since the eight 
types of profound dharmata that will be explained should also be understood.  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C2. Explanation of the differences among  the signs of irreversibility  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C2A. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C2B. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C2C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C2A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
QUESTION: In order to describe the characteristics of the irreversible bodhisattvas abiding 
on the path of meditation, with respect to which objects are the eight types of profundities?  
 
EXPLAN ATION  
QUESTION: In order to describe the characteristics that are signs of the irreversible 
bodhisattvas abiding on the path of meditation, with respect to which objects do the 
eight types of profundities  exist ?   
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C2B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
4.59  Profoundities with respect to production, cessation, 
Thusness, objects of knowledge,  
Knowledge, activity, non -duality, 
And skill in means.  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
434 EXPLANATION  
The subject —the eighth ground bodhisattva —possesses the understanding of the eight types 
of profun dities, because he possesses the understanding of the profundities  with respect to 
(1) production , the profound mode of abidance of bases , (2) profound cessation, (3) 
thusness , the profound mode of practicing the deeds , (4) objects of knowledge, (5) 
knowle dge, (6) activity, (7) profound non -duality, and (8) skill in means , the profound 
mode of actualizing the result . 
 
Respectively, sutra says:  
(1) [The Bhagavan said,] “Subhuti, what do you think of that? What mind is ceased? Therefore, will it be produced?”  [Subhuti said,] “Bhagavan, it is not so.”  
(2) [The Bhagavan said,] “Subhuti, what do you think of that? Do you think whatever mind that has been produced possesses the property of cessation?” [Subhuti said,] “Bhagavan, it 
possesses the property of cessati on.” 
(3) [The Bhagavan said,] “Subhuti, what do you think of that? Will thusness abide only in 
that mode?” [Subhuti said,] “Bhagavan, it will.”   
(4) [The Bhagavan said,] “Subhuti, what do you think of that? Is thusness mind?” [Subhuti 
said,] “Bhagavan, it  is not.”  
(5) [The Bhagavan said,] “Is the thusness perfectly and subsequently seen by way of thusness?” [Subhuti said,] “Bhagavan, it is not.”  
(6) [The Bhagavan said,] “Subhuti, is that practice in that way a practice in the profound perfection of wisdom? ” [Subhuti said,] “Bhagavan, it is not.”  
(7) [The Bhagavan said,] “Subhuti, with respect to what is the practice of a great bodhisattva’s practice in the profound perfection of wisdom a practice?” [Subhuti said,] 
“Bhagavan, it is a practice with respect to  the ultimate that is immovability with respect to 
that.”  
(8) [The Bhagavan said,] “How does a great bodhisattva destroy the discrimination of the 
non-existence of the sign of signs?” [Subhuti said,] “Bhagavan, the great bodhisattva does 
not think, ‘The pr actice in the perfection of wisdom in this way should destroy signs; it 
should destroy non- signs.’”  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C2C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C2C -1. The entities of the profoundities  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C2C -2. The way the realization of those becomes si gns 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C2C -1. The entities of the profoundities  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. (1) “ Not by earlier or later instants, and also not through non -
entitiness, yet the very superior meaning to be realized through meditation will be generated” —dependent -arising, (2) “all things are without entitiness by way of nature since 
having arisen, but still cease conventionally” —cessation, (3) “although one is familiar with 
thusness on all occasions, one does not actualize it” —thusness, (4) “ one subsequently 
accomplish es many aspects, generosity and so forth, with respect to all phenomena of the 
nature of thusness” —objects of knowledge, (5) “by way of the entitiness of thusness, mere 
non-seeing is seeing” —knowledge, (6) “ the absence  of activity with respect to all by way of 
dharmata is activity” —activity, (7) “ one accomplish es all as entitiness being devoid of  
duality” —non-duality, and (8) “one thoroughly completes all accumulations , but one does 
not attain the result of that, buddhahood” —skill in mea ns…  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
435  
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the eighth ground bodhisattva —:  
(1) understands  profound production, emptiness of true existence that is the meaning of the 
term “ dependent -arising,”  because he possesses the understanding that “ Enlightenment is 
not attained by earlier  or later instants  of the generated mind singly , and also not 
through non- entitiness  conventionally , yet the very superior meaning to be realized 
through meditation , enlightenment, will be generated.”  
(2) understands profound cessation , because h e has directly understood that the two truths 
are not contradictory, that  “All things are without entitiness by way of nature since [ the 
time of their] merely having arisen at the beginning , but still cease conventionally.”  
(3) possesses the understanding  of profound thusness , because he has understood the 
profound mode of realizing thusness, that “Although one is familiar with thusness on all 
occasions  of the learners’ paths , one does not actualize it at an improper time.”   
(4) possesses the understandin g of profound objects of knowledge , because he has directly 
understood “One subsequently accomplish es many aspects, generosity and so forth, 
with respect to all phenomena , although they are not established ultimately by way of the 
nature of thusness.”  
(5) possesses profound knowledge , because he has directly understood that  “If all 
phenomena were to exist ultimately by way of the entitiness of thusness  ultimately, such 
would be observable , but they are never seen ultimately ; mere non -seeing  of suchness is 
seeing  suchness. ”  
(6) possesses profound activity , because he has directly understood that  “The absence  of 
activity with respect to all phenomena  by way of dharmata that is the emptiness of true 
existence  is activity with respect to the meaning of the mode of abidance.”  
(7) possesses the realization of profound  non-duality , because he has directly understood 
“One a ccomplish es all paths as the entitiness being devoid of  duality  ultimately.”  
(8) possesses profound skill in means, because he has directly understood and familiarized 
with “One thoroughly completes all accumulations  of merit and exalted wisdom, but one 
will not attain the result of that, buddhahood , ultimately.”  
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -2C2C -2. The way the realization of those becomes sign s 
COMMENTARY 
…by means of attaining the liberation that is not conceivable, through accomplishing meanings that are mutually contradictory, are the profundities.   
 
EXPLANATION  
The eight profundities are  understood  by means of attaining the liberation that is not 
conc eivable  by the awareness of dialecticians, great forbearance with respect to the 
phenomenon  that is not produced , through practicing and accomplishing meanings  that 
are mutually contradictory (in the perspective of those of inferior intelligence) as a 
common locus without contradiction . 
2B2C -2A1B -2C1B -3. Summary 
COMMENTARY  
The assembly of irreversible learners as well as the characteristics have been explained.  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
436 EXPLANATION  
The assembly of irreversible learners as well as the characteristics have been  explained.  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2. Explanation of the special paths that act to achieve the three exalted bodies 
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A. Cause of the truth body: the application of equality of cyclic existence and peace  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2B. Cause of the complete enjoyment bod y: the application of pure land  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2C. Cause of the emanation body: the application of skillful means  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A. Cause of the truth body: the application of equality of cyclic existence and peace  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -1. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -2. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -3. Commentary 
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY  
Because those who have attained the qualities of the assembly of learners make effort in 
order to attain buddhahood, the cause of attaining buddhahoo d: the equality of samsara and 
nirvana. 
 
EXPLANATION  
After having explained the signs of irreversibility, it is appropriate to explain the cause of 
attaining buddhahood: the application of the equality of samsara and nirvana, because 
those who have attaine d the signs of irreversibility, the qualities of the assembly of 
learners, make effort in the proximate cause in order to quickly attain buddhahood. The 
signs of irreversibility of those abiding on the eighth ground and above have been 
explained. However, to make a connection at this juncture, [Haribhadra’s] Great 
Commentary  says:  
 
Now, the learners who have been taught in the passage “The characteristics of non -
learning sangha shall be indicated” are on the seventh ground and those below. Upon attaining t he eighth ground, a bodhisattva needs to complete the special corpus of the 
path to achieve the three exalted bodies, and does not need to learn other paths, so he is called a “no -more -learner.” The way to complete the corpus of the path will be explained. 
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -2. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -2A. Actual meaning  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -2B. Rejecting dispute s   
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -2A. Actual meaning  
ROOT TEXT  
4.60ab  Because phenomena are like dream s,  
Not conceptualizing cyclic existence and peace. 
 
EXPLANATION  
[Sutra says,] “Sariputra asked, ‘Subhuti, if one has entered absorption into the meditative 
stabilization of the three doors of liberation in a dream, does the perfection of wisdom 
increase?’ Subhuti answered, ‘If it increases through meditation during the da y, it increases 
through meditation even during a dream. Why? There is no conceptuality during a dream or 
the day.’” Condensing its meaning, the subject —the eighth ground bodhisattva —has a 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
437 reason for not conceptualizing cyclic existence and peace  as truly e xistent, because, by 
means of having realized with direct cognition that cyclic existence and peace are devoid of 
true existence, he has exhaustively destroyed the opportunity for generating a manifest 
adherence to true existence even during the occasion o f subsequent attainment. Cyclic 
existence and peace are devoid of  true existence, because phenomena included within 
cyclic existence and peace are not ultimately existent, like a dream. 
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -2B. Rejecting dispute s 
ROOT TEXT  
4.60cd  The response to dispute s such as “K arma does not exist ” 
Is just that which has been explained.  
 
EXPLANATION  
If all phenomena are not established ultimately, it follows that it is not that there is the fault 
of actions and results not being able to be posited, because the response to disputes  such 
as “It follows that karma does not exist ” is just that which has b een explained  in sutra , 
and those disputes can be rejected . 
 
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -2B1. Rejecting the consequence that it follows that accumulating karma even during 
daytime is infeasible  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -2B2. Rejecting the consequence that it follows that a path o f action in a dream is complete  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -2B3. Rejecting contradiction with scripture  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -2B4. Rejecting the ridiculous consequence 
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -2B1. Rejecting the consequence that it follows that accumulating karma even during daytime 
is infeasible  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -2B1A. Dispute  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -2B1B. Reply  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -2B1A. Dispute  
It follows that accumulating karma of virtue or negativity even during daytime would be 
infeasible, because actions and results are not established ultimatel y, for example, as in the 
case of a dream. Fearing wordiness, I have not cited the words of sutra. I have summarized 
the meaning and stated it. That very disputeset forth by Sariputra to Subhuti was made by 
acting as if he had a doubt for the sake of takin g care of trainees who hold that the two 
truths are contradictory.  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -2B1B. Reply  
SUBHUTI: It follows that the repudiation stated by Sariputra is not a correct repudiation, 
because (i) relative to the ultimate, the reply is “Accept,” and (ii) relative to the 
conventional, the reply is “The pervasion is indefinite.”   
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -2B2. Rejecting the consequence that it follows that a path of action in a dream is complete  
Objection  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -2B2B. Reply  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -2B2A. Objection  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -2B2A -1. Dividing the context of the dispute by Subhuti  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -2B2A -2. Actual dispute by Sariputra  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
438 2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -2B2A -1. Dividing the context of the dispute by Subhuti  
SUBHUTI: Having killed during the day and killed in a dream, if afterwards these are 
nourished by forceful adherence, saying, “That [person] has been killed by me. The killing 
of that [person] by me was well done!”, then they would be similar in having become paths 
of actions. Sariputra, what do you say about that karma?  
2B2C-2A1B -2C2A -2B2A -2. Actual dispute by Sariputra  
SARIPUTRA: Well, it follows that killing an object to be killed , giving an object to be 
given in a dream , and so forth  would be complete paths of action, because the waking state 
and a dream are similar. If you accept that, then it follows that the vows of a fully -ordained 
monk would be lost even due to dreaming that he killed a man in a dream.  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -2B2B. Reply  
SUBHUTI: It follows that the repudiation by Sariputra is also not a correct repudiation, 
because the reply to that is “Accept.” For, the waking state and a dream differ in the degree 
of the strength of karma; if nourished by forceful adherence, even the k arma of a dream 
would become a path of action of virtue or non -virtue. The vows of a fully ordained monk 
would not be given up due to dreaming that he killed a man in a dream. That is presented 
from the point of view of a training stipulated by the Bhagava n, similar to the arisal of a 
downfall of unchaste conduct , as in the case of one who has produced a mind of 
concealment being posited as not being a fully -ordained monk, and one who has not 
produced a mind of concealment being posited as being a fully -ordained monk who is a 
person who has relinquished a training regarding a punishable action.  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -2B3. Rejecting contradiction with scripture  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -2B3A. Dispute  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -2B3B. Reply  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -2B3A. Dispute  
SARIPUTRA: If there is  the accumulating of karma in both the waking state and a dream, 
then it would contradict what has been taught in sutra: “[They] are devoid [of] all karma and 
intentions.”  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -2B3B. Reply  
SUBHUTI: Sariputra, it follows that it would also not con tradict that, because what has 
been taught in sutra says that karma and intentions do not exist ultimately, but karma and 
results exist conventionally.  
 
Analyzing whether the dispute made once again by Sariputra in that manner is reasonable or 
unreasonabl e is clearly an expression of not having realized the meaning, because he acted 
as if he has doubt for the sake of trainees; do not wonder, “Would Sariputra have internal 
contradictions?”  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -2B4. Rejecting the ridiculous consequence 
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -2B4A. Dispute  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -2B4B. Reply  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
439 2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -2B4A. Dispute  
SARIPUTRA TO SUBHUTI: It follows that the cultivation of the performance of 
generosity until wisdom by a bodhisattva in a dream would become the complete two 
accumulations if the ro ots of virtue are further dedicated to complete enlightenment, 
because there are complete paths of action in a dream. If you accept that, then there would 
be a ridiculous consequence, because a path of action in a dream is not even established as a 
real co nventionality.  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -2B4B. Reply  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -2B4B -1. Subhuti’s own reply has already been given by implication  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -2B4B -2. Making referral to Maitreya  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -2B4B -1. Subhuti’s own reply has already been given by implication  
Indeed we have already replied by implication; we are not able to give all replies by ourselves, because there is meaning in future buddhas arising continuously.  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -2B4B -2. Making referral to Maitreya  
With regard to the teaching, “Sariputra ask ed Maitreya, and Maitreya said, ‘Did [the one 
with] the name “ Maitreya”  give a reply? ’…” someone’s assertion that Maitreya  did not 
reply is incorrect, because, as indicated by Subhuti above, he correctly indicated the meaning of the equality of cyclic exis tence and peace. Having indicated cyclic existence and 
peace as not existing ultimately, by implication he replied, “If one were to practice generosity and so forth in a dream and dedicate them to enlightenment, they would become 
accumulations; therefore t here would be no ridiculous consequence.” Maitreya’s  not 
explicitly completing the reply to that question indicates that the question and the answer 
are incomplete. The waking state and a dream characterize samsara and nirvana.  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -3. Commentar y 
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -3A. Actual meaning  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -3B. Rejecting the disputes 
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -3C. The meaning established by that  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -3A. Actual meaning  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. Because samsara and the completely pure —the discordant and the 
antidote —are realized as being merely like dreams, due to being entities that are mere 
appearing images, since it does not conceptualize samsara and nirvana as differe nt, equality.   
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —an exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise of an eighth ground bodhisattva —
is an application of equality  of cyclic existence and peace, because, since it does not 
conceptualize samsara and nirvana as different , it is  a yoga of the pure grounds that 
realizes with direct cognition that they are similar in being empty of true existence. It realizes that cyclic existence and peace are empty of true existence, because the 
discordant , samsara,  and the antidote , the completely pure , are realized as (i) not 
existing ultimately and (ii) being  merely like dreams, due to being entities that are mere 
appearing images  conventionally . 
 Upon attaining the eighth ground, during the subsequent attainment, regardless of wha t 
objects of knowledge that are varieties appear, they appear like a reflection of a face in the 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
440 mirror; objects that are not illusory appearances, like the appearances on some occasions on 
the seventh ground and below, do not appear even slightly. Even th ough one may not have 
abandoned exhaustively the seeds of the conceptions of true existence, due to having destroyed the opportunity for manifest conceptions of true existence to be produced, one is 
presented as “having attained the application of equality  of cyclic existence and peace.”  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -3B. Rejecting the disputes 
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -3B1. Disputes  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -3B2. Reply 
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -3B1. Disputes  
COMMENTARY  
“If they are like dreams, by the ten non -virtues and generosity and so forth not exi sting, 
would it not become like on the occasion of being asleep, even on the occasion of not being 
asleep?” The reply to these disputes  … 
 
EXPLANATION  
“It follows that the ten non -virtues , killing and so forth, and virtuous actions, generosity 
and so forth would be pervaded by not existing, because all phenomena are empty of true 
existence; for example, they are like dreams. Therefore, would the collection of karma  not 
become non-existent like on the occasion of being asleep, even on the occasion of not 
being asleep?” The meaning is that, regarding “ these disputes ” mentioned, the reply  to all 
the disputes  that argue  that the two truths are contradictory, which are characterized by this 
dispute, should be characterized and known by this explanation below.  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -3B2. Reply 
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -3B2A. Reply that the pervasion is indefinite  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -3B2B. Reply that the example is not established  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -3B2A. Reply that the pervasion is indefinite  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -3B2A -1. Positing as an example the indefinite pervasion renowned to the hearers 
themselves  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -3B2A -2. Indicating that as being similar also for the Middle-Wayers  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -3B2A -1. Positing as an example the indefinite pervasion renowned to the hearers themselves 
2B2C -2A1B-2C2A -3B2A -1A. They themselves have accept ed the object to be killed and the killer as not 
established for an ultimate awareness  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -3B2A -1B. They themselves have also accept ed them as established as objects of a 
conceptual conventional awareness  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -3B2A -1A. They themselves have accept ed the object to be killed and the killer as not 
established for an ultimate mind  
COMMENTARY  
In the tradition of propounders of external objects, they disintegrate without a cause due to momentarines s, because it occurs even in the tenets: “The diverse worlds arise from karma.” 
Ultimately the killing of someone by anyone does not exist, and not killing also does not; the robbing of anyone by someone does not exist, and not robbing also does not.  
 
EXPLANATION  
In the tradition of propounders of external objects —the Sutra Followers (Sautrantikas) 
and the Followers of the Great Exposition (Vaibhashikas)—it follows that ultimately , that 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
441 is, in the perspective of apprehension of an ultimate awareness, an  unmistaken sense 
consciousness,  the killing of someone by anyone does not appear as parts, part -possessor, 
and continuity -possessor , and the parts and part -possessor of the virtuous path of action, 
not killing, also do not  appear; in the perspective of ap prehension of that, the robbing of 
anyone by someone does not exist, and not robbing also does not  [exist] , because, in the 
perspective of apprehension of that, they do not appear as parts and part -possessor . That 
follows (i) because, in the perspective of apprehension of that, although infinitesimal final 
instants and minute particles appear, they disintegrate without a cause arisen later due to 
momentariness  in which things do not remain for a second period , and (ii) because it 
occurs even in our own tenets, [Vasubandhu’s] Treasury of Knowledge  (Abhidharmakosa) 
(4.1a): “The diverse worlds are produced from karma.”  This is because, by having 
asserted that the outer and inner environment and the inhabitants are produced from 
common and uncommon karma, ceasin g of life occurs through the force of exhausting the 
karma that propels life. Hence, it is because part -possessors that are common and 
uncommon karma as well as their results are also not established in the perspective of 
apprehension of an unmistaken awar eness.  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -3B2A -1B. They themselves have also accept ed them as established as objects of a conceptual 
conventional awareness 
COMMENTARY  
Regarding positions in the aforesaid and so forth, with respect to the property (contradictory 
to engaging t he continuity) that is generated, by means of realizing the killer and so forth, 
like possession of improper attention as non -virtues and so forth , killing and so forth  are 
presented.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Regarding positions  that assert in that way in the perspective of an ultimate awareness  in 
the aforesaid and so forth, with respect to the property (contradictory to engaging the 
continuity of the life that is the object to be killed ) that is generated  by the killing, by 
means of realizing the object to be killed, the killer , and so forth as objects of 
conventional awarenesses , killing and so forth  are presented  by they themselves. 
Likewise, the pervasion that it does not exist conventionally if it does not exist ultimately i s 
indefinite. It is like their possession of improper attention , covetousness, harmful intent, 
and so forth,  being  posited  as non -virtues and so forth. By “and so forth,” right view is 
posited as virtue and so forth.  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -3B2A -2. Indicating that as being similar also for the Middle-Wayers  
COMMENTARY  
“Similarly, although the properties are like dreams, to those who have not weaken ed all 
erroneous bonds, through adhering to the properties and so forth of the objects concordant 
with those.” That and  that replies in the aforesaid and so forth have been taught in other 
positions . One should understand the aforesaid. 
 
EXPLANATION  
“Similar  to that analogy , although the properties —the object to be killed,  the killing, and 
so forth —do not exist in the pers pective of a reasoning  [consciousness]  analyzing finality 
that comprehends ultimate truths, like dreams, it is not that they do not exist as objects of 
valid cognizers of conventionalities. Therefore, even though the object to be killed, the 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
442 killing, and s o forth  do not exist ultimately, to the childish who have not realized emptiness, 
those who have not weakened  all erroneous bonds, the presentation of actions and results 
(through adhering to the objects of comprehension of valid cognizers of 
conventionali ties—the properties and so forth of the objects concordant with those , the 
object to be killed, the killing, the object to be given, the giving, and so forth —as the object 
to be killed, the killing, and so forth) is correct.” That reply of indefinite pervasion relative 
to the conventional and that  reply of acceptance relative to the ultimate in the aforesaid 
and so forth that the two truths are not contradictory have been taught in other positions 
in this small commentary [Haribhadra’s Clear Meaning ], the Perfection of Wisdom sutras, 
and the treatises of the Protector Nagarjuna . One should understand the aforesaid. This is 
the meaning that is to be realized from those in an extensive manner. 
 Although the reply is the word commentary  of “[The response] is just that which has 
been explained,” [4.60d] it should not be taken to have explained “other positions” in the 
sutras that the Proponents of Mind- Only  asserted to be definitive in meaning and so forth. 
Alternatively, regarding the me aning of applying the double expression “That and that,” the 
infinite responses that the two truths are not contradictory should be understood from the 
sutras and the extensive explanations given by the trailblazers.  
 To summarize, it is stated that “It follows that there is no pervasion that accumulating 
karma even during the daytime would be infeasible if actions and results are not truly 
existent, because, in the way  actions and results exist as objects of conventional 
awarenesses even though the three circles are not complete in the perspective of an ultimate 
awareness in your system, that of the Propounders of Objects, likewise also for us, the 
Middle -Wayers, actions and results are asserted to be objects of conventional valid 
cognizers even though the y do not exist in the perspective of that which comprehends the 
ultimate.”  
 In dependence on these words of the commentary, propounding that “The two hearer 
schools are pervaded by asserting that, if it is a gross object and a continuity, then it is 
empty of true existence,” is only erroneous. In that case, one would be asserting all three 
circles if that earlier debate itself were to counter itself. Hence, do not engage in deprecation 
since a skilled Propounder of Objects —who (i) explicitly repudiates his own root assertion 
by himself and (ii) asserts that itself to be a correct repudiation of others —is impossible.  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -3B2B. Reply that the example is not established  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -3B2B -1. The example is not established for the Middle-Wayers  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -3B2B -2. The example is not established for the Propounders of Objects 
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -3B2B -1. The example is not established for the Middle-Wayers  
COMMENTARY  
In addition, since it has been said, “The dream mind is weakened by sleep, therefore re sults 
are not the same,” the example is not established.  
 
EXPLANATION  
In addition to the sign being indeterminate , the concordant example of there being no 
accumulation of karma during dreams is not established as correct for us, the Middle -
Wayers, because , since it has been said  in [Vasubandhu’s] The Twenty  (Vimsatika ), “The 
dream mind is weakened by sleep, therefore results are not the same,”  we also assert 
that the yielding of results [by] karma [accumulated during] dreams is merely weak in 
strength; the re is accumulation of karma .   
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
443  The Acarya accepts this to be concordant with the tenets of the Yogic Practitioners 
(Yogacara ). Therefore it is cited as the reason for the example not being established for 
ourselves; it is the reason for the example not be ing established for the Proponents of Mind -
Only  having taken them as the other party. For, it is inappropriate for the Propounders of 
Objects to fling the repudiation explained above to the Proponents of Mind- Only . Suppose 
one were to explain this as an ex ample that is not established for the Proponents of Mind -
Only ; even if those who dispute with the Middle -Wayers are explicitly stated as the two 
types of Propounders of Objects, since the Proponents of Mind- Only  also debate with the 
Middle -Wayers in the wa y the Propounders of Objects debate above, apply the reply of the 
example not being established for the Proponents of Mind -Only , the challenger. 
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -3B2B -2. The example is not established for the Propounders of Objects 
COMMENTARY  
Similarly, regarding virtue or non -virtue being performed also in dreams, if one rejoices, 
“Oh! It was done. It was well done!” on the occasion of being awake , it becomes fully 
nourished by the nourishing of adherence with a mind of subsequent occasion, be cause of 
that. 
 
EXPLANATION  
It follows that, similar  to that example , the concordant example of there being no 
accumulation of karma during dreams is not established  as correct also for the Propounders 
of Objects themselves,  because  the Propounders of Objects themselves also assert that the 
karma [accumulated during] dreams definitely yield results if it is nourished by intense 
adherence:  if virtue or non -virtue is performed also in dreams , through  rejoicing, “Oh! 
It was done. It was well done!” on the occasion of awaking, it becomes fully nourished 
by the nourishing of adherence with a mind of subsequent occasion.    
2B2C -2A1B -2C2A -3C. The meaning established by that  
COMMENTARY 
Since also the example is not established, samsara and ni rvana are just equal. 
 
EXPLANATION  
Samsara and nirvana are established to be just equal  in being empty of true existence, 
because, since the sign and the concordant example that have been stated to damage that 
are [respectively] indeterminate and not estab lished, [the repudiation] is established to be a 
counterfeit repudiation . 
2B2C -2A1B -2C2B. Cause of the complete enjoyment body: the application of pure land  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2B -1. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2B -2. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2B -3. Commentary  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2B -1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
Due to meditating on the equality of both, one will become a buddha in one’s own buddha land. Therefore, after that, the pure buddha land:  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
444 EXPLANATION  
Due to meditating on the equality of both cyclic existenc e and peace, one will become a 
buddha in one’s very own buddha land where one will attain buddhahood. Therefore, after 
that, the pure buddha land:  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2B -2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
4.61 Through establishing them,  
The world of sentient beings, and like wise 
The impure world of the environment as pure, 
The pure buddha land.   
 
EXPLANATION  
The eight h ground bodhisattva has attained the  application of pure buddha land where he 
will attain buddhahood, because —through having  accumulated the roots of virtue that 
establish  the impure world of sentient beings  as pure , and likewise the impure world of 
the environment as pure —he has attained the application of pure land . 
2B2C -2A1B -2C2B -3. Commentary 
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. Regarding the two types of buddha lands through the instances of the worlds of sentient beings and the environment, respectively, purity by means of 
generating purities the resources of gods, and golden grounds and so forth, as the antidotes 
to that which is impure due to hunger and  thirst, and stones and thorns and so forth, is pure 
buddha land.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Upon attaining the eighth ground, one possesses the application of pure buddha land. In 
dependence on having been preceded by extensive roots of virtue that purify the land, 
regarding the two types of buddha lands , the objects to be purified, the  purity of the 
land—through the instances of the worlds of sentient beings and the environment 
respectively, (i) by means of generating the possession of the resources  that are  
enjoyments  of gods, as the antidotes to the land of the inhabitants which is impure due to 
hunger and thirst and so forth, and (ii) [by means of generating] purities, golden grounds 
and so forth, as the antidotes to the land of the environment  which is impure due to  stones 
and thorns and so forth—is the possession of the application of pure land .   
2B2C -2A1B -2C2C. Cause of the emanation body: the application of skillful means  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2C -1. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2C -2. Root text  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2C -3. Comment ary 
2B2C -2A1B -2C2C -1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
Having established one’s pure buddha land, it is necessary to enact the deeds of a buddha exactly in accordance with the fortunes [of the trainees] through skillful means; therefore 
skill in means:  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
445 EXPLANATION  
After the application of pure land, the application of skillful means will be explained. The 
reason is that, having established one’s pure buddha land, it is necessary to enact the 
deeds of a buddha exactly in accordance with the fortunes [of the trainees] through 
skillful means; therefore skill in means:  
2B2C -2A1B -2C2C -2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
4.62  Objects,  this bearer that is  the application  
Transcended the enemies ; 
Not abiding ; according to force ; 
Characteristics not in common ; 
 
4.63  Not grasping ; not observing ; 
Signs ; extinguishment of wishes ; 
The signs of that ; and immeasurable : 
The ten types of skillful means.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The objects of the applications are [expressed by] “ objects .” The entity of the applications 
is [expressed by] “ this bearer that is  the application .” The divisions of the applications 
are the ten types of skillful means , beginning from “ Transcended the enemies .”   
2B2C -2A1B -2C2C -3. Commentary 
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. (1) Because of having correctly  crossed beyond obstructing 
phenomena, having transcended the maras, the gods and so forth, (2) because of having 
meditated upon the equality of all phenomena, abiding without abiding, (3) because of 
having accomplished prayer, being propelled by the force  of previ ous others’ welfare, (4) 
because of having familiarized very much with all difficult activities, not in common, (5) 
because of pure wholesome qualities, the absence of apprehending any phenomenon, (6) 
because of the emptiness door of liberation, not observ ing, (7) because of the signlessness 
door of liberation, signs do not exist, (8) because of the wishlessness door of liberation, wishes do not exist, (9) because of expressing the qualities  of irreversibility, having been 
previously questioned, the sign of  irreversibility, and (10) because of knowing all objects, 
immeasurable; the application that knows the proper time  and the improper time with 
respect to actualizing the ten types of objects of the perfection of wisdom is skillful means.  
EXPLANATION  
The a pplication  of the pure grounds  that directly knows the proper time regarding  
benefiting sentient beings and the improper time regarding  not benefiting sentient beings 
with respect to actualizing the ten types of objects of the perfection of wisdom , the thr ee 
doors of liberation and so forth, is the application of skillful means. What are they?  
 (1) The subject —the exalted wisdom of the tenth ground —has transcended the maras, 
the maras of the son of the  gods and so forth, because of having correctly crossed  
beyond obstructing phenomena,  the potential to be obstructed by maras and so forth, 
through the force of yoga. 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
446  What dies? The mara of the aggregates: the five appropriated aggregates. Through what 
does one die? The mara of the afflictions: the [root] afflictions and the secondary afflictions 
of the three realms. What is death? The mara of the lord of death: that which stops one’s life 
power beyond one’s control. That which hinders one from transcending death is the mara of 
the son of the gods (devaputra):  the Lord of Ecstasy160, the ruler of Controlling Others’ 
Emanations.  Due to hindering the attainment of the state of nirvana, they are called 
“maras.”  
 Hinayanists transcend the mara of the son of the gods upon attaining the path of seeing 
and transcend the mara of the afflictions  upon attaining the state of foe -destroyer. [Those 
who are] liberated from both factors transcend the mara of the lord of death  because of 
having attained control over the blessing of the composition factors of life. They transcend the mara of the aggregates  upon attaining nirvana without remainder. 
 Mahayanists transcend the mara of the son of the gods upon attaining a sign of 
irreversibility, and upon attaining the eighth ground they transcend the coarse [form of] the 
three other maras, but the destruction of all the four maras without exception occurs upon 
attaining buddhahood.  
 (2) [The exalted wisdom of the tenth ground] poss esses the application of abiding 
conventionally without abiding  ultimately  with respect to all phenomena , because of 
having meditated upon the equality of all phenomena in being empty of true existence.  
(3) It possesses [the application of] being propelled  by the force of previous  prayers for 
others’ welfare, because of having accomplished the  prayer : “May I enact others’ 
welfare spontaneously!”  (4) It possesses the application that is not in common with hearers 
and solitary realizers , because of having fam iliarized very much with all difficult 
activities  that enact others’ welfare. (5) It possesses the absence of apprehending any 
phenomenon as truly existent , because of being distinguished by the purity  that is free 
from the apprehending of wholesome  qualit ies (of the grounds and paths that have been 
familiarized with) as truly existent.  
 (6) It possesses the application that does not observe  the entities of the self of persons 
and of phenomena as truly existent  because of having familiarized with  the empti ness door 
of liberation  for many countless eons. (7) It possesses the application that realizes that 
signs that are causes do not exist  truly , because of having familiarized with  the 
signlessness door of liberation for many countless eons.  (8) It possesses the application 
that realizes that wishes for results do not exist  truly , because of having familiarized with  
the wishlessness door of liberation  for many countless eons.  
 (9) It possesses skill in the means of the sign of oneself being irreversible, because of 
possessing the special conventions that enable [others] to understand that oneself is 
irreversible, due to having  expressed the qualities of irreversibility that are concordant 
with the attainment of special signs of irreversibility with respect to  having been 
previously questioned by others based upon one’s irreversibility. (10) It possesses skill in 
the means of immeasurable  realizations , because of knowing all objects  that are methods 
for educing answers to questions , due to havi ng been made skilled in the five subjects of 
knowledge, and having directly familiarized with the mode of abidance for many countless eons. At this juncture in [Haribhadra’s] Great Commentary , difference is made between the 
three exalted knowers and the ap plication in complete aspects as explained above.   
                                             
 
160 dga’ rab dbyang phyug  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                  Chapter 4: The Application in Complete Aspects  
 
447 2B2C -2A1C. Summarizing the chapter  
ROOT TEXT  
The fourth chapter on the complete clear realization in all aspects from the Treatise of 
Quintessential Instructions of the Perfection of Wisdom: Ornament for Clear Realization. 
 
COMMENTARY 
The commentary on the fourth  chapter from the Treatise of Quintessential Instructions 
of the Perfection of Wisdom: Ornament for Clear Realization . 
 
EXPLANATION  
The explanation of the commentary on the fourth  chapter from the Ornament of the 
Essence, which is an explanation of [ the commentary on] the Treatise of Quintessential 
Instructions of the Perfection of Wisdom: Orn ament for Clear Realization . 
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
448  
Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
2B2C -2A2. Peak application: the effect [that has gained  control]   
2B2C -2A2A. Making a connection by stating the relationship  
2B2C -2A2B. Explaining the text of the ch apter  
2B2C -2A2C. Summarizing the chapter  
2B2C -2A2A. Making a connection by stating the relationship  
COMMENTARY 
Since, having attained the clear complete  realization of all aspects, the realization of 
excellent culmination will arise, because it causes easy  understanding, the clear realization 
of the peak being preceded by the explanation of the signs and so forth:  
 
EXPLANATION  
After having explained the application in complete aspects, there is a reason for explaining 
the clear realization of the peak , since, having attained the clear complete  realization 
of all aspects  of the three exalted knowers for the sake of gaining control over 
familiarization , the realization of excellent culmination that has gained self- power  over 
familiarization will arise. There i s a reason for explaining the peak by way of being 
preceded by the explanation of the signs of having attained the peak and so forth, 
because it causes easy understanding.  
2B2C -2A2B. Explaining the text of the chapter  
2B2C -2A2B -1. Peak of the path of prep aration  
2B2C -2A2B -2. Peak of the path of seeing  
2B2C -2A2B -3. Peak of the path of meditation  
2B2C -2A2B -4. Uninterrupted peak  
2B2C -2A2B -1. Peak of the path of preparation  
2B2C -2A2B -1A. Individual entities  
2B2C -2A2B -1B. Summary  
2B2C -2A2B -1A. Individual entities  
2B2C -2A2B -1A1. Peak application of the heat  
2B2C -2A2B -1A2. Peak application of the peak  
2B2C -2A2B -1A3. Peak application of the forbearance  
2B2C -2A2B -1A4. Peak application of the supreme mundane quality  
2B2C -2A2B -1A1. Peak application of the heat  
2B2C -2A2B -1A1A. Root text  
2B2C -2A2B -1A1B. Commentary  
2B2C -2A2B -1A1A. Root text   
ROOT TEXT  
5.1 Viewing all phenomena as being like dreams  
Even in a dream and so forth,  
The twelve types of signs of the application  
That has gone to the peak are asserted. 
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
449 EXPLANATION  
The twelve types of signs of having attained the application that has gone to the peak 
are asserted in sutra, because the twelve types, viewing all phenomena with the meditative 
stabilization that is a union  of calm abiding and special insight as being like dreams even 
in a dream through the force of a wisdom arisen from meditation  and so forth,  are asserted  
in sutra . 
 Know that even if one is able to observe [all phenomena] in that manner just once in a 
dream through the force of having cultiva ted special insight observing emptiness on the 
occasion of being awake, that is a sign of having attained peak application. 
  Sutra says, “Subhuti, a great bodhisattva views all phenomena as being like dreams even 
in a dream… Bhagavan, a great bodhisattva who practices in that way is becoming close to 
omniscience.”  
2B2C -2A2B -1A1B. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. (1) Because of having very much familiarized ; viewing all 
phenomena as being like dreams and so forth even on the occasion of dreams ; (2) will not 
generate a mind of joy towards the grounds of hearers and so forth ; (3) seeing the tathagatas 
and so forth;  (4) observing emanations of the miraculous pow ers of the buddhas ; (5) 
generating the mind of teaching the excellent Dharma ; (6) having previously seen  sentient 
beings of the hells and so forth, recollecting to abandon bad migrations in one’s buddha land; (7) accomplishing the blessings of the truth th at pacify burning cities and so forth ; (8) 
accomplishing words of truth that annihilate non -humans, yaksas (harm -giver spirits), and 
so forth ; (9) through one’s clairvoyance, relying on a spiritual guide who outshines 
antagonists ; (10) training in the perfection of wisdom in all types ; (11) not having adherence 
to any phenomenon;  and (12) becoming close to a buddha’s enlightenment : the aforesaid 
twelve types are the special signs on the occasion of having attained the clear realization of 
the peak.  
 
EXPLANA TION  
The twelve types are the special signs on the occasion of having attained the clear 
realization of the peak. What are they?  
 The subject —a bodhisattva abiding on the heat level of the path of preparation —(1) 
possesses viewing all phenomena as being like dreams and so forth even on the 
occasion of dreams, because of having very much familiarized  with the union of calm 
abiding and special insight observing emptiness during waking time .  
 He has attained the peak application, because (2) he will not gen erate a mind of joy 
towards the grounds of hearers and so forth even in a dream through the force of having 
familiarized with the Mahayana generated mind.   
 He has attained the peak application, because he has attained the signs of the peak of:  (3) 
seeing  tathagatas surrounded by retinues consisting of hundreds of thousands [of trainees] 
and teaching the Dharma and so forth  even in a dream, through the force of having ripened 
the Mahayana roots of virtue to not be deprived of seeing the buddhas ; (4) observ ing in a 
dream  emanations of the miraculous powers of the buddhas : levitating into space and 
then teaching the Dharma and so forth ; (5) generating the mind of teaching the Dharma  
even in a dream, thinking, “Upon wakening, I shall teach sentient beings that  all phenomena 
are like dreams ;” (6) due to having previously seen sentient beings of the hells and so 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
450 forth  on the occasions of being awake and of a dream , recollecting to abandon bad 
migrations , thinking, “May even the names of bad migrations not exist  in my buddha 
land; ” (7) accomplishing the blessings of the truth that pacify burning cities and so 
forth  when dreaming and awake ; (8) accomplishing words of truth that annihilate non -
humans, yaksas (harm -giver spirits), and so forth  by expressing the power of the truth 
when a man or a woman is seized by them on the occasion of being awake ; (9) relying on a 
spiritual guide who outshines the actions of antagonistic maras  through oneself being 
without pride and one’s clairvoyance  knowing the actions of maras ; (10) training in the 
perfection of wisdom  for others’ welfare  in all types  of meditative equipoise and 
subsequent attainment ; (11) not having adherence to any phenomenon as truly existent 
through the force of having realized emptiness with a wisdom arisen from meditation ; and 
(12) becoming close to a buddha’s enlightenment due to abiding on the faultlessness of a 
bodhisattva and so forth.  
2B2C -2A2B -1A2. Peak application of the peak  
2B2C -2A2B -1A2A. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A2B -1A2B. Root text  
2B2C -2A2B -1A2C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A2B -1A2A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
QUESTION: How many types of increases are characterized by the signs in that way?  
RESPONSE: Increases:   
 
EXPLANATION  
QUESTION: How many types of increases are characterized by the s igns in that way?  
RESPONSE: Increases:  
2B2C -2A2B -1A2B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
5.2 The virtues of however many beings there are  
In Jambudvipa making offerings to the buddhas and so forth;  
Through analogies made in many ways,  
There are the natures of the six teen increases. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —a bodhisattva abiding on the peak application of the peak —has attained the 
natures of the sixteen increases  in merit, because he has attained that greatly exceeding 
the virtues of however many sentient beings there are in the billionfold world systems, 
the beings in Jambudvipa and so forth, making offerings to the buddhas and so forth, 
through analogies made in many ways.  
 Sutra says, “Suppose all the sentient beings, however many there are in Jambudvipa, 
without som e being earlier and the rest later, were to obtain human bodies and become 
buddhas, and, for as long as they live, a son of the lineage or daughter of the lineage were to 
revere them, honor them, and so forth. In comparison to that merit, if a son of the l ineage or 
daughter of the lineage, having taught others this perfection of wisdom, were to practice it with attention, his or her merit would have increased more... Suppose one, thinking ‘this,’ 
thinks, ‘This is the perfection of wisdom; through this perfe ction of wisdom I shall achieve 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
451 omniscience.’ It has been taught that, ‘If one has practiced in that way, one has not practiced 
the perfection of wisdom.’ ”   
2B2C -2A2B -1A2C. Commentary  
COMMENTARY  
So the root text is said. (1) Exceeding that of making offe rings to tathagatas by however 
many sentient beings there are in the billionfold world systems, Jambudvipa and so forth, 
(2) paying attention  to the perfection of wisdom, superior, (3) having attained forbearance 
regarding the phenomenon  that is not  produc ed, (4) phenomena —that which is to attain 
enlightenment and that which acts to attain enlightenment —are not observed, (5) superiority 
over the attainment of the ten virtues and so forth and the formless absorptions, (6) all classes of gods come near, (7) o utshining all maras, and (8) towards beings as if they are the 
Teacher, abiding similarly —the aforesaid eight types of merit; also (9) through skill in 
means in all ways, pure trainings, (10) transformation into a bearer of buddha lineage, (11) 
the cause o f attaining the resultant buddhahood, (12) not producing minds that are 
discordant classes  of the perfection of wisdom, (13) not producing a mind of realization 
possessing forms and so forth, (14) knowing how to include all the perfections, (15) has 
attain ed all fulfillments, and (16) becoming close to perfect complete enlightenment —the 
aforesaid eight other types of merit. Through analogies made in many ways, the virtues of making offerings to buddhas with flowers and so forth, due to higher and higher sup eriority, 
the entities of the sixteen occasions are the increases.   
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the entitinesses of the sixteen occasions of having attained the peak 
application of the peak —are the increases  in merit, due to the attainment of superiority  of 
each latter one over the former one , through analogies made in many ways, the virtues of 
making offerings to buddhas with flowers and so forth.  
 What are the sixteen?   
 The subject —a bodhisattva who has attained the peak application of the peak —possesses 
an increase in merit, because (1) he possesses merit greatly exceeding that of making 
offerings to tathagatas by however many sentient beings there are in the billionfold 
world systems, Jambudvipa and so forth.  
  He possesses an increase in merit, (2) becau se he possesses paying attention  to the 
perfection of wisdom  through possessing the two applications , merit superior  to that 
[former one] , (3) because he possesses having attained forbearance regarding emptiness, 
the phenomenon  that is not produced, superior to that [former one], (4) because, through 
the strength of the peak application, he realizes  that causal and resultant  phenomena—that 
which is to attain enlightenment and that which acts to attain enlightenment—are not 
observed as ultimately exist ent, superior to that [former one].  
 [The subject —a bodhisattva who has attained the peak application of the peak —
possesses an increase in merit, because he possesses:] (5) having attained great superiority 
over the attainment of the ten virtues and so fo rth, and the concentrations and formless 
absorptions  of sentient beings in Jambudvipa , (6) respectfully and without causing harm, 
all classes of gods come near  before he who strives in the perfection of wisdom of the 
peak , (7) outshining all maras  through the force of the perfection of wisdom of the peak , 
and (8) respecting  other bodhisattvas, beings  who have entered the same vehicle as himself,  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
452 as if they are the Teacher, and  abiding in similar  trainings .The aforesaid eight types of 
merit are mainly extern al due to relying on other persons.   
 Also, the subject —that [as above] —possesses an increase in merit of having attained the 
peak, because he possesses, (9) through skill in the means of the two accumulations  in all 
ways, pure trainings  by way of the wis dom realizing dharmata with a wisdom arisen from 
meditation .  
 He possesses an increase in merit of having attained the peak, (10) because he has 
attained  transformation into a bearer of buddha lineage  through the force of the 
perfection of wisdom of the peak , (11) because he has attained the generated mind that is 
concomitant with the applications and so forth, the cause of attaining the resultant 
buddhahood, (12) because he has attained the excellent quality of not producing 
miserliness and so forth, minds that are discordant classes of the perfection of wisdom , 
through the force of the perfection of wisdom of the peak , (13) because he has attained  not 
producing a mind of realization possessing manifes t acquired conceptions of forms and 
so forth  as truly existent, through the force of the peak , (14) because he has attained  
knowing how to practice through including all the perfections  within the perfection of 
wisdom , (15) because he has attained all fulfillments  of the classes of realizations of the 
three vehicles through the wisdom arisen from meditation , and (16) because he has attained  
becoming close to perfect complete enlightenment through the force of the perfection of 
wisdom of the peak. The afores aid are eight other types of merit, different from those 
above, that are mainly internal .  
2B2C -2A2B -1A3. Peak application of the forbearance  
2B2C -2A2B -1A3A. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A2B -1A3B. Root text  
2B2C -2A2B -1A3C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A2B -1A3A. Making a  connection  
COMMENTARY  
Through increases in that way, since the characteristic of having culminated the self- power 
of augmenting is definitely stable, the definite stability:  
 
EXPLANATION  
There is a reason for explaining the “ definite stability ,” the peak  application of the 
forbearance, after the peak application of the peak, because, through increases in merit in 
that way  explained above, one has attained a stable realization of method and wisdom. It 
follows that there is pervasion , since the characteristic of having culminated the self-
power of augmenting merit is the definitely stable  realization of method and wisdom :   
2B2C -2A2B -1A3B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
5.3 Unsurpassable thorough completion  
Of the qualities of the three exalted knowers of all and  
The thorough non- forsaking of the welfare of sentient beings  
Is called the “stability.”  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
453 EXPLANATION  
The subject —the forbearance level of the Mahayana path of preparation —there is a reason 
for it  to be  called the “stability”  in sutra, because it is a parti al concordance with definite 
discrimination that (i) has attained unsurpassable  thorough completion of the classes of 
realizations that are qualities of the three exalted knowers of all included within 
realizations, one’s own welfare, and (ii) has attained  the thorough  non-forsaking of the 
welfare of sentient beings through compassion, others’ welfare, as explained in sutra. 
 [Asserting that one] connects to a pure ground through merely having attained the 
complete classes of realizations of the three exalt ed knowers leads to absurd consequences. 
If one were to take [completion of the classes of realizations] as referring to the completion 
of the entity of the realizations, [asserting that] it is attained from the ninth ground would be  
even more incorrect than that.   Sutra says, “By these roots of virtue, may persons of the bodhisattva vehicle, those 
observing the unsurpassable complete enlightenment, thoroughly complete the qualities of a buddha ; may they thoroughly complete the self- arisen qualities ; and may they thoroughly 
complete all uncontaminated qualities.”   
2B2C -2A2B -1A3C. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. The characteristic of thorough non -forsaking of the welfare of 
sentient beings, on the occasion of realizing the non -conceptualizing through the entity of 
actualizing great compassion, through the strength of perfect skill in means in that way, the 
unsurpassable thorough completion of the topics  of the three exalted knowers of all that 
have been explained, the ge nerated mind and so forth mentioned above, is definite stability.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —that [the forbearance level of the Mahayana path of preparation] —is the peak 
of definite stability , because it is the third partial concordance with definite discrim ination 
that has attained special method and wisdom. It has attained special stable method, because 
it has attained the characteristic of thorough non -forsaking of the welfare of sentient 
beings, even on the occasion of realizing the non -conceptualizing meditative equipoise 
by way of being conjoined with the entity of actualizing great compassion , which 
observes sentient beings , through the strength of perfect skill in means that accomplishes 
others’ welfare in that way. It has attained special stable wisdo m, because it has attained 
the unsurpassable thorough completion of the classes of realizations that are the thirty topics (of the three exalted knowers of all that have been explained previously, the 
exalted knower of all aspects and so forth), the genera ted mind and so forth mentioned 
above.  
2B2C -2A2B -1A4. Peak application of the supreme mundane quality  
2B2C -2A2B -1A4A. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A2B -1A4B. Root text  
2B2C -2A2B -1A4C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A2B -1A4A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
Through being made definitely stable in that way, since the characteristic that becomes definitely stable is the always -abiding mind, the always -abiding mind:   
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
454   
EXPLANATION  
After the peak of the stability has been explained, the peak of the  always -abiding mind 
will be ex plained, since , through the realization of method and wisdom being made 
definitely stable by the peak of the forbearance in that way, the characteristic of method 
and wisdom  that becomes definitely stable after that is the always -abiding mind:  
2B2C -2A2B -1A4B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
5.4 Through analogies made of the four continents and  
A thousand, a million, and the billion world systems,  
The meditative stabilization s is  
Proclaimed by immense merit.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The meditative stabilization s of the peak application of the supreme mundane quality is 
proclaimed  in sutra because, through analogies made of the amount of water in the four 
continents and a thousand, a million, and the billion world systems  being measurable 
with weighing scales, it i s indicated through being characterized in comparison with those 
by the immense  merit of rejoicing in the virtues of the four types of bodhisattvas. 
 Sutra says, “Rejoice from the bottom of your heart at the generated minds of those who 
have entered suprem e irreversible enlightenment. The weight of the Mount Merus of the 
billionfold world systems can be determined with weighing scales; that virtue of rejoicing is 
not like that.”   
2B2C -2A2B -1A4C. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
By way of saying,  ‘The amount is measurable with weighing scales,’ by the four continents 
and so forth and the billionfold world systems, through individual analogies made of the 
merit and exalted wisdom of the meditative stabilization of the entitiness of all, the 
perfections and so forth, by immense merit superior and beyond measure compared to those, 
the characteristic of meditative stabilization described  is the always -abiding mind.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The amount of great earth and water in  the four continents and so forth and the 
billionfold world  systems can be determined respectively with weighing scales and with 
the number of drops that are taken up with the tip of a strand of hair, because they are 
measurable in that manner by way of saying, ‘The amount is measurable with weighing 
scales.’  
 The characteristic of the meditative stabilization (included within the collections of the 
merit and exalted wisdom of the meditative stabilization of the complete classes of the entitiness of all clear realizations, the perfections of generosity and so forth , in this context 
in sutra) described in sutra is the always -abiding mind, the peak application of the supreme 
mundane quality.  
 How is it described in sutra?  Through individual analogies made of the amount of the 
earth mandala and water in  the billionfold  world systems, the four continents and so 
forth , being determinable respectively with weighing scales and with the number of drops 
[that are taken up] with the tip of a strand of hair, the merit of rejoicing in the virtues of the 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
455 four types of bodhisattva s is indicated through being characterized by immense merit far 
more superior and beyond measure compared to that in those analogies. 
 It is characterized by indicating the merit of rejoicing in the virtues of the four—(1) one 
who actually generates the fi rst mind [of enlightenment], (2) one who has engaged in deeds, 
(3) one who is irreversible, and (4) one who is obstructed by one rebirth —being far more 
superior compared to that in those analogies explained above, and indicated. 
2B2C -2A2B -1B. Summary  
COMMENTARY  
Those, the signs and so forth, should be understood respectively as being the entities of the 
four partial concordances with definite discrimination, the heat and so forth.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Those  peak applications that have been indicated by the four, th e signs and so forth, 
should be understood respectively as being the entitinesses of the four partial concordances with definite discrimination, the heat and so forth.  
2B2C -2A2B -2. Peak of the path of seeing  
2B2C -2A2B -2A. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A2B -2B. Explaining the meanings of the individual objects of abandonment and antidotes  
2B2C -2A2B -2A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
After the partial concordance with definite discrimination is the path of seeing.  
 
EXPLANATION  
After having explained the peak of the partial concordance with definite discrimination , 
the peak of the path of seeing is  to be explained . 
2B2C -2A2B -2B. Explaining the meanings of the individual objects of abandonment and antidotes  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1. The conceptions that are the objects of abandonment  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2. The antidotes to those  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1. The conceptions that are the objects of abandonment  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1A. Brief indication  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B. Extensive explanation  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1C. Summary  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1A. Brief indication  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1A -1. Brief indication of the conceptions of apprehendeds  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1A -2. Brief indication of the conceptions of apprehenders  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1A -1. Brief indication of the conceptions of apprehendeds  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1A -1A. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1A -1B. Root text  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1A -1C. Commentary  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
456 2B2C -2A2B -2B1A -1A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
Regarding that, since there are four types of discordant classes as well as antidotes, for the 
time being, the two types of conceptions with respect to apprehend eds that are discordant 
classes:  
 
EXPLANATION  
Regarding that peak of the path of seeing , since there are four types of discordant 
classes as well as antidotes, for the time being, the two types of conceptions with respect to apprehendeds that are discordant classes:   
2B2C -2A2B -2B1A -1B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
5.5 The conceptualizations of appre hendeds  
With respect to engagement and turning away  
Are to be individually known as the natures of nine,  
As the natures not as the objects are. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the conceptualizations of apprehendeds with respect to engagement and 
turning away that are the bodhisattvas’ objects of abandonment of the path of seeing —are 
to be individually known as the natures of nine, because  there are nine each through 
divisions by way of the objects. They are to be known as the natures apprehending what 
are not as the objects are , because they are wrong consciousnesses that are mistaken with 
respect to their objects of adherence . 
2B2C -2A2B -2B1A -1C. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. Regarding engagement and turning away , the entitinesses that do not 
observe and observe, respectively, through divisions of the objects that are the discordant 
classes, like afflictions, conceptualizations with respect to apprehendeds called 
“apprehendeds by means of the dharmas of the bodhisattvas and the hearers and so forth 
being adopted and being discarded ,” the nine types that exist individually, because of 
appearing erroneously, since they engage without being related to reality, are to be known as the self- entities not exactly as the objects are.   
 
EXPLANATION  
The sub ject—the objects to be abandoned by the path of seeing that are  conceptualizations 
with respect to apprehendeds called “ (1) the bodhisattvas ’ objects to be engaged in: the 
apprehendeds (that are paths as well as the results conjoined with the wisdom realizing that 
[phenomena] are not observed as truly existent) adopted  by bodhisattvas , and 
respectively, and (2) [the bodhisattvas’] objects to be turned away  from : the 
appre hendeds (by means of the dharmas of the hearers and so forth, the entitinesses 
observ ing [phenomena] as truly existent,) discarded  by bodhisattvas ” as truly existent —
are the discordant classes  of the peak application of the path of seeing , like the afflictions 
that are to be abandoned by the path of seeing , because they act to hinder the production of 
that. 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
457   They are the nine types each that exist individually , because they exist in that way 
through divisions of the objects . They are to be known as the self -entities apprehending 
what are not exactly as the objects are, because their objects  appear erroneously.  That 
follows, since they engage by way of adhering to true existence without being related to 
reality. 
 
2B2C -2A2B -2B1A -2. Brief indication of the conceptions of apprehenders  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1A -2A. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1A -2B. Root text  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1A -2C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1A -2A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
Having shown the two classes of conceptualizations with respect to apprehendeds in 
that way, the two types of conceptualizations with respect to apprehenders: 
 
EXPLANATION  
Having shown the two classes of conceptualizations with respect to apprehendeds in that 
way, the two types of conceptualizations with respect to apprehenders:  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1A -2B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
5.6abc  Through the divisions of ordinary beings and aryas,  
With respect to sentient beings as substantial ly exist ing and imputedly  
exist ing, 
The apprehenders, conceptualizations are asserted.   
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the conceptions of apprehenders that are objects to be abandoned by the 
Mahayana path of seeing —are of two types, because through the divisions of ordinary 
beings and aryas,  by observing [respectively] the apprehenders of sentie nt beings as 
substantial existents and the apprehenders of beings as  imputed existents, the 
apprehenders  that are  conceptualizations [of them] as truly existent utilizers are asserted.  
(i) The difference between substantial existence and imputed existence, and (ii) the 
presentation of the conceptions of apprehenders that observe them should be known as they 
have been explained above in the first chapter.  
 
ROOT TEXT  
5.6d  Those are individually the natures of nine.  
 
5.7 If they are asserted to be the appreh enders of any,  
The apprehended objects in reality,  
Then those would be of the characteristic of  
Being empty of the entities of apprehenders in that way.  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
458 EXPLANATION  
Those are to be individually known as  the natures of nine  each, because  there are nine 
each through divisions by way of objects.  
 It follows that it is inappropriate that they are asserted to be the apprehenders of any  
object that accords with reality, because they are mistaken consciousnesses whose  
apprehended objects do not exist in reality . If that is accepted, then those  conceptions  
would be of the characteristic of being empty of the entities of unmistaken 
apprehenders in that way , because of that which is accepted .  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1A -2C. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. Sinc e there exist apprehenders bearing the support of substantially 
and imputedly existent beings respectively of ordinary beings and arya persons, because the conceptualizations with respect to apprehenders act to hinder, they are the discordant 
classes. Nine  types individually exist through divisions of objects, at that time when “those 
which have become the things that are the objects of those do not exist as the entities of the 
apprehendeds according with the apprehended objects,” they are not apprehenders also of 
whatever, because of that, since they are entities devoid of the entities of apprehending, because of appearing erroneously, they are to be known as the self- entities not exactly as the 
objects are.  
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the  conceptualizations with respect to apprehenders  that are objects to be 
abandoned by the Mahayana path of seeing , since there exist apprehenders bearing the 
support of substantially and imputedly existent beings respectively in the continua of 
ordinary beings and arya persons  who are the individual supports —are the discordant 
classes  of the peak application of the path of seeing, because they act to hinder  the 
production of that. They are to be known as the entities apprehending what are  not 
exactly as the objects are, because  their objects  appear erroneously. That follows since 
they are consciousnesses that are entities devoid of the entities of apprehending  that 
according with the reality of the objects. That follows  because they are not apprehenders 
also of whatever  accordin g with the reality of the objects . That follows  because at that 
time “those which have become the things that are the objects of those conceptions do 
not exist as the entities of the apprehendeds according with how the apprehended  
objects are apprehended.”  It is that  nine types individually exist, because they exist in that 
way through divisions of objects.  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B. Extensive explanation  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -1. Extensive explanation of conceptions of apprehendeds  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -2. Extensive explanation o f conceptions of apprehenders  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -1. Extensive explanation of conceptions of apprehendeds  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -1A. Conceptions of apprehendeds to be engaged in  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -1B. Conceptions of apprehendeds to be turned away from   
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -1A. Conceptions of apprehendeds to be engaged in  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -1A1. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -1A2. Root text  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -1A3. Commentary  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
459 2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -1A1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
QUESTION: How are conceptualizations of the first type  of apprehendeds bearing the 
support of that to be engaged in of nine types?  
  
EXPLANATION  
QUESTION: How are conceptualizations of the first type of apprehendeds bearing the 
support of that to be engaged in of nine types?  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -1A2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
5.8 The entitiness, lineage,  
The perfect accomplishment of the path,  
The unmistaken observed object of a knower,  
The discordant classes and antidotes,  
 
5.9 One’s own realizations, making,  
The actions of that, and the result of activity:  
The conceptualizations bearing the support of the class of engagement in 
them  
Are asserted to be of nine types.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The conceptualizations  of apprehendeds bearing the support of the class of engagement 
are asserted to be of nine types , because nine exist through divisions of objects, the 
entitiness  of the Mahayana paths as well as results and so forth . 
  Sutra says, “Subhuti, what do you think of this? Have you not perfectly subsequently 
seen the mind that is an illusory mind? ... Thro ugh the analogy of the operator of a wooden 
apparatus, elimination of the conceptualization regarding the result of activity has been 
taught.”  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -1A3. Commentary  
So the root text is said. (1) The entitiness of the devoid not realized by the dev oid, (2) due to 
entering the Immovable ground and so forth, definite in the Buddha lineage, (3) due to 
realizing as like illusions, perfectly accomplish the paths of seeing and so forth, (4) due to being exhausted in being  mere appearing images, unmistaken  objects of observation of 
consciousnesses, (5) due to adopting and discarding that are preceded by having seen the excellent qualities and the faults, the antidotes and the discordant classes, (6) due to 
separation from all stains, realization of itself, (7) due to inferiority and non -sublimity, acts 
to keep  the grounds of the hearers and so forth distant, (8) through accomplishing in 
accordance with the mentality, actions of sentient beings’ welfare, and (9) through the force 
of perfect skillful means, en gaging in mere objects to be apprehended by way of 
faultlessness with respect to the results of placing all beings in nirvana. Conceptualizations of the first type of the aforesaid apprehendeds, the nine types bearing the support of the 
class of engagement , are asserted to be objects to be abandoned by  the occasions of the 
application of the path of seeing.  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
460 EXPLANATION  
The subject—conceptualizations of the first type of apprehendeds, the nine types 
bearing the support of the class of engagement that adhere  to “objects to be engaged in as 
objects to be apprehended with respect to the Mahayana paths as well as results” as truly 
existent objects of utilization —are asserted to be objects to be abandoned by the 
occasions of the application of the Mahayana path of seeing , because they are conceptions 
that act to hinder the production of that  [Mahayana path of seeing] . 
 What are the nine? With respect to that, there are:  
A. The bodhisattvas’ objects of engagement as a generality 
B. The particularities of the bodhis attvas’ objects of engagement  
A. The bodhisattva’s objects of engagement as a generality 
(1) The subject —the Mahayana paths and results, the entitiness of attainment 
conventionally, even though unsurpassable enlightenment devoid  of ultimate existence is 
not realized and not attained ultimately by the six perfections  devoid  of ultimate 
existence —are the bodhisattvas’ objects of engagement, because they are their objects of 
practice.161  
B. The particularities of the bodhisattva’s objects of engagement  
B1. Cause s of the path s 
B2. Entities of the path s 
B3. Results of the path s 
B1. Cause s of the path s 
(2) The subject —bodhisattvas —become definite in the Buddha lineage, due to definitely  
entering the Immovable ground and so forth. 
B2. Entities of the path s 
B2A. Actual path s 
B2B. Objects of observation of the path s 
B2C. Ability to destroy the objects of abandonment  
B2A. Actual path s 
(3) The subject —they —perfectly accomplish the paths of seeing and so forth, due to 
realizing all phenomena as empty of true existence, like illusions. 
B2B. Objects of observation of the path s 
(4) [The subject—they —] observe  unmistaken objects of observation of consciousnesses, 
due to understanding all phenomena are exhausted in being mere appearing images. 
B2C. Ab ility to destroy the objects of abandonment  
(5) [The subject —they —] have attained a special ability to eliminate the objects of 
abandonment, because of having attained the ability to produce the antidotes to the 
knowledge obscurations and to destroy the di scordant classes, due to adopting that is 
preceded by having seen the excellent qualities and discarding that is preceded by 
having seen the faults.   
                                              
161 Therefore, the subject —adherence to t he Mahayana paths and results as truly existent objects of 
utilization that is included within acquired objects of abandonment —is an object of abandonment of the peak 
application of the path of seeing, because the seeds of it are directly destroyed by that.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
461 B3. Results of the path s 
B3A. One’s welfare  
B3B. Others’ welfare 
B3A. One’s welfare  
(6) The subject —the e xalted knower of all aspects —has attained the final realization of 
Mahayana itself, due to separation from all stains  of any realization.  
B3B. Others’ welfare 
B3B1. Ability to enact others’ welfare  
B3B2. Actions of others’ welfare  
B3B3. Results of others’  welfare  
B3B1. Ability to enact others’ welfare  
(7) [The subject —the exalted knower of all aspects —] acts to keep the grounds of the 
hearers and so forth distant  with respect to those who are definite in the Mahayana 
lineage, because of setting them in the  Mahayana paths and results , due to the inferiority of 
the hearers’ paths  and the non-sublimity  of the results. 
B3B2. Actions of others’ welfare  
(8) [The subject—the exalted knower of all aspects —] possesses actions of sentient 
beings’ welfare, because of enacting others’ welfare through emanating as Indra and so 
forth in accordance with the mentality  of trainees.  
B3B3. Results of others’ welfare  
(9) [The subject —the exalted knower of all aspects —] engages by way of faultlessness 
with respect to  the results of placing all beings  who are the three lineage -bearers  in 
nirvana, because of acting in that way through the force of perfect skillful means  in 
enacting others’ welfare . 
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -1B. Conceptions of apprehendeds to be turned away from  
2B2C-2A2B -2B1B -1B1. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -1B2. Root text  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -1B3. Commentary  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -1B1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
QUESTION: How are conceptualizations of the second type  of apprehendeds bearing the 
support of that to be turned away from of nine types?  
 
EXPLANATION  
QUESTION: How are conceptualizations of the second type of apprehendeds bearing 
the support of that to be turned away from of nine types?   
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -1B2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
5.10 Due to having fallen into cyclic existence and solitary peace,  
Lesser realizations,  
Lacking a tutor,  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
462 An incomplete type of path,  
 
5.11 Progressing through the conditions of others,  
A wrong object of intent,  
Trifling, various,  
Those confused about abiding and engaging,  
 
5.12 Accompanying:  
These conceptualizations, the natures of nine, Bearing the support of the class to be turned away from  
Arise in the minds of hearers and so forth.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —these conceptualizations  of lesser paths as well as results arisen in the 
minds of hearers and so forth  as truly existent objects to be turned away from , bearing 
the support of the class to be turned away from by bodhisattvas —exist as  the natures of 
nine, because there are nine by way of objects: the paths of hearers and sol itary realizers 
[being]  lesser realizations due to having fallen into the extremes of cyclic existence and 
solitary peace  and so forth .   
 Sutra says, “Subhuti, it is like this; for example, if a wheel -turning king were separated 
from the seven types of precious objects, he would not obtain the name ‘wheel -turning,’ … 
Subhuti, it is like this; the seven precious objects of a wheel -turning king, the precious 
wheel and so forth, are asserted prior to possessing the four branches of the accumulations 
of army162.” 
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -1B3. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. (1) Due to having fallen into either nirvana or samsara, lesser 
realizations, (2) due to separation from a spiritual guide who is skilled in means, lacking a 
tutor, (3) due to not bein g an antidote to all knowledge obscurations, an incomplete path for 
accomplishment, (4) due to relying upon the instruction s of the tathagatas and so forth, 
progressing through the condition of others, (5) due to not engaging the great mind  of the 
supremac y of all sentient beings, a wrong object of intent, (6) due to the antidote to 
afflictive obscurations, the actions of a trifling path, (7) through being together with 
observation, the different realizations, the first result and so forth, (8) due to not h aving 
abandoned all dormancies  of ignorance, not knowing abidance and progression, and (9) due 
to encompassing all the Mahayana, to progress to the exalted knower of all aspects at the 
end of all nirvanas: those said to be objects to be turned away from, in not being objects to 
be upheld, since they are together with flaws. Conceptualizations of the second type  with 
respect to the aforesaid apprehendeds, bearing the support of the class to be turned away from, the nine types arising as mere objects to be a dopted in the continua of hearers and 
solitary realizers, are asserted to be objects to be abandoned by  the occasions of engaging 
the minds and mental factors of the path of seeing of the bodhisattvas. 
 
                                             
 
162 These refer to the infantry and the troops mounted on horses, elephants, and chariots.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
463 EXPLANATION  
The subject —conceptualizations of the sec ond type with respect to apprehendeds, the 
nine types of conceptions of apprehendeds in which those arising as mere objects to be 
adopted in the continua of hearers and solitary realizers  have been taken as objects , 
bearing the support of the class to be turned away from  by bodhisattvas —are asserted 
to be objects to be abandoned by the occasions of the uninterrupted path engaging the 
minds and mental factors of the path of seeing of the bodhisattvas , because their seeds 
are destroyed by it . 
 What are the ni ne? 
A. Lesser realizations, the paths and results of hearers and solitary realizers  
B. Lesser tutor, the empowering condition        
C. Lesser method for achieving the two welfares  
D. Degeneration from special abandonments and realizations 
E. Degeneration  through not attaining the special path and result  
A. Lesser realizations, the paths and results of hearers and solitary realizers  
(1) The subject —hearers and solitary realizers —are of lesser realizations compared to 
[persons of] the Mahayana, due to havin g fallen into either nirvana or samsara  even 
though they have entered the path to liberation.163 
B. Lesser tutor, the empowering condition        
(2) [The subject —hearers and solitary realizers —] lack a tutor  who holds them with a 
special path, due to separation from a spiritual guide who is skilled in means.   
C. Lesser method for achieving the two welfares 
C1. Lesser method for achieving others’ welfare  
C2. Lesser method for achieving one’s welfare  
C3. Lesser method for achieving the welfares of both  
C1. Lesser method for achieving others’ welfare  
(3) [The subject —a path of solitary realizers —] is an incomplete path for accomplishing 
others’ welfare , due to being able to abandon merely the afflictive obscurations and the 
knowledge obscurations that are conce ptions of apprehendeds; they are not a complete  
antidote to all knowledge obscurations . 
C2. Lesser method for achieving one’s welfare  
(4) [The subject —hearers —] progress to liberation through the condition of others, due 
to relying upon the instruction s of the tathagatas and so forth  even in the life they att ain 
the state of foe -destroyer. 
C3. Lesser method for achieving the welfares of both  
(5) [The subject—hearers and solitary realizers —possess] a wrong object of intent, due to 
desiring to attain liberati on for the sake of themselves alone; they do not engage the objects 
                                              
163 Therefore, the subject —adherence to the lesser realizations of hearers and solitary realizers as truly 
existent objects of utilization  that is included within acquired objects of abandonment —is an object of 
abandonment of the peak application of the path of seeing, because the seeds of it are directly destroyed by 
that.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
464 of intent: the three greatnesses, the great mind of the supremacy of all sentient beings  
and so forth.  
D. Degeneration from special abandonments and realizations 
D1. Lesser abandonments  
D2. Lesser realizations  
D1. Lesser abandonments  
(6) [The subject —hearers —] possess the actions of a path  of trifling  abandonments , due 
to cultivating the mere antidote to afflictive obscurations.  
D2. Lesser realizations  
(7) [The subject —hearers and solit ary realizers —] possess the different classes of higher 
and lower realizations, the first result of stream -enterer and so forth, because of acting to 
attain the four results gradually through being together with the observation  of the bases 
and paths as truly existent.   
E. Degeneration through not attaining the special path and result  
E1. Degeneration through not attaining the special path  
E2. Degeneration through not attaining the special result  
E1. Degeneration through not attaining the special path  
(8) [The subject —hearers and solitary realizers —] do not know abidance  on the Mahayana 
path and progression by way of that path as long as they have not attained the extreme of 
solitary peace , due to not having abandoned all dormancies  of ignorance  through 
abiding on the mere Hinayana path.  
E2. Degeneration through not attaining the special result  
(9) [The subject—hearers and solitary realizers —] are to progress to and attain the exalted 
knower of all aspects at the end of all nirvanas, because that exalted knower of all aspects 
is the finality due to encompassing all the classes of Mahayana  abandonments and 
realizations . 
 Therefore, there are nine adherences to the objects to be turned away from as truly 
existent by way of objects: those  said to be objects to be turned away from, in not being 
objects to be upheld  in the continua of bodhisattvas , since the paths and results of hearers  
are together with flaws.  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -2. Extensive explanation of conceptions of apprehenders  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -2A. Conceptions of apprehenders of substantial existence  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -2B. Conceptions of apprehenders of imputed existence  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -2A. Conceptions of apprehenders of substantial existence  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -2A1. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -2A2. Root text  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -2A3. Commentary  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -2A1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
QUESTION: How are conceptualizations of apprehenders of the first type  belonging to  
ordinary beings bearing the support of substantially existent  beings o f nine types?  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
465  
EXPLANATION  
QUESTION: How are conceptualizations of the first type of apprehenders belonging 
to ordinary beings bearing the support of substantially existent beings of nine types?  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -2A2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
5.13 Upholds and discards,  
Attention, closely related  
To all three realms,  
Abiding, adhering,  
 5.14 Imputing things that are phenomena, 
Grasping, antidotes, and  
Impaired progress as desired:  
The first type of apprehenders is to be understood.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The first type of conceptualizations of apprehenders is to be understood as nine, because 
there are nine, adherence to that which upholds and discards posited as a person as a truly 
existent utilizer and so forth .  
 Sutra says, “Bhagavan, the perfection of wisdom does not uphold or relinquish any 
phenomenon... Subhuti, regarding this, the great bodhisattva has grasping, ‘Form,’ or ‘This is form,’…”  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -2A3. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. (1) Upholding and relinquishing, like an i llusion conventionally, (2) 
attention without paying attention  to the perfect, (3) closely related to the three realms 
together through  the nature, (4) abidance through not abiding in emptiness, (5) through not 
adhering to things, adherence to all, (6) all  phenomena are imputations  since they are devoid 
of substantial existence, (7) grasping that precedes non -adherence  through non- grasping that 
knows such ness, (8) through the mere antidote that cultivates equality, the antidote, and (9) 
through not knowing perfectly the perfection of wisdom, obstructed with respect to progress 
as desired: through adhering to the aforesaid as ultimate things, conceptualizations of the 
first type  with respect to apprehenders, the nine types, are asserted  to be objects to be 
abandoned by the occasions of the application of the path of seeing.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —through adhering to apprehenders belonging to ordinary beings as things  
that are ultimate utilizers , conceptualizations of the first type with respect to 
apprehende rs, the  nine types  included within acquired knowledge obscurations —are 
asserted to be objects to be abandoned by the occasions of the application that is the 
peak application of the path of seeing , because they are directly destroyed by it . 
 In terms of ab andoning the seeds, the names of the antidotes have been merely 
individually explained from the point of view of the objects of abandonment; in fact, the 
seeds of all the four conceptualizations of apprehendeds and apprehenders, the objects to be 
abandoned by the path of seeing, by that very uninterrupted path of the peak application of 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
466 the path of seeing are abandoned simultaneously. Know that the assertion that they are 
abandoned sequentially is damaged by many reasonings. 
 Although it has been explained that the first two types of conceptions of apprehendeds 
and conceptions of apprehenders are abandoned by paths that are preparations of the applications, since a little [degree] of those two are easily abandoned from the point of view 
of the manifest, they  have been posited in that way; it does not indicate that there are two 
stages of antidotes that abandon the seeds prior to the liberated path on the peak application of the path of seeing.  
 What are the nine?  
A. Degeneration from the causes of the exalted  knower of all aspects  
B. Degeneration from the result, the exalted knower of all aspects  
A. Degeneration from the causes of the exalted knower of all aspects  
A1. Adherence to behavior  
A2. Adherence to objects of knowledge 
A3. Adherence to objects of abandonment and antidotes  
A1. Adherence to behavior  
A1A. Adherence to objects to be adopted and objects to be discarded  
A1B. Motivation of that, attention to true existence   
A1C. Drawback of that  
A1A. Adherence to objects to be adopted and objects to be di scarded  
(1)The subject —adherence to the person ( upholding excellent qualities and relinquishing 
faults, who, although not exist ing ultimately, is  like an illusion conventionally ) as a truly 
existent utilizer that is included within acquired [objects of aba ndonment] —is an object of 
abandonment of the peak application of the path of seeing, because the seeds of it are 
directly destroyed by that.164 Apply the sign and the predicate similarly to the later ones. 
A1B. Motivation of that, attention to true existence   
(2) adherence to  attention to true existence  (without paying attention to the perfect  
meaning of the mode of abidance) as a truly existent utilizer165  
A1C. Drawback of that  
(3) adherence to that  (closely related to the three realms together through the na ture of 
generating afflictions by that attention to true existence) as a truly existent utilizer  
A2. Adherence to objects of knowledge 
A2A. Adherence to things as truly existent  
A2B. Adherence [to things] as being devoid of  true existence  
                                              
164 In full, this syllogism should read: the subject —through observing the apprehender that apprehends the 
person (upholding excellent qualities and relinquishing faults, who, although not existing ultimately, is like 
an illusion conventionally) as substantially existent, adherence to it as a truly existent utilizer that is included 
within acquired objects of abandonment —is an object of abandonment of the peak application of the path of 
seeing, because the seeds of  it are directly destroyed by that.  
165 In full, the syllogism should read: the subject —through observing the apprehender of the person (who 
pays attention to true existence without paying attention to the perfect meaning of the mode of abidance) as 
substant ially existent, a dherence to it as a truly existent utilizer that is included within acquired objects of 
abandonment —is an object of abandonment of the peak application of the path of seeing, because the seeds 
of it are directly destroyed by that.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
467 A2C. Adherence [ to things] as mere imputations  
A2A. Adherence to things as truly existent  
(4) abidance by having apprehended true existence (through not abiding in the realization 
of the  emptiness  of all phenomena)166  
A2B. Adherence [to things] as being devoid of  true exi stence  
(5) adherence to all as being devoid of  true existence  through not adhering to things  as 
truly existent   
A2C. Adherence [to things] as mere imputations  
(6) holding to the understanding (of all phenomena  as mere imputations  since they are 
devoid of  substantial existence ultimately) as a truly existent utilizer 
A3. Adherence to objects of abandonment and antidotes  
A3A. Adherence to discordant classes  
A3B. Adherence to antidotes  
A3A. Adherence to discordant classes  
(7) grasping  to the discordant classes that precedes non -adherence to anything through 
non-grasping that knows suchness that is the mode of abidance ,  
A3B. Adherence to antidotes  
(8) apprehending the antidote (to apprehending signs through the antidote that cultivates  
equality  of all phenomena) as a truly existent utilizer  
B. Degeneration from the result, the exalted knower of all aspects  
(9) The subject —adherence to the person (who is obstructed for a long time with respect 
to progress to omniscience as desired throug h not knowing perfectly the perfection of 
wisdom  that realizes the meaning of the mode of abidance) as a truly existent utilizer that is 
included within acquired objects of abandonment —  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -2B. Conceptions of apprehenders of imputed existence  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -2B1. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -2B2. Root text  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -2B3. Commentary  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -2B1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
QUESTION: How are conceptualizations of the second type with respect to apprehenders 
bearing the suppor t of imputedly existent  beings of nine types?  
 
                                              
166 In fu ll, the syllogism should read:  the subject —through observing the apprehender of the person (who 
abides by having apprehended true existence through not abiding in the realization of the emptiness of all 
phenomena) as substantially existent, adherence to it  as a truly existent utilizer that is included within 
acquired objects of abandonment —is an object of abandonment of the peak application of the path of seeing, 
because the seeds of it are directly destroyed by that.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
468 EXPLANATION  
QUESTION: How are conceptualizations of the second type with respect to 
apprehenders bearing the support of imputedly existent beings of nine types?  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -2B2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
5.15 Not definitely emerging as intended,  
Definitely apprehending a path as not being a path,  Production as well as cessation,  
Possession and non- possession of properties,  
 
5.16 Abiding, destroying the lineage,  
Seeking, lacking the cause, and  
Observing antagonists:  
These are the other conceptualizations that apprehend.  
 
EXPLANATION  
These are the nine other conceptualizations that apprehend  those—from not definitely 
emerging exactly to the objects of intent, until observing antagonists  such as maras —
imput ed as beings as truly existent utilizers, because there are nine through divisions by way 
of objects .  
 Sutra says, “Subhuti, it is like this. A wheel -turning king rides on a chariot drawn by four 
pairs of horses and travels evenly on the road… Subhuti, it  is like this. For example, a 
master of combat who wields the bow of proficiency and endowment is difficult to defeat 
by enemies and antagonists. Likewise, a great bodhisattva who practices the perfection of 
wisdom is difficult to defeat by maras or the go ds belonging to the class of maras…”  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -2B3. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. (1) Due to definite  emergence of the hearers and so forth, not 
definitely emerging exactly to the objects of intent, (2) since the path of one’s desire  does 
not exist, definitely apprehending the other path as not a path, (3) through the conventional 
entities of causes and results, producing and ceasing, (4) through appearing as being without 
obstacle and the other, possession and non -possession of all t hings, (5) through likeness 
with a bird that abides in the sky, abiding on forms and so forth, (6) by means of the 
generated mind of enlightenment and so forth, destroying the lineage of hearers and so 
forth, (7) since qualities superior to thusness do not  exist, without desire, (8) through 
dependence upon ultimate truth, lacking the  cause, and (9) through the nature of having 
immensely familiarized with miserliness, observing things that are antagonists such as the 
maras: conceptualizations of the second t ype that apprehend through adherence to the 
aforesaid imputed things, nine types, are asserted to be objects to be abandoned by  the 
occasions of engaging the mind and mental factors of the path of seeing.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —conceptualizations of the second type that apprehend through adherence 
to imputed things  as truly existent utilizers , nine types  included within acquired 
knowledge obscurations —are asserted to be objects to be abandoned by the occasions of 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
469 the uninterrupted path engaging the minds and mental factors of the  peak application of 
the path of seeing, because their seeds are directly destroyed by it.  
 What are the nine?  
A. Not attaining the results as desired    
B. Erroneous adherence  
C. Contradiction with the correct path  
A. Not attainin g the results as desired  
(1) Not attaining the results as desired refers to  not definitely emerging exactly to the 
three great objects of intent by way of the mere path of hearers , due to definite emergence  
to the mere enlightenment  of the hearers and so f orth.  
 The subject —adherence to the being (who is unable to definitely emerge to the desired 
results) as a truly existent utilizer that is included within acquired knowledge 
obscurations —is an object of abandonment of the peak application of the path of s eeing, 
because it is directly destroyed by that.167 Apply the sign and the predicate similarly to the 
ones below.  
B. Erroneous adherence  
B1. Erroneous adherence to the path     
B2. Erroneous adherence to objects of knowledge   
B1. Erroneous adherence to the p ath    
(2) adherence to the being (imputed to one  definitely apprehending the other path , the six 
perfections, as not a path, since the path of the desire of hearers themselves does not 
exist) as a truly existent utilizer  
B2. Erroneous adherence to objects of knowledge  
B2A. Apprehending affirmative and negative phenomena as truly existent  
B2B. Apprehending possessing and not possessing features as truly existent   
B2C. Apprehending the meaning of the mode of abidance as tru ly existent  
B2A. Apprehending affirmative and negative phenomena as truly existent  
(3) apprehending the being (who adheres to states as existing ultimately  through the 
conventional entities of producing results and ceasing causes ) as a truly existent utili zer 
B2B. Apprehending possessing and not possessing features as truly existent   
(4) [adherence to] the being (imputed to one  apprehending as truly existent the continuous 
possession and non- possession of all things  that are paths , through [their] appearing as 
being without the obstacle and the other , being with the obstacle that is the conception of 
true existence ,) [as a truly existent utilizer] 
B2C. Apprehending the meaning of the mode of abidance as truly existent  
(5) adherence to the being (im puted to one—abiding in the manner of adhering to forms 
and so forth, which do not abide ultimately —as truly existent , through likeness with a 
bird that abides in the sky,) as a truly existent utilizer 
                                              
167 In full, this syllogism should read: the subject —through observing the apprehender that apprehends the 
being (who is unable to definitely emerge to the desired results) as imputedly existent, adherence to it as a 
truly existent utilizer th at is included within acquired objects of abandonment —is an object of abandonment 
of the peak application of the path of seeing, because the seeds of it are directly destroyed by that.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
470 C. Contradiction with the correct path  
C1. Degeneratin g the lesser lineage 
C2. Incomplete conducive conditions  
C3. Seized by adverse conditions     
C1. Degenerating the lesser lineage 
(6) [adherence to] the being (imputed to one  destroying and degenerating the lineage of 
hearers and so forth,  by means of the generated mind of enlightenment and so forth,) 
[as a truly existent utilizer ]   
C2. Incomplete conducive conditions  
C2A. Not seeking the special result    
C2B. Lacking the cause of that, the perfection of wisdom   
C2A. Not seeking the special result    
(7) [adherence to] the being (imputed to one  without the desire  of seeking buddhahood , 
upon having realized the meaning of emptiness, having become satisfied with merely that, 
since qualities superior to thusness do not exist,) [as a truly existent utilizer] 
C2B. Lacking the cause of that, the perfection of wisdom  
(8) [adherence to] the being (imputed to one  lacking the cause, the cultivation of the 
perfection of wisdom, through dependence upon ultimate truth, ) [as a truly existent 
utilizer] 
C3. Seized by adverse conditions  
(9) The subject—adherence to one  (observing things that are antagonists that interfere 
with enlightenment, such as the maras, through the nature of having immensely 
familiarized with miserliness,) as a truly existent utilizer that is included w ithin acquired 
objects of abandonment — 
2B2C -2A2B -2B1C. Summary  
COMMENTARY 
In that way, through nine interceding stanzas, due to the four types, there are individually nine types of discordant classes of the path of seeing. One should understand also that  the 
four types of antidotes to abandon those are similarly different by way of divisions.  
 
EXPLANATION  
In that way, through nine interceding stanzas, due to the four types of conceptions , 
there are individually nine types of discordant classes of the  peak  application of the  path 
of seeing. One should understand also that the four types of antidotes to abandon those 
objects of abandonment  are similarly different by way of divisions .  
 With respect to the conceptualizations that are objects of abandonment, the presentation 
of the four possibilities by means of objects is as follows. (1) That which is a conception of 
apprehendeds but not a conception of apprehenders is: adherence to forms and so forth as 
truly existent objects of utilization. 
(2) That which is  a conception of apprehenders but not a conception of apprehendeds is: 
adherence to a single instant of consciousness as a truly existent utilizer. It is not an 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
471 apprehended object [because] it has been posited that it cannot be realized by a direct 
perceiv er of an ordinary being.168 
(3) The possibility that is both a conception of apprehendeds  and a conception of 
apprehende rs is as follows. With respect to  consciousness that possesses continuity , 
adherence to it as an object of utilization is a conception of apprehendeds, while adherence 
to it as a utilizer is a conception of apprehende rs.169 
(4) That which is neither is: the non -dual perfection of wisdom. 
2B2C -2A2B -2B2. The antidotes to those  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2A. The causes of the peak application of the path of seeing  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B. The result of the peak application of the path of seeing, great enlightenment  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2C. The self -entity of the peak application of the path of seeing  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2A. The causes of the peak application of the path of seeing  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2A -1. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2A -2. Root text  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2A -3. Commentary  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2A -1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
In that way, having shown the discordant classes as well as antidotes with respect to the path of seeing, those whic h are causes asserted as together with the causes, the path of 
seeing that acts to accomplish great enlightenment, one interceding stanza:  
 
EXPLANATION  
In that way, having shown the discordant classes as well as  antidotes with respect to 
the peak applicati on of the  path of seeing, due to being  together with the causes  of the 
peak application of the path of seeing that acts to accomplish final great enlightenment, 
those which are causes that act to generate great enlightenment , one interceding stanza:  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2A -2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
5.17 With respect to enlightenment, teaching others,  
Thoroughly bestowing the causes of that, and  
The uninterrupted cause for attaining that, 
The characteristics of immense merit.  
 
EXPLANATIO N 
In order to generate the peak  application of the path of seeing, the cause that generates final 
great enlightenment, one transforms it from the possession of the two causal accumulations: 
(i) for the sake of placing  other  Mahayana lineage -bearers in enlightenment , teaching  the 
method for that , (ii) thoroughly bestowing the words and meanings of the perfection of 
wisdom, the causes of that enlightenment , and (iii) the possession of the uninterrupted 
cause for attaining that  peak application of the path of seeing , the characteristics of 
                                              
168 The reason seems faulty. The fact that it cannot be realized by a direct perceiver of an ordinary being does 
not mean that it is not an apprehended object.  
169 When positing an example that is both a conception of an apprehended and a conception of an 
apprehender in (3), it is quizzical that two different conceptions are posited.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
472 immense merit, cultivating the perfection of wisdom during meditative equipoise by 
oneself and so forth . 
 The causes of the final great enlightenment are indicated. However, this is only to be 
definitely applied to indicating the causes of the temporal gre at enlightenment, the peak 
application of the path of seeing.  
 Respectively, sutra says:  
“Ananda, these 6,000 bhiksus will attain clear complete  buddhahood in unsurpassable 
complete enlightenment in the star- like eon.”  
“Ananda, therefore I bestow upon you  this profound perfection of wisdom.”   
“Ananda, therefore, if a person of the hearer vehicle teaches Dharma possessing the 
perfection of wisdom to a great bodhisattva one day, when small, his merits will increase 
greatly.”  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2A -3. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. Placing others in enlightenment, which bears characteristics that will 
be explained, through teaching the path of seeing and so forth, is one. By means of perfect 
words, meanings, and so forth, as the sole causes of enli ghtenments, bestowing the 
perfection of wisdom perfectly and individually to those, is the second. The uninterrupted cause that acts to attain enlightenment, the characteristics of much more merit of cultivation 
of the perfection of wisdom by oneself and s o forth, is the third. 
 
EXPLANATION  
A. Placing in enlightenment   
B. Placing in the causes of that  
C. Cultivating one’s uninterrupted cause  
A. Placing in enlightenment   
The subject —placing other  trainees  in enlightenment, which bears characteristics that 
will be explained  below , through teaching the path of seeing and so forth,  by a 
bodhisattva on the path of preparation —is one cause of the peak application of the path of 
seeing, because it is included within the accumulation of merit that observes the final  great 
enlightenment, a cause for generating it .   
B. Placing in the causes of that  
By means of perfect words, meanings, and so forth  that teach the mode of abidance, as 
the sole causes of temporal and final enlightenments, bestowing the perfection of wisd om perfectly and individually to those trainees by a bodhisattva on the path of 
preparation, is the second  cause that generates the peak application of the path of seeing, 
because it is included within the accumulation of merit, a cause for generating it, [and]  it 
places others in the causes of it .  
C. Cultivating one’s uninterrupted cause  
The subject —the exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise of the path of preparation 
possessing  the characteristics of much more merit of cultivation of the perfection of 
wisdom during meditative equipoise by oneself, teaching it to others during subsequent 
attainment, and so forth, the uninterrupted cause that acts to attain the enlightenment  
included within the peak application of the path of seeing —is the third  cause of the peak 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
473 application of the path of seeing, because it is other than the two previous [causes and] it is 
the substantial cause of that . 
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B. The result of the peak application of the path of seeing, great enlightenment  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -1. Identification of great enlightenment in our system  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2. For those who assert that things are truly existent, the incorrectness of that  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -3. Indicating that those desiring to attain final great enlightenment need  to assert that all 
phenomena are empty of true existence  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -1. Identification of great enlightenment in our system  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -1A. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -1B. Root text  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -1C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -1A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
QUESTION: What is that great enlightenment for the aim of which the path of seeing is asserted to be together with such causes?  
RESPONSE: Through an interceding stanza, the great enlightenment:  
 
EXPLANATION  
QUESTION: What is that grea t enlightenment for the aim of which , the result, the path 
of seeing is asserted to be generated by being together with such causes  of it? 
RESPONSE: Through an interceding stanza, the great enlightenment:   
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -1B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
5.18 The e xalted wisdom of the extinction and  
Non-production of stains is described as “enlightenment.”  
Because they are devoid of extinction and are devoid of production,  
Those are to be known respectively.  
 
EXPLANATION  
There is a reason for indicating in sutra that “Obscurations are devoid of extinction 
ultimately and are devoid of  production ultimately,” because they  are established in 
dependence on a correct sign to be devoid of  extinction and be devoid of production 
ultimately. Those final exalted wisdoms directly knowing that they are devoid of extinction 
and production  ultimately are to be known respectively  as the great enlightenments 
knowing extinction and non -production, because the final exalted wisdom directly 
knowing the ultimate  extinction and non -production of stains is described  in sutra  as the 
“great enlightenment”  and is suitable in that way . 
  Sutra says, “Ananda, those who assert the extinction of the perfection of wisdom just 
assert the extinction of space,” and “Do those phenomena have p roduction? If they do not 
exist, how can they have extinction?”  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -1C. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. The stains that are afflictive and knowledge obscurations that have been produced and that have not been produced, imputed, since “Not belonging to 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
474 dharmadhatu, in this way phenomena do not exist” occurs, the entitinesses of dharm adhatu, 
like space, because they are devoid of  cessation and production; or as there do not exist 
feasible  things by way of the entitinesses of one and many, and the signs of causes and 
results and so forth, like a lotus in the sky, because of being devoid  of cessation and 
production. Respectively, the knowledge of the extinction and non -production of stains, the 
characteristic of realizing all phenomena non -erroneously, the nature of exactly the truth 
body and so forth, is described as being the great enli ghtenment. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the stains that are afflictive and knowledge obscurations that have been  
produced  and are past now, and that have not been produced  and are future, imputed as 
truly existent by the Propounders of Things —are devoid of  true existence , because of being 
devoid of  cessation and production ultimately . There is pervasion, because of the 
entitinesses of dharmadhatu, the emptiness of true existence, like space, of all 
phenomena, which are empty of true existence, since , also in th at way  “Not belonging to 
dharmadhatu, in this way phenomena do not exist” occurs  in [Maitreya’s] 
Differentiation  of the Middle and the Extremes  (Madhyantavibhaga). Mentioning “ or” has 
the significance of either sign being established.  
 The subject —the obscurations —are devoid of  true existence, because they are free from  
the entitinesses of truly existent one and many.  The subject —those —are devoid of  
production ultimately, because they are not produced ultimately : (i) from a cause that is self, 
other, or bot h, or (ii) causelessly. [This is] because with respect to the above predicate and 
subject, ultimately existent results are not produced [and] also those that are non -things are 
not produced ultimately , like a lotus in the sky. The stains are devoid of extinction and 
production  ultimately, because they are devoid of  cessation and production  ultimately . 
That follows, as there do not exist feasible things ultimately  by way of the signs and so 
forth  that have been explained.  
 The subject —the exalted knower of all aspects, the characteristic of realizing the mode 
of abidance of all phenomena non- erroneously, the nature of exactly the three exalted 
bodies, the truth body and so forth—is described as being the great enlightenment,  
because it is the final exalt ed wisdom  respectively knowing the ultimate  extinction and 
non-production of stains . 
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2. For those who assert that things are truly existent, the incorrectness of that  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2A. Refuting through contradiction with reasoning  
2B2C -2A2B-2B2B -2B. Refuting through contradiction with that asserted  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2A. Refuting through contradiction with reasoning  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2A1. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2A2. Root text  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2A3. Commentary  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2A1. Making a  connection  
COMMENTARY 
Because of what? Because of being like that. Regarding those, a knower which considers 
“extinction ” with regard to extinction by thinking of the destruction of things and a knower 
which considers “ non-production ” with regard to non -production by thinking of non-
production of things, expressed [by] those as being the knower of extinction and non -
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
475 production,  and also enlightenment expressed as being the knower of extinction and non -
production, since extinction and non -production only  do not exist, that knower is not 
suitable. The aforesaid has been taught through an interceding stanza:  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —regarding those, (i) a knower which considers “ extinction ” with regard to 
extinction by thinking of the destruction of previously  existing  things that are truly 
existent stains  and (ii) a knower which considers “non-production ” with regard to non -
production by thinking of non- production due to severing the continuation of production 
of truly existent things  that are stains , expresse d [by] those  Propounders of Things as 
being the knower of extinction and non- production, and also the enlightenment of our 
system expressed as being such a final knower of extinction and non -production —such 
a knower is not suitable  as great enlightenment , since extinction and non -production 
only do not exist  ultimately . Because of what? Because of stains being  established as 
empty of true existence like that. In order to refute the great enlightenment imputed by 
others, the aforesaid has been taught through an interceding stanza:  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2A2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
5.19 With respect to the nature that is without cessation,  
By the path called “seeing”  
What type of conceptualization is extinguished?  What aspect of non -production is attained?  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —by the Mahayana path called “seeing” —what previously existing  truly 
existent type of conceptualization  that is a knowledge obscuration  is extinguished, and 
what true cessation that is the aspect of non -production  that is a severance of the 
continuation of production of a truly existent [type of conceptualization that is a knowledge 
obscuration]  is attained?  It follows that [kind of true cessation] it is not attained, because it 
[i.e. the Mahayana path of seeing] is  of the nature that is without a cessation  in which 
previously existing  truly existent stains are newly stopped. That follows, because truly 
existent stains have never existed previously. You accepted the former consequence. 
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2A3. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text i s said. If the extinction and the cessation with the characteristic of acting to 
hinder production respectively of the produced and the not -yet-produced are free, the nature 
of the entity of thusness ultimately, by the strength of the path of seeing [imputed] by you 
wrongly adhering to things: regarding the produced entities, conceptualizations and so forth, what are extinguished? Regarding the not -yet-produced bearing the property of non -
production, what is produced? As they are only not even slightl y existent, because of that, it 
has been thought  that only the scriptural system of us is to be asserted.   
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —by the strength of the path of seeing [imputed] by you , the Propounders of 
Things, who wrongly adhere to the mode of abidan ce of things —regarding the 
previously existing  truly existent produced entities, conceptualizations that are knowledge 
obscurations and so forth, what are extinguished? Regarding the not -yet-produced 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
476 liberated path  bearing the property of non -production  that is a severance of the 
continuation of production , what is produced?  It follows that such extinction and 
production are incorrect, because the extinction by antidotes and the  cessation with the 
characteristic of acting to hinder production respectively o f the produced and the not -
yet-produced stains are free from  ultimate existence. That follows, because it  is the nature 
of the entity of thusness , all phenomena’s emptiness of true existence , ultimately. Because 
of that, it has been thought that only the s criptural system of us , the Middle -Wayers, is 
to be asserted, as ultimately existent extinction and production are only not even slightly 
existent. 
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B. Refuting through contradiction with that asserted  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B1. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B2. Root text  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B3. Commentary  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
If it is asserted  that they are  not empty of true existence like that, that is, phenomena 
exist perfectly, then , according to that asserted, the assertion that the Bhagavan has 
abandoned the conceptualizations that are afflictive and knowledge obscurations in all 
ways, in the manner of having abandoned the seeds, is a state that is greatly amazing , 
since a contradiction has been asserted . The a foresaid has been taught through an 
interceding stanza:   
 
EXPLANATION  
If it is asserted that they are not empty of true existence like that, that is, phenomena exist 
perfectly, then, according to that asserted, the assertion that the Bhagavan has abandone d 
the conceptualizations that are afflictive and knowledge obscurations in all ways, in the 
manner of having abandoned the seeds, is a state that is greatly amazing, since a 
contradiction has been asserted. The aforesaid has been taught through an interced ing 
stanza:   
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
5.20 Any statement that the Teacher  Has extinguished the obscurations also with respect to objects of 
knowledge,  
Even though phenomena of others exist,  
I deem that as amazing! 
 
EXPLANATION  
I, Maitreya, deem that— any statement that the Teacher has extinguished the 
obscurations of confusion also with respect to objects of knowledge , even though outer 
and inner  phenomena ultimately exist in the system of others , the Propounders of 
Things —as amazing , because if things were to exist ultimately, it would be unsuitable for 
obscurations to be abandoned!  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B3. Commentary  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B3A. Presentation of the generality 
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B3B. Meaning of the words  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
477 2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B3A. Presen tation of the generality  
It is incorrect to link the first two of these yogic grounds to only those of the hearers schools 
and the Proponents of Mind- Only, because the uncommon meanings imputed by them are to 
be refuted in this context. 
 Further, someone, having taken the yogic grounds to be four, explained that the second 
accords with the view of solitary realizers, and the third accords with the view of Mind -
Only. This is also incorrect, (i) because the views of solitary realizers and Mind -Only do not 
differ in being higher or lower, (ii) because , although it is propounded that “Since solitary 
realizers assert that apprehenders are truly existent, whereas the Proponents of Mind -Only  
assert consciousnesses (in which apprehendeds and apprehenders are non -dual) exist 
ultimately, [their views] are different,” that is merely agreeable only in the absence of 
having undertaken investigation, and (iii) because the view based upon a sign of definite 
concurrent observation by the second yogic ground has been indicate d, and there is no 
Proponent of Mind- Only who has asserted a way to determine a view that is higher than 
that.  
 The assertion of the “four yogic grounds” is also something to be reflected upon, 
[because] the stages of a person —who, having refuted that blu e is a different substance 
from the consciousness to which blue appears, does not refute that (apprehendeds and 
apprehenders are different substances in which) the consciousness to which blue appears is 
a different substance from blue —are incorrect.  
 OPINI ON: Even though it has been refuted on the second yogic ground that blue is an 
external object, an apprehended being merely another substance relative to an inner consciousness has not been refuted. Therefore, the emptiness of apprehendeds and 
apprehenders  being mere different substances is indicated by the third yogic ground.  
RESPONSE: That is also very incorrect, (i) because, like it has been said in [Dharmakirti's] 
Commentary on [Dignaga's] “Compendium of Valid Cognition”  (Pramanavarttikakarika ) 
that “Th e argument is similar for that,” apprehendeds and apprehenders being different 
substances relative to an inner consciousness has also been refuted in dependence on that very previous reasoning, and the levels of higher or lower tenets with respect to that have 
not been taught by any of the great trailblazers, and (ii) because it follows that the 
Proponents of Mind- Only  have not refuted apprehendeds and apprehenders being mere 
different substances [from the point of view of] a sense consciousness in dependen ce on a 
sign of definite concurrent observation; a sign of definite concurrent observation that 
accords with the Proponents of Mind- Only  has been indicated by the second yogi c ground, 
but, according to you, it is necessary to refute apprehendeds and appreh enders being mere 
different substances in dependence on the third yogi c ground above that [second yogic  
ground].  
 With respect to the determining of the view of the Proponents of Mind- Only , it is realized 
without exception in dependence on a sign of the definite concurrent observation; that which accords with it is just what has been indicated as the second yogic ground. Since 
there is no other view above that besides the view of the Middle -Wayers, the “four yogic 
grounds” are only something to be reflect ed about.  
 In this Ornament for Clear Realization , only three levels of vehicles from the point of 
view of views have been indicated: (1) the small, the common realization of selflessness of 
persons ; (2) the middling, the realization of apprehendeds and ap prehenders being empty of 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
 
478 different substances ; and (3) the great, the realization of consciousnesses as not being truly 
existent. 
  QUALM: They seem to have been indicated sequentially in this chapter. Why is this the case?  
RESPONSE: This is to be analyzed. These explanations on the yogic grounds here indicate 
the stages of meditation on the essential meaning in the way it has been taught in the 
Ornament for Clear Realization . Further, one initially meditates on the  common [realization 
of] selflessness of persons. Having been preceded by that, after that one pays attention to apprehendeds and apprehenders being empty of different substances, in which there is an absence of external objects, the mode of Cognition -Only  conventionally. Since the Acarya 
made a presentation of the absence of external objects concordant with that of the Yogic Practitioners (Yogacara ) conventionally, the sign of definite concurrent observation has 
been mentioned here; the occasion for determ ining the uncommon tenets of Mind -Only has 
not arrived , and they are not asserted [here] since it would be inappropriate.  
 With respect to that, the indication according to two levels is as follows. In terms of 
realizing subtle emptiness, when one directly realizes the emptiness of true existence during meditative equipoise, during subsequent attainment one realizes that dependent -arisings are 
illusions through the force of experience. Like that, when one directly realizes the emptiness of apprehendeds and apprehenders being different substances during meditative equipoise, 
during subsequent attainment one turns away the apprehension of sense consciousness es to 
which blue appears and so forth as unmistaken other- powered natures, and realizes that they 
are m istaken other- powered natures through the force of experience. Therefore, the stages of 
the modes of realization of meditative equipoise and subsequent attainment have been merely indicated; the assertion that the sequence of higher and lower views has bee n 
indicated is only inappropriate since it cannot withstand analysis. I shall explain the remaining points from time to time.  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B3B. Meaning of the words  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B3B -1. Stages of meditation on the essential meaning  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B3B- 2. Explaining the mere meaning of the words of the root text  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B3B -1. Stages of meditation on the essential meaning  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B3B -1A. Yogic ground that realizes the selflessness of persons 
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B3B -1B. Yogic ground that realizes apprehendeds and apprehenders are empty of being 
different substances  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B3B -1C. Yogic ground that realizes all phenomena are empty of true existence  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B3B -1A. Yogic ground that realizes the selflessness of persons 
COMMENT ARY  
So the root text is said. With regard to that, because of being empty of production and 
disintegration, through having meditated, thinking, “A self does not exist,” the adherence to 
a self has been completely cast away, one perfectly observes dependen t-arisings, aggregates 
and so forth devoid of that, the bearers of the properties of production and disintegration.   
EXPLANATION 
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B3B -1A1. Reasoning of the wisdom arisen from contemplation  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B3B -1A2. Yoga of the wisdom arisen from meditation    
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B3B -1A3. The result of meditation     
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
 
479 1. Reasoning of the wisdom arisen from contemplation  
The subject —with regard to that,  the appropriated aggregates —are empty of a person who 
is not merely imputed upon the collection or the continuity, since they are produced and 
disintegrate. There is pervasion,  because whatever is a self of persons is empty of 
production and disintegration.  
2. Yoga of the wisdom arisen from meditation    
In that way, in dependence on calm abiding, [one meditates] during meditative equipoise, 
thinking, “A self of persons does not exist.”  
3. The result of meditation   
Through having meditated in that way, the manifest acquired  adherence to a self of 
persons has been abandoned and also the manifest innate [adherence to a self of persons] 
has been suppressed . Having completely cast that away, because aggregates and so forth 
devoid of that  self are dependent -arisings,  one perfectly observes the bearers of the 
properties of production and disintegration during subsequent attainment . 
 One acts to abandon the adherence to the continuity as substantially existent. Meditation 
on this through a union of calm abiding and special insight exists from the path of preparation until the path of seeing. However, the meditation in dependence on mere calm 
abiding exists even on the path of accumulation. The purpose is, having destroyed the glory of the afflictions on the occasions of the paths of accumulation and preparation, fo r the sake 
of suppressing the classes of sufferings of cyclic existence. 
 Further, if one has not abandoned the cyclic existence that is a result of karma and 
afflictions, let alone accomplishing others’ welfare, one will not [be able to] accomplish 
even one’s welfare. Hence it has been taught that bodhisattvas have despondency with respect to cyclic existence that is a hundred thousand times stronger than that of hearers. This is the stage of meditating on that very knower of bases that has been explained as the subject matter of the third chapter above. There is a purpose for cultivating the yogic ground that observes selflessness, because it is for the sake of (i) suppressing the manifest 
afflictions and (ii) passing through the grounds of hearers having viewed them by knowing 
and seeing. 
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B3B -1B. Yogic ground that realizes apprehendeds and apprehenders are empty of being 
different substances  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B3B -1B1. The stages of meditation during meditative equipoise in dependence on the 
reasoning of the wisdom arisen from contemplation 
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B3B -1B2. The stages of attention during subsequent attainment  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B3B -1B1. The stages of meditation during meditative equipoise in dependence on the 
reasoning of the wisdom arisen from contemplation  
COMMENTARY  
Because of definite concurrent observation of blue and the awareness of it, to pay attention, thinking, “This is only mere mind; there is no external object”, and through not having completely cast away adherence to the mind bearing the aspect of an apprehender, one has abandoned adherence to external objects.  
 
EXPLANATION 
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B3B -1B1A. Reasoning of the wisdom arisen from contemplation  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B3B -1B1B. Yoga of the wisdom arisen from meditation  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
 
480 2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B3B -1B1C. The result of meditation   
 
A. Reasoning of the wisdom arisen from contemplation 
The subject —blue —it and the awareness of it, that is, [the awareness] to which  it appears, 
are not different substances, because of definite concurrent observation. An awareness 
that is based upon the aforesaid sign is a reasoning  of the wisdom arisen from 
contemplation. 
 
B. Yoga of the wisdom arisen from meditation  
During meditative equipoise, one  pays attention, thinking, “This blue is the nature of only 
mere mind; there is no external object,” and meditates on that.  
   
C. The result of meditation   
Even though one has not observed subtle emptiness  through not having completely cast 
away adherence to the mind bearing the aspect of an apprehender  as truly existent , one 
has abandoned adherence to external objects; one understands dualistic appearances are mistaken . 
 
Since the Acarya made a presentation of conventionalities concordant with that of the Yogic 
Practitioners (Yogacara ), he asserted that apprehendeds  and apprehenders are empty of 
being different substances even conventionally and a knower of emptiness of duality is established as a mere conventionality. The [assertion of the] mere non -existence of external 
objects even conventionally is common to the Proponents of Mind- Only; the true existence 
of a knower of non -duality should not be asserted in any way in this context.  
 There is a purpose for meditating on apprehendeds and apprehenders being empty of 
different substances, because it is for the sake of (i) abandoning the adherence to 
apprehendeds and apprehenders being different objects and (ii) passing through the grounds of solitary realizers having viewed them by knowing and seeing. This is the stage of meditating on the points that have been indicated in the second chapter and on the occasion of the aspects of the knower of bases. Further, it is meditated on the Mahayana path of accumulation until the path of seeing.  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B3B -1B2. The stages of attention during subsequent attainment  
COMMENTARY  
By definitely thinking, “If apprehendeds do not exist, apprehenders do not exist,” having eliminated  even that mere cognition, the characteristics of the aspect of apprehender, [and] 
having ascertained that “Solely this exalted wisdom of non -duality is a correctly  existing 
entity.”  
 
EXPLANATION 
By definitely thinking  during the occasion of subsequent attainment , “If apprehendeds do 
not exist  as another substance , unmistaken apprehenders to which apprehendeds  and 
apprehenders appear to be of different substances  do not exist,” having eliminated even 
that mere apprehension of the characteristics of the aspect of apprehender as unmistaken cognition, [and] having ascertained that “Solely this  exalted wisdom of non-
duality of the apprehendeds and apprehenders is a correctly  existing entity,” one pays 
attention to that . 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
 
481  This is the meaning of not having abandoned the conception of true existence with 
respect to  a knower of non -duality with respect to the imprint of that realization; it is 
inappropriate [to interpret it as] (i) adherence to true existence that is induced by its own 
force and (ii) establishment as truly existent as the meaning of the formulated tenets. (a) Understanding that apprehenders  to which appr ehendeds and apprehenders appear to be of 
different substances are mistaken and (b) counteracting the apprehension that they are 
unmistaken as explained above indicate the occasion of subsequent attainment.  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B3B -1C. Yogic ground that realize s all phenomena are empty of true existence  
COMMENTARY 
Furthermore, that, because it is a dependent -arising, like an illusion, is devoid of  entitiness. 
Through having meditated, thinking, “Perfectly and solely, [phenomena are] free from the 
imputed entities as the thing, the absence  of the thing, and so forth,” when the strength of 
meditation is accomplished, like the knowing of gems, silver, and so forth in someone, all signs that mistake have  been abandoned. If the non -conceptualizing awareness to which the 
nature of being like an illusion  appears  is perfectly produced like whatever that is to be 
cognized by the individual itself, the yogi perfectly abandons the knowledge obscurations.  
EXPLANATION 
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B3B -1C1. Reasoning of the wisdom arisen from contemplation  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B3B -1C2. Yoga of the wisdom arisen from meditation    
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B3B -1C3. The result of meditation   
1. Reasoning of the wisdom arisen from contemplation  
The subject —furthermore, that knower of non -duality —is devoid of  entitiness ultimately , 
because it is a dependent -arising, for example, like an illusion, since, by way of the 
reasoning, “When the true existence of things has been negated, since the object of negation does not exist, it is clear that the negation does not exist perfectly,” that the negation is truly existent is also refuted. 
2. Yoga of the wisdom arisen from meditation  
Through having meditated, thinking, “Perfectly and solely, [phenomena are] free from 
the imputed entities as the thing  that is true exis tence , the truly existent  absence  of the 
thing (that is true existence) in which that has been negated , and so forth,” one abandons 
the adherence to true existence. 
3. The result of meditation  
Through having meditated on the emptiness of all phenomena,  when the strength of 
meditation is accomplished, [that is,] the clear appearance with respect to dharmata is fully 
completed, the yogi perfectly abandons the afflictive obscurations and the knowledge 
obscurations. The reason is because, at that time, all sign s that  mistake  the aggregates as  
truly existent, the seeds of the acquired knowledge obscurations, have been abandoned, 
[and] the non- conceptualizing awareness (of meditative equipoise to which the awareness 
itself, although appearing, is empty of true exi stence, appears as the nature of being like 
an illusion)  is perfectly produced like whatever that is to be cognized by the  individual 
meditative equipoise itself, for example, like the knowing of the forms of crystal gems, 
silver, and so forth  individually  without mixing them up  in someone  who is an expert.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
482  An “awareness to which the nature of being like an illusion  appears” [in the commentary 
above] i s illusion -like meditative equipoise, because that has been taught on many occasions 
in [Haribhadra’s] Great Commentary . Regarding the assertion that dependent -arisings 
appear as illusions in the perspective of a learner arya’s meditative equipoise that di rectly 
comprehends ultimate truths, since it lacks even the mere scent of the Middle -Wayers, know 
that as erroneous propounding while not having realized the Acarya’s intention. The 
assertion by someone in the past that that the Acarya established illusion s through reasoning 
is also just a deprecation of the Great Middle -Wayer.  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B3B -2. Explaining the mere meaning of the words of the root text  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B3B -2A. Demonstration of damage to ultimately existent obscurations  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B3B-2B. The contradiction between accepting that and accepting the assertion that the 
seeds of knowledge obs curations can be abandoned  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B3B -2A. Demonstration of damage to ultimately existent obscurations  
COMMENTARY 
It is not like that, becau se in the way  space, the entity of the mere absence  of substance, is 
apprehended at all times, a self -entity in which there is no generation and there is no 
abandonment is apprehended. If the entities of mere dharma knowledge that are the instants 
and the characteristics of the objects of knowledge exist ultimately, then at that time, by 
meditation on the antidotes —like  space —they do not act even slightly on those. 
 
EXPLANATION  
It follows that a self- entity in which there is no new generation of antidotes t hat act to 
abandon the afflictive obscurations and knowledge obscurations and there is no abandonment  of obscurations is  apprehended, because  the obscurations are  not empty of 
true existence like that, that is, they exist ultimately, in the way,  for example, 
uncompounded space, the entity of the mere absence  of obstructive substance, is 
apprehended at all times. If you accept that, then  it follows that at that time , when  the 
objects of abandonment and the antidotes exist ultimately, by meditation on the 
antidotes —like  one is not able to produce benefit or damage to  space —the antidotes  do 
not act even slightly  to damage those  objects of abandonment, because the entities of 
mere dharma knowledge that are the instants and the obscurations to the 
characteristics of the objects of knowledge exist ultimately.  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -2B3B -2B. The contradiction between accepting that and accepting the assertion that the 
seeds of knowledge obs curations can be abandoned  
COMMENTARY  
Because of that, since others do not  turn away the errors of adherence to things, one —who 
[accepts] that knowledge obscurations have been abandoned in all ways by the Bhagavan 
and who accepts also that phenomena exist —by accepting mutually contradictory meanings, 
I deem as amazing!  
 
EXPLANA TION  
One—who [accepts] that knowledge obscurations have been abandoned in all ways by 
the Bhagavan and who accepts also that phenomena that are objects of abandonment and 
antidotes exist ultimately —is pervaded by accepting mutually contradictory meanings , 
since others, the Propounders of Things, (a) have accepted that knowledge obscurations 
have been abandoned by the Bhagavan, and (b) have accepted that objects of abandonment 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
483 and antidotes exist ultimately, and do not turn away the errors of adherence to ul timately 
existent things  if they exist ultimately. Because of that established above in that way , I, 
Maitreya, deem that as amazing!  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -3. Indicating that those desiring to attain final great enlightenment need to accept that all 
phenomena are  empty of true existence  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -3A. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -3B. Root text  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -3C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -3A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
“Having eliminated the position of existence in that way, by firmly taking the position of 
absence  of entitiness, those desiring liberation should accept only this.” Through a n 
interceding  stanza about the aforesaid, the position of abidance:  
 
EXPLANATION  
“Having eliminated the position of ultimately existent obscurations  in that way, by 
firmly taking the position of absence of entitiness  ultimately , those desiring liberation 
should accept  only this  emptiness of true existence of all phenomena .” Through a stanza 
of interlude about the aforesaid, the position of abidance: 
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -3B. Root text  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -3B1. The mode of abidance of things that are the bases  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -3B2. The view that realizes it  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -3B3. Result of familiarizati on with the view  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -3B1. The mode of abidance of things that are the bases  
ROOT TEXT  
5.21a  With respect to those, there is no object to be eliminated,  
 
EXPLANATION  
With respect to those constituents that are pure by nature , there is no previ ously existent 
object— ultimately existent (i) objects of adherence of the conceptions of self of persons 
and of phenomena and (ii) afflictions —to be newly eliminated, because ultimately existent 
objects of adherence of the two conceptions of self and affli ctions have never existed from 
the beginning.  
 Through this, (i) the superimpositions that adhere to any phenomenon as truly existent 
and have deviated from the meaning of the mode of abidance, and (ii) their objects of 
adherence, have been indicated to no t be established from the beginning. Although the 
conception of afflictions as ultimately existent is a conception of self of phenomena, explaining that itself separately is with purpose.  
 
ROOT TEXT  
5.21b There is no object to be posited slightly.  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
484 EXPLA NATION  
With respect to these  constituents, there is no previously non -existent object—the two 
selflessnesses —to be newly posited even slightly, because they are the natures of being 
devoid of a self of persons and of phenomena .   
 Through this, the refutat ions of (i) the deprecations that wrongly engage the meaning of 
the mode of abidance, saying, “the two selflessnesses do not exist,” and (ii) their objects of 
adherence, have been indicated to not be newly posited. 
 Explaining in general that there is no stain to be eliminated and there is no antidote to be 
generated —without affixing qualifications to the objects of negation —is a deprecation.  
 Furthermore, that very explanation by way of the first two lines [5.21ab] is correlated to 
the meaning established : if it is established that there is no previously existent affliction that 
is truly existent to be newly [eliminated], then it is established that there is no previously 
non-existent affliction that is empty of true existence to be newly posited. 
 That is  an explanation in terms of the explicitly indicated self- isolates; if the emptiness of 
true existence, ultimate truth, is established (since, with respect to these —the person and the 
aggregates —there is no previous existent that is truly existent to be ne wly eliminated,) then, 
(since it is established that there is no previously non -existent illusion -like falsity that is 
empty of true existence to be newly posited even slightly,) with respect to objects that are 
empty of being established by nature ultimat ely, conventional truths —in which all actions 
and agents are feasible —are established. 
 In summary, the union of the two truths —that is permitted due to our system’s 
acceptance of (i) ultimate truth, the emptiness of true existence in which the focal objec t of 
the conception of true existence does not exist even slightly, and (ii) all presentations of 
objects and agents —has been indicated. 
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -3B2. The view that realizes it  
ROOT TEXT  
5.21c  It correctly views the perfect.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The wisdom realizing the absence  of nature ultimately, which correctly views  
the perfect—the emptiness of the person and the aggregates being established by nature 
ultimately —in that way, is  the view that understands the meaning of the mode of abidance .   
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B-3B3. Result of familiarization with the view  
ROOT TEXT  
5.21d Having seen the perfect, freedom . 
 
EXPLANATION  
If, having directly seen the perfect meaning, (conjoined with the extensive factor of 
method, the class of deeds,) one familiarizes with it aga in and again , freedom , the state of a 
perfect complete buddha, will be attained . 
2B2C -2A2B -2B2B -3C. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. Because of what? Because to be liberated while  adhering  to things is 
incorrect. Any phenomenon, without having been  eliminated or posited by the entities of 
deprecation and superimposition, regarding dependent -arisings, forms and so forth, these 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
485 very entities that exist perfectly conventionally, should be inve stigated as entities being 
devoid of  nature and so forth. In that way, since one turns away errors, like an illusory 
elephant defeating another illusory elephant, when one sees suchness  one will be completely 
liberated. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —dependent- arisings, forms and so forth, these entitiness es that exist 
perfectly , that is, by way of their own character, conventionally —should be investigated 
and meditated upon as entities being devoid of  nature ultimately and so forth by those 
desiring to attain om niscience; because of what? Because to be liberated  while  not having 
abandoned adher ing to things as existing ultimately is incorrect. They should view the 
mode of abidance of conventionalities that are the bases in the manner of a union of the two 
truths, because any phenomenon should be known as not existing ultimately and as 
existing conventionally , without having been (i) eliminated by the entity of deprecation , 
saying “It does not exist even conventionally ,” or (ii) posited by the entity of 
superimposition , saying “It exists ultimately .” When, through having familiarized with it 
in that way,  one sees suchness with direct cognition, one will be completely liberated, 
since , if one familiarizes with it in that way, one turns away errors , falsities that are  
objects of abandonment, by way of falsities that are antidotes , like an illusory elephant 
defeating another illusory elephant.  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2C. The self -entity of the peak application of the path of seeing  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2C -1. Actual  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2C -2. That w hich empowers the abandonment  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2C -1. Actual  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2C -1A. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2C -1B. Root text  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2C -1C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2C -1A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
In that way, having expressed those that have come as  an auxiliary, the real path of seeing 
itself:  
 
EXPLANATION  
In that way, having expressed the three stanzas [5.19 —5.21] not explicitly conjoined with 
sutra  that have come as an auxiliary  to great enlightenment , the real , that is, ordinary, 
path of seeing i tself: 
2B2C -2A2B -2B2C -1B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
5.22 That included within the forbearance that is the same instant as  
That which is those mutually included  
In each of generosity and so forth,  
Is the path of seeing in this. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —that uninterrupted path included within the forbearance of dharma 
knowledge with respect to sufferings that is the same instant as that which is those six 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
486 perfections mutually included in each of generosity and so forth —is the  peak application 
of the  path of seein g in this  context, because it is a clear realization of the truth that acts to 
directly destroy the seeds of the conceptualizations of apprehendeds and apprehenders that 
are the objects to be abandoned by the path of seeing . 
 Sutra says, “Subhuti, with res pect to this, when a great bodhisattva performs generosity, 
he completely dedicates it to omniscience and performs generosity.”  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2C -1C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2C -1C1. Actual  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2C -1C2. The action of that  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2C -1C1. Actual  
COMMENTARY  
So the root text is said. That which has been produced bearing the thirty -six aspects, 
distinguished by the pure three circles, included within the forbearance of dharma 
knowledge with respect to sufferings, the same instant as that which is the six perfections, 
generosity and so forth, mutually included as above in each entity of generosity and so forth 
individually is the path of seeing with respect to this clear realization of the peak. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —that uninterrupted path  which has been  produced bearing the thirty -six 
aspects that are divisions by way of isolates distinguished by the pure three circles  with 
respect to all six perfections, that included within the forbearance of dharma knowledge 
with respect to sufferings, the same instant as that which is the six perfections, 
generosity and so forth, mutually included (as explained in the context of achieving of 
armor170 above ) in each entity of generosity and so forth individually—is the path of 
seeing with respect to this c lear realization of the peak. The sign is like [that in the 
explanation of] the root text. 
 That very uninterrupted path with respect to directly destroying the seeds that are the 
knowledge obscurations has been indicated as being produced in the nature of infinite clear 
realizations; if it were not distinguished by infinite accumulations of merit, it would not be able to abandon the seeds that are the knowledge obscurations. 
2B2C -2A2B -2B2C -1C2. The action of that  
COMMENTARY 
If that has been produced, then, by the divisions of the desire, form, and formless realms, 
through nine aspects individually of the four types of conceptualizations, since the 108 
conceptualizations of apprehendeds and apprehenders have been abandoned, the abandonment of the 108 afflict ions that are latencies that act to generate the 
conceptualizations included within those is attained through the nature of dependent -arising.  
 
EXPLANATION  
If that peak application of the path of seeing has been produced, then the abandonment 
of the 108 af flictions that are latencies that act to generate the conceptualizations 
included within those conceptualizations of apprehendeds and apprehenders that are 
objects to be abandoned by the path of seeing  is attained through  the nature of 
                                              
170 The achieving of armor is the 7th topic in chap ter 1.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
487 dependent -arising, s ince the 108 conceptualizations of apprehendeds and 
apprehenders that are objects to be abandoned by the path of seeing  have been 
exhaustively abandoned  by it.  
 It is appropriate to divide the conceptualizations into 108 , because there are thirty -six 
with respect to each realm  by the divisions included within the levels of the desire, form, 
and formless realms, through nine aspects individually of each of the four types of 
conceptualizations  that exist . 
2B2C -2A2B -2B2C -2. That which empowers the abandonment  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2C -2A. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2C -2B. Root text  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2C -2C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2C -2A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
In order to gain control over  that, one acts to repeatedly cultivate  that itself. The aforesaid 
has been tau ght through an interceding stanza:  
 
EXPLANATION  
In order to gain control over that  peak application of the path of seeing , one acts to 
repeatedly  cultivate that peak application of the path of seeing itself. The aforesaid has 
been taught through  an interceding stanza:  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2C -2B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
5.23 Then , through having absorbed into the meditative stabilization  
Of the loftily looking lion,  
He realizes the forward order and  
Reverse order of dependent -arising.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Having indicated the mode of abandoning the objects to be abandoned by the peak 
application of the path of seeing, then, the subject —the yogi who cultivates the peak 
application of the path of seeing —possesses a special function that acts to gain control o ver 
the abandonment, because, due to having absorbed into the meditative stabilization of 
the loftily looking lion  during meditative equipoise , during subsequent attainment he 
realizes the forward order and reverse order of dependent- arising.  
 The assertio n—that the yoga (that is cultivated on the occasion of the path of meditation 
after the peak application of the path of seeing has been cultivated) has been indicated by the “then” mentioned [in the root text 5.23a]—is unrelated, because the Acarya very cl early 
indicated that [it refers to] the cultivation by that very [yogi] abiding on the peak application 
of the path of seeing.  
 Even if they were correlated to the earlier and later stages with respect to ascertainment, 
one should explain that the uninterrupted path has been indicated by the earlier passage, and 
the liberated path (in which fear of the two obscurations has been extinguished) has been 
indicated by this [passage].   
 Sutra says, “One differentiates among the eight liberations and the nine serial absorptions 
and absorbs into the meditative stabilization of the loftily looking lion,” and “One 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
488 individually investigates the twelve links of dependent -arising in forward order and in 
reverse order.”  
 
OPINION: The clear realization of the truth is one  instant; since that itself is not to be 
repeatedly cultivated, that contradicts the words in [the above section on] “Making a connection.”  
RESPONSE: There is no fault. (i) Since there are two earlier and later occasions of uninterrupted path and liberated  path, it is explained to be “repeatedly cultivated,” and (ii) 
further, not only is it cultivated during meditative equipoise, during subsequent attainment the investigation with respect to dependent -arising  is explained to be “repeatedly 
cultivated.” Henc e there is no contradiction. Correlating these [paths] explained here with 
the exalted wisdoms of the pure grounds has already been explained above to be unrelated.  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2C -2C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2C -2C1. Peak application of the path of seeing i ncluded within meditative equipoise  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2C -2C2. Peak application of the path of seeing (that is to be passed through having been 
viewed by knowing and seeing ) that is attained subsequent to that  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2C -2C1. Peak application of the path of seeing included within meditative equipoise  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. The yogi who has attained the path of seeing, because he does not have fear of the afflictive and knowledge obscurations, through
 having absorbed into the 
meditative stabiliz ation of the loftily looking lion, …  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the yogi who has attained the  peak application of the  path of seeing— has 
absorbed into the meditative stabilization of the loftily looking lion, because he is a 
person abiding in the clear real ization of the truth who does not have fear of the afflictive 
and knowledge obscurations  that are the objects to be abandoned by the path of seeing by 
means of having directly abandoned the seeds of the acquired knowledge obscurations.  
“Through” leads to w hat comes later.  
2B2C -2A2B -2B2C -2C2. Peak application of the path of seeing (that is to be passed through having been viewed 
by knowing and seeing ) that is attained subsequent to that  
COMMENTARY 
… afterwards, with regard to dependent -arising, he correctly investigates in forward order, 
“Through the condition of ignorance, compositional action,” and so forth, and in reverse order, “Through having ceased birth, aging and death cease,” and so forth.  
 
EXPLANATION  
From the meditative equipoise on ultimate truth, afterwards, with regard to dependent -
arising, he correctly  investigates:  
(i) the thoroughly afflicted in forward order : from “Through the condition of ignorance, 
compositional action ; through the condition of compositional action, consciousness ,” until 
“Through the condition of birth, aging and death,”  
(ii) the completely pure in forward order:  from “Through having ceased ignorance, 
compositional action ceases” until  “Through having ceased birth, aging and death 
cease,” and so forth,  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
489 (iii) the thoroughly afflicted in  reverse order : from “Aging and death arise from birth,” 
until “Compositional action arises from ignorance,” and  
(iv) the completely pure in reverse order,  when one wonders, “Through having ceased what 
do aging and death cease?”: from “Through having ceased birth, aging and death cease,” 
until “Through having ceased ignorance, compositional action ceases,” and so forth.  
 
There is a purpose for investigating  in that way, because it is for the sake of understanding 
the Four Noble Truths exactly. Also, (a) through having investigated the thoroughly 
afflicted in reverse order, having understood the nature of sufferings, one produces the 
desire to be separated from them, and (b) through having investigated [the thoroughly 
afflicted] in forward order, having understood the causes of sufferings, one produces the 
desire to abandon origins. If one has established with valid cognition that origins can be abandoned, (c) through having investigated the completely pure in reverse order, one will 
understand that sufferings can be ceased, and (d) through having investigated [the completely pure] in forward order, one will understand that the true paths that act to cease 
ignorance are to be relied upon in one’s continuum. 
 This explanation here is the explanation of that very path of seeing ( that is to be passed 
through having been viewed by knowing and seeing)  that is to be generated in the continua 
of bodhisattvas. 
2B2C -2A2B -3. Peak of the path of meditation  
2B2C -2A2B -3A. The path of meditation that is the antidote  
2B2C -2A2B -3B. The conceptions that are the objects of abandonment  
2B2C -2A2B -3C. The benefits of having abandoned the objects of abandonment by the antidotes  
2B2C -2A2B -3A. The path of meditation that is the antidote171 
2B2C -2A2B -3A1. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A2B -3A2. Root text  
2B2C -2A2B -3A3. Commentary  
2B2C -2A2B -3A1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
Having described the path of seeing in that way, since abandoning the discordant classes 
and so forth will be easy to understand if one first establishes the support, the path of 
meditation that is the support:  
 
EXPLANATION  
Having described the peak application of the path of seeing in that way, after that, the 
peak application of the  path of meditation that is the support of abandoning the objects of 
abandonment will be explained, since abandoning the discordant classes that are the 
supported and so forth will be easy to understand if one first establishes  the suppor t 
through valid cognition .  
2B2C -2A2B -3A2. Root text  
2B2C -2A2B -3A2A. Presentation of the generality  
2B2C -2A2B -3A2B. Meaning of the words  
                                              
171 Refer to the chart on leaping absorptions.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
490 2B2C -2A2B -3A2A. Presentation of the generality  
2B2C -2A2B -3A2A- 1. The manner in which it has been indicated in sutra  
2B2C -2A2B -3A2A- 2. The manner in which it has been summarized by the treatise  
2B2C -2A2B -3A2A- 3. Explaining the nature of the leaping [absorption]  
2B2C -2A2B -3A2A- 1. The manner in which it has been indicated in sutra  
With respect to the nine serial absorptions, the following have been taught:  
the preparation for the absorptions in forward order and in reverse order: the meditative 
stabilization of the loftily looking lion,   
an ascending process without inserting anything in -between,  
an ascending process by alte rnating the four concentrations and the four formless 
absorptions with the [absorption of] cessation, and  
a descending process by alternating the nine serial absorptions with the desire realm mind. 
2B2C -2A2B -3A2A- 2. The manner in which it has been summari zed by the treatise  
Having indicated the meditative stabilization of the loftily looking lion by the first two lines 
[5.24ab], and a mere summary of the descending process [involving] alternation with the 
desire realm mind by the remaining lines [5.24cd —5.25], [Maitreya], having thought that 
the two middle ones are easy to understand, [indicated them] through implication.  
2B2C -2A2B -3A2A- 3. Explaining the nature of the leaping [absorption]  
The bases of alternation, the four concentrations and the four formle ss absorptions, are 
alternated with the alternated property, the [absorption of] cessation. At the time when the nine serial absorptions have been taken as the bases of alternation, the alternated property is 
the desire realm mind . Therefore , when one is a ble to enter into absorption having 
performed alternation in that way, one will have complete d the dexterity in meditative 
stabilization.  
 Regarding the ascending process without inserting anything in -between, since merely the 
loci of the series is indica ted, it is not an actual leaping [absorption], because proceeding 
through alternating with that which is not similar to the bases of alternation has been taught to be a leaping [absorption]. If one has not previous ly entered a Hinayana path, this is 
attain ed on the sixth ground and above.  
2B2C -2A2B -3A2B. Meaning of the words  
ROOT TEXT  
5.24abc  Having ascended and descended in two ways  
In the nine absorptions that are along with the [absorption of] cessation,  
The leaping absorption.  
 
EXPLANATION  
[This] is t he leaping absorption here, because it absorbs by means of the two, the 
preparation and the actual. It is an absorption preceded by a preparation, because, with 
respect to the first actual [absorption], having ascended and descended in two ways —in 
forward order and in reverse order—in the nine absorptions that are along with  the 
[absorption of] cessation, after that one initiates the actual [absorption]. 
 Sutra says, “Subhuti, what is the meditative stabilization of the loftily looking lion of a 
great bodhi sattva? Subhuti, regarding this, a great bodhisattva —who is isolated from desire, 
isolated from non -virtuous qualities that are negativities, together with investigation, 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
491 together with analysis, and bears the joy and the happiness that are produced from 
isolation —will accomplish the first concentration and abide in it.”  
 
ROOT TEXT  
5.24d  Taking the demarcation of the non -equipoise  
 
5.25abc  Consciousness included in the desire realm,  
Having leaped over one, two, three,  Four, five, six, seven, and eight,  
 
EXPLANATION  
There is a purpose of taking the demarcation of the non -equipoise consciousness 
included in the desire  realm  and abiding in it, because it is for the sake of alternating the 
nine serial absorptions with the desire realm mind in the descending process. The subject —
the eighth -grounder —is able to alternate the nine serial absorptions with the desire realm 
mind, bec ause he is able to enter into absorption:   
1. first, having entered into the [absorption of] cessation, actualizing the desire realm mind;  
2. then, having leaped over only one, the [absorption of] cessation, actualizing the Peak 
of Existence, and then actualizin g the desire realm mind;   
3. then, having leaped over two, the [absorption of] cessation and the Peak of Existence, 
actualizing Nothingness and then actualizing the desire realm mind;  
4. then, having leaped over three, the previous two  [—the absorption of cessation and 
the Peak of Existence —and Nothingness], actualizing Infinite Consciousness and then 
actualizing the desire realm mind;  
5. similarly, having leaped over four, actualizing Infinite Space and then actualizing the 
desire realm mind;  
6. then, having lea ped over  five, actualizing the fourth concentration and then 
actualizing the desire realm mind;  
7. then, having leaped over six, actualizing the third concentration and then actualizing 
the desire realm mind;  
8. then, having leaped over seven,  actualizing the se cond concentration and then 
actualizing the desire realm mind; and   
9. then, having leaped over eight, actualizing the first concentration and then actualizing 
the desire realm mind. 
 
ROOT TEXT  
5.25d  Proceeding dissimilarly, until  the [absorption of] cessat ion. 
 
EXPLANATION  
That absorption that has been explained is called a “leaping absorption,” because it is an 
absorption that proceeds by means of alternating dissimilar  equipoise and non -equipoise 
[minds] , [alternating ] the four concentrations and the four formless absorptions, until  the 
[absorption of] cessation , [with the desire realm mind] . 
2B2C -2A2B -3A3. Commentary  
2B2C -2A2B -3A3A. Preparation  
2B2C -2A2B -3A3B. Actual  
2B2C -2A2B -3A3C. Conclusion  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
492 2B2C -2A2B -3A3A. Preparation  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. Bodhisattvas, having ascended from the first concentration until  the 
[absorption of] cessation, and after that, having descended from the [absorption of] 
cessation until the first concentration, in that way, through the two types —the forward order 
and r everse order— having ascended and descended in the nine absorptions with the 
characteristics of the four concentrations, the four formless  absorptions , and the [absorption 
of] cessation,  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —bodhisattvas  who have attained the sixth ground and above —there is a 
reason for them to actualize the preparation of the leaping absorption, because, for the sake of actualizing the actual leaping absorption immediately, having ascended from the first 
concentration until  the [absorption of] cessation, and after that, having descended 
from the [absorption of] cessation until  the first concentration, in that way, through 
the two types —the forward  order and reverse  order —having ascended and descended 
in the nine absorptions with the characteristics of the four concentrations, the four 
formless  absorptions , and the [absorption of] cessation,  after that, they enter into the 
actual [leaping absorption]. 
 This passage below repeats, that is, merely expresses, the abov e for the sake of leading 
up to the actual; those who have explained it to indicate other points have not engaged the 
meaning of the words.  
2B2C -2A2B -3A3B. Actual  
Regarding the ascending process without inserting anything in -between that was explicitly 
indicated in sutra, [Haribhadra], having thought that it was easy to understand, also did not 
explicitly indicate it in this commentary.  
 
COMMENTARY 
Again, having entered into absorption on the first concentration, having arisen from that, 
cessation; similarl y, from [the second concentration]  until the source Without 
Discrimination Not Without Discrimination, they enter into absorption on cessation. Having 
arisen from that, they enter into the absorption immediately; observe. 
  
EXPLANATION  
The subject —those [b odhisattvas who have attained the sixth ground and above] —there is a 
reason for them to enter into the actual leaping absorption, because it is for the sake of 
training in the dexterity of meditative stabilization: again, having entered into absorption 
on the first concentration, having arisen from that, [they enter into absorption on] 
cessation; similarly, having arisen from [the second concentration] until  the source 
Without Discrimination Not Without Discrimination, they enter into absorption on 
cessatio n. Having arisen from that, they enter into the absorption immediately  
following the absorption on cessation ; there is a reason for them to observe the Peak of 
Existence and enter into absorption, because having actualized the desire realm mind after 
that, it is for the sake of alternating with the desire realm mind in the descending process.   
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
493 OPINION: The purpose for entering into the absorption on the Peak of Existence after the 
[absorption of] cessation is that, since one is unable to arise from the [a bsorption of] 
cessation into the [absorption of] cessation, one re gresses  slightly from  it. 
RESPONSE: Even if you have thought that in the ascending process the bases of alternation 
are all nine absorptions, that is inappropriate, (i) because, at the time when the [absorption 
of] cessation has been taken as a basis of alternation, it is incorrect to take the [absorption 
of] cessation as the alternated property, and (ii) since all nine absorptions are present in the 
bases of alternation in the descending pro cess, the [absorption of] cessation would be 
missing in the enumeration in this commentary.  
 Therefore, although one is able to arise into an uncontaminated path after the [absorption 
of] cessation, know that one enters into the absorption on the Peak of E xistence for the sake 
of alternating the desire realm mind in the descending process, through  actualiz ing the 
desire realm mind after that. Hearers, due to a lesser method, are distant by way of the four 
types of distances: support, object of observation, aspect, and absorption.  
 
COMMENTARY 
Having set himself on the entity of the demarcation consciousness that operates  in the desire 
realm, arisen through the strength of skillful means, a non -equipoise consciousness. Having 
actualized like that, after that, into cessation. Then into non -equipoise. After that, casting 
away only one, cessation, the source Without Discrimination Not Without Discrimination. 
Then into non- equipoise. Then casting away two, the source Nothingness. Then into non -
equipoise. Similarly, having cast away up until eight, into the first concentration. Then into 
non-equipoise.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Although [hearers] are unable to actualize a desire realm mind immediately after the Peak of Existence, a bodhisattva, arisen from the Peak of Existence, through the strength of 
skillful means, having actualized  a desire realm mind  like that, a non -equipoise 
consciousness to which forms and so forth of the desire realm appear, having set himself 
on the entity of the demarcation consciousness that operates i n the desire realm, 
initiates the descending process. Then, after that, [he enters] into cessation. Then [he 
enters] into non- equipoise. After that, casting away only one, the [absorption of] 
cessation, [he enters] the source Without Discrimination Not Without Discrimination. 
Then [he enters] into non- equipoise. Then casting away two, [he enters] the source 
Nothingness. Then [he enters] into non -equipoise. Just understand that. Similarly, having 
cast away [three] up until  eight—[the eight] from cessation until  the second 
concentration —[he enters] into the first concentration. Then [he enters] into non -
equipoise.  
2B2C -2A2B -3A3C. Conclusion  
COMMENTARY 
In that way, having cast away one and so forth, until  reaching the a bsorption of cessation, 
since, by means of the dissimilar, it ascends, progressing dissimilarly, due to actualizing  the 
characteristic of mastery over the leaping absorption, it is the path of meditation.  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
494 EXPLANATION  
In that way, having cast away one , two , and so forth, since it descends by means of 
dissimilar  bases of alternation and alternated property , [alternating] the absorption of 
cessation  until  reaching the first concentration  [with the desire realm mind] , and ascends , 
alternating the four concentrations and the four formless absorptions with the [absorption 
of] cessation, progressing  dissimilarly, due to actualizing the characteristic of mastery 
over the leaping absorption, it is the peak application of the  path of meditation.  
2B2C -2A2B -3B. The conceptions that are the objects of abandonment  
2B2C -2A2B -3B1. Making a connection for the generality 
2B2C -2A2B -3B2. Individual entities  
2B2C -2A2B -3B3. Summary  
2B2C -2A2B -3B1. Making a connection for the generality 
COMMENTARY 
In that way, having described t he path of meditation, since, in order to abandon on that, it is 
necessary to describe the four types of discordant classes:  
 
EXPLANATION  
In that way, having described the peak application of the  path of meditation, since, in 
order to abandon the objects of abandonment  on that, it is necessary to describe the four 
types of discordant classes:     
2B2C -2A2B -3B2. Individual entities  
2B2C -2A2B -3B2A. Conceptions of apprehendeds  
2B2C -2A2B -3B2B. Conceptions of apprehenders  
2B2C -2A2B -3B2A. Conceptions of apprehe ndeds  
2B2C -2A2B -3B2A -1. Conceptions of apprehendeds to be engaged in  
2B2C -2A2B -3B2A -2. Conceptions of apprehendeds to be turned away from  
2B2C -2A2B -3B2A -1. Conceptions of apprehendeds to be engaged in  
2B2C -2A2B -3B2A -1A. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A2B -3B2 A-1B. Root text  
2B2C -2A2B -3B2A -1C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A2B -3B2A -1A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
For the time being, the first type of conceptualizations of apprehendeds:  
 
EXPLANATION  
For the time being, the nine of the first type of conceptualizations of a pprehendeds  will 
be explained . 
2B2C -2A2B -3B2A -1B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
5.26 The brief, the extensive, that not held  By the aid of the buddhas,  
The non- existent qualities of the three times,  
The three types of paths that are excellent : 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
495  
5.27ab  This one type of conceptualizations of apprehendeds  
Are possessors of objects of utilization of the aspects of the applications.  
 
EXPLANATION  
There are nine by way of objects, because there are the conceptions —from the adherence to 
the brief and the extensive  scrip tures as truly existent objects to be engaged in, until the 
adherence to the three types of paths that are excellent as truly existent objects of 
utilization. 
 The entity of the conceptions is  this one type of conceptualizations  of apprehendeds  
that adhere  to (i) the scriptures and (ii) their subject matter, the bodhisattvas’ paths and 
results, as truly existent objects to be engaged in. The antidotes are the occasions of the 
preparations of the applications, possessors of objects of utilization of the aspe cts of the 
applications.   
 Respectively, sutra says:  
(1-2) “Bhagavan, how will a great bodhisattva seek the brief and the extensive of all the 
Dharma?”  
(3) “If one learns the perfection of wisdom that has been taught...”  
(4) “Great bodhisattva, this one w ho abides in the perfection of wisdom that has been taught 
in that way is to be known as irreversible.”  
(5) “Accomplish the perfection of wisdom...”  
(6) “One meditates on the perfection of wisdom; it is to be known to have these benefits.”  
(7) “Since depen dent-arising has no essence, practice the perfection of wisdom.”  
(8) “By accomplishing the emptiness of space, accomplish the perfection of wisdom.”  
(9) “By meditating on the emptiness of space, meditate on the perfection of wisdom.”  
2B2C -2A2B -3B2A -1C. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. (1) The brief Dharma that takes care of sentient beings who like the 
brief, (2) the extensive Dharma that takes care of sentient beings who like the extensive, (3) 
due to not being persistent regarding the meani ngs as they have been explained, not being 
aided , that is, held by the buddhas, (4) by the ceasing of arisal, the excellent qualities of the 
path of preparation do not exist, (5) by not possessing the cause of perfectly producing, the excellent qualities o f the path of seeing do not exist, (6) by the future not existing, the 
excellent qualities of the path of meditation do not exist, (7) by pacification of errors and so 
forth, the path of preparing to attain nirvana, (8) by the accomplishment of emptiness, the 
path of seeing, and (9) by meditating upon the absence  of nature, the path of meditation. 
Regarding the aforesaid, the first type of conceptualizations of apprehendeds, since they are the objects to be abandoned on this occasion, are the nine types of object -possessors on the 
occasion of the application of the path of meditation.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the first type of conceptualizations of apprehendeds —are  of nine types , 
because there are  nine objects to be abandoned by the  object- possessors on the occasion of 
the application that is the peak application of the  path of meditation.  That follows, since 
the nine divisions by way of objects  are the objects to be abandoned on this occasion  of 
the preparation s of the applications . 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
496  What are the nine? (1) The subject —the conception included within innate adherence to 
the brief Dharma scriptures that take care of sentient beings who like the brief as truly 
existent objects to be engaged in —is an object of abandonment of the preparati ons of an 
application of the path of meditation of a Mahayana arya, because it is to be directly 
destroyed by them . Apply the sign and the predicate similarly to the ones below. 
 (2) The subject —that included within innate adherence to the extensive Dharma  
scriptures along with the subject matter that takes care of sentient beings who like the 
extensive as truly existent objects to be engaged in —[is an object of abandonment of the 
preparation s of an application of the path of meditation of a Mahayana arya, because it is to 
be directly destroyed by th em.] The meanings are as follows. The former is adherence to the 
subject matter of the scriptures, the knowledge of the general characteristics of thusness and 
so forth, as truly existent objects to be engaged in , and the latter is adherence to the 
extensive Dharma, the knowledge of the individual specific characteristics, as truly existent 
objects to be engaged in.   
 (3) The one in terms of behavior is the adherence to the attention that is a yoga of the 
perfect ion of wisdom, (an antidote to not being aided, that is, held by the buddhas 
through them acting as protectors , due to [oneself] not being persistent regarding the 
meanings of the brief and the extensive as they have been explained,) as a [truly existent] 
object to be engaged in. “Aided172” is a synonym of “assisted” and “protected”; explaining 
it to mean “sent out173” is a case of erroneous terminology.  
 
 (4-6) The three in terms of the excellent qualities of the paths are adherences to:  
• the excellent qualiti es of the path of preparation, which  do not exist  ultimately but 
exist conventionally , by the ceasing of arisal , that is, reliance on the path of seeing ,  
• the excellent qualities of the path of seeing , which  do not exist  ultimately but exist 
conventionally , by not possessing the cause of perfectly producing  them as the four 
extremes , and  
• the excellent qualities of the path of meditation , which  do not exist  at the time of the 
path of seeing but exist at the time of the path of meditation, by not existing as a future  
substance,  
as truly existent objects to be engaged in.  
 
 (7-9) The three in terms of the entity of the paths are: the subject —the innate conceptions 
that are adherences to:  
• the path of preparing to attain nirvana, by pacification of errors , the conception of 
permanence and so forth, and realizing impermanence  and so forth,  
• the path of seeing, by the accomplishment of, that is, meditation on the new realization 
of emptiness, and  
• the path of meditation, by meditating upon the absence  of nature ultimately that has 
already been realized with direct cognition on the path of seeing , 
as truly existent objects to be engaged in —[are object s of abandonment of the preparation s 
of an application of the path of meditation of a Mahayana arya, because they are  to be 
directly destroyed by th em.] 
2B2C -2A2B -3B2A -2. Conceptions of apprehendeds to be turned away from  
2B2C -2A2B -3B2A -2A. Making a connection  
                                              
172 Tibetan: bstangs  ba 
173 Tibetan: phyir btang 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
497 2B2C -2A2B -3B2A -2B. Root text  
2B2C -2A2B -3B2A -2C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A2B -3B2A -2A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
In that way, having shown the first, the second type of conceptualizations of apprehendeds:  
 
EXPLANATION  
In that way, having shown the first, the second type of conceptualizations of 
apprehendeds:  
2B2C -2A2B -3B2A -2B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
5.27cd  The second are asserted to be object -possessors  
Engaging minds and mental factors. 
 
5.28 Not producing the mind, non- attention to  
The essence of enlightenment,  Attention to the lesser vehicle,  
Non-attention to complete enlightenment,  
 
5.29 Meditating,  not meditating,  
Their opposites, and  
Not according with the meaning: these conceptions are  
To be known with respect to the path of meditation.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Regarding the antidotes, the second type of conceptions of apprehendeds, the conceptions 
of apprehendeds to be turned away from, that are objects to be abandoned by the Mahayana path of meditation, are not abandoned by any antidote, because they are asserted to be 
abandoned by the uninterrup ted paths that are the object- possessors engaging minds and 
mental factors  included within the Mahayana path of meditation . 
  Know that there are nine conceptualizations that are to be abandoned on the occasions of 
the uninterrupted paths of the path of me ditation of a Mahayana arya, because there are nine 
divisions by way of the objects to be turned away from, not producing the mind  of 
enlightenment and so forth.  
 Sutra says, “Having generated the first mind, hold it close,” and “Practice the perfection 
of wisdom until abiding in the essence of enlightenment.”   
2B2C -2A2B -3B2A -2C. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. (1) Due to being separated from the spiritual guide and so forth, not 
producing the mind of enlightenment, (2) due to being devoid of the superior merit of the 
buddhas, not paying attention to the essence of enlightenment, (3) because of being a hearer lineage -bearer, paying attention to the vehicle of that, (4) because of being a solitary realizer 
lineage -bearer, actualizing the vehi cle of that, (5) due to lacking achievement of the 
perfection of wisdom, not paying attention to perfect complete enlightenment, (6) due to 
being together with the observation, meditating, (7) due to lacking the observation, not 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
498 meditating, (8) due to lack ing the observation and also lacking non -observation, lacking 
meditation and also not lacking meditation, and (9) since erroneously adhering, not exactly 
according with the meaning. Regarding the aforesaid, the second type of conceptualizations 
of apprehen deds, since they are the objects to be abandoned on that occasion, are the nine 
types of object -possessors on the occasions of engaging minds and mental factors of the 
path of meditation.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the second type of conceptualizations of ap prehendeds  included within 
innate objects of abandonment, the conceptions of apprehendeds to be turned away from —
are the  nine types of object- possessors, because there are  nine by way of objects. They are 
to be destroyed  on the occasions of the uninterrupt ed paths engaging minds and mental 
factors of the path of meditation  of a Mahayana arya , since they are the objects to be 
abandoned on that occasion.  
 What are the nine?  
 (1) The subject —someone on the hearer’s path of accumulation who proceeds to solitary 
peace —does not produce the mind of complete enlightenment as long as he has not 
attained the result of hearer foe -destroyer, due to being separated from the spiritual guide 
and so forth who guides him in that way.  
 The subject —the innate conception that is a bodhisattva’s adherence to that as a truly 
existent object to be turned away from, since the Mahayana generated mind is not produced on a hearer’s path of accumulation —is an object of abandonment of the uninterrupted path s 
of the Mahayana path of meditation, because it is to be directly destroyed by th em. Apply 
the sign and the predicate similarly to the ones below. (2) The subject —the former 
[someone on the hearer’s path o f accumulation who proceeds to solitary peace] —does not 
pay attention to the essence of enlightenment, due to lacking the superior merit of 
observing the buddhas . 
 (3) The subject —someone proceeding to solitary peace who abides on the hearer’s path 
of prep aration —pays attention to the vehicle of that  hearer, because of being a hearer 
lineage -bearer . 
 (4) The subject —someone on the path of preparation who is definite in the solitary 
realizer’s lineage —actualizes the vehicle of that solitary realize r, because  of being a 
solitary realizer lineage -bearer .  
 (5) The subject —someone on the hearer’s path of seeing who proceeds to solitary 
peace —does not pay attention to perfect complete enlightenment as an object to be 
attained in his continuum for the time being , due to lacking diligent achievement of the 
perfection of wisdom . 
 (6) The subject —someone on the hearer’s path of meditation — meditates on a reflection 
of the perfection of wisdom , due to being together with the direct observation  of 
impermanence and so forth without being conjoined with the wisdom realizing emptiness.   
 (7) The subject —a hearer foe -destroyer— does not meditate  on the meaning of the mode 
of abidance , due to lacking the observation  of that. 
 (8) The subject —that —(i) lacks meditation  on the meaning of the mode of abidance , 
due to  lacking the observation  of that , and (ii) also does not lack meditation, due to also 
lacking non -observation of impermanence and so forth.  
 In terms of the object, they are explained in that way; the subject —the innate conception 
that is adherence (to the four possibilities, (i) adherence to meditation as truly existent, (ii) 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
499 adherence to non -meditation as truly existent, (iii) [adherence to] both meditation and non -
meditation [as truly existe nt], and (iv) [adherence to] neither [as truly existent], as truly 
existent) as a truly existent object to be turned away from —[is an object of abandonment of 
the uninterrupted path of the Mahayana path of meditation, because it is to be directly 
destroyed  by that.] The antidote s to that is the uninterrupted path s of the path of meditation 
realizing freedom from the four possibilities in suchness.  
  (9) The subject —hearers and solitary realizers —adhere to that which is not exactly 
according with the meaning  of the mode of abidance, since they erroneously adhere  to 
the meaning of the mode of abidance . The subject —the innate conception that apprehends 
that as a truly existent object to be turned away from, since hearers and solitary realizers erroneously adher e to the meaning of the mode of abidance —[is an object of abandonment 
of the uninterrupted path s of the Mahayana path of meditation, because it is to be directly 
destroyed by them .] 
2B2C -2A2B -3B2B. Conceptions of apprehenders  
2B2C -2A2B -3B2B -1. Conceptions of apprehenders of substantial existence  
2B2C -2A2B -3B2B -2. Conceptions of apprehenders of imputed existence  
2B2C -2A2B -3B2B -1. Conceptions of apprehenders of substantial existence  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -1A. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -1B. Root text  
2B2C -2A2B-2B1B -1C. Commentary  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -1A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
In that way, having shown the second, the first type of conceptualizations of apprehenders:  
 
EXPLANATION  
In that way, having shown the second [type of c onceptualizations of apprehend eds], the 
first type of conceptualizations of apprehenders:   
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -1B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
5.30 The objects of utilization imputed as a sentient being,  
Imputed as phenomena, not empty,  
Grasping, nature of discerning,  
Acting on properties, the three vehicles,  
 
5.31 Impure gifts, and  
Disturbed  conduct: 
That the first type acting on apprehenders  
Are to be known is proclaimed.  
 
EXPLANATION  
That the first type acting on apprehenders are to be known as conceptions of apprehenders of substantial existence is proclaimed  in sutra, because there are nine 
divisions by way of objects : the conception adhering (to the objects of utilization imputed 
as a sentient being, an ordinary being, and so forth) as trul y existent utilizers and so forth . 
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
500 2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -1C. Commentary  
COMMENTARY  
So the root text is said. (1) Due to not being produced as substantially existent, imputed as a 
sentient being, (2) because of just being mere appearances, imputed as phenomena, (3) 
because of progressing to all aspects, phenomena of the exalted knower of all aspects and so 
forth that are not empty, (4) due to not having abandoned adherence in any way, grasping to 
phenomena, (5) due to having realized the absence  of entitiness, di scerning dharma, (6) due 
to not acting the objects of intent, acting the objects of intent that are properties, (7) because 
of not observing forms and so forth, definite emergence of the three vehicles, (8) due to not 
having perfectly and strongly entered, impure gifts, and (9) due to having observed and 
accomplished generosity and so forth, disturbed  conduct. Regarding the aforesaid, as above, 
the conceptualizations with respect to apprehenders are the nine types of object -possessors 
on the occasion of an application of the path of meditation. Fifth bundle.  
 
EXPLANATION  
As explained on the occasion of the objects to be abandoned by the path of seeing above, 
the conceptualizations with respect to apprehenders of substantial existence included 
within innate objects of abandonment are the nine types of object- possessors, because 
there are nine divisions by way of objects, the objects of abandonment on the occasion of 
an application of the path of meditation.  
 What are the nine? The three in terms of object of knowledge are as follows. (1) The 
subject —the innate conception that adheres to that which is merely imputed  upon the five 
aggregates as a sentient being, due to not being produced as a substantially existent  
independent person , as a truly existent utilize r—is an object of abandonment of the 
preparation s of an application of the path of meditation of a Mahayana arya, because it is to 
be directly destroyed by th em. Apply the sign and the predicate similarly to the remaining 
ones.174 (2) The five aggregates are  just merely imputed  upon as phenomena,  because 
phenomena that are forms and so forth are  just mere appearances  to a knower of 
conventionalities .175 (3) Phenomena of the exalted knower of all aspects and so forth are 
not empty,  i.e. not non -existent, conventionally because [the exalted knower of all aspects 
and so forth] progress as comprehenders to all bases, paths, and aspects . The subject —the 
innate conception that adheres to phenomena of the  three exalted knowers  posited as a 
person  as a truly exis tent utilizer—[ is an object of abandonment of the preparation s of an 
application of the path of meditation of a Mahayana arya, because it is to be directly 
destroyed by them .]  
 The two in terms of view are as follows. (4) The subject —an ordinary being —gra sps to 
phenomena  as truly existent , because of adhering to true existence due to not having 
abandoned adherence in any way. (5) The subject —a bodhisattva —discerns dharma that 
                                              
174 In full, this syllogism should read:  the subject —the innate conception that, through observing the 
apprehender that apprehends the person (who is merely imputed  upon the five aggregates as a sentient being ) 
as substantially existent, adheres to it  as a truly existent utilizer —is an object of abandonment of the 
preparations of an application of the path of meditation of a Mahayana arya, because it is to be directly 
destroyed by them.  
175 The corresponding syllogism should read:  the subject —the innate conception that, through observing the 
apprehender that apprehends the person (who is merely imputed  upon the five aggregates as phenomena ) as 
substantially exist ent, adheres to it  as a truly existent utilizer —is an object of abandonment of the 
preparations of an application of the path of meditation of a Mahayana arya, because it is to be directly destroyed by them.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
501 is the mode of abidance, due to having realized the absence of entitiness  of all 
phenomena ultimately.   
 The two in terms of conduct are as follows. (6) The subject—hearer and solitary realizer 
aryas —act  to seek  the objects of intent that are properties of pacification of the 
sufferings of cyclic existence, due to seeking mere liberati on, not acting [to seek] the 
objects of intent that are the three greatnesses . (7) The subject —a bodhisattva —has the  
definite emergence of the three vehicles, because of being with great compassion, and, if 
forms and so forth  were  truly existent, it would be suitable to observe [them as such], but a 
bodhisattva does  not observe [them as such] .  
 The two in terms of the view and conduct of hearers and solitary realizers are as follows. 
(8) The subject —someone on the hearer’s path of accumulation —has impure g ifts from 
benefactors , due to having realized the mere selflessness of persons, not having perfectly 
and strongly entered  into dharmata . (9) The subject —that —has  disturbed conduct of the 
perfections , due to having observed and accomplished generosity and s o forth  that are 
the three circles at the time of performing generosity and so forth .  
2B2C -2A2B -3B2B -2. Conceptions of apprehenders of imputed existence  
2B2C -2A2B -3B2B -2A. Brief indication  
2B2C -2A2B -3B2B -2B. Extensive explanation  
2B2C -2A2B -3B2B -2A. Brief indication  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -2A1. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -2A2. Root text  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -2A3. Commentary  
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -2A1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
In that way, having shown the first, the second type of conceptualizations of apprehen ders:  
 
EXPLANATION  
In that way, having shown the first, the second type of conceptualizations of apprehenders:   
2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -2A2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
5.32 The object -possessors of an imputed sentient being  
And the causes of that, since being destroyed by that,  
Are nine other types  
Of discordant classes related to the path of meditation.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the conceptions that are innate object- possessors that adhere (to [i] that 
which is imputed  a convention , [imputed]  as a sentient being , and [ii] the aggregates that 
are the causes of imputing that convention) as truly existent —are nine types (of 
discordant classes related as objects of abandonment and antidotes  to the path of 
meditation  of Mahayana aryas) that are other  than the [ conceptions of ] apprehenders of 
substantial existence , since the nine differentiated by way of objects are destroyed by that  
path of meditation . Sutra says, “Subhuti, conventions, names, signs, and adherence.”  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
502 2B2C -2A2B -2B1B -2A3. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. The second type of conceptualizations of apprehenders that are the 
discordant classes, the object -possessors of that which is imputed as a sentient being and 
mere appearances that are the causes of presenting as that, because of being objects to be perfectly abandoned by the path of meditation, nine types related to that. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the second type of conceptualizations with respect to  apprehenders that 
are the discordant classes  of the path of meditation , the object- possessors that adhe re (to 
[i] that which is imputed  a convention as a sentient being  and [ii] that which is imputed as 
a being upon phenomena that are mere appearances as aggregates  that are the causes of 
presenting [them] as that  convention) as truly existent utilizers, the  innate conceptions of 
apprehenders of imputed existence —are  nine types related as objects of abandonment and 
antidotes  to that path of meditation, because the nine differentiated by way of objects are  
objects to be perfectly abandoned by the path of meditation.  
2B2C -2A2B -3B2B -2B. Extensive explanation  
2B2C -2A2B -3B2B -2B1. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A2B -3B2B -2B2. Root text  
2B2C -2A2B -3B2B -2B3. Commentary  
2B2C -2A2B -3B2B -2B1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
QUESTION: What are the nine types like?  
RESPONSE: They have been taught through two types of interceding stanzas:  
 
EXPLANATION  
QUESTION: What are the nine types like?  
RESPONSE: They have been taught through two types of interceding stanzas:  
2B2C -2A2B -3B2B -2B2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
5.33 The three types of obsc urations to  
The three exalted knowers of all exactly according with the natures, The path that pacifies, being associated and  
Not being associated with thusness and so forth,  
 5.34 Inequality, sufferings and so forth,  
The nature of the afflictions, and  
Confusion with respect to non -duality: 
These are asserted to be the last conceptualizations.   
 
EXPLANATION  
There are nine types of conceptions of apprehenders of imputed existence that are objects to 
be abandoned by the path of meditation, because the nin e—from the conception of 
apprehenders of imputed existence that is confusion about the three types of obscurations to the three exalted knowers of all, exactly according with  the natures of the objects of 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
503 observation of the three exalted knowers , until the adherence (to that which is imputed as a 
being upon confusion with respect to non -duality ) as a truly existent utilizer—are 
asserted to be the last conceptualizations  that are objects of abandonment . 
2B2C -2A2B -3B2B -2B3. Commentary 
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. (1) Due to not fully knowing all aspects, confused about the 
obscurations to the exalted knower of all aspects, (2) due to not fully knowing all paths, 
confused about the obscurations to the knower of paths, (3) due to not fully knowing all 
bases, confused about the obscurations to the knower of all, (4) due to not fully knowing the 
perfection of wisdom, confused about the path that pacifies all, (5) due to not fully knowing 
objects of knowledge, forms and so forth, and thusness, confused abou t being associated or 
not being associated with thusness and so forth, (6) due to not fully knowing the self- entities 
of maras and so forth, confused about the inequality, (7) due to holding to the meaning as 
literally acceptable, confused about the truths , sufferings and so forth, (8) due to not fully 
knowing the entitiness of attachment and so forth, confused about the nature of afflictions, 
and (9) due to not fully knowing the characteristics of apprehendeds and apprehenders, 
confused about non- duality.  Regarding the aforesaid, as above, the last conceptualizations 
of apprehenders are asserted to be the nine types of object -possessors on the occasions of 
engaging minds and mental factors of the path of meditation.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —as above, the i nnate conceptions of apprehenders of imputed existence that 
are the last conceptualizations of apprehenders — are asserted to be the nine types of 
object- possessors,  because there are nine differentiated by way of objects. They are objects 
of abandonment on the occasions of the uninterrupted paths engaging minds and mental 
factors of the path of meditation , because they are to be directly destroyed by them . 
 What are the nine? The three types of confusion about the objects of observation of the 
three exalt ed knowers are as follows. (1) The subject —someone on the hearer’s path of 
accumulation —is confused about the abandoning of  the obscurations to the exalted 
knower of all aspects, because of confusion due to not fully knowing all aspects that are 
modes and varieties. (2) [The subject —someone on the hearer’s path of accumulation] —is 
confused about the abandoning of  the obscurations to the knower of paths, because of 
confusion due to not fully knowing all paths  of the three vehicles. (3) The subject —a 
common o rdinary being —is confused about the abandoning of  the obscurations to the 
knower of all, because of confusion due to not fully knowing all bases. The subject —the 
innate conception s that adhere to that which are imputed as being s [who are confused] about 
the abandoning of the three types of obscurations as truly existent utilizer s—[are object s of 
abandonment of the uninterrupted path s of the path of meditation, because they are  to be 
directly destroyed by th em.]176 Due to confusion about the objects of observa tion of the 
three paths, one is confused about the abandoning of the obscurations of those three [exalted 
knowers].  
                                              
176 In full, this syllogism should read:  the subje ct—the innate conception s that, through observing the 
apprehender s that apprehend  the person s (who are imputed as beings  confused about the abandoning of the 
three types of obscurations ) as imputedly  existent, adheres to them  as truly existent utilizer s—are object s of 
abandonment of the uninterrupted paths of the path of meditation, because they are to be directly destroyed 
by them . 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
504  The one confusion about the entity of the path is as follows. (4) The subject —that —is 
confused about the path that pacifies all  obscuration s, because of confusion due to not 
fully knowing the perfection of wisdom  that realizes the mode of abidance.  
 The two types of confusion about the objects of observation of the path are as follows. (5) 
The subject —that —is confused about (i) forms and so forth being associated with 
thusness and so forth, the two truths being one entity, or (ii) [forms and so forth]  not 
being associated [with thusness and so forth], the two truths being different entities , 
because of confusion due to not fully knowing (a) the property -possessors177—objects of 
knowledge, forms and so forth, and thusness —and (b) dharmata . (6) The subject—that —
is confused about the inequality  between the Hinayana and Mahayana paths , because of 
confusion due to not fully knowing emptiness, the se lf-entities of maras and so forth  
who act to hinder the Mahayana path. Alternatively, this has been explained to be confusion 
about the attribute of the uncommon path.  
 The one confusion about the meaning of the mode of abidance is as follows. (7) The 
subject—someone on the hearer’s path of accumulation —is confused about the  dharmata 
of the four truths, sufferings and so forth, [because of confusion] due to holding to the 
meaning of the sutra sets that teach impermanence and so forth as literally acceptable  to 
be the final mode of abidance.   The one confusion about the nature of the objects of abandonment is as follows. (8) [The 
subject —that —] is  confused about the nature of afflictions, because of confusion due to 
not fully knowing (i) the adventitious entitiness of attachment and so forth, and (ii) 
emptiness.  
 The one confusion about the coarse selflessness of phenomena is as follows. (9) [The 
subject —that —] is  confused about non- duality  that is the emptiness of apprehendeds and 
apprehenders being differe nt substances , because of confusion due to not fully knowing 
that the characteristics of apprehendeds and apprehenders  are empty of being different 
substances .  
 The subject —the innate conception that adheres (to that which is imputed as a being 
upon the nine types of confusion) as a truly existent utilizer—is an object of abandonment 
of the uninterrupted path s of the path of meditation, because it is to be directly destroyed by 
them. Most of these are indicated by way of manifest conceptions, but know that  the 
principal objects of abandonment are the seeds [of the conceptions].   
2B2C -2A2B -3B3. Summary  
COMMENTARY 
To abandon those four types of discordant classes of the path of meditation, understand that, “Also the four types of antidotes, by the divisions of those, are different ones.”  
 
EXPLANATION  
Understand that, “Also the four types of antidotes to the four types of conceptualizations of apprehendeds and apprehenders, by the divisions of those  different isolates , are thirty -
six different ones ,” because t hey serve to  abandon those four types of discordant classes 
of the path of meditation , the thirty -six that exist. 
                                             
 
177 Sanskrit: dharmin  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
505 2B2C -2A2B -3C. The benefits of having abandoned the objects of abandonment by the antidotes  
Regarding the excellent qualities that are attained  through having abandoned the objects to 
be abandoned, there are:  
 
2B2C -2A2B -3C1. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A2B -3C2. Root text  
2B2C -2A2B -3C3. Commentary  
2B2C -2A2B -3C1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
Since, at just the same time as the 108 conceptualizations as above are abandoned, the 108 
afflictions included within those are abandoned, all the fulfillments of excellent qualities are 
supported upon the bodhisattva abiding on the path of meditation. The aforesaid is taught 
through intercedin g stanzas:  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject—the bodhisattva arya abiding on the path of meditation —all the 
fulfillments of the classes of excellent qualities  of realizations of the three vehicles are 
supported upon him, since, at just the same time as the 108 conceptualizations of 
apprehendeds and apprehenders that are objects to be abandoned by the path of meditation 
(as explained in the context of the peak application of the path of seeing above ) are 
abandoned, the 108 afflictions included within those conceptions are abandoned.  
 Although it is suitable to explain that the afflictive obscurations (that are objects to be 
abandoned by the path of meditation) are abandoned at the same time as when the knowledge obscurations  (that are objects to be abandoned by the path of meditation) are 
abandoned, according to the explanations in other contexts of [Haribhadra’s] Great Commentary ,  it is clear that it is asserted that the manifest conceptions and the seeds that 
are knowledge  obscurations are abandoned at the same time, and even though the manifest 
knowledge obscurations do not occur on the eighth ground and above, there is no 
contradiction with the explanation in that way.  
2B2C -2A2B -3C2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
5.35 Having exha usted these infectious diseases,  
Like gaining relief after a long time, 
All the fulfillments of excellent qualities that accomplish  
The happiness of migrating beings in all ways, 
 
5.36 Like rivers [converging]  in the great ocean, 
Are supported in all ways  upon 
The great bodhisattva who is  
Adorned by the supreme results.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —upon the great bodhisattva abiding on the great of the great level of the path 
of meditation who is beautified and adorned by the supreme results  that are realizati ons 
and abandonments of the three vehicles —all the fulfillments of excellent qualities of the 
three vehicles  that accomplish the temporal and final happiness of migrating beings in 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
506 all ways, like rivers [converging] in the great ocean, are supported in all  ways,  because, 
having exhausted these conceptions included within the small of the small objects to be 
abandoned by the path of meditation that are like infectious diseases  since they act to harm 
many,  with regard to those excellent qualities being supported [upon him], adverse 
conditions are absent and the conducive conditions are complete, for example, like a patient 
recovering from an illness and  gaining relief with joy after a long time.   
2B2C -2A2B -3C3. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. Through familiarization with the path of meditation, having 
exhausted these four classes of conceptualizations that serve infectious diseases due to 
acting to harm, since hindrances are absent, like gaining relief with joy, through being under 
the influenc e of compassion, all the fulfillments of excellent qualities ( of skill to generate 
the happiness of migrating beings in all ways) included within the three vehicles, like rivers upon the great ocean, are supported upon the bodhisattva abiding on the path o f meditation 
who is beautified by those that will attain the culminated excellent results by the aspect of 
coming beforehand in all ways. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the bodhisattva abiding on the great of the great path of meditation who is 
beautified by tho se excellent qualities that will attain the culminated excellent results  
that are realizations and abandonments of the three vehicles —through being under the 
influence of compassion, upon  him all the fulfillments of excellent qualities ( of skill to 
generate the temporal and final happiness of migrating beings in all ways ) included 
within the three vehicles are supported by the aspect of being anticipated and coming 
beforehand in all ways,  since through familiarization with the path of med itation  for 
many countless eons , having exhausted these four classes of conceptualizations of 
apprehendeds and apprehenders that serve as infectious diseases due to acting to harm, 
the conducive conditions for completing the excellent qualities are complet e and 
hindrances due to adverse conditions are absent , for example, like a patient gradually 
recovering from an illness and  gaining relief with joy  after a long time . The analogy for the 
excellent qualities naturally converging is like the four rivers178 converging naturally at the 
great ocean.     
2B2C -2A2B -4. Uninterrupted peak  
2B2C -2A2B -4A. Actual  
2B2C -2A2B -4B. Eliminating wrong conceptions  
2B2C -2A2B -4A. Actual  
2B2C -2A2B -4A1. Characterized by immense merit and indicated  
2B2C -2A2B -4A2. Explanation of the objects of observation and aspect  
2B2C -2A2B -4A1. Characterized by immense merit and indicated  
2B2C -2A2B -4A1A. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A2B -4A1B. Root text  
2B2C -2A2B -4A1C. Commentary  
                                              
178 These are the four rivers in India: the Ganges, Yamuna, Brahmaputra, and Indus.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
507 2B2C -2A2B -4A1A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
After the path of meditati on, since it is the uninterrupted path, the uninterrupted meditative 
stabilization:  
 
EXPLANATION  
After the peak [application] of the path of meditation, the uninterrupted meditative 
stabilization will be explained, since this very peak  is the uninterrupted  path of 
buddhahood. It has been explained that the peak application of the path of meditation is the generality, and the uninterrupted peak application is a particularity of it. Alternatively, those 
that have been explained on the occasion of the peak app lication of the path of meditation 
are together with the seeds of the conceptions, whereas at the time of the uninterrupted peak application, the seeds are not even slightly present, therefore they are very different.  
2B2C -2A2B -4A1B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
5.37 Through analogies made of the virtues of setting  
The beings of the billionfold world systems in the excellent realizations  
Of hearers and the rhinoceros -like, 
And in the faultlessness of the bodhisattvas,   
 
5.38 By immense merit,  
That uninterrupted meditative stabilization,  
Is without interruption to buddhahood,  
The exalted knower of all aspects.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —that uninterrupted meditative stabilization  at the end of the continuum —is 
the uninterrupted peak application, because it is the final direct cause that is without interruption to buddhahood, the nature of the exalted knower of all aspects. The 
uninterrupted peak application is characterized by means of the immense merit of its result and indicated in sutra, because, through analogies made of the great merit of the virtues 
of setting the beings of the billionfold world systems in [the excell ent realizations], from 
hearers [until] the first ground,  the faultlessness of the bodhisattvas, it has been 
characterized through comparison  by the immense merit of the result of the uninterrupted 
peak application, buddhahood, and indicated . The immense m erit of the direct cause is 
characterized by the immense merit of the direct result.  
2B2C -2A2B -4A1C. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. Through analogies made of that merit that is generated by someone through setting the sentient beings of th e billionfold world systems in hearers, solitary 
realizers, and the faultlessness of bodhisattvas, by more merit superior to that, since that which is the exalted knower of all aspects is buddhahood, that which is the uninterrupted 
meditative stabilization  that will attain buddhahood is called the uninterrupted meditative 
stabilization here.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
508  
EXPLANATION  
The uninterrupted peak application is characterized by its result being of more merit and 
indicated in sutra, because, through analogies made of more meri t [than] that merit that 
is generated by someone through setting the sentient beings of the great thousand of the billionfold world systems in [the excellent realizations of] hearers, solitary realizers, and 
the first ground, the faultlessness of bodhisatt vas, it has been characterized  through 
comparison  by the direct result of the uninterrupted peak application, buddhahood, being of 
more merit superior to that, and indicated . 
 The direct result of the uninterrupted peak application, buddhahood, is of more merit, 
since that which is the exalted knower of all aspects is buddhahood  that is the direct 
result of the uninterrupted peak application.   The subject —that which is the uninterrupted meditative stabilization  at the end 
of the continuum —is called the uni nterrupted meditative stabilization here, because it is 
the final application that will attain perfect complete buddhahood.  
2B2C -2A2B -4A2. Explanation of the objects of observation and aspect  
2B2C -2A2B -4A2A. Question 
2B2C -2A2B -4A2B. Reply  
2B2C -2A2B -4A2A. Q uestion  
COMMENTARY 
QUESTION: What are the objects of observation and so forth of that like?  
RESPONSE: The objects of observation and so forth are taught through an interceding stanza:  
 
EXPLANATION  
QUESTION: What are the objects of observation and so forth of that uninterrupted peak application like?  
RESPONSE: The objects of observation and so forth are taught through an 
interceding stanza : 
2B2C -2A2B -4A2B. Reply  
2B2C -2A2B -4A2B -1. Root text  
2B2C -2A2B -4A2B -2. Commentary 
2B2C -2A2B -4A2B -1. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
5.39 The objects of observation of this are devoid of  the thing.  
The empowering is asserted to be mindfulness.   
The aspect is pacification.  
Regarding these, the propounders dispute continuously.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —all illusory phenomena devoid of  the thing  that is true existence —are the 
objects of observation of this  uninterrupted peak application, because they are the bases 
for eliminating superimpositions of this. 
 The subject —the Mahayana generated mind, the  mindfulness  that is included within th e 
path that is the application at the end of the continuum on the tenth ground —is asserted to 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
509 be the empowering  condition of the uninterrupted peak application, because it is the 
condition that is self- powered with respect to generating that. 
 The subject —the uninterrupted peak application —bears the aspect of pacification  by 
nature, because it directly realizes all phenomena as being empty of true existence. 
 These states of the objects of observation and aspect of the uninterrupted peak application 
are very profound, because , regarding these  objects of observation and aspect , the 
propounders of the two truths as contradictory pass from one to another, and dispute , 
saying , “If it is an observed object condition, it is truly existent; if it is devoid of  true 
existence, then that contradicts it being an observed object condition .” 
 Sutra says,  “Subhuti, the objects of observation of the exalted knower of all aspects are 
devoid of  the thing. The empowering is mindfulness. The aspect is pacification. The 
characte ristic is the absence  of characteristic.”  
2B2C -2A2B -4A2B -2. Commentary 
2B2C -2A2B -4A2B -2A. Actual  
2B2C -2A2B -4A2B -2B. Indicating these states as profound  
2B2C -2A2B -4A2B -2A. Actual  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. The observed object conditions of this  uninterrupted meditative 
stabilization are all phenomena observed as being devoid of  the thing. The empowering 
condition is mindfulness. The aspect is pacification by nature. 
 
EXPLANATION  
Compounded phenomena are the observed object conditions of this uninterrupted 
meditative stabilization , because all phenomena are observed by it  as being devoid of  
the thing  that is true existence . The empowering condition and the aspect are as 
[explained in the  explanation on] t he root text. 
2B2C -2A2B -4A2B -2B. Indicating these states as profound  
COMMENTARY 
Regarding these states, because they are difficult to fathom, the argumentative disputes of 
the propounders who have not realized skill in means  arise continuously, those are t o be 
eliminated through skill in means. By this, there is the thought thinking, “The profundity of 
these is explained.”  
 
EXPLANATION  
There is a reason for the argumentative disputes of the propounders (deprived of skill in 
the means of the divisions of th e two truths) arising continuously, because, regarding 
these states of the objects of observation and aspect of the uninterrupted peak application , 
since the divisions of the two truths must be understood, they are  difficult to fathom. By 
this indication o f the argumentative disputes arising continuously , there is the thought 
thinking, “The profundity of these  objects of observation and aspect of this uninterrupted 
peak application  is explained,” because, since the arguments arise continuously, those 
argume nts have been indicated to be eliminated through skill in the means of the divisions 
of the two truths .   
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
510 2B2C -2A2B -4B. Eliminating wrong conceptions  
2B2C -2A2B -4B1. Making a connection  
2B2C -2A2B -4B2. Root text  
2B2C -2A2B -4B3. Commentary  
2B2C -2A2B -4B1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
THOSE POSSESSING THE WEALTH OF INTELLIGENCE: Through eliminating what 
wrong conceptions will that meditative stabilization be generated?  
RESPONSE: After meditative stabilization, the wrong conceptions:  
 
EXPLANATION  
There is a  reason for explaining the wrong conceptions  that are to be eliminated after  the 
uninterrupted meditative stabilization , because it is for the sake of dispelling the qualm of 
those possessing the wealth of intelligence, thinking, “ Through first eliminating  what 
wrong conceptions will that meditative stabilization be generated? ” 
2B2C -2A2B -4B2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
5.40 Feasible objects of observation,  
Their entitiness definitely apprehended,  
The exalted wisdom that is the exalted knower of all aspects,  
The ultimate and the conventional,  
 5.41 The application, the Three Jewels,  
Together with means, the realizations of the subduers,  
The errors as well as the path,  
The antidotes and the discordant classes,  
 
5.42 Characteristics and meditation:  
The wrong c onceptions of the propounders  
Bearing the support of the exalted knower of all aspects  
Are asserted to be of sixteen types.   
 
EXPLANATION  
The wrong conceptions of the propounders of the two truths as contradictory (bearing the support of the objects of observation and aspects of the exalted knower of all aspects 
and the uninterrupted peak application, its cause,) are asserted to be of sixteen types , 
because they are asserted to be sixteen by way of objects . 
 What are the sixteen?
 They are:  
(1-2) two wrong conceptions with respect to the objects of observation and aspect of the 
path meditated upon;  
(3) one wrong conception with respect to the result of meditation;  
(4-5) two disputes with respect to the infeasibility of conventional and ult imate truths, the 
modes of abidance of the bases;  
(6) one consequence with respect to the infeasibility of conduct;  (7-9) three consequences with respect to the infeasibility of going for refuge that is the 
support of conduct, as well as its objects;  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
511 (10) one consequence with respect to the infeasibility of the attribute of conduct;  
(11-12) two consequences with respect to the infeasibility of clear realizations and their 
objects of abandonment;  
(13) one consequence with respect to the infeasibility of the entity of the path;  
(14) one consequence with respect to the infeasibility of divisions of the objects of 
abandonment and the antidotes;  
(15) one consequence with respect to the infeasibility of specific and general characteristics 
that are to be med itated upon;  and 
(16) one consequence with respect to the infeasibility of meditating upon those.  It has been extensively taught in sutra: “Bhagavan, why? Is it that only an exalted knower 
of all aspects is devoid of  the thing? Or is it that forms are dev oid of  the thing?.…”  
2B2C -2A2B -4B3. Commentary  
2B2C -2A2B -4B3A. Identifying the wrong conceptions that are to be eliminated  
2B2C -2A2B -4B3B. Instructions on generating the uninterrupted peak application after having eliminated 
them   
2B2C -2A2B -4B3A. Identify ing the wrong conceptions that are to be eliminated  
COMMENTARY  
(1) Due to compounded and un compounded constituents being devoid of  the thing, objects 
of observation are feasible, (2) because  of being devoid of  nature in all ways, the entitiness 
of the obj ect of observation is definitely apprehended, (3) due to things and non -things not 
being observed, the exalted wisdom that is the exalted knower of all aspects, (4 -5) due to the 
entitiness of thusness, the two , conventional and ultimate truths, (6) due to generosity and so 
forth not being observed, the application, (7) due to there being no object to be realized, the 
Buddha Jewel, (8) due to just being merely imputed in name, the Dharma Jewel, (9) due to 
the observation of forms and so forth being stopped, the Sangha Jewel, (10) due to 
generosity and so forth not being observed, skill in means, (11) due to the realization of 
entities of the things, non -things, and both being stopped, the clear realizations of the 
tathagatas, (12) due to impermanence that pre sents elaborations, errors regarding 
permanence and so forth, (13) due to the result of meditating upon the path  not being 
actualized, the path, (14) due to discarding and adopting not existing, discordant classes and antidotes, (15) due to the absence  of the property -possessors, the characteristics of 
phenomena,  and (16) due to specific and general characteristics being infeasible, meditation. Regarding the aforesaid, the wrong conceptions of all propounders, beings who 
do not know the skill in means of t he bodhisattvas, through having established  mutually 
contradictory meanings, due to being infeasible, the entity of doubt by the object -possessors 
that have been explained, sixteen wrong conceptions bearing the support of the exalted 
knower of all aspects.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —those  wrong conceptions of all propounders, beings who do not know the 
skill in means of the divisions of the two truths  of the bodhisattvas  explained above —are 
not causes of correct repudiations, because they do not transcend the entitiness of doubt  
when they are well examined. That follows, because they are awarenesses that conceive erroneously due to thinking that subsuming (i) the objects of observation of the exalted 
knower of all aspects and (ii) the emptiness of true existen ce into a common locus is  
infeasible, through having established that (a) being an object of observation of the 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
512 exalted knower of all aspects and (b) the emptiness of true existence are mutually 
contradictory meanings  although they are not contradictory. T here are sixteen wrong 
conceptions , because, by the object- possessors that have been explained, the objects of 
observation of the exalted knower of all aspects being infeasible and so forth , there are 
sixteen  bearing the support of the objects of observati on and aspects of the uninterrupted 
peak application and  the exalted knower of all aspects  being infeasible and so forth . 
 What are the sixteen? The wrong conception with respect to the objects of observation is 
as follows. (1) It follows that the objects of observation of the uninterrupted peak 
application and the exalted knower of all aspects are not feasible, due to compounded and 
uncompounded constituents being devoid of  the thing  that is true existence.179 [Those 
propounders] see that the compounded and so forth are not feasible as observed  object 
conditions from their own side if one has refuted that all phenomena are established from 
the side of the objects’ mode of subsistence without being posited throu gh the force of 
appearing to an awareness; and having seen that (i) [the compounded and so forth] are posited as observed  object conditions from their own side and (ii) the meaning of true 
existence that has been explained is not negated, they hold that th e two truths are 
contradictory. When the conventional has been asserted in our system, the observed focal 
objects of the conception of true existence would not become non -existent; if it were to 
become like that, it would be awkward to assert the conventio nal in our system. This is a 
wrong conception with respect to  the objects of observation of the two accumulations.  
 Regarding this, having stated the Middle -Wayers’ assertion that posits the ultimate reality 
as the sign, disputing that the conventional is not feasible is an argument bearing the door of 
the ultimate. If the qualification “ultimate” has been explicitly affixed to the sign, one 
replies that the pervasion is not established, and if it has not been explicitly affixed, one 
replies that the sign is not established, in which case the pervasion with respect to the accuracy of the sign is not established.  
 The wrong conception with respect to the aspect is as follows. (2) It follows that the 
aspect in which the  entitiness of the object of observation is definitely apprehended  as 
being free from elaborations is infeasible , because all phenomena are devoid of  nature  in 
all ways.  
 This also is an argument bearing the door of the ultimate and one should reply that the 
sign is not established. Applying the reply “Conventionally the sign is not established” is 
foolish, since, if the sign were  correct, the n [the reply ] would be “No pervasion. ” If the 
dispute is carried out having explicitly affixed the qualification “ultimate” to the sign, then 
one replies that the pervasion is not established. 
 If (i) someone says, “It follows as being that ultimately,” and one replies “A ccept,” (ii) 
someone says, “It follows as being that conventionally, because of being that ultimately,” 
and one replies that the pervasion is not established, and (iii) someone says, “It follows as 
being that conventionally, because of being that conventio nally,” and one replies that the 
sign is not established, then these are expressions of not keeping in mind the dispute on the two truths.   
 The one wrong conception with respect to the result is as follows. (3) It follows that the 
result, the exalted wis dom that is the exalted knower of all aspects , is infeasible , due to 
things and non- things  not being observed . 
                                             
 
179 This reason means that compounded and uncompounded constituents  do not exist ultimately.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
513  The two  wrong conceptions with respect to the two  truths are as follows. (4 -5) It follows 
that forms and so forth existing conventionally is infeasible, due to the entitiness of 
thusness,  the emptiness of true existence. It follows that ultimate truth is infeasible, due to 
thusness, the emptiness of true existence of all phenomena. 
 With respect to both of those  [(4) and (5)] , the reply is “N o pervasion. ” [The 
propounders] think, “ If it is an ultimate truth, it is truly existent.” The two disputes and 
these two are to be individually explained. Hence the Acarya said “ the two” [in the 
Commentary] . 
 The wrong conception with respect to the entity of conduct is as follows. (6) It follows 
that the application that is a union of calm abiding and special insight is infeasible, due to 
generosity and so forth not being observed. 
 The three wrong conceptions with respect to going for refuge that is the su pport of 
conduct, as well as its objects, are as follows. (7) It follows that the Buddha Jewel is 
infeasible, due to there being no object to be realized  that expands the awareness with 
respect to object s of knowledge.  
(8) It follows that the Dharma Jewel  is infeasible, due to all dharma  just being merely 
imputed in name. 
 (9) It follows that the Sangha Jewel  is infeasible, due to the observation of forms and 
so forth , the bases for the imputed “Sangha ,” being stopped.  
 The wrong conception with respect to the attribute of conduct is as follows. (10) It 
follows that skill in means  is infeasible, due to generosity and so forth that are conjoined 
with not conceiving the three circles  not being observed .   
 The wrong conception with respect to clear realization s is as follows. (11) It follows that 
the clear realizations of the tathagatas  are infeasible, due to the realization of entities of 
the things, non -things, and both that are to be realized  being stopped.  
 The wrong conception with respect to objects of abandonment is as follows. (12) It 
follows that the four erroneous  conceptions  regarding permanence and so forth  of the 
aggregates are infeasible, due to the non -erroneous conceptions  regarding  impermanence 
and so forth, that purify  elaborations  being infeasible . Here also the sign is not established. 
 The wrong conception with respect to the entity of the path is as follows. (13) It follows 
that the entity of the path is infeasible , due to enlightenment, the result of meditating 
upon the path, not being actualized.  
 The wrong conception with respect to the divisions of the objects of abandonment and 
the antidotes is as follows. (14) It follows that the divisions of discordant classes and 
antidotes  are infeasib le, due to the objects to be discarded and the objects to be adopted  
not existing.  
 The wrong conception with respect to the divisions of the characteristics of phenomena is 
as follows. (15) It follows that the specific and general characteristics of pheno mena  are 
infeasible , due to the absence of the property -possessors that are bases of 
characterization.  
 The wrong conception with respect to meditating upon specific and general 
characteristics is as follows. (16) It follows that meditation  upon the specific and general 
characteristics of phenomena is infeasible, due to specific and general characteristics  that 
are to be meditated upon  being infeasible. 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
514 2B2C -2A2B -4B3B. Instructions on generating the uninterrupted peak application after having eliminated the m 
COMMENTARY  
Because of that, regarding the arguments bearing the doors of the conventional and the 
ultimate, since it is necessary to reply respectively by means of the ultimate and the 
conventional, the bodhisattvas desiring virtue, having perfectly gen erated in all ways the 
ascertainment that precedes dispelling in a thousand ways, through skill in means that is based upon the two truths, should generate the uninterrupted meditative stabilization.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the bodhisattvas desiring virtu e, the fulfillment of one’s and others’ 
welfare s—having been preceded by skill in the divisions of the two truths, should generate 
the uninterrupted meditative stabilization, because, having perfectly generated in all 
ways the non-erroneous ascertainment of the objects of observation and aspects of the 
uninterrupted peak application and the exalted knower of all aspects  that precedes 
dispelling in a thousand ways  the wrong conceptions that have been explained , through 
skill in means that is based upon both truths, the objects of the two accumulations , they 
should generate the uninterrupted meditative stabilization.  
  They should be skilled in the divisions of the two truths, since, (i) regarding the 
arguments bearing the doors of the conventional  that act to  repudiate the ultimate 
through having stated the Middle -Wayers’ assertion of the conventional as the sign , it is 
necessary to reply respectively by means of the ultimate, (ii) and regarding the 
arguments bearing the doors of the ultimate  that act to repudiate the conventional through 
having stated the Middle -Wayers’ assertion of the ultimate as the sign , it is necessary to 
reply by means of the conventional.  That follows, because  it is necessary to reply that the 
two truths are not contra dictory in response to the continuously arising arguments that the 
two truths are contradictory. As a branch of completing the accumulations of merit in one’s 
continuum, it is appropriate to eliminate the wrong conceptions that apprehend the two 
truths as contradictory in others’ continua. However, mainly one should extinguish the 
manifest conceptions as well as their seeds in one’s continuum.  
 (i) The conception of the two truths as contradictory posited by tenets is exhaustively 
abandoned on the path of seeing, and (ii) the manifest conception of true existence that apprehends contradiction with the conventional operates until the seventh ground , and its 
seeds are exhaustively abandoned by the uninterrupted peak application.  
 In summary, suppose one (i) r efutes that the generation of a sprout by a seed is 
established from the side of the objects’ uncommon mode of subsistence without being posited through the force of appearing to an awareness, and (ii) accepts that a seed generates  
a sprout from its own si de; [those propounders], having seen those two as contradictory, 
dispute that they are infeasible. If the meaning of true existence has been negated, then the 
generation of a sprout by a seed is just posited to be [like] thinking, “In the perspective of 
the conception apprehending a snake upon [the basis of] a mottled rope, a snake exists.”  
 Saying “It follows that the generation of a sprout by a seed from its own side is 
infeasible, because the generation of a sprout by a seed is just posited through the force of 
an appearance to an  awareness” is an argument bearing the door of the ultimate, but the 
reply that the pervasion is not established is approp riate; it is not necessary to only reply 
with the sign not being established relative to the conventional in response to an argument bearing the door of the ultimate.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence                Chapter 5: The Peak Application  
 
515  Furthermore, saying “ It follows that the generation of a sprout by a seed is established  
from the side of the sprout’s uncommon mode of subsistence without being posited through 
the force of appearing to an awareness, because the sprout is generate d by a seed from its 
own side ” is an argument bearing the door of the conventional , but the repl y that the 
pervasion is not established is appropriate . 
 These are the modes of reply by means of the two truths that agree with the assertions of 
the Acarya; if one were to look at how the intention of the Protector Nagarjuna ha s been 
commentated upon by Acarya Buddhapalita and Acarya Chandrakirti, [one would see that] the modes of reply of the two truths based upon that, due to the object of negation being 
narrower than that, have been explained differently.  
2B2C -2A2C. Summarizing the chapter  
ROOT TEXT  
The fifth chapter on the clear realization of the peak from the Treatise of Quintessential 
Instructions of the Perfection of Wisdom: Ornament for Clear Realization. 
 
COMMENTARY 
The commentary on the fifth  chapter from the Treatise of Quintessential Instruct ions of 
the Perfection of Wisdom: Ornament for Clear Realization . 
 
EXPLANATION  
The explanation of the commentary on the fifth  chapter from  the Ornament of the 
Essence, which is an explanation of [the commentary on] the Treatise of Quintessential 
Instructions of the Perfection of Wisdom: Ornament for Clear Realization . 
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence              Chapter 6: The Serial Application  
 
516 2B2C -2B. The stabilizing cause and effect  
2B2C -2B1. The serial appli cation that is cultivated for the sake of attaining stability 
2B2C -2B2. The instantaneous application that has attained stability   
 
Chapter 6: The Serial Application  
2B2C -2B1. The serial application that is cultivated for the sake of attaining stability 
2B2C-2B1A. Making a connection by stating the relationship  
2B2C -2B1B. Explaining the text of the chapter  
2B2C -2B1C. Summarizing the chapter  
2B2C -2B1A. Making a connection by stating the relationship  
COMMENTARY 
Since one who has attained the clear realization of the peak, having taken cognizance of the 
meanings that are realized individually and together  in accordance with the sequence, 
thoroughly cultivates, because it is to make it stable, the clear realization  of the serial:  
 
EXPLANATION  
After having explained the clear realization of the peak, the clear realization of the serial 
will be explained. The reason is because, since  a person who has  attained the clear 
realization of the peak, having taken cognizance of  the meanings —(i) the aspects of the 
three exalted knowers that have been indicated in the first three chapters that are realized  
individually and (ii) the aspects of the three exalted knowers that have been indicated in 
the [fourth] chapter on [the clea r complete  realization of] all aspects, from the aspects until 
the characteristics, [that are realized] together —in accordance with the sequence  of the 
modes of production , thoroughly  cultivates [them] , it has been indicated for the sake of 
that. There is a reason for cultivating [them] progressively, because it is to make the  
cultivation  stable. 
2B2C -2B1B. Explaining the text of the chapter  
2B2C -2B1B -1. Root text  
2B2C -2B1B -2. Commentary  
2B2C -2B1B -1. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
6.1 Those with generosity until wisdom,  
Remembering the Buddha and so forth, and   
Phenomena, entitinesses devoid of  the thing,  
Are asserted to be the activities of the serial.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Those  progressive cultivations of the aspects of the three exalted knowers by means of 
being conjoin ed with these thirteen topics are asserted to be the activities of the serial.  
What are the thirteen? [Those cultivations are] conjoined with  (1-6) the six perfections, 
from generosity until  wisdom, (7-12) the six recollections  remembering the Buddha and 
so forth, and (13) the wisdom realizing all phenomena  as entitinesses devoid of  the thing  
ultimately.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence              Chapter 6: The Serial Application  
 
517  Sutra says, “Bhagavan, a great bodhisattva practices serially, trains serially, and with 
diligence performs serially with respect to all, the entitinesses  devoid of  the thing.”  
 Someone’s interpretation that the cultivation of these thirteen topics progressively is the 
mode of cultivation of the serial contradicts the Acarya’s text, because in the commentary 
below where the summarized meanings have been ex plained as six180, he explained [the 
mode of cultivation of the serial] to be the cultivation of the aspects of the three exalted 
knowers progressively. Although “ the meanings that are realized individually and 
collectively ” [mentioned] in the section on making a connection of this [point above] are 
cultivated progressively, it is very clear that (i) the indication of the aspects of the three 
exalted knowers individually in the first three chapters, and the occasions of train ing in the 
aspects of the three exalted knowers and not completing [the training] slightly are [the 
significances of] “individually” and (ii) the  indication of the 173 aspects of the three exalted 
knowers completely in the [fourth chapter on the clear comp lete realization of] all aspects is 
the significance of “ collective ;” cultivation of those [173 aspects] completely is the meaning 
of collective cultivation. One must definitely assert that the cultivation of all the aspects of 
the three exalted knowers wi thout exception in a single series having definite sequence, like 
a horse galloping, is the mode of cultivation of the serial.  
 Further, by means of the cultivation in that manner being conjoined with the thirteen 
topics, (i) cultivation on the occasion of the path of accumulation is serial activity, (ii) 
cultivation on the occasion of [partial concordance with] definite discrimination is serial 
training, and (iii) cultivation on the occasions of the path of seeing and the path of 
meditation is serial achie ving. The mode of acting to be conjoined with the thirteen topics is 
to be just understood as the mode of being conjoined with the realization [of phenomena] as entitinesses devoid of  the thing, and one trains through: (a) not being separated from the 
recollection of the Three Jewels, the support, (b) recollecting ethics that is characterized as 
the turning away from discordant classes, (c) recollecting giving that is characterized as the 
engaging in virtue, and (d) recollecting the gods and the gurus as witnesses; one also 
practices all of those through being conjoined with the six perfections.  
2B2C -2B1B -2. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. (1 -6) Because the four perfections are included within the perfection 
of wisdom, by completing in all ways the six, the perfection of generosity and so forth, 
distinguished by the purity of the three circles, perfectly achieving the ten grounds; (7)(a) 
the close placements of mindfulness and so forth, (b) the aspects of the branches of 
enlightenment, and (c) the eight branches of aryas’ paths, recollection of the Buddha with 
the characteristic of not remembering as existing ultimately, the three types respectively that 
act to describe the partial concordance with definite discrimination, and the paths of se eing 
and meditation; (8) similarly, recollection of virtuous, non -virtuous, and unspecified 
phenomena; (9) like the above, recollection of the bodhisattva arya irreversible sangha; (10 -
12) similarly, recollections of ethics, giving, and the gods; and (13) the understanding of all 
phenomena, forms and so forth, as entitinesses devoid of  the thing. Those which are 
realizations by way of the aforesaid are asserted to be the activities of the serial.  
 
                                              
180 See below: 2B3A. Summarizing into six meanings  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence              Chapter 6: The Serial Application  
 
518 EXPLANATION  
Those which are the  activities of realizing progressively all the aspects of the three exalted 
knowers without exception by way of the first twelve former topics and (13) the 
understanding of all phenomena, forms and so forth, as entitinesses devoid of  the thing  
ultimately are asserted to be the activities of the serial  here.  
 What are the twelve? (1 -6) At the time of cultivating the aspects progressively, one 
should cultivate them by means of being conjoined with the conduct [of] the six perfections, 
because one must cultivate them by means of bein g conjoined with that perfectly achieving 
the ten grounds, by completing  in all ways the six : the perfection of generosity, 
distinguished by the purity of the three circles  in which one does not observe the gift, the 
giver, and the giving to be ultimately existent, and so forth.   
 
QUALM: In order to complete the ten grounds, does not one need the ten perfections?  
RESPONSE: There is no t the fault of the remaining four perfections not being included 
within them, because the four perfections of skillful means, prayer, power, and exalted wisdom are included within the perfection of wisdom.  
 
The way of acting to be conjoined with the excellent attitudes [of] the six recollections is as 
follows. (7) Initially one performs a cultivation by means o f not being separated from the 
recollection of the Buddha, because one performs recollection of the Buddha  by means of 
the causes : the three types respectively , (a) the close placements of mindfulness and so 
forth  [shown] in sutra as acting to indicate  the partial concordance with definite 
discrimination, (b) the cultivation of the aspects of the branches of enlightenment shown 
in sutra as acting to indicate  the path of seeing, and (c) the eight branches of aryas’ paths  
shown in sutra  as acting  to describe  the path of meditation , and so forth .  
 (8) One cultivates through being conjoined with the recollection of  the Dharma, because 
one performs cultivation by means of similarly (i) not remembering virtuous, non -
virtuous, and unspecified phenomena as existing ultimately , and (ii) recollecting exactly 
the characteristic of having adopted, discarded, and acted in equanimity [respectively with 
respect to  virtuous, non- virtuous, and unspecified phenomena] conventionally. 
 (9) One performs cultivation by means of r ecollection of the Sangha , because, like the 
above, one cultivates without being separated from the recollection of the bodhisattva 
arya irreversible sangha  as assistants. (10-12) One cultivates similarly  through (i) not 
remembering those recollections of ethics  that are characterized as the turning away from 
discordant classes , giving  that is characterized as the engaging in virtue , and the gods , the 
witnesses, as existing ultimately, and  (ii) having remembered exactly the characteristics [of 
their] existi ng conventionally.  
2B2C -2B1C. Summarizing the chapter  
ROOT TEXT  
The sixth chapter on the clear realization of the serial from the Treatise of Quintessential 
Instructions of the Perfection of Wisdom: Ornament for Clear Realization. 
 
COMMENTARY 
The commentary on the sixth  chapter from the Treatise of Quintessential Instructions of 
the Perfection of Wisdom: Ornament for Clear Realization . 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence              Chapter 6: The Serial Application  
 
519 EXPLANATION  
The explanation of the commentary on the sixth chapter from  the Ornament of the 
Essence, which is an explanation of the commentary on the Treatise of Quintessential 
Instructions of the Perfection of Wisdom: Ornament for Clear Realization .  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence              Chapter 7: The Instantaneous Application  
 
520  
Chapter 7: The Instantaneous Application  
2B2C -2B2. The instantaneous application that has attained stability   
2B2C -2B2A. Making a connection by stating the relationship  
2B2C -2B2B. Explaining the text of the chapter  
2B2C -2B2C. Summarizing the chapter  
2B2C -2B2A. Making a connection by stating the relationship  
COMMENTARY 
Because of thoroughly cultivating, that is, greatly familiarizing, with the clear realization of 
the serial, since one cultivates those by way of a single instant , there is the clear complete  
enlightenment of a single instant; further, that, since there are four types by way of the 
characteristics:  
 
EXPLANATION  
After the serial, it is appropriate to explain  the clear complete  enlightenment of a single 
instant, since —when one has progressively thoroughly cultivated , that is, excellently 
culminated the familiarization with, the aspects of the three exalted knowers, the clear realization of the serial —one is able to cultivate tho se by way of a single instant . The 
reason for that is because of having greatly familiarized with  them for many countless 
eons. The subject —further, that—is of four, since there are four types by way of the 
characteristics  in which one entity has been differentiated by way of isolates.  
2B2C -2B2B. Explaining the text of the chapter  
2B2C -2B2B -1. Non -ripened instantaneous application  
2B2C -2B2B -2. Ripened instantaneous application  
2B2C -2B2B -3. Characterless instantaneous application  
2B2C -2B2B -4. Non -dual ins tantaneous application  
2B2C -2B2B -1. Non -ripened instantaneous application  
2B2C -2B2B -1A.Actual  
2B2C -2B2B -1B. An analogy characterizing that  
2B2C -2B2B -1A.Actual  
2B2C -2B2B -1A1. Making a connection  
2B2C -2B2B -1A2. Root text  
2B2C -2B2B -1A3. Commentary  
2B2C -2B2B -1A1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
The first, the  clear complete  enlightenment of a single instant with the characteristic of all 
uncontaminated qualities that are non -ripened in a single instant:   
 
EXPLANATION  
The first of the four instants , the clear complete  enlightenment of a single instant with 
the characteristic of actualizing all uncontaminated qualities that are non- ripened  
(since they have been accomplished with exertion on the seventh ground and below) in a 
single instant:  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence              Chapter 7: The Instantaneous Application  
 
521 2B2C -2B2B -1A2. Root t ext 
ROOT TEXT  
7.1 Because all uncontaminated qualities are  
Included within each of generosity and so forth,  
This realization of a subduer  
In a single instant is to be understood.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —this realization in which the uncontaminated non -ripened paths are actualized 
in a single instant  in the continuum of a subduer  abiding on the uninterrupted path at the 
end of the continuum —is to be understood  as the first instantaneous application, because it 
is a final application in which the uncontaminated non -ripened classes are actualized. At 
that time, when a single uncontaminated exalted wisdom has been actualized, one is able to actualize the others, b ecause all qualities that are uncontaminated paths are included 
within  each of generosity and so forth.  
 Sutra says, “Great bodhisattva, practicing the Mother in that way acts to fully complete 
the six perfections with a single generated mind.”   
2B2C -2B2B -1A3. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. Because it occurs in the system in the self- entity of dharmadhatu: 
“One thing is the entitiness of all things. All things are the entitiness of one thing. 
Whichever sees the thusness of one thing sees  the thusness of all things.” It is not exhausted 
only in one being included within many; rather, a single instant that observes the exalted wisdom of generosity and so forth, through the entity of being separat ed from the errors of 
definitely apprehending  things as individuals, because of including all phenomena with the 
characteristics —from generosity and so forth, until the eighty excellent exemplifications —
the realization of the subduer bodhisattva should be known as “the clear complete  
enlightenment in  a single instant.”  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the realization of the subduer bodhisattva abiding on the uninterrupted path 
at the end of the continuum —should be known as “the clear complete  enlightenment in a 
single instant,”  because it is not exhausted onl y in one being included within many , 
such as an a soka tree being included within a forest ; rather, it is a final application in which 
that very exalted wisdom at the end of the continuum (cultivating  a single instant that 
observes the exalted wisdom of gen erosity and so forth ) cultivates by way of including 
generosity and so forth, until  the eighty excellent exemplifications. At the time of 
cultivating one instant of uncontaminated exalted wisdom, one is able to cultivate all uncontaminated paths, because a t the time of the uninterrupted path, one is able to do that 
through  (i) the conducive conditions for cultivating in that way being complete, and (ii) the 
entity of being separated  from all the adverse conditions , the errors of definitely 
apprehending thin gs that are the two truths as individual  entities. At the time of the 
uninterrupted path at the end of the continuum, although one has not exhaustively 
abandoned the stains of negative states, know that there is not even th e slightest stain at that 
time.  
 There is a reason for being able to extinguish the stains that apprehend the two truths as 
different entities, because it occurs in the system of the great trailblazer Acarya Aryadeva : 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence              Chapter 7: The Instantaneous Application  
 
522 (i) having thought that all phenomena are the same in the entity of dha rmadhatu that is the 
emptiness of true existence, it is said, “One thing is the entitiness of all things ,” and (ii) in 
the perspective of the seer that is an arya’s meditative equipoise, the dharmata of all things 
appear as only one aspect; they do not app ear as dissimilar, [so] it is said, “All things are 
the entitiness of one thing.” Further, since they appear in that way, “Whichever person 
directly sees the thusness of one thing sees the thusness , the dharmata, of all things.”  
2B2C -2B2B -1B. An analogy characterizing that  
2B2C -2B2B -1B1. Making a connection  
2B2C -2B2B -1B2. Root text  
2B2C -2B2B -1B3. Commentary  
2B2C -2B2B -1B1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
QUALM: Yet how, when observing one uncontaminated exalted wisdom, are all 
uncontaminated [qualities] in cluded?  
RESPONSE: A mundane analogy:  
 
EXPLANATION  
QUALM: Yet how, when observing one uncontaminated exalted wisdom, are all 
uncontaminated [qualities] included?  
RESPONSE: A mundane analogy:  
2B2C -2B2B -1B2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
7.2 Like all are set in motion together  
When the apparatus of a water mill  
Is propelled by a being with a single stride,  
Likewise it knows in a single instant.   
 
EXPLANATION  
The exalted wisdom at the end of the continuum is able to  know  all uncontaminated exalted 
wisdoms  in a single instant , because, like in the analogy that all are set in motion 
together when the apparatus of a water mill is propelled by a being with a single 
stride, it is able to likewise  know . 
2B2C -2B2B -1B3. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. It is like, for example, when propelled by a being with a single 
stride, through the strength of previous excellent construction by a skilled craftsman, all of 
the apparatus  of a water mill is set in motion together at one time. Due to t he projection of 
former prayers and the force of dharmadhatu, in only a single instant, when a single uncontaminated wisdom is observed, all those concordant in type are actualized.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the uninterrupted path at the end of the continuu m—when a single 
uncontaminated wisdom , such as a branch of enlightenment, is observed in only a single 
instant, all those concordant with it in type are actualized, because one is able to do that 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence              Chapter 7: The Instantaneous Application  
 
523 due to the projection of former prayers , thinking, “May I be  able to actualize all in one 
instant,”  and the force of dharmadhatu in which all phenomena are the same taste in the 
nature of thusness . It is like, for example, when propelled by a being with a single stride, 
through the strength of previous excellent co nstruction by a skilled craftsman, all of 
the apparatus of a water mill is set in motion together at one  time.  
2B2C -2B2B -2. Ripened instantaneous application  
2B2C -2B2B -2A. Making a connection  
2B2C -2B2B -2B. Root text  
2B2C -2B2B -2C. Commentary  
2B2C -2B2B -2A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
In that way, having indicated the first, the second, the clear complete  enlightenment in a 
single instant with the characteristic of all phenomena as uncontaminated that is the state of 
ripened qualities in a single instant : 
 
EXPLANATION  
In that way, having indicated the first, the second, the clear complete  enlightenment in 
a single instant with the characteristic of all phenomena as uncontaminated that is the 
state of ripened qualities in a single instant:   
2B2C -2B2B -2B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
7.3 At the time when the state of ripened qualities,  
The perfection of wisdom, The nature of all wholesome qualities, is produced,  
Exalted wisdom in a single instant.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the uninterrupted path at the end of the c ontinuum, at the time when  the 
exalted wisdom at the end of the continuum, the state  of uncontaminated  ripened qualities 
that have been attained without exertion, the perfection of wisdom, the nature of all 
wholesome qualities  (since it is free from stains ), is produced —is the clear complete  
enlightenment [with respect to] all uncontaminated qualities in a single instant, because it 
is a bodhisattva’s final exalted wisdom.  
  Sutra says, “One abiding on the bodhisattva’s path bearing ripened qualities fully  
completes the six perfections.”  
2B2C -2B2B -2C. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. When, through the bodhisattvas cultivating the antidote, being  
separated from all discordant classes, the state of ripened qualities of the completely pure 
class, like autumn moonlight that is free from all stains, the entitiness of the wholesome, is 
produced, the exalted wisdom realizing the uncontaminated [qualities] that are  the state s of 
the ripened in just a single instant is the clear complete  enlightenment  in a single instant, the 
perfection of wisdom.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence              Chapter 7: The Instantaneous Application  
 
524 EXPLANATION  
The subject —the exalted wisdom that is the uninterrupted path at the end of the continuum  
realizing the uncontaminated [qualites] that are  the state s of the ripened (since they 
have been attained  without exertion) in just a single instant, at that time when the exalted 
wisdom at the end of the continuum is produced —is the second  clear complete  
enlightenment in a single instant, the perfection of wisdom , because it is a final 
application realiz ing the uncontaminated ripened exalted wisdoms in a single instant. That 
uninterrupted path at the end of the continuum is able to do that, because it is able to do that 
since  the entitiness of the wholesome  (since it is free from all stains )—that is the state  of 
ripened qualities of the completely pure class, the antidote , by way of being separated 
from all discordant classes  that are the two obscurations through the bodhisattvas 
cultivating the antidote, the wisdom realiz ing selflessness, for three countless eons —is 
produced , like, for example , autumn moonlight  that is free from obscurers such as dust, 
smoke, mist, and so forth . 
2B2C -2B2B -3. Characterless instantaneous application  
2B2C -2B2B -3A. Making a connection  
2B2C -2B2B -3B. Root text  
2B2C -2B2B -3C. Commentary  
2B2C -2B2B -3A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
In that way, having shown the second, the third, the clear complete  enlightenment in a 
single instant with the characteristic of all phenomena in a single instant as without 
characteris tics: 
 
EXPLANATION  
In that way, having shown the second, the third, the clear complete  enlightenment in a 
single instant with the characteristic of all phenomena in a single instant as without 
characteristics:   
2B2C -2B2B -3B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
7.4 Through abiding on all phenomena as being like dreams,  
By means of the conduct of generosity and so forth,  
It realizes, in a single instant,  
That phenomena are devoid of  character.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the uninterrupted path at the end of the continuu m—is the characterless 
instantaneous application, because it is a final application that directly realizes, in a single 
instant, that phenomena of the thoroughly afflicted class and completely pure class are 
devoid of  character  ultimately. It is able to re alize that, because it is a final application 
that, through abiding on the realization of all phenomena as being like dreams, by 
means of the conduct of the six perfections, generosity and so forth,  has familiarized with 
that. 
 Sutra says, “When a great bo dhisattva practices the perfection of wisdom, he abides on 
the dream -like five appropriated aggregates and practices generosity … cultivates wisdom.”  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence              Chapter 7: The Instantaneous Application  
 
525 2B2C -2B2B -3C. Commentary  
COMMENTARY  
So the root text is said. By previous familiarization with all pheno mena as being like 
dreams, having experienced the two accumulations, in the state of realization, abiding with 
respect to all phenomena with the entitiness  of dreams, the appropriated aggregates and so 
forth, through achieving the six perfections, generosi ty and so forth, through just a single 
instant, bearing the aspect that definitely realizes the entitinesses of generosity and so forth, 
since it knows “All phenomena are without character,” phenomena with the entities of the 
thoroughly afflicted and the c ompletely pure are just without  character, it is the clear 
complete  enlightenment in a single  instant.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —that —is the  third clear complete  enlightenment in a single instant, since it 
is a final application bearing the aspect of definitely realizing the entitinesses of 
generosity and so forth  that, through just a single instant, knows “All phenomena are 
without character  ultimately ,” thoroughly afflicted and the completely pure 
phenomena are just without character  ultimately . The tenth ground bodhisattva at the end 
of the continuum is able to know that, because —(i) abiding  through realizing in that way 
with respect to all phenomena with the entitiness of dreams, the appropriated 
aggregates and so forth  that appear but are devoid of  nature , and (ii) abiding through 
achieving the six perfections, generosity and so forth— he has familiarized with them for 
three countless eons. That follows, because , by previous familiarization with all 
phenomena as being like dreams  on the ninth ground and below , having experienced the 
two accumulations, he is preceded by having attained and familiarized with  the state of 
realization.  
2B2C -2B2B -4. Non -dual instantaneous application  
2B2C -2B2B -4A. Making a connection  
2B2C -2B2B -4B. Root text  
2B2C -2B2B -4C. Commentary  
2B2C -2B2B -4A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY  
In that way, having indicated the third, the fourth, the clear complete  enlightenment with the 
characteristic of all phenomena in a single instant as the characteristic of non -duality:  
 
EXPLANATION  
In that way, having indicated the third, the fourth, the clear complete  enlightenment 
with the characteristic of all phenomena in a single instant as the characteristic of non -
duality:   
2B2C -2B2B -4B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
7.5 Like not seeing a dream and tha t which sees it  
In a manner of duality,  
It sees in a single instant  
The thusness that is the non -duality of phenomena. 
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence              Chapter 7: The Instantaneous Application  
 
526 EXPLANATION  
The subject —the uninterrupted path at the end of the continuum —is the non -dual 
instantaneous application, because it is a final yoga that sees in a single instant the 
thusness that is the non -duality, the emptiness of being different substances,  of 
phenomena  that are apprehendeds and apprehenders, for example, like not seeing (i) the 
mountains, houses, and so forth of a dream  and (ii) the consciousnesses that see them —in 
a manner of different substances . 
 Sutra says, “When a great bodhisattva practices the perfection of wisdom, he does not see 
dreams and does not see the seeing of dreams.”  
2B2C -2B2B -4C. Commentary  
COMMENTARY  
So the root text is said. For a long time, through having readily  familiarized with 
uninterruptedly abandoning dualistic appearances, the bodhisattva who has uprooted the 
latencies of dualistic appearances, when not seeing dreams as apprehendeds and the s eeing 
of dreams as apprehenders, in a manner of apprehendeds and apprehenders, since, through 
realizing in just a single instant, “All phenomena are also of such a nature,” the suchness of 
phenomena, the absence  of duality, it is the clear complete  enlight enment in a single instant. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —that —is the  fourth clear complete  enlightenment in a single instant, 
because it is a final application  through directly realizing in just a single instant, “All 
phenomena that are apprehendeds and appreh enders are also of such a nature of being 
empty of being different substances ,” the suchness of phenomena, the absence  of duality  
between apprehendeds and apprehenders. The bodhisattva who  abides at the end of the 
continuum is able to realize that, because  he has uprooted the latencies of mistakes in 
which apprehendeds and apprehenders appear dualistically. That follows because it is a 
final [application] through having readily familiarized with uninterruptedly abandoning the mistakes of dualistic appearanc es for a long time, for example, like not 
seeing (i) the mountains, houses, and so forth of  dreams as apprehendeds that are other 
objects and (ii) the seeing of dreams as apprehenders  that are different substances —in a 
manner of apprehendeds and apprehende rs that are different substances .  
2B2C -2B2C. Summarizing the chapter  
ROOT TEXT  
The seventh chapter on the clear realization of the instantaneous from the Treatise of 
Quintessential Instructions of the Perfection of Wisdom: Ornament for Clear Realization. 
 
COMMENTARY 
The commentary on the seventh  chapter from the Treatise of Quintessential Instructions 
of the Perfection of Wisdom: Ornament for Clear Realization .   
 
EXPLANATION  
The explanation of the commentary on the seventh  chapter from  the Ornament of the  
Essence, which is an explanation of the commentary on the Treatise of Quintessential 
Instructions of the Perfection of Wisdom: Ornament for Clear Realization .  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
527  
Chapter 8: The Truth Body   
2B2C -3. Explaining the truth body extensively   
2B2C -3A. Making a connection by stating the relationship  
2B2C -3B. Explaining the text of the chapter  
2B2C -3C. Summarizing the chapter  
2B2C -3A. Making a co nnection by stating the relationship  
COMMENTARY 
In the second /next  instant of having thoroughly cultivated the clear complete  enlightenment 
in a single instant is the clear complete  enlightenment as the truth body, since that, further, 
by way of the divisi ons of the nature body and so forth, is of four types:  
 
EXPLANATION  
After the instantaneous application, there is a reason for explaining the truth body, because 
in the second instant of having thoroughly cultivated the application of the clear 
complete  enlightenment in a single instant with respect to all phenomena , the clear 
complete  enlightenment as the truth body  arises.  
 The subject —that  truth body, further —is of four types , since it is of four types by way 
of the divisions of the nature body and so fo rth. 
2B2C -3B. Explaining the text of the chapter  
2B2C -3B1. Presentation of the exalted bodies 
2B2C -3B2. The exalted activities that are deeds  
2B2C -3B1. Presentation of the exalted bodies 
2B2C -3B1A. Meaning of the generality 
2B2C -3B1B. Meaning of the branches  
2B2C -3B1A. Meaning of the generality 
2B2C -3B1A -1. Demarcation in the time of accomplishing the result  
2B2C -3B1A -2. Identifying the entity of the three exalted bodies  
2B2C -3B1A -3. Eliminating wrong conceptions regarding that  
2B2C -3B1A -1. Demarcati on in the time of accomplishing the result  
While that very uninterrupted path at the end of the continuity of the ten grounds is placed 
in meditative equipoise on thusness in [a manner of] water placed  in water, at the time of 
that uninterrupted path, in t he perspective of the seer that is that meditative equipoise, not 
even the slightest aspect that is an object of knowledge that is a variety181 dawns, because it 
has not exhaustively abandoned the stains that apprehend the two truths to be different entities . However, at that time, it abides in the nature of having attained all the classes of 
clear realizations that are the twenty -one sets of uncontaminated exalted wisdom without 
exception.  
 Then, in the second instant, when the liberated path is produced, d ue to dualistic 
appearances having vanished with respect to objects of knowledge that are modes, in the 
perspective of the seer that is that [liberated path], which has become [like] water placed in 
                                             
 
181 “An object of knowledge that is a variety ” refers to a conventional truth.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
528 water, all the objects of knowledge that are varieties ar e directly seen like an amalaki [fruit] 
placed on the palm of the hand. At that time, it is said that “the knowledge obscurations 
have been exhaustively abandoned, the perfect end has been actualized, the truth body has 
been actualized, and one has attaine d clear complete  enlightenment in all ways with respect 
to all phenomena.”  
 At the time of attaining the truth body , one achieves a complete enjoyment body, which 
possesses the five characteristics, the five excellent qualities, and the five certainties —a 
later similar type of that very exalted body that is adorned with the signs and 
exemplifications when one is abiding at the end of the continuity of the ten grounds. 
Through the complete enjoyment body acting as an empowering condition, [one achieves] a 
supreme emanation body that takes care of trainees by means of the twelve deeds. At that 
time, although they do not exist as a composite, underst and that some instances of a 
buddha’s emanation body are attained in a manner of having established a relationsh ip with 
the complete enjoyment body in dependence on a single set that is a composite of direct 
causes.  
 You should know from elsewhere the mode of accomplishing the form body by 
traversing the path of the Paramitayana (Perfection Vehicle) for up to three countless eons, 
and augmenting it with the path of Mantra [Vehicle] after that.  
2B2C -3B1A -2. Identifying the entity of the three exalted bodies  
(i) The factor of purity with respect to the inherent stains  distinguished by the purity with 
respect to advent itious [stains] of the form bodies and the exalted wisdom truth body, and 
(ii) the factor of purity with respect to adventitious [stains] in regard to those [the form 
bodies and the exalted wisdom truth body ] are the uncompounded bodies and are called “the  
nature bodies.” In the statement “Because of being the entity of a follower of reasoning” in the Two Truths  by Acarya Jñanagarbha, that which has been taught to be the object found 
by a reasoning consciousness  analyzing finality is that very factor of purity with respect to 
the nature.  
 Suppose one thinks, “If that very body possessing the two purities, without existing in the 
continua of sentient beings since beginningless time, were to arise only at the time of buddhahood, then it would necessarily be i mpermanent.” This is a mistake due to (i) not 
differentiating between the permanence that is renowned to the wise and [the permanence 
that is renowned to] the foolish, and (ii) not differentiating between occasional functioning 
things and occasional uncomp ounded phenomena.  
 If it were not like that, it would be necessary to accept that the disintegratedness of a 
house in the morning has existed since beginningless time, and it would be necessary to 
accept that the new disintegratedness of a house in the ev ening has existed in the morning. 
 The exalted wisdom truth body included within the twenty -one sets of uncontaminated 
exalted wisdom has been taught to be the fourth exalted body from the point of view of the 
Mantra [Vehicle]. Taking it also to be the fou rth exalted body by the victors’ son, 
Haribhadra, is merely a way of categorization; it is not that he asserts that it is not subsumed 
under the three exalted bodies. 
 
OBJECTOR: It is inappropriate for that [exalted wisdom truth body ] to be included in the  
three exalted bodies because it is neither a nature body nor either of the other two exalted 
bodies.   
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
529 RESPONSE: It follows that it would be inappropriate for it to be included in the four 
exalted bodies because, for example, the copper- colored nails of the complete enjoyment 
body are not any of the four exalted bodies that you assert. If that is said, what reply do you have?  
 OBJECTOR: The sign is not established. [The copper -colored nails not being any of the 
four exalted bodies is not established becau se] they are the complete enjoyment body.  
 
RESPONSE: In that case, what contradiction would there be in accepting that the other [the 
exalted wisdom truth body ] is the nature body?  
 OBJECTOR: It follows that [the exalted wisdom truth body ] would be an unc ompounded 
phenomenon.  
 RESPONSE: It follows that the other, [the copper- colored nails], would also have the 
complete thirty -two excellent signs and eighty excellent exemplifications. If you accept that, 
then, since you would accept the other, they are similar in all ways. 
 
OBJECTOR: [The copper -colored nails] are only one part of the complete enjoyment body; 
they are not an actual complete enjoyment body since [the complete enjoyment body] is 
imputed upon the composite of all the signs and exemplifications without exception.  
 RESPONSE: Also [the exalted wisdom truth body ] is a part of the nature body. It is not an 
actual [nature body] because [the nature body] is imputed upon the composite possessing the two purities in regard to the exalted wisdom truth bod y.  
 Therefore, having seen that the exalted wisdom truth body  is together with an exceptional 
purpose, [Haribhadra] presented it as an exalted body and so forth. The complete enjoyment 
body has already been explained. The supreme emanation body is the exalted wisdom truth 
body  itself that (i) appears to some ordinary beings as a form body adorned with the signs 
and exemplifications, and (ii) shows the manner of attaining clear complete  enlightenment 
at the foot of the bodhi tree through the stages of desce nding from the abode of the Tushita 
and so forth.  
2B2C -3B1A -3. Eliminating wrong conceptions regarding that  
Asserting that the nature body of a buddha is not a fully qualified buddha is a negativity 
greater than other negativities because it deprecates t he exalted body possessing the two 
purities. If that were the case, it follows that it would not even be a mere excellent quality, because it would neither be a final excellent quality nor a temporal excellent quality that is 
not that. If [you were to say that] the former [part of the] sign [i.e. that it is not a final 
excellent quality] is not established, then your position that it is not a buddha would 
degenerate. If you accept that [it is not even a mere excellent quality ], if it were  not the 
excell ent quality of final abandonment, then it would be similar in also not being the 
excellent quality of final realization.  
 OBJECTOR: The two form bodies are mere other- appearances of the trainees; they do not 
exist with respect to the self- appearance of bud dhas and they are not included within the 
continua of buddhas themselves.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
530  
RESPONSE: Saying that is a very grave misdeed, because it follows that a form body of a 
buddha does not exist at all because it is not directly seen by an omniscient knower. If [you  
were to say that this sign] is not established, it would contradict [your opinion above that form bodies] do not exist with respect to the self- appearance of buddhas.  
 
OBJECTOR: The buddhas are always in the meditative equipoise on thusness; that is the 
meaning of [the form bodies] not being established in the perspective of that seer.  
 RESPONSE: It has already been explained previously that also that is incorrect.  
 Do you assert that the two form bodies are not included within the continuum of any 
person , or that they are included within the continuum of a sentient being? In the first case, 
it follows that it would be impossible for bodhisattva aryas to attain the final result through 
having familiarized with performing generosity, guarding  ethics , and so  forth in their 
continua, because it is impossible for the final result of familiarizing with the accumulation 
of merit to be included in the continuum of any person. 
 
OBJECTOR: In that case, if, in dependence upon having familiarized with the practices of 
generosity and so forth that are included in one’s own continuum until the end of the 
continuity of the ten grounds, one were to become a buddha, then there would only be the 
nature of total purity, thusness, due to the continuity of cognition having been  severed.  
 
RESPONSE: In that case, you would not be able to demonstrate even the slightest damage 
to the [assertion] by the Ayatas that, although cognition occurs until one is about to die, 
upon death it becomes non -existent. Therefore, do not propound tha t the very system of the 
Charvakas is the thought of the Muni! Know that the assertion that there is no awareness in an arya’s meditative equipoise is also refuted through this. 
 
OBJECTOR: The two form bodies are merely included in the continuum of a senti ent being.  
 RESPONSE: Suppose the person Devadatta’s cultivation of the intention to perform 
generosity, the intention to abandon [misdeeds], and the like has been excellently 
culminated. Asserting that Yajjadatta, a person of a different continuum from h im, (i) has 
culminated long life such that henceforth he does not display the manner of death in the 
perspective of appearance to trainees, (ii) has culminated great resources, and so forth, is to 
be understood as the culmination of erroneous speech propou nding actions and results, in 
which actions done are wasted and actions not done are met with.   Someone’s propounding that there is not even the slightest compounded excellent quality 
included within the continuum of a buddha is to be known as the erroneo us system of others 
who assert the extinction of awareness and the extinction of phenomena. Know that these [points] also refute the assertion that the two form bodies of a buddha are not fully qualified 
buddhas.  
 As a proof for that, someone says that the  Bhagavan taught [in the Vajra Cutter Sutra 
(Vajracchedika)] that, “Some see me as form” and so forth. Taking that quotation as a proof 
is a case of an insincere mind. Did you, who propounded in that way, not assert that they are 
not buddhas? Therefore, th rough taking the exalted wisdom of a buddha as the basis of 
designation, it is presented as the form bodies; one should understand that there is not even 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
531 the slightest body that is an agglomeration of very subtle particles that are included within 
matter.  
2B2C -3B1B. Meaning of the branches  
2B2C -3B1B -1. Nature body  
2B2C -3B1B -2. Exalted wisdom truth body  
2B2C -3B1B -3. Complete enjoyment body  
2B2C -3B1B -4. Supreme emanation body  
2B2C -3B1B -1. Nature body  
2B2C -3B1B -1A. Making a connection  
2B2C -3B1B -1B. Root text  
2B2C -3B1B -1C. Commentary  
2B2C -3B1B -1A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
The first, the nature body:  
 
EXPLANATION  
The first of the four exalted bodies , the nature body:  
2B2C -3B1B -1B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
8.1 The nature body of the Subduer  
Has attained th e uncontaminated qualities,  
Is pure in all ways, and  
Bears the characteristics of the nature of those.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the nature body of the Subduer —is distinguished by three attributes, 
because it is an exalted body that (i) has attained the t wenty -one sets of uncontaminated 
qualities, the close placements of mindfulness and so forth: the attribute of possession; and 
possesses the two: (ii) purity in all ways  in being free from the two obscurations along with 
their latencies: the attribute of s eparation , and (iii) purity in bearing the characteristics of  
being empty of true existence, the nature of those  uncontaminated exalted wisdoms: the 
attribute of entity .   
 Sutra says, “Subhuti, the uncontaminated qualities are like dreams. They do not possess 
the thing, are empty of the characteristic of bearing the nature of non -thing, and are 
completely pure in all ways. This unique characteristic, that which is the nature of all of 
those, the absence of characteristic, is to be understood as the tath agata, foe -destroyer, 
perfectly complete buddha.”  
2B2C -3B1B -1C. Commentary  
2B2C -3B1B -1C1. Actual  
2B2C -3B1B -1C2. The purpose of positing the three exalted bodies that are property -possessors as different 
from the dharmata  body  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
532 2B2C -3B1B -1C1. Actual  
COMMENTARY  
So the root text is said. The nature body of the Muni Buddha Bhagavan: (1) uncontaminated 
through the entitiness of supramundane dharmadhatu, the nature of exalted wisdom, the 
close placements of mindfulness and so forth; (2) since stains are a dventitious, pure in all 
ways; and (3) the entitiness of the self of those which are the characteristic of being devoid of nature, the entitiness of absence  of production is this. Since it is an object that is not 
contrived, it is attained through a supram undane path; since it is not created, it is attained 
through the realization of all phenomena by the illusion -like consciousness. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the nature body of the Muni Buddha Bhagavan —is distinguished by three 
attributes, because of the foll owing. It is distinguished by (1) the attribute of possession: 
being uncontaminated through the entitiness of supramundane dharmadhatu, the 
nature of uncontaminated exalted wisdom, the close placements of mindfulness and so 
forth . It is [distinguished by] (2) the attribute of separation: being  pure and devoid in all 
ways  in being free from the two obscurations along with their latencies; the obscurations are 
suitable to be utterly extinguished by antidotes, since stains are adventitious . (3) The 
attribute o f entity: the entitiness of absence  of production ultimately is this, because it is 
the entitiness of the nature that is the mode of abidance  of those which are the 
uncontaminated exalted wisdoms that are of the characteristic of being devoid of nature  
ultimately .  
 It is not to be newly produced by causes, since it is an object that is not contrived  by 
causes and conditions . It is not attained by any method, a mere mundane path and so forth, 
because  it is attained through a supramundane path; since it is n ot a mere mundane path 
and [is not] created  by conditions, it is attained through (i) being  ornamented by extensive 
method  and (ii) the realization of all phenomena as being free from elaborations by the 
illusion -like consciousness that directly realizes e mptiness . 
2B2C -3B1B -1C2. The purpose of positing the three exalted bodies that are property -possessors as different 
from the dharmata body  
COMMENTARY 
The remaining three exalted bodies, the entities of dharmata ultimately, distinguished by 
beliefs in accordance with how they appear as real conventionalities, because “They are 
presented as the objects of utilization of buddhas, bodhisattvas, hearers, and  so forth” has 
been indicated. Because it occurs in the system, “Why? Voidness is asserted as merely not 
different from that which is devoid.” Although not different from that, those are presented 
as different.   
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the remaining thre e exalted bodies  that are property -possessors—are not 
different entities from the nature body, because they are exalted bodies that are of the entities of dharmata , emptiness of true existence, ultimately. Although not different in 
entity from that, those  three  are presented as different, because, although not different 
from that in entity, they are posited and  distinguished by different beliefs in accordance 
with  how they appear  dissimilarly  as real conventionalities.  
 There is a purpose for positing them as three different [exalted bodies], because “They 
are presented differently as the direct objects of utilization of only buddhas  mutually 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
533 among themselves , and as the objects of utilization of the bodhisattvas, hearers, and so 
forth” has been indicated.  
 They are not different entities from the nature body, because it occurs in the system  of 
the great trailblazers , “That called ‘emptiness’ does not exist whatsoever [as being] other 
from consciousness. Why? Voidness of true existence is asserted as merely not a 
different entity from the basis of emptiness, that which is devoid  of true existence .” Those 
who assert that the two form bodies are not able to perform functions in the way they appear 
[and] are unreal conventionalities are simply separated from the  fortune of seeing these 
stainless commentaries.  
2B2C -3B1B -2. Exalted wisdom truth body  
2B2C -3B1B -2A. Actual meaning  
2B2C -3B1B -2B. Explaining the attributes of that  
2B2C -3B1B -2C. Dispelling objections regarding that   
2B2C -3B1B -2A. Actual meaning  
2B2C -3B1B -2A1. Indicating that the exalted wisdom truth body is different from the three exalted bodies  
2B2C -3B1B -2A2. Refuting those who do not assert that [the exalted wisdom truth body] is different [from the 
three exalted bodies]  
2B2C -3B1B -2A3. Dispelling obje ctions regarding the assertion that [the exalted wisdom truth body] is 
different [from the three exalted bodies]  
2B2C -3B1B -2A1. Indicating that the exalted wisdom truth body is different from the three exalted bodies  
2B2C -3B1B -2A1A. Making a connection  
2B2C -3B1B -2A1B. Root text  
2B2C -3B1B -2A1C. Commentary  
2B2C -3B1B -2A1A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
In that way, having shown the first exalted body, the second, the truth body, the nature of the exalted wisdom devoid of  elaboration, the entities of uncontaminated close placements 
of mindfulness and so forth:  
 
EXPLANATION  
In that way, having shown the first exalted body, the second  exalted body , the exalted 
wisdom truth body, the nature of the exalted wisdom devoid of  elaboration  ultimately , 
the entities of uncontaminated close placements of mindfulness and so forth:  
2B2C -3B1B -2A1B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
8.2 The harmonies with enlightenment; the immeasurables;  
The liberations; the natures of  
The nine serial absorptions;  
The natures of the ten totalities ; 
 
8.3 The sources that are the masteries,  
Eight types due to the classifications;  
Without afflictions; the exalted knower of wishes;  
The clairvoyances; the individual correct knowledges;   
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
534 8.4 The four purities in all ways;  
The ten powers; the ten strengths;  
The four fearlessnesses;  
The three types of absence of anything to guard against;  
 
8.5 The three types of close placements of mindfulness;  
The nature that does not have forgetfulness;  
Perfectly destroyed latencies;  
Great compassion for beings;  
 
8.6 The eighteen unmixed qualities of a subduer alone;  
Those which are explained and  
The exalted knower of all aspects and [so forth]   
Are called the “truth body.”  
 
EXPLANATION  
The exalted wisdom truth body is divided into twenty- one sets, because those st arting from 
the harmonies with enlightenment,  [until] the exalted knower of all aspects, and the 
exalted wisdoms that are the finalities of the knower of paths and the knower of bases are called “the exalted wisdom truth body.”  
 Sutra says, “The thirty -seven harmonies with enlightenment... the knower of paths, and 
the knower of all; Subhuti, these are called ‘all uncontaminated qualities.’”   
2B2C -3B1B -2A1C. Commentary  
2B2C -3B1B -2A1C -1. Divisions  
2B2C -3B1B -2A1C -2. Positing those as the exalted wisdom truth  body  
2B2C -3B1B -2A1C -1. Divisions  
COMMENTARY  
So the root text is said. (1) From the close placements of mindfulness and so forth until the 
eight branches of aryas’ paths: the harmonies with enlightenment; (2) like the above, love 
and so forth: the Brahma  abodes, the immeasurables; (3) by the internal discriminating as 
having form and not having form, viewing external forms: two; liberation of the attractive manifested by the body, having completed, abiding: one; the sources Space, Consciousness, Nothingne ss, and Without Discrimination Not Without Discrimination: four; and ceasing 
discrimination and feeling: one; in that way the eight liberations;   
EXPLANATION  
(1) From the close placements of mindfulness and so forth until  the eight branches of 
aryas’ paths: the harmonies with enlightenment, taken as one set; (2) like the above, 
love and so forth: the Brahma abodes, the  four immeasurables, taken as the second set; 
(3) the third set is: (i -ii) by the internal , the yogi, being placed in the discrimination  of 
himself as having form and being placed in the discrimination  of the mere aggregates of 
the four names without having form, viewing external forms  in the aspect of 
unattractiveness : two; (iii) imagining eventually that all appearances of forms are one taste 
in being attractive, liberation of the attractive manifested by the body, having 
completed, abiding: one ; (with respect to the first two [liberations], although [the yogi] has 
previously separated from attachment to the forms of the desire realm, sin ce he has not 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
535 attained mastery over them as he desires, he observes them again for the sake of attaining it; 
when the continuum is discouraged due to having meditated on unattractiveness through the 
first two, the third liberation is (a) for the sake of up lifting it, and (b) for the sake of 
examining whether or not the first two liberations have been accomplished; if adherence is not produced even though one pays attention to the attractive, then the first two liberations 
have been accomplished);  (iv-vii) t he four liberations of the formless : [Infinite] Space  and 
so forth are for the sake of being liberated from the obscurations of relishing the taste and [for the sake of] keeping them distant ; and (viii) for the sake of being liberated from the 
obscurations  of coarse discrimination and feeling, ceasing discrimination and feeling: 
one; in that way , the eight liberations.   
 It has been explained in [Asanga's]  Compendium of Knowledge 
(Abhidharmasamuchchaya)  that also the first two liberations are supported on the final 
fourth concentration. However, [Vasubandhu’s] Treasury of Knowledge  (Abhidharmakosa) 
explains that “The first two of the eight liberations, unattractivenesses, exist in two 
concentrations” [8.32ab] . It is not that it is inappropriate for someone who has asserted the 
former to assert the latter.  
  
The fourth set:  
COMMENTARY 
(4) four form realm concentrations, four formless absorptions, and absorption of cessation: nine absorptions that abide serially;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(4) four form realm concentration s, four formless absorptions, and absorption of 
cessation: nine absorptions that abide serially;  
 
The fifth set, the totalities:  
A. Actual meaning  
B. Differences among the liberations, the masteries, and the totalities   
A. Actual meaning  
COMMENTARY 
(5)(a) earth, (b) water, (c) fire, (d) wind, (e) blue, (f) yellow, (g) red, (h) white, (i) space, and (j) consciousness: the ten types of totalities;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(5) The entity is that which is concomitant with a meditative stabilization and wisdom that 
observes the ten phenomena. The divisions are the ten types of totalities observing (a–d) 
the four elements, earth  and so forth, (e–h) the four that have arisen from the elements, 
blue and so forth, (i) [Infinite] Space , and (j) [Infinite] Consciousness . With respect to the 
mind support,  the first eight are supported on the fourth concentration, and the last two on 
[Infinite] Space and [Infinite] Consciousness.  
 With respect to the manner of training,  if one is preceded by familiarization in which one 
has trained in the past, then, by merely seeing the special support of observation, one will 
attain a meditative stabilization of totality. At the time of generating it newly, fill a vessel 
with clear water free from impurities. At a favorable place —at the fo ot of a tree, at a 
guesthouse, and so forth —pile up logs of wood that have oil and sap. Encircle it with a wall 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
536 and in it make a hole of diameter measuring one finger span182 and four fingerbreadths. 
Having lit the fire, there is the wood below, the smoke ab ove, and the fire in the middle. In 
any of the intermediate directions, make a window or hole in the wall that can be contacted 
by the wind. Take as the support of observation the colors blue, yellow, red, white, and so 
forth.  
 Place a butter lamp in a va se. Having made a hole in it that is not too big, through its 
light, an orb of illumination that strikes the surface of a wall will remain for a long time. At 
a location where the wall is covered by either a piece of matted fabric or woolen cloth, make 
a hole of diameter measuring one finger span and four fingerbreadths, and take this as the 
object of seeing.  Through taking these as the supports of observation, in dependence on 
a concentration, one observes the mere individual names, “Earth, earth, water, w ater,” and 
familiarizes with them again and again.  
 Having familiarized with them in that way, when one is able to emanate as one desires to 
pervade all without exception with earth, water, and so forth, and is able to gather them back and so forth, then [ the totalities] have been accomplished. However, if they appear in 
the aspect of water with bubbles, the fire dying out, falling, and the like, and one is not able 
to emanate as one desires, then [the totalities] have not been accomplished.  
 The sign of the totality of earth has not been explained because [Haribhadra] had thought 
that it was easy to understand; it is not that it does not exist. The appearance of the earth 
having patches of salt and so forth is a sign that [the totality of earth] has not bee n 
accomplished. Being able to emanate [earth] as one desires —shiny, level, and the like —is a 
sign that [the totality of earth] has been accomplished. 
 The function of meditating in that way is that,
 through the eight types of observation with 
respect to th at having form, one is able to accomplish emanation and the magical emanation 
of transformation. In dependence on the totality of space, one travels in space. In 
dependence on the totality of consciousness, one accomplishes the excellent qualities: abandon ment of the afflictions, the four individual correct knowledges, and so forth.  
 From among the twelve sources, these totalities are posited only with respect to four of 
them: the four colors with respect to the form source, the four elements with respect to the 
source of object of touch, space with respect to the phenomena source, and consciousness 
with respect to the mental source.  
 With respect to the meaning of the name “totality,” “totality” has the significance of that 
acting to pervade and spread to  all without exception. The presentation of the generality of 
these will be explained; other modes are just to be understood.  
 
QUALM: Why is anything other than these not posited as a totality?  
RESPONSE: It is because a totality is that which acts to perv ade [all]; anything other than 
these is not able to pervade [all]. That in which the class of it is present can be pervaded by 
it. (i) Because the class of the five sense powers is not present in the forms of the 
environment, (ii) because the class of odors and tastes is not present in the forms of the form 
realm, and (iii) because sounds do not have a continuity of similar class, thereby they cannot 
be emanated to pervade [all] —they are not posited as totalities.  
                                             
 
182 A finger span is the distance from the tip of the thumb to the tip of the middle finger . 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
537 B. Differences among the liberations, the m asteries, and the totalities  
The causes that produce the liberations, the masteries, and the totalities are the respective 
previous [sources]. The methods that act to purify are the respective later [sources]. 
Therefore, the sources that are the masteries  and the totalities are to be known as special 
paths that act to purify the liberations.  
 
QUALM: If one meditates on the sources that are the masteries for the sake of training in 
the observed object s of the liberations, why is there an explanation of a m astery that trains 
in the liberation of having form, but no explanation of [that of] the liberation of the 
formless?  
  
RESPONSE: It is because it is difficult to master form. That is because when one masters it, 
one will also attain the power to master the  formless. Through the liberations, one imagines 
other aspects of emanated forms: small natural forms and so forth. Through the masteries, by means of attaining power, one masters the previous [forms].  
 In general, the masteries are of five types:  
(i) the great mastering the small;  
(ii) the powerful mastering the weak;  
(iii) mastery through making that which was previously visible invisible;  
(iv) the mastery through repudiation, as in the abandonment of the afflictions; and  
(v) the mastery of co ntrol, as in a lord who controls his servant.  
Here, [those indicated are] the masteries included within the third and the fifth.   
 The sixth set, [the masteries]:  
COMMENTARY  
(6)(a) through the internal discriminating as form and formless, individually v iewing 
external forms in the aspects of great and small, and having mastered those, knowing: four, and (b) through only the internal discriminating as formless, having mastered blue, yellow, 
red, and white, seeing: four types; in that way, the eight types of sources that are masteries;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(6)(a) through the internal , the yogi, discriminating himself as form and discriminating 
himself as formless, individually with respect to each, viewing external forms in the 
aspects of great and small, as beaut iful and not beautiful, and as good and bad, and 
having mastered those  forms , knowing them through calm abiding and seeing them 
through special insight : four  masteries of shapes , and (b) through only the internal , [the 
yogi,]  discriminating [himself] as fo rmless, having mastered  the colors, blue, yellow, 
red, and white, knowing and seeing: four types. The first four [masteries] arise from 
causes that are the first two liberations, while the latter four arise from causes that are the 
liberation of attractive ness; in that way, [those are] the  eight types of sources that are 
masteries.  
 Regarding the latter four, they are as taught in sutra: “The internal discriminating 
[himself] as formless views external forms as blue, as blue color, as displayed like they a re 
blue, and as emitting blue light. For example, he views a flower of the flax plant or the fine 
cloth of Varanasi as blue, as blue color, as displayed as if it is blue, and as emitting blue 
light. Likewise, the internal discriminating [himself] as formle ss views external forms as 
blue, blue color, displayed like they are blue, and as emitting blue light. Having mastered 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
538 those forms, he knows them. Having mastered them, he sees them. Discriminating in that 
way is the fifth source that is a mastery.”   
 Similarly, apply [the above] to the three other [colors] through connecting the karnikara 
flower to yellow cloth, the vandujipaka flower to red [cloth], and the planet Venus to white 
[cloth].  
 With respect to that, blue is a brief indication; blue color is in nate; that displayed like it is 
blue is manufactured; regarding emitting blue light, there is clear light with respect to both 
[the innate and the manufactured]. A flower is an example of the innate, while a cloth is an 
example of the manufactured.  
  
The seventh, the meditative stabilization without afflictions:  
COMMENTARY  
(7) that which is “the meditative stabilization in which the continuity of the foes, the afflictions, included in the continua of others is uprooted”: without afflictions;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(7) When hearer foe -destroyers go to a town, they merely do not act as an observed object 
condition for the afflictions (related to the desire realm in the continua of others) that are to 
be abandoned by the path of meditation. That which is “the meditative stabilization in 
which, through the force of the tathagatas’ meditative stabilization without afflictions, not 
only do they merely not act as the observed object condition for the production of afflictions, the continuity of the foes, the afflictions, included in the continua of other  
sentient beings  is uprooted” is  the meditative stabilization without afflictions .  
 
The eighth:  
COMMENTARY 
(8) through perfectly separating from all signs, destroying grasping, and accomplishing t he 
prayers that eliminate doubts, engagement during the occasions as long as samsara exists 
and until liberation: the exalted knower of wishes;   
 
EXPLANATION  
(8) Through (i) spontaneously enacting others ’ welfare by means of perfectly separating 
from and pacifying all signs of exertion that motivates correct actions of body and speech , 
(ii) destroying grasping to all objects of knowledge as truly existent , and (iii) 
accomplishing the prayers that eliminate others’ doubts  by means of the exalted knower 
without obstructions , engagement of the exalted knower without grasping and obstructions 
during the occasions as long as samsara exists and until the attainment of liberation  by 
all sentient beings is  the exalted knower of wishes . 
 
The ninth:  
COMMENTARY 
(9) the six clairvoyances explained above;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(9) Sutra says: “Bhiksu, one experiences many aspects of magical emanations, and 
experiences through knowing and seeing the transformation into many after having transformed into one, the transformation  into many, the transformation into one, the 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
539 transformation into the visible, and the transformation into the invisible. Without being 
obstructed by the body, one passes unimpeded through walls and one passes unimpeded 
even through mountains, as though the y are space. One descends through the ground as 
though it is water. One travels on water without sinking, as though it is the ground. One remains in space with legs crossed, as though one is a bird. One touches the sun and the 
moon with one’s hand. One dom inates the realms until  the Brahma world with one’s body,” 
and so forth. The summarized meanings of those are the six clairvoyances explained 
above.   
 
COMMENTARY  
(10) the four individual correct knowledges;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(10) The tenth is the four individual correct knowledges  of the pure subject matter to be 
explained and the [pure] means of explaining it.   
 
COMMENTARY  
(11) the four purities: support, object of observation, exalted mind, and completely pure 
exalted wisdom;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(11) The elevent h is the four purities: (i) pure body  support , due to having gained mastery 
over the taking on of a body, abiding in it, and relinquishing it , (ii) pure object of 
observation, pure utilization, due to having gained mastery over emanating and 
transforming forms, odors, tastes, objects of touch, and so forth, (iii) pure exalted mind , 
due to having gained mastery over meditative stabilization , and (iv) completely pure 
exalted wisdom , due to having gained mastery over wisdom.  
 
COMMENTARY 
(12) the ten powers: p ower over (a) life, (b) mind, (c) necessities, (d) actions, (e) rebirth, (f) 
imagination, (g) wishes, (h) magical emanation, (i) exalted wisdom, and (j) Dharma;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(12) The twelfth is the ten powers: (a) power over life , being able to abide as lo ng as one 
wishes for eons , (b) power over mind , due to having attained power over countless 
meditative stabilizations , (c) power over  necessities , due to having gained mastery over the 
Sky Treasury , (d) power over actions , due to having attained power over demonstrating the 
results of actions such as crafts and artistic skills , (e) power over rebirth  as one wishes , (f) 
power over  imagination , such as the ability to display all the world systems filled with the 
bodies of buddhas, (g)  power over wishes , due t o being able to display emanations of great 
enlightenment , (h) power over magical emanation , due to power over displaying many 
dissimilar magical manifestations to the various trainees at one time , (i) power over  exalted 
wisdom , due to knowing all objects of knowledge without obstructions , and (j) power over  
Dharma , due to having attained the power that is skill in all the words and meanings of 
Dharma. They are explained in sutra to be attained from the eight h ground.  
 
The thirteenth, the fourteenth, and the fifteenth:  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
540 COMMENTARY 
(13) the ten strengths  [explained above ]; and (14) the four fearlessnesses explained above; 
(15) the completely pure behavior of body, speech, and mind of the Tathagata; this does not 
have the thought thinking, “I shall conceal,” due to trepidation concerning others knowing 
the erroneous conduct: the three types of absence of anything to guard against;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(13) The thirteenth is the ten strengths  explained above , and (14) the fourteenth  is the four 
fearlessnesses explained above . (15) The fifteenth is  the completely pure behavior of 
body, speech, and mind of the Tathagata, because he possesses final purity ; this Subduer 
does not have the thought thinking, “I shall conceal  shortcomings ,” due to trepidation 
that is the apprehensiveness  concerning  others knowing the erroneous conduct  of the 
three doors : the three types of absence of anything to guard against.  
 
The sixteenth:  
COMMENTARY 
(16) when teaching the D harma , the abidance possessing m indfulness in equanimity in only 
being devoid of subsequent grasping, anger, and both, respectively, toward those desiring to 
listen, not desiring to listen, and both: the three types of close placements  of mindfulness;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(16) The subject —this  Subduer —possesses the three close placements of mindfulness  that 
do not give rise to the thoroughly afflicted when an assembly is gathered, because when teaching the D harma  to an assembly of retinue , he has culminated the abidance 
possessing mindfulness in equanimity in only being devoid of (i) subsequent grasping 
respectively toward those desiring to listen  with respect , (ii) anger  toward those  not 
desiring to listen  with respect , and (iii) both grasping and anger toward t hose who engage 
with a mixture of both respect and disrespect. 
 The seventeenth:  
COMMENTARY 
(17) the characteristic of not missing out on the time for enacting the welfare of sentient 
beings: the nature of not having forgetfulness;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(17) [The s ubject —this Subduer —] possesses the nature of not having forgetfulness  with 
respect to the welfare of sentient beings , because he closely abides in mindfulness at all 
times with regard to all enactment of the welfare of sentient beings: “ the characteristic  of 
not ever missing out on the time for enacting the welfare of sentient beings .” 
 
The eighteenth:  
COMMENTARY 
(18) due to having abandoned the seeds that are the entities of dormancies of the afflictive 
and knowledge obscurations, perfect destruction of t he latencies;  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
541 EXPLANATION  
(18) [The subject —this Subduer —] possesses perfect destruction of the  latencies  of the 
three doors , due to having exhaustively abandoned the seeds , the entities of dormancies 
of the afflictive and knowledge obscurations.  
 
The nineteenth:  
COMMENTARY 
(19) the thought of benefit with respect to all beings: great compassion with respect to 
beings;   
 
EXPLANATION  
(19) [The subject —the Subduer —] possesses  the great compassion  that is the thought to 
accomplish benefit and happiness with respect to all beings, because he has culminated the 
thought of temporal and final benefit with respect to all beings, thinking during the six 
periods of day and night: Who is ripened? Who is not ripened? Who is a vessel for high status? Who is a vessel  for definite goodness?  
 
COMMENTARY 
(20) the eighteen unmixed qualities of a buddha; and  
 
EXPLANATION  
(20) The twentieth is the eighteen unmixed qualities of a buddha  explained above . 
 
COMMENTARY  
(21) the exalted knower of all aspects and [so forth] ; those included within the term “and [so 
forth]” —the knower of paths and so forth explained above —are also.  
 
EXPLANATION  
(21) And the twenty -first is the exalted knower of all aspects directly realizing the ten 
topics of principal cause and effect  and [so forth]; those  included within the term “and 
[so forth]” —the finalities of the knower of paths , the knower of bases, and so forth 
explained in the second and third chapters above —are also  the exalted wisdom truth body . 
2B2C -3B1B -2A1C -2. Positing th ose as the exalted wisdom truth body  
COMMENTARY 
The natures of the exalted wisdom devoid of  elaborations, the harmonies with  
enlightenment and so forth, due to the states having transformed, become; all also are 
clearly expressed as the truth body. The aforesaid is of some. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The natures of the exalted wisdom devoid of  the elaborations  of conceptualizations, the 
harmonies with  enlightenment and so forth, due to the contaminated states having 
transformed, become  uncontaminated ; all the twenty -one sets also are clearly expressed 
as the exalted wisdom truth body  that is different from the three exalted bodies . The 
aforesaid is the  assertion  of some : the Abbot Vairocana, Acarya [Haribhadra], and so forth . 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
542 2B2C -3B1B -2A2. Refuting those who do not asse rt that [the exalted wisdom truth body] is different [from the 
three exalted bodies]  
2B2C -3B1B -2A2A. Describing the system that asserts the earlier and later stanzas above as the brief 
indication and extensive explanation that indicate the nature body  
2B2C -3B1B -2A2B. The assertion that, although two dissimilar exalted bodies have been individually shown, 
there is not the fault of not having engaged the meaning of the words  
2B2C -3B1B -2A2A. Describing the system that asserts the earlier and later stanzas above as the brief indication 
and extensive explanation that indicate the nature body  
COMMENTARY 
The nature body of the Subduer  
Has attained the uncontaminated qualities , 
Is pure in all ways, and  
Bears the characteristics of the nature of those.  
 
Due to others having asserted only the supramundane uncontaminated qualities in 
accordance with a literal reading of the above, the nature body bears the characteristic of 
that w hich is not being produced, the nature of those. It has been explained that those 
themselves also are the dharmata body, but having made non -manifest the condition of 
entity (or nature), the “truth body” has been indicated. If it is asked, “What are those 
uncontaminated qualities, such that the truth body bears the characteristic of the natures of 
them?” the stanzas “The harmonies with enlightenment; the immeasurable [8.2a]” and so 
forth engage them.   
 
EXPLANATION  
Due to others —Arya Vimuktisena and so fort h—having asserted that only the 
supramundane uncontaminated qualities included within compounded phenomena have been explicitly indicated by “the uncontaminated qualities” [in 8.1b]  in accordance with a 
literal reading of the first stanza “The nature body of the Subduer…,” [8.1], the nature 
body bears the characteristic of that which is the nature of not being produced  
ultimately , the nature of those  exalted wisdoms .  
 
OBJECTION: In the context of the extensive explanation it would be reasonable to say “the  
dharmata body (dharmatakaya),” but instead ‘Are called the “truth body (dharmakaya)”’ 
occurs [in 8.6d]. Therefore, although the earlier stanza [8.1] has been asserted to indicate the 
nature body, that the later stanzas [8.2 –8.6] indicate the exalted wisdo m truth body  as an 
exalted body that is other than the nature body is an assertion of Venerable [Maitreya]; it is incorrect to take the earlier stanza and the later stanzas [respectively] as the brief indication 
and the extensive explanation.  
 RESPONSE: In  the context of completing the conclusion, it has been explained that it 
would have been reasonable that those dharmatas of the twenty -one uncontaminated exalted 
wisdoms themselves also ‘Are called the “dharmata body” (dharmatakaya)’ to occur, but 
having a bbreviated the words from the perspective of metered stanzas, the “truth body” 
(dharmakaya) was said. Having erased, that is, made non- manifest “ta,” the condition of 
entity (or nature) in “dharma ta
kaya,” ‘Are called the “truth body  (dharmakaya)” ’ [8.6d]  
has been indicated.  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
543 QUALM: Are those  twenty -one sets of uncontaminated exalted wisdoms asserted as the 
dharmata body? Otherwise, they would not be relat ed [to each  other] and the passages that 
assert four exalted bodies would be established.  
 
RESPONSE:  There is no fault  [that the twenty -one sets of uncontaminated exalted wisdoms 
and the dharmata body would not be relat ed to each  other and the passages that assert four 
exalted bodies would be established ], [because] since they [the twenty -one sets of 
uncontaminated exalted wisdoms ] are excellent qualities of the nature body183, they are to 
be included in that. There is also no fault that the earlier and the later are not related, 
[because] the truth body bears the characteristic of the natures of the uncontaminated 
minds and mental factors. Hence, if it is asked, “What are those  uncontaminated 
qualities?”  the stanzas “The harmonies with enlightenment; the immeasurable [8.2a]” 
and so forth engage  in explaining them .  
 
QUALM: Do those (who do not assert the  earlier stanza and the later stanzas as the brief 
indication and the extensive explanation) not accept the words  “the uncontaminated 
qualities” [in 8.1b]  in accordance with a literal reading [ of the first stanza ]?  
 RESPONSE: They do not  [accept the words  “the uncontaminated qualities”  in accordance 
with a literal reading of the first stanza  to refer to only the supramundane uncontaminated 
qualities included within  compounded phenomena ], because they explain “uncontaminated” 
by way of the entitiness of dha rmadhatu; otherwise, they would definitely have to accept 
[the earlier stanza and the later stanzas] as the brief indication and the extensive 
explanation. 
2B2C -3B1B -2A2B. The assertion that, although two dissimilar exalted bodies have been individually sh own, 
there is not the fault of not having engaged the meaning of the words  
COMMENTARY 
OTHERS: According to those, by means of generating the appearances, the special conventional welfare of the yogi, having become [uncontaminated] due to the states having 
transformed, enact the deeds of welfare, teaching the Dharma and so forth, non -dual minds 
and mental factors, how are those that must surely be asserted included?  
 
EXPLANATION  
OTHERS  WHO ASSERT FOUR EXALTED BODIES : According to those  who do not 
assert those uncontaminated exalted wisdoms to be other than the three exalted bodies, the subject —those exalted wisdoms possessing the three attributes  that must surely be 
asserted on the buddha ground—how are  they included  within the buddha ground ? It 
follows that it is incorrect that they are included, because they are not included within any 
of the three other exalted bodies. You accepted the pervasion.   
 [Those exalted wisdoms] possess the three attributes, because they  (1) enact the deeds of 
welfare, teaching the Dharma, radiating light rays, and so forth, by means of generating 
                                             
 
183 “Nature body” and “dharmata body” seem to be have been used interchangeably here. While such an 
usage would have been justified in the Consequence School, it is problematic in the Autonomy School, since 
the dharmata body in the Autonomy School is only the nature body that is the factor of purity with respect to 
inherent stains, and does not include the nature body that is the factor of purity with respect to adventitious 
stains.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
544 the appearances of the two form bodies that are their results , the special conventional 
welfare of the yogi : the attribute of the function, and  because they  are distinguished by (2) 
having become  uncontaminated due to the contaminated states having transformed : the 
attribute of abandonment, and (3) minds and mental factors in which apprehendeds and 
apprehenders are non- dual : the attribute of enti ty. 
 
OBJECTION: There is no fault that [those uncontaminated exalted wisdoms] are not 
included within any of the three exalted bodies, because, since a property -possessor 
(dharmin) is included within the dharmata, they are included within the nature body.  
RESPONSE: It follows that it is also incorrect to indicate the complete enjoyment body and 
the emanation body as different bodies, because the reasoning is similar also for them. If you are saying that I must definitely assert the divisions of the three e xalted bodies since 
three exalted bodies have been taught in the scriptures and [Maitreya’s] Mahayana Treatise on the Sublime Continuum  (Mahayanottaratantrasastra ) and so forth, then it follows that it 
is reasonable to also posit the exalted wisdom truth b ody as another division of the exalted 
bodies, just like the complete enjoyment body and emanation body, because the bodies have 
been taught also as four in some scriptures and valid commentaries.  
2B2C -3B1B -2A3. Dispelling objections regarding the assertio n that [the exalted wisdom truth body] is different 
[from the three exalted bodies]  
2B2C -3B1B -2A3A. Dispute  
2B2C -3B1B -2A3B. Reply  
2B2C -3B1B -2A3A. Dispute  
COMMENTARY  
Nature  along with complete enjoyment, 
Likewise the other, emanation,  
Truth body  along wi th the activities  
Are perfectly described as being of four types. [0 .18] 
 SOMEONE: In the stanza above, since just after the term “nature,”  the term “truth body” 
does not occur, the exalted bodies are only three. 
 
EXPLANATION  
SOMEONE  WHO ASSERTS THE EXALTE D BODIES TO BE THREE : The words 
“truth body” indicated after the three exalted bodies [in] “Nature” and so forth [ 0.18ab]  are 
words joining the brief indication of the corpus and the extensive explanation of the corpus, 
because it would be incorrect that, after having taught the words that join the brief 
indication and the extensive explanation for the corpus of the seven other chapters, [the 
brief indication and the extensive explanation] are not joined for the eighth.  
 According to you, the extensive exp lanation of those words “truth body” is “The 
harmonies with enlightenment; the immeasurable s [8.2a]” and so forth, and if you assert 
that those [stanzas 8.2 –8.6] have indicated [a fourth exalted body] other than the three 
exalted bodies, then in this stanz a above on the corpus of the truth body , since just 
immediately after the term “nature,” the term “truth body” should occur but it does not 
occur, the exalted bodies are only three. 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
545 2B2C -3B1B -2A3B. Reply  
COMMENTARY 
OTHERS: Purposes in terms of indicating, because joining only the exalted wisdom and the 
activities from the perspective of composition of the stanzas, having taught that. Because of 
that, it would not contradict any the teachings of the exalted bodies as four in other 
positions.  
 
EXPLANATION  
OTHERS  WHO ASSERT THE EXALTED BODIES TO BE FOUR: There is a purpose 
for having taught that , “Truth body  along with the activities” [0. 18c] in the presentation of 
the corpus without agreeing with the order of the extensive explanation , because it is for the  
sake of joining together only the exalted wisdom truth body and the activities. 
Accordingly, there is also a reason not to mention “Exalted wisdom along with the 
activities,” because it is from the perspective of easy composition of the stanzas  of the 
Ornament for Clear Realization.  
 
QUALM: Through the indication in that way, how can one realize all activities as the 
activities of the exalted wisdom truth body ? 
 RESPONSE: One is able to realize in that way, because one realizes that there are those 
purposes  explained above in terms of indicating the exalted wisdom truth body and 
activities together. There is not the fault that the divisions of the exalted bodies into four in 
that way have not engaged the meaning of the words of the Ornament . Because of that, it 
would be correct that it does not contradict any the teachings of the exalted bodies as 
four in other positions —the tantra vehicle —from the point of view of scriptures and 
reasoning . 
2B2C -3B1B -2B. Explaining the attributes of that  
2B2C -3B1B -2B1 . Meditative stabilization without afflictions  
2B2C -3B1B -2B2. Meditative stabilization of the exalted knower of wishes 
2B2C -3B1B -2B1. Meditative stabilization without afflictions  
2B2C -3B1B -2B1A. Making a connection  
2B2C -3B1B -2B1B. Root text  
2B2C -3B1B -2B1C. Commentary  
2B2C -3B1B -2B1A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
Because the buddhas’ meditative stabilization without afflictions is to be distinguished from 
the meditative stabilization without afflictions of the hearers and so forth, an interc eding 
stanza:  
 
EXPLANATION  
Because the buddhas’ meditative stabilization without afflictions is to be distinguished from the meditative stabilization without afflictions of the hearers and so forth, an 
interceding stanza:  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
546 2B2C -3B1B -2B1B. Root text  
ROOT TEX T 
8.7 The hearers’ without afflictions  
Abandons the afflictions of people who look;  
The victors’ without afflictions cuts the continuity  
Of the afflictions of those in towns and so forth. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The buddhas’ meditative stabilization without afflict ions is greatly superior to the hearers’ 
meditative stabilization without afflictions, because the  hearers’ meditative stabilization 
without afflictions simply abandons acting as the observed object condition of the 
afflictions of people who look  at them i n towns and so forth; whereas the victors’ 
meditative stabilization without afflictions cuts from the root the continuity of the 
afflictions of those  people and so forth who observe them when they go to  towns , cities,  
and so forth.  
 Before hearers and solitary realizers go on alms round and so forth in towns, having 
investigated whether or not afflictions will be produced in others who observe them, if they 
know that [afflictions] will be produced, then they will absorb into the medit ative 
stabilization without afflictions in dependence on a final concentration. However, the tathagatas [absorb into the meditative stabilization without afflictions] by merely relying 
upon their wish.  
2B2C -3B1B -2B1C. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root te xt is said. The meditative stabilization without afflictions of the hearers and so 
forth, abandons the production of afflictions in people: “It would be inappropriate if 
afflictions will be produced in some through seeing me.” The tathagatas’ meditative 
stabilization without afflictions uproots the continuity of afflictions in all beings in towns 
and so forth.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The meditative stabilization without afflictions of the hearers and so forth, abandons 
the production of afflictions in people: “It woul d be inappropriate if afflictions will be 
produced in some through seeing me.” The tathagatas’ meditative stabilization 
without afflictions uproots the continuity of afflictions in all beings in towns and so 
forth. It is as in the [explanation of the] root  text. 
2B2C -3B1B -2B2. Meditative stabilization of the exalted knower of wishes 
2B2C -3B1B -2B2A. Making a connection  
2B2C -3B1B -2B2B. Root text  
2B2C -3B1B -2B2C. Commentary  
2B2C -3B1B -2B2A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
Because the tathagatas’ exalted knower o f wishes has been shown as distinguished from the 
knower of wishes of the hearers and so forth, an interceding stanza:  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
547 EXPLANATION  
Because the tathagatas’ exalted knower of wishes has been shown as distinguished 
from the knower of wishes of the hearers an d so forth, an interceding stanza:  
2B2C -3B1B -2B2B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
8.8 The buddhas’ exalted knower of wishes is asserted  
To be spontaneous, to have abandoned grasping,  
To be unobstructed, to abide permanently, and  
To answer all questions. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The buddhas’ exalted knower of wishes  is greatly superior to the hearers’ knower of 
wishes, because that of the buddhas engages naturally, is non -erroneous, pervades all 
objects of knowledge, does not discontinue, and acts to eliminate all doubts, whereas  the 
hearers’ knower of wishes is greatly inferior to that. 
2B2C -3B1B -2B2C. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. The tathagatas’ exalted knower of wishes is asserted to: (1) engage naturally without the signs; (2) be separated from grasping to forms and so forth, through 
not adhering to things; (3) be unobstructed with respect to all objects  of knowledge, since 
afflictive and knowledge obscurations along with their latencies have been abandoned; (4) abide permanently, because of abiding as long as samsara exists; and (5) answer questions, 
due to having acquired the individual correct knowledg es. That of the hearers and so forth, 
due to being the reverse, is not like that.  
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the tathagatas’ exalted knower of wishes —is greatly superior to the 
hearers’ knower of wishes, because it is asserted to: (1) engage naturally without the 
signs  of exertion ; (2) be separated from grasping to forms and so forth, through not 
adhering to things  as truly existent ; (3) be unobstructed exalted wisdom with respect to 
all objects of knowledge, since the two  obscurations along with their latencies have 
been abandoned;  (4) abide permanently, because of the action of the meditative 
stabilization abiding as long as samsara exists;  and (5) answer  all questions, due to 
having acquired the culmination of the four individual correct knowledges.   
 The subject —the exalted knower of wishes  of the hearers and so forth —is not even 
similar in part to a buddha’s exalted knower of wishes like that, due to being an exalted 
knower of wishes that is  with exertion and so forth , the reverse  of that distinguis hed by the 
five attributes . 
2B2C -3B1B -2C. Dispelling objections regarding that  
2B2C -3B1B -2C1. Dispelling objections regarding the truth body being permanent  
2B2C -3B1B -2C2. Dispelling objections regarding both pervasiveness and permanence  
2B2C -3B1B -2C1. Dis pelling objections regarding the truth body being permanent  
2B2C -3B1B -2C1A. Making a connection through raising an objection  
2B2C -3B1B -2C1B. Reply  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
548 2B2C -3B1B -2C1A. Making a connection through raising an objection  
COMMENTARY 
“Even when residing permanently i n the truth body with the entitiness of great exalted 
compassion, why does he not enact welfare permanently?” In order to reply to the aforesaid, 
an interceding stanza:  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the Subduer Buddha Bhagavan —why does he not enact the welfare of all 
sentient beings permanently by means of directly displaying the appearances of exalted 
bodies ? He should. It follows that it is incorrect for him not to enact the welfare [even] 
occasionally by means of the exalted bodies directly appearing to certain sentient beings,  
because he  resides permanently  in the truth body with the entitiness of great exalted 
compassion that wishes all sentient beings to be free from suffering as long as cyclic 
existence exists. In order to reply to the aforesaid, an interceding stanza:  
2B2C -3B1B -2C1B. Reply  
2B2C -3B1B -2C1B -1. Reliance on the attribute of the accumulations in sentient beings’ own continua  
2B2C -3B1B -2C1B -2. Explanation through an analogy that the exalted body does not directly appear if the 
conditions i n sentient beings’ own continua are not complete  
2B2C -3B1B -2C1B -1. Reliance on the attribute of the accumulations in sentient beings’ own continua  
2B2C -3B1B -2C1B -1A. Root text  
2B2C -3B1B -2C1B -1B. Commentary  
2B2C -3B1B -2C1B -1A. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
8.9 Through the thorough ripening of the causes,  
It appears as this and that  
Beneficial activity  
For anyone, anywhere, at any time. 
 
EXPLANATION  
It follows that the enactment of sentient beings’ welfare through a buddha’s exalted body 
directly appearing to them relies on the attribute of they themselves having gathered the 
accumulations, because in dependence on the thorough ripening of the roots of virtue —
the causes  for hearing the Dharma directly from a buddha, the cultivation of faith through 
having obser ved buddhas in the past and so forth —the exalted body appears as this and 
that benefit through performing the activity of directly teaching the Dharma for any  such 
trainees , anywhere, at any time, and performs activities; and it does not appear to those 
who have not gathered the accumulations . 
2B2C -3B1B -2C1B -1B. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. The seeds of the roots of virtue generated in the past through having 
met the spiritual guide and so forth, the causes of having observed  the buddhas and so forth, 
having become fully developed, at that time when, if the Dharma is taught to whichever 
sentient beings at whatever time, it will be agreeable for a long time. Since they have 
accomplished  past prayers in order to enact the welfare of those, s ince the bhagavans 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
549 perform activities of welfare appropriately in accordance with appearing  at this and that, 
although abiding nearby like the wish- granting gem at all times, due to the causes being 
incomplete since it is generated through the shortcomings  of their karma, the results do not 
appear to ripen. Thinking the aforesaid is the intention.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Hearing the Dharma directly from a buddha relies on the two special outer and inner 
conditions, (i) because it must arise in dependence upon the inne r condition: the seeds of 
the roots of virtue of faith and so forth generated in the past through having met  the 
Mahayana spiritual guide and so forth in the past , the  causes that are generated through 
having observed the buddhas and so forth, having becom e fully developed powerful 
potentials , and (ii) because of the outer condition: performing activities of directly teaching 
the Dharma at that time when, if the Dharma is taught to whichever  sentient beings at 
whatever time, it will be agreeable and benefic ial temporally and for a long time  through 
the attainment of liberation . 
 Although the subduer buddha bhagavans’ capacity to enact others’ welfare abides 
nearby like the wish -granting gem at all times, the results  of that do not appear to  
directly ripen  certain sentient beings. It is not due to the capacity of the buddhas’ exalted 
compassion having degenerated; rather it is due to the causes for the buddhas directly appearing  being incomplete, since it is generated through the shortcomings of the  
karma  of sentient beings themselves who especially committed negativities . They abide  
like the wish -granting gem at all times, since the bhagavans  perform activities of welfare 
in accordance with appearing at this and that  place and time wherever and whenever 
there are trainees who have gathered the accumulations. That follows , since they have 
accomplished past prayers in order to directly enact the welfare of those  trainees .   
2B2C -3B1B -2C1B -2. Explanation through an analogy that the exalted body does not directl y appear if the 
conditions in sentient beings’ own continua are not complete  
2B2C -3B1B -2C1B -2A. Making a connection  
2B2C -3B1B -2C1B -2B. Root text  
2B2C -3B1B -2C1B -2C. Commentary  
2B2C -3B1B -2C1B -2A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
“What is that like?” Regarding  that thought, through an interceding stanza, the analogy:  
 
EXPLANATION  
“What is that like?” Regarding that thought, through an interceding stanza, the analogy:  
2B2C -3B1B -2C1B -2B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
8.10 Just as, even though the king of gods might have sent down rain,  
An unsuitable seed does not grow,  
Due to lacking fortune, they do not experience the excellences  Even though the buddhas arise.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Even though the buddhas actually arise  in the world, there is a reason for certain sentient 
beings  not directly meeting them, because, due to lacking the fortune to directly see the 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
550 buddhas, they do not experience the excellences  of hearing the excellent Dharma and so 
forth, just as , for example, even though the king of gods might have sent down rain, with 
respect to that which is unsuitable as a seed due to having been burnt by fire and so forth, a 
green sprout does not grow.  
2B2C -3B1B -2C1B -2C. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. For example, even though the king of gods might have sent d own 
rain, sesame seeds and so forth that have become unsuitable through the entity of rot and so 
forth do not grow. Similarly, even though the buddhas who are skilled in fully completing 
all hopes in the mind arise, since lacking fortune, they will not att ain the excellences of 
hearing the excellent Dharma and so forth.   
 
EXPLANATION  
Even though the buddhas who are skilled in fully completing all temporal and ultimate 
hopes in the mind arise, certain sentient beings will not attain the excellences of hearing 
the excellent Dharma and so forth, since certain [sentient beings]  lack the fortune  for 
that. For example, even though the king of gods might have sent down rain, sesame 
seeds and so forth that  have become  unsuita ble through the entity of rot and so forth 
do not grow.   
2B2C -3B1B -2C2. Dispelling objections regarding both pervasiveness and permanence  
2B2C -3B1B -2C2A. Question 
2B2C -3B1B -2C2B. Reply  
2B2C -3B1B -2C2A. Question 
COMMENTARY 
QUALM: The truth body with the nat ure of exalted wisdom exists in the supports that are 
the continua of definite individual yogis and arises in each instant. Why is it described as 
“pervasive” and also “permanent?”  
 
EXPLANATION  
QUALM: The subject —the truth body with the nature of uncontam inated exalted 
wisdom  included within the compounded —why is it described as “pervasive?”  It follows 
that it is unreasonable, because it  exists only in the supports that are the continua of 
definite individual yogis who abide in Akanistha  and so forth. And  because it is produced 
and arises in each instant , why is it also described as  “permanent?”  
2B2C -3B1B -2C2B. Reply  
2B2C -3B1B -2C2B -1. Making a connection  
2B2C -3B1B -2C2B -2. Root text  
2B2C -3B1B -2C2B -3. Commentary  
2B2C -3B1B -2C2B -1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY  
It has been taught by an interceding stanza:  
 
EXPLANATION  
It has been taught by an interceding stanza:  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
551 2B2C -3B1B -2C2B -2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
8.11 Because the activities in that way are extensive, 
The Buddha is definitely described as “ pervasive;”   
Because that itself is without extinction,  
He is also described as “permanent.”   
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the Buddha —there is no contradiction that he  is definitely described as 
“pervasive ,” because the activities in that way explained above  are extensive , due to 
engaging all sentient beings ; in consideration of the continuity,  he is also described as 
“permanent,” because  that entity of him itself is without extinction  even though it enacts 
the welfare of sentient beings and resides as long as  cyclic existence exists . 
2B2C -3B1B -2C2B -3. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. Because of his extensive performance of activities by means of 
appearing at all through the mode that has been explained in that way and because the 
Bhagavan does not have extinction even though he resides continually as long as cyclic 
existence exists, respectively the Buddha is clearly described as “pervasive” and 
“permanent.”  
 
EXPLANATION  
There is a reason for respectively describing the Buddha as “pervasive,” because of his 
extensive performance of activities of others’ welfare by means of the exalted body  
directly appearing at all opportune times to directly subdue the trainees  through the mode 
that has been explained in the context of “Through the thorough ripe ning of the causes” 
[8.9a] in that way; in consideration of  the continuity, he is clearly  described as 
“permanent,” because the Bhagavan does not have extinction in continuity even though 
he resides continually as long as cyclic existence exists.  
2B2C -3B1B -3. Complete enjoyment body  
2B2C -3B1B -3A. Brief indication by means of characteristics  
2B2C -3B1B -3B. Extensive explanation of the excellent qualities  
2B2C -3B1B -3A. Brief indication by means of characteristics  
2B2C -3B1B -3A1. Making a connection  
2B2C -3B1B -3A2. Root text  
2B2C -3B1B -3A3. Commentary  
2B2C -3B1B -3A1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
Having indicated two bodies in that way, the third, the complete enjoyment body, the 
entitiness of the form body, blazing with the excellent signs and exemplifications :   
 
EXPLANATION  
Having indicated two bodies in that way, the third, the complete enjoyment body, the entitiness of the form body, blazing with the excellent signs and exemplifications : 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
552 2B2C -3B1B -3A2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
8.12 This nature of the thi rty-two signs and  
Eighty exemplifications is asserted to be  
The complete enjoyment body of the Subduer  
Because of thoroughly enjoying the Mahayana. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —this form body of the Subduer  residing only in Akanistha , bearing the 
nature of t he thirty -two signs and eighty exemplifications — is asserted to be the 
complete enjoyment body, because it is an exalted body distinguished by the five 
certainties : completely and  thoroughly enjoying the Mahayana Dharma and so forth . 
2B2C -3B1B -3A3. Comment ary 
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. This entitiness of the thirty -two signs and eighty exemplifications, 
because of utilizing the very unblemished joy and happiness of the enjoyment of the Mahayana together with the great bodhisattvas residing on the ten grounds, is the complete enjoyment body of the Buddha Bhagavan.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —this form body residing in only Akanistha , the entitiness of the thirty -two 
signs and eighty exemplifications —is the complete enjoyment body of the Buddha 
Bhagavan , because it is an exalted body possessing the five certainties : utilizing the very 
unblemished joy and uncontaminated happiness of the enjoyment of the Mahayana 
together with  its retinue, the great bodhisattvas residing on the ten grounds , and so 
forth .   
2B2C -3B1B -3B. Extensive explanation of the excellent qualities  
2B2C -3B1B -3B1. Signs  
2B2C -3B1B -3B2. Exemplifications 
2B2C -3B1B -3B1. Signs  
2B2C -3B1B -3B1A. The resultant signs  
2B2C -3B1B -3B1B. Relation between the causes and the results  
2B2C -3B1B -3B1C. Explaining the causes that have been explained in the sutras  
2B2C -3B1B -3B1A. The resultant signs  
2B2C -3B1B -3B1A -1. Making a connection  
2B2C -3B1B -3B1A -2. Root text  
2B2C -3B1B -3B1A -3. Commentary 
2B2C -3B1B -3B1A -1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
QUESTION: What  are those thirty -two signs?  
RESPONSE: Five interceding stanzas:  
 
EXPLANATION  
QUESTION: What are those thirty -two signs?  
RESPONSE: Five interceding stanzas : 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
553 2B2C -3B1B -3B1A -2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
8.13 Hands and feet having the signs of wheels, tortoise feet , 
Digits of the hands and feet joined with webs,  
Hands along with feet smooth and tender, Seven [regions] of the body elevated,  
 8.14 Long digits, broad heels, a large and upright body,  
Knees not protruding, hairs pointing upward,  
Calves like the antel ope’s, long and beautiful arms,  
Secret organ well retracted in a sheath,  
  
8.15 Golden- hued skin, soft skin,  
Hairs growing singly and excellently clockwise,  
Face adorned with a treasure hair, torso like the lion’s,  
Tops of the shoulders rounded, broadness between the shoulders,  
 8.16 With respect to this, the appearance of even tastes that are not delicious as 
the best of tastes,  
Body is symmetrical like a nyagrodha tree, 
Possessing a protrusion on the crown, tongu e beautiful and long,  
The melodious voice of Brahma, cheeks like a lion’s,  
 
8.17 Very white teeth, even teeth, well set,  
Forty complete in number,  Azure eyes, eyelashes like a magnificent cow’s:  
These thirty -two are the signs.  
 
EXPLANATION  
These thirty -two, “Hands and feet ” and so forth, are the excellent signs.  Sutra says: 
“Subhuti, having trained in this Mother and attained all those qualites, one will attain clear 
complete  buddhahood in unsurpassable complete enlightenment; one will attain the exalte d 
body of the Tathagata Foe -Destroyer Perfect Complete Enlightened One with respect to all 
from all aspects, adorned with the thirty -two signs and adorned with eighty exemplifications 
of a great being, and one will display the joy, happiness, satisfaction, and great joy of 
unsurpassable enjoyment of the supreme vehicle to bodhisattvas.”  
2B2C -3B1B -3B1A -3. Commentary 
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. (1) Due to seeing off and receiving gurus and so forth, hands and feet possessing the signs of wheels; (2) due to firmness in having perfectly adopted vows, 
feet that abide very [evenly] similar to the tortoise;  
 
EXPLANATION  
The former parts [of each point in the commentary] are causes, while the latter parts are the entity of resultant signs. Through having be en preceded by the various causes, one achieves 
the possession of these results.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
554  
(1) There is a reason for the occurrence of the Subduer’s hands and feet possessing the 
signs of wheels  that are complete with a thousand spokes, a hub, and a rim, as if they were 
carved in bone or ivory, because they occur in that way due to  his having familiarized with 
seeing off and receiving gurus , offering himself as a retinue servant, and so forth at the 
time of a learner in the past. Also apply in that way with respect to the root text.  
 
(2) [The complete enjoyment body] possesses two soles of the feet without depressions that 
abide very  evenly  on the ground similar to [the underside of] the tortoise , due to having 
culminated mental firmness in having perfectly adopted  whichever of the three vows  in 
the past.   
COMMENTARY  
(3) due to having relied upon the four means of gathering [disciples], digits joined with webs like those of the king of swans; (4 ) due to having given sublime food and drink and so 
forth, hands and feet that are smooth and tender;   
 
EXPLANATION  
(3) He possesses digits  of the hands and feet joined with webs that allow ornaments such as 
rings to be worn, without gaps between the digit s, starting from the first joint, like those of 
the king of swans, because of having culminated activities due to having relied upon the 
four means of gathering [disciples]: generosity, speaking pleasantly, and so forth.  
 
(4) He possesses hands and feet t hat are smooth and tender, because they occur in that way 
due to his having given sublime food and drink and so forth in the past.  
  
COMMENTARY 
(5) due to having given very sublime lickables and so forth, since the areas of the hands and 
feet, the two reg ions between the shoulders, and the nape are elevated, seven elevated areas; 
(6) due to having liberated that to be killed, long digits;   
EXPLANATION  
(5) He possesses seven elevated areas since the areas of the backs of the two hands and 
tops of the  two feet, the two regions between the shoulders, and the nape are elevated  
through being fleshy , because they occur in that way  due to having given very sublime 
lickables and so forth.   
 (6) He possesses long digits  of the hands and feet , because of having culminated 
familiarization in that way  due to having liberated that to be killed, bound, and so forth. 
Join whatever is appropriate to the end of all.  
 
COMMENTARY  
(7) due to having helped to live, broad heels; (8) due to having abandoned killing, a large 
and upright body; (9) due to having perfectly adopted virtuous qualities, legs and 
anklebones that do not protrude;  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
555 EXPLANATION  
(7) He possesses broad heels , extending beyond by one -fourth of [the length of] the soles of 
the feet , due to having helped to live , that is, protected others’ lives.   
 
(8) He possesses a large and upright body through the body being seven cubits184 in height 
and being free from  crookedness , due to having abandoned killing.  
 
(9) He possesses kneecaps of the  legs and ankle bones that do not protrude outwards, due to 
having perfectly adopted virtuous qualities, generosity and so forth.    
COMMENTARY 
(10) due to having advanced the perfect adoption of virtue, hairs of the body that point 
upward; (11) due to having devoted to the kno wledges, crafts, and so forth , and imparted  
them , calves like the Enaya antelope’s; (12) due to not having rejected  beings who beg for 
wealth and possessions, long beautiful arms;   
 
EXPLANATION  
(10) He possesses hairs of the body that point upward individually , due to having 
advanced the perfect adoption of virtue  in others . 
 
(11) He possesses calves that are not debilitated, proportionate, fully developed, and 
rounded, like the Enaya antelope’s, due to having devoted to the knowledges  of healing , 
crafts, and so forth , and imparted them  to others . 
 
(12) He possesses long beautiful arms  since the hands reach his knees even without him 
bending the body, due to not having rejected beings who beg for wealth and possessions  
from him.  
 
COMMENTARY 
(13) due  to having caused all beings to behave chastely and having safeguarded the 
confidential  words of secrets, the secret organ retracted in a sheath; (14) due to having given 
sublime mats, golden hue; (15) due to having given excellences, fine houses and so fo rth, 
soft skin; (16) due to having completely abandoned disquiet and so forth, body hairs that 
curl clockwise individually;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(13) He possesses the secret organ retracted in a sheath  like that of the elephant and the 
wise horse , due to having c aused all beings to behave chastely and having safeguarded 
the confidential words of secrets  of others.  
 
(14) He possesses pure and clear skin of golden hue, due to having given sublime mats  to 
others. 
 
(15) He possesses soft skin  like very refined gold a nd silver, due to having given 
excellences : fine houses , inestimable mansions, and so forth.  
                                              
184 A cubit is the distance from one's elbow to the tips of one's fingers . 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
556 (16) He possesses body hairs that curl clockwise individually, without a single pore 
containing two hairs , due to having completely abandoned disquiet , distraction s, and so 
forth.   
 
COMMENTARY  
(17) due to having set all higher beings in accordance with their states, a face adorned with a 
treasure hair; (18) due to not having ridiculed with haughty words in any way, a torso like 
the lion’s; (19) due to having acted  in accordance with that pleasantly spoken and well 
spoken, tops of the shoulders that are very rounded;   
EXPLANATION  
(17) He possesses a face adorned with a treasure hair  at the location of the essential drop 
between the eyebrows, which is smooth, white, soft, three cubits or more in length if extended , and curls clockwise if released, with its tip pointing upward, the size of only an 
amalaki fruit, and like the aspect of a silver protrusion , due to having honored and set all 
higher beings in accordance with their states  as human beings .  
 
(18) He possesses a broad torso like the lion’s, due to not having ridiculed others with 
haughty words in any way.  
 (19) He possesses tops of the shoulders that are very rounded, that are rounded and well 
connected like the neck of a golden vase, with a network of veins  that are not prominent, 
due to having trained and acted in accordance with that pleasantly spoken and well 
spoken by others.  
 
COMMENTARY  
(20) due to having given medicine and so forth, broadness between the shoulders; (21) due 
to having nursed sick beings, knowing of the best of tastes; (22) due to having perfectly 
caused the construction of groves, parks, and so forth, symmetry like the nyagrodha tree;   
 
EXPLANATION  
(20) He possesses broadness between the shoulders , the region between the tops of the 
shoulders being broad, due to having given others  medicine , doctors, and so forth.  
 
(21) He possesses the appearance and knowing of the best of tastes  even with respect to 
tastes that are not delicious , due to having nursed sick beings, served them, and so forth.  
 
(22) He possesses symmetry like the nyagrodha (banyan) tree, the length of the body 
equaling his arm span , due to having perfectly caused others to  construct groves, parks, 
and so forth.      
 
COMMENTARY 
(23) due to having exceptionally given temple s and so forth, possessing a crown protrusion; 
(24) due to having spoken smoothly and so forth, a long tongue; (25) due to having caused 
sentient beings of all the world systems to understand the excellent Dharma, the melodious 
voice of Brahma;   
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
557 EXPLANATI ON 
(23) He possesses a crown protrusion that is round and balanced, and that curls clockwise , 
due to having exceptionally given temples , fine houses, and so forth.  
 
(24) He possesses a long tongue  that is able to touch the opening of the ear and the hairline , 
and is like the color of a red utpala flower, due to having spoken soft and pleasant words  
smoothly  and so forth  over three countless eons in the past .  
 
(25) He possesses the melodious voice of Brahma  that has the five branches —speech (i) 
that will be known and thoroughly known, (ii) that is worthy of being listened to and is 
devoid of  discordances, (iii) that is deep and resounding, (iv) that is not unruly and is 
pleasant to the ear, and (v) that is unconfused and clear, due to having caused sentient beings of all the world systems to understand the excellent Dharma  in accordance with 
their own language with a single speech.  
 
COMMENTARY 
(26) due to having abandoned senseless talk, cheeks like the lion’s; (27) due to having honored and so forth all beings, white teeth; (28) due to pure livelihood, even teeth;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(26) [He possesses] cheeks that are as round and full as a mirror d isc, like the lion’s, due to 
having abandoned senseless talk  in the past.  
 
(27) He possesses white teeth, due to having honored , praised, and so forth all beings  in 
the past.   
 
(28) He possesses even teeth  without some being high and others being low , due to pure 
livelihood  in which the five wrong livelihoods have been abandoned.  
 
COMMENTARY 
(29) due to having always used truthful words, teeth that are well set; (30) due to having 
abandoned slanderous words, possessing forty teeth; (31) due to having view ed all sentient 
beings like an only son, azure eyes; and (32) due to having viewed without anger, eyelashes 
like the cow’s. 
 
EXPLANATION  
(29) He possesses teeth that are well set since there are no gaps in between , due to having 
always used truthful words  over three countless eons. 
 (30) He possesses forty teeth, twenty above and twenty below, (it not being the case that 
there are no more than thirty -two,) due to having abandoned slanderous words  over a 
period as the above.  
 
(31) He possesses eyes like azure gems since the black and white portions are not mixed 
and they are free from reddish streaks , due to having viewed all sentient beings like an 
only son over just that period .  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
558 (32) He possesses eyelashes like the cow’s  since the upper and lower lashes are spread well 
and are not mixed , because they occur in that way due to having viewed sentient beings 
without anger, grasping, confusion, and so forth over a long period.   
2B2C -3B1B -3B1B. Relation between the causes and t he results  
2B2C -3B1B -3B1B -1. Making a connection  
2B2C -3B1B -3B1B -2. Root text  
2B2C -3B1B -3B1B -3. Commentary 
2B2C -3B1B -3B1B -1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY  
“Since the causes have been accomplished, the signs will be accomplished,” an interceding 
stanza:  
 
EXPLANATION  
“Since the causes of the signs have been accomplished, the signs will be accomplished,” an interceding stanza:  
2B2C -3B1B -3B1B -2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
8.18 These signs will be perfectly accomplished  
Due to having thoroughly completed   The corres ponding causes that act to accomplish  
The signs with respect to this.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —with respect to this  complete enjoyment body —these thirty -two resultant 
signs will be perfectly accomplished, due to having thoroughly completed the 
correspondi ng causes that act to accomplish the  thirty -two signs.  
2B2C -3B1B -3B1B -3. Commentary 
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. By having thoroughly completed those which are the causes that act 
to accomplish whichever sign, these thirty -two signs will arise.  
 
EXPLANATION  
By having thoroughly completed those which are the causes that act to accomplish 
whichever sign, these thirty -two signs will arise. Apply as in [the explanation of] the root 
text. 
2B2C -3B1B -3B1C. Explaining the causes that have been explained in  the sutras  
2B2C -3B1B -3B1C -1. Making a connection  
2B2C -3B1B -3B1C -2. Root text  
2B2C -3B1B -3B1C -3. Commentary 
2B2C -3B1B -3B1C -1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
QUESTION: What are the causes?  
RESPONSE: After that, through interceding stanzas:  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
559  
EXPLANATION  
QUESTION: What are the causes of the signs?  
RESPONSE: After that, through interceding stanzas: 
2B2C -3B1B -3B1C -2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
8.19 Seeing gurus off and so forth;  
Firm perfect adoption;  
Relying on gathering; giving  
Sublime thing s; liberating   
 
8.20 That to be killed; perfectly adopting  
Virtue; advancing it and so forth : 
The characteristics of the causes that act to accomplish them  
Are as they have been explained in the sutras. 
 
EXPLANATION  
Through having familiarized with those causes of the signs  explained above, one will 
definitely accomplish the resultant signs, because one will definitely accomplish the resultant signs through having familiarized with those  as they have been explained in the 
sutras  that are the Mothers: (i) the seven explicitly  indicated here —seeing gurus off and so 
forth; firm perfect adoption and so forth —and (ii) the twenty -five included in “ and so 
forth ” [in 8.20b]. 
2B2C -3B1B -3B1C -3. Commentary 
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. Since these two stanzas have already been commentated upon in the explanation of the signs above, I shall not write on them again.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The reason for not explaining them extensively here is as follows. The subject —these two 
stanzas —I shall not write extensively on them again here, because  I shall not write on 
them  here since they have already been commentated upon in the explanation of the 
entity of the signs above.  They have been explained there since the explanation is simple 
and easy to realize by others due to the causes and results ha ving been correlated.  
2B2C -3B1B -3B2. Exemplifications 
2B2C -3B1B -3B2A. Making a connection  
2B2C -3B1B -3B2B. Root text  
2B2C -3B1B -3B2C. Commentary  
2B2C -3B1B -3B2A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
In that way, having described the signs, the excellent exemplifica tions have been taught by 
twelve interceding stanzas:   
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
560 EXPLANATION  
In that way, having described the signs, the excellent exemplifications have been 
taught by twelve interceding stanzas: 
2B2C -3B1B -3B2B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
8.21 The Subduer’s  nails that a re copper colored,  
Glossy, and raised; digits  
Rounded, well -developed, and tapered;  
Veins not prominent and without knots;  
 8.22 Anklebones that do not protrude; equal legs;  
The gait of a lion, an elephant, 
A swan, and a leader; proceeds in a clockwise  manner, 
Beautifully, and upright; body that is elegant, 
 8.23 Cleansed, well proportioned,  Clean, soft, and pure;  
Signs are thoroughly complete;  
Body that is well -built and comely;  
 
8.24 Strides are even; two eyes that are  
Clear; youthful- looking; 
Body that is not feeble and is well -developed;  
Body that is very firm;  
 
8.25 Limbs are thoroughly distinct;  
Sight is unobscured and clear;  
Waist is round, moderately sized, without depressions, and  
Belly is flat; navel is  
 
8.26 Deep and curled clockwise;  
Attractive when beheld;  
Pure conduct; body is  
Without moles;  
 8.27 Hands that are smooth like cotton;  
The lines of the hands are radiant, deep, and long;  
Face is not too long;  
Lips are as red as the bimba fruit;  
 
8.28 Tongue is supple, slender, and  
Red; voice  is thunderous,  
Supple, and smooth; canine teeth are round,  
Sharp, white, even, and   
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
561 8.29 Tapered; nose is prominent and  
Supremely clean;  
Wide eyes and thick eyelashes, 
Like lotus petals;  
 8.30 Eyebrows are long, smooth, and  
Glossy, and even hairs;  
Arms  are long and well -developed; ears are equal and  
Completely unimpaired;  
 
8.31 Forehead is well -defined and  
Broad; head is well -formed;  
Hair is as black as bees,  
Dense, smooth, untangled, and  
 8.32 Not bristly, fragrance  
Captivating the minds of beings;  Shrivatsas and svastikas:  
Asserted to be the Buddha’s excellent exemplifications
. 
 
EXPLANATION  
Join “ The Subduer’s ” to all below, and join also the last line [“ Asserted to be the 
Buddha’s excellent exemplifications ”] to the end of all the above. The attri butes of the 
signs of the exalted body that appear externally to others cause the internal excellent qualities that will be explained to be understood. Due to causing understanding in others’ 
continua, they are [called] exemplifications.   
2B2C -3B1B -3B2C. Commentary  
From among eight [sets], the first set of ten:  
 
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. (1) Due to having separated from attachment to all compounded 
phenomena, nails that are copper colored; (2) due to the extraordinary thought of benefiting 
all sentient beings, nails that are glossy; (3) due to having been born in the best of classes, 
nails that are raised; (4) due to the modes without  misdeeds, digits that are rounded; (5) due 
to the collection of roots of virtue, digits that are well -developed;  (6) due to perfect 
engagement serially or individually, digits that are tapered; (7) due to having guarded  
against actions of the body and so forth and livelihood, veins that are not prominent; (8) due 
to having untied the knots of the afflictions, veins that are without knots; (9) due to 
possessing intelligence with respect to very hidden phenomena, ankle bones that do not 
protrude; (10) due to having acted to liberate beings from all locations of difficult 
migrations, legs that are not unequal;  
 
EXPLANATI ON 
(1) The complete enjoyment body possesses nails that are copper colored, due to having 
culminated separation from attachment to all compounded phenomena.  It is said, “As a 
sign that one has such an inner excellent quality, one possesses the sign of the exalted 
body.” 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
562 (2) He possesses nails that are glossy, due to possessing the culminated extraordinary 
thought of benefiting all sentient beings  in the long -term.  
(3) He possesses nails that are raised  without any unevenness , due to having been born 
in the best of human classes.  
(4) He [possesses] digits that are rounded, due to  having culminated the modes of 
practice of the achievings without misdeeds.   
(5) He possesses digits that are well -developed, due to having culmina ted the collection 
of roots of virtue  in the past . 
(6) He possesses digits that are tapered, due to having culminated  perfect engagement 
serially or progressively in the classes of realizations of the three vehicles . Affix “having 
culminated” in accordance  with what is suitable in the context.  
(7) He possesses veins of the body that are not prominent  from the outside , due to having 
guarded against the ten non -virtuous paths of actions of the body and so forth and wrong 
livelihood.  
(8) He possesses veins tha t are without knots, due to having untied the knots of the 
afflictions  and having become freed . 
(9) He possesses smaller ankle bones that do not protrude, due to possessing intelligence 
with respect to very hidden phenomena  since he has realized the profoun d secret point .  
(10) He possesses legs that are not unequal since they do not differ in length , due to 
having acted to liberate beings from all locations of difficult migrations  such as cyclic 
existence .  
 
The second set of ten:  
COMMENTARY 
(11) due to skill in outshining human beings, the gait of a lion; (12) due to skill in 
outshining nagas, the gait of an elephant; (13) due to skill in traveling through space, the 
gait of a swan; (14) due to skill in being a leader of beings, the gait of a leader; (15 ) due to 
proceeding in accordance with the path of circumambulation, reversing and proceeding in a clockwise manner; (16) due to skill in being beautiful, proceeding beautifully; (17) due to 
always not having a crooked mind, proceeding without swaying; (18 ) due to perfectly 
expressing excellent qualities, a body that is elegant; (19) due to not being defiled by 
qualities of negativities, a body that is as though cleansed; (20) due to having taught 
Dharma in accordance with the trainees, a body that is well proportioned;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(11) He possesses the gait of a lion, due to skill in outshining human beings.  
(12) He possesses the gait of an elephant, due to skill in outshining evil nagas  and so 
forth .  
(13) He possesses the gait of a swan, due to skill in  traveling through space  like a bird .  
(14) He possesses the gait of a leader, due to skill in being a leader of beings , sentient 
beings’ guide to the desired destinations .  
(15) He reverses and proceeds in a clockwise manner, due to proceeding in accordance 
with the path of circumambulation.  
(16) He proceeds beautifully, due to skill in being attractive and beautiful  to behold when 
he is proceeding .  
(17) He proceeds without swaying,  due to always not having a crooked mind that pays 
attention to two loci .  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
563 (18) He possesses a body that is elegant  since it is well -developed and dignified , due to 
perfectly expressing others’ excellent qualities.  
(19) He possesses a body that is as though cleansed since it is clean and pure , due to not 
being defiled by qualities of negativities  of the three doors .  
(20) He [possesses] a body that is well proportioned  since the height, girth, and so forth 
are precise  and not mixed- up, due to having taught Dharma in accordance with the  
minds of the trainees.  
 
The third set of ten:  
COMMENTARY 
(21) because of behavior of body and so forth that was clean, a body that is pure; (22) 
because of a compassionate mind, a body that is soft; (23) because of a pure mind, a body 
that is pure; (24) because of having thoroug hly completed the subduing qualities, signs that 
are complete; (25) because of having completed excellent qualities that are vast and 
beautiful, a body that is well -built and comely; (26) because of an equanimous mind 
towards  all, strides that are even; (2 7) because of having taught the pure Dharma, eyes that 
are clear; (28) because of having taught a Dharma that is easy to understand, a body that is 
very youthful -looking; (29) because of a mind that is dauntless, a body that is not feeble; 
(30) because of superior roots of virtue, a body that is well -developed;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(21) He is clean due to a body that is pure, because of behavior of body, speech, mind,  
and so forth that was clean.  
(22) He possesses a body that is soft, because of a compassionate mi nd. 
(23) He possesses a body that is pure, because of a pure mind  free from stains .  
(24) He possesses signs that are complete, because of having thoroughly completed all 
the subduing qualities  that destroy the afflictions and conceptualizations in his con tinuum .  
(25) He possesses a body that is well -built due to it being broad and comely  in features , 
because of having expressed to others  excellent qualities that are (i) vast due to being 
extensive and (ii) beautiful  due to being pleasing .  
(26) He possess es strides that are even  since they do not differ in  span, because of an 
equanimous mind towards all sentient beings .  
(27) He possesses two eyes that are clear  since there are no specks and the like , because of 
having taught the pure Dharma  that generated  only excellent qualities .  
(28) He possesses a body that is very youthful -looking, because of having taught a 
Dharma along with examples  that is easy to understand.  
(29) He [possesses] a body that is not physically feeble, because of a mind that is always 
dauntless  regarding difficult matters .  
(30) He [possesses] a body that is physically well-developed, because of roots of virtue 
superior  to all worlds .   
 
The fourth set of ten:  
COMMENTARY 
(31) due to having extinguished rebirth, a body that is ve ry firm; (32) due to having very 
distinctly taught dependent- arising, primary limbs  and secondary limbs that are very 
distinct; (33) due to having taught the meaning of the words that are very pure, sight that is 
without visual aberration and is clear; (34 ) due to having caused excellent ethics in his 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
564 students, a waist that is round; (35) due to not being defiled by the faults of cyclic existence, 
a waist that is moderately sized; (36) due to having destroyed the inflatedness of pride, a 
waist that is witho ut depressions; (37) due to having turned away from the limited Dharma, 
a belly that is flat; (38) due to having realized the profound Dharma, a navel that is deep; (39) due to having caused his students to uphold in accordance, a navel that is curled 
clockwise; (40) due to having caused beauty in his retinue, beautiful;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(31) He possesses a body that is very firm  since the flesh is not flabby , due to having 
extinguished the karma for taking rebirth.  
(32) He possesses primary limbs , such as han ds and legs,  and secondary limbs , such as 
digit joints, that are very distinct since the components are differentiated , due to having 
very distinctly taught the forward and reverse cause and effect processes of dependent-
arising  for the sake of freeing tra inees from cyclic existence . 
(33) He possesses sight that is without visual aberration of adventitious defilements and 
is clear, due to having completely taught the meaning of the words based upon high 
status and definite goodness that are very pure. (34) He possesses a waist that is round, due to having caused excellent ethics in his 
students. 
(35) He possesses a waist that is moderately sized  since the waist is appropriately sized , 
due to not being polluted and not being defiled by the faults of cyclic ex istence  since he 
has destroyed them with antidotes . 
(36) He possesses a waist that is without depressions  since the waist is not too long , due 
to having destroyed the inflatedness of pride.    
(37) He possesses a belly that is flat without highs and lows , due to having turned away 
from the limited and taught unlimitedly the Dharma  that is to be known . 
(38) He possesses a navel that is deep, due to having realized the profound Dharma.  
(39) He possesses a navel whose creases are  curled clockwise, due to having caused his 
students to uphold the instructions in accordance  with himself.  
(40) He possesses beautiful  conduct, due to having caused beautiful behavior of the three 
doors  in all his retinue. 
 
The fifth set of ten:  
COMMENTA RY 
(41) due to a pure mind, conduct that is pure; (42) due to having separated from subduing 
Dharma that is untimely, no moles or black marks on the body; (43) due to having taught 
the Dharma for attaining well -being of the body and so forth, hands that ar e very smooth 
like cotton; (44) due to having attained the status of a great splendid trainee -in-virtue, lines 
of the hands that are radiant; (45) due to having abided in the profound Dharma, lines of the hands that are deep; (46) due to perfectly giving p ure teachings also in the future, lines of 
the hands that are long; (47) due to having taught plenty of  trainings, a face that is not too 
long; (48) due to having realized that all worlds are like a reflection, lips that are as red as 
the bimba fruit; (49) due to having subdued with smooth words, a tongue that is supple; (50) 
due to abundant logic that is an excellent quality, a tongue that is very slender;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(41) He possesses conduct of the three doors that is pure, due to a pure mind  since it is 
stainless . 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
565 (42) He has  no moles or black marks on the body, due to having separated from (i) 
teaching a wrong path and (ii) teaching subduing Dharma that is untimely,  such as 
subduing trainees at an inopportune time .   
(43) He possesses hands that are very smooth like cotton, due to having taught the 
Dharma that becomes a cause for attaining well -being of the body, speech, mind, and so 
forth.  
(44) He possesses lines of the hands that are clearly radiant, due to having equalized his 
own being and other be ings and  attained the status of a great splendid trainee -in-virtue. 
(45) He possesses lines of the  hands that are deep  that are visible from a long distance , 
due to having abided in the culmination of realizing the profound Dharma.  
(46) He possesses lines of the  hands that are long, due to granting happiness in the short -
term and benefitting in the long -term, and perfectly giving pure teachings again and again 
also in the future. 
(47) He possesses a face that is not too long, due to having taught plenty of trainings in 
accordance with the many levels of the trainees . 
(48) He possesses lips that are as red as the bimba fruit  in which reflections of forms can 
appear, due to having realized that all worlds of environments and inhabitants are like a 
reflection. 
(49) He possesses a tongue that is supple, due to having subdued all trainees with 
smooth words.  
(50) He possesses a tongue that is very slender, due to having taught  abundant logic of 
reasoning that is an  excellent quality.  
 
The sixth set of ten:  
COMMENT ARY  
(51) due to having taught a subduing Dharma that is difficult to fathom by childish beings 
who have grasping, a tongue that is red; (52) due to not having had any trepidation, he 
possesses a thunderous voice; (53) due to having spoken pleasantly and so forth, a voice that 
is pleasant, supple, and smooth; (54) due to having restrained the entwinements with 
samsara, canine teeth that are round; (55) due to having tamed beings who are difficult to 
tame, canine teeth that are sharp; (56) with the very whole some subduing Dharma, canine 
teeth that are white; (57) due to having abided on the ground of equality, canine teeth that are even; (58) due to having perfectly taught the serial clear realizations, canine teeth that 
are tapered; (59) due to having abided in the supreme wisdom, a nose that is prominent; (60) 
due to excellent pure beings, a nose that is clean;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(51) He possesses a tongue that is red, due to having taught a subduing Dharma for 
destroying afflictions that is difficult to fathom by childish beings who have grasping to 
I and mine . 
(52) He possesses a thunderous voice, due to not having had any trepidation, 
apprehensiveness,  and fear [thinking,] “I shall conceal shortcomings.”  
(53) He possesses a voice that is pleasant, supple, and smooth, due to having spoken 
pleasantly and so forth through speech that is delightful to the ears . 
(54) He possesses canine teeth that are round, due to having exhaustively restrained the 
nine entwinements with samsar a: subsequent grasping and so forth.  
(55) He possesses canine teeth that are sharp, due to having tamed the strong afflictions 
in beings who are difficult to tame. 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
566 (56) He possesses canine teeth that are white, because of having acted to destroy with the 
very wholesome subduing Dharma that destroys afflictions . 
(57) He possesses canine teeth that are even  since they do not differ in length , due to 
having abided on the ground that realizes the equality  of samsara and nirvana . 
(58) He possesses canine teeth that are tapered, due to having perfectly taught the 
serial clear realizations  of the three vehicles through their stages . 
(59) He possesses a nose that is prominent, due to having abided in the supreme 
wisdom  realizing emptiness that is complete in the fac tor of method . 
(60) He possesses a nose that is clean  since it is free of snot and the like , due to beings  
(who are the trainees) possessing excellent pure  conviction .     
 
The seventh set of ten:  
COMMENTARY 
(61) because of the very extensive Dharma, eyes  that are wide; (62) due to having led  
multitudes of sentient beings, eyelashes that are thick; (63) due to having pleased all young 
female migrating beings, eyes with the white and black parts defined, like the lovely petals 
of a lotus; (64) due to consta ntly watching in the future, eyebrows that are long; (65) due to 
being skilled in the gentle subduing Dharma, eyebrows that are smooth; (66) due to the 
mental continuum having been moistened by virtue, eyebrows that are glossy; (67) due to 
seeing the fault s, hairs of the eyebrows that are even; (68) due to having turned  away the 
worst harm, arms that are long and well -developed; (69) due to being victorious over 
attachment and so forth, ears that are equal; (70) due to not degenerating the continua of all sentient beings, ear sense powers that are unimpaired;  
 
EXPLANATIO N 
(61) He possesses eyes that are wide, because of having taught the very extensive 
innumerable Mahayana Dharma.  
(62) He possesses eyelashes that are thick, due to having led limitless multitudes of 
sentient beings  through having abided in cyclic existence . 
(63) He possesses eyes with the white and black parts defined  since they are unmixed , 
like the lovely complete petals of a lotus, due to having pleased all young female god, 
anti-god, and human migrating beings  who are difficult to please, since he is wo rthy of 
praise by them . 
(64) He possesses eyebrows that are long, due to constantly watching migrating beings 
in the future , through looking, “How will they be in the future?”  
(65) He possesses eyebrows that are smooth, due to being skilled in the gentle s ubduing 
Dharma  through subduing with the gentle Dharma that does not rely on the five fires and 
the like .  
(66) He possesses eyebrows that are glossy, due to the mental continuum having been 
thoroughly moistened by virtue.  
(67) He possesses hairs of the e yebrows that are even  since they do not differ in length , 
due to seeing the faults  of afflictions . 
(68) He possesses arms that are long and well -developed, due to having turned away 
the worst harm  of sentient beings: the causes of general cyclic existence and of bad 
migrations [in particular].  
(69) He possesses ears that are equal  since they do not differ in length or size , due to 
being victorious over attachment and so forth  that are difficult to conquer . 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
567 (70) He possesses ear sense powers that are unimpaired  such as ears that are unimpaired 
in engaging sounds , due to having set all sentient beings (who are the trainees) in 
happiness without  degenerating their continua.  
 
The eighth set of ten:  
COMMENTARY 
(71) due to not having been influenced by all that is fabricated by views, a forehead that is 
well-defined; (72) due to having defeated all propounders, a forehead that is broad; (73) due 
to having completed the best of prayers, a head that is v ery well- formed; (74) due to having 
turned away from the joy of objects, hair that is as black as bees; (75) because of having 
abandoned those dormancies that are to be abandoned by the  path of seeing and the  path of 
meditation, hair that is dense; (76) du e to having known the teachings with a smooth mind, 
hair that is smooth; (77) due to a mind that is not disturbed by attachment and so forth, hair 
that is untangled; (78) due to words that are always not harsh, hair that is not bristly; (79) 
due to having scattered the flowers of the branches of enlightenment, hair that is fragrant; 
(80) due to having been beautiful in all ways, hands and feet that are adorned with shrivatsas, svastikas, and nandyavartas;   
 
EXPLANATION  
(71) He possesses a forehead that is well -defined  and a hairline that stands out well , due 
to not having been influenced by all that is fabricated by views  holding to extremes, 
such as the sixty -two bad views, which have not been able to change his original [view] . 
(72) He possesses a forehea d that is broad, due to having defeated all wrong 
propounders.  
(73) He possesses a head that is very well -formed  like the parasol , due to having 
completed the best of prayers in which one prays to attain buddhahood for others’ welfare .  
(74) He possesses hair that is as black as bees, due to having turned away from all 
craving to objects —forms, sounds, and so forth —the joy of objects. 
(75) He possesses hair that is dense  without intermediary gaps , because of having 
exhaustively abandoned those dormancies that are to be abandoned by the path of 
seeing and the path of meditation.  
(76) He possesses hair that is smooth, due to having known the teachings with a smooth 
mind that is without the roughness of holding to extremes . 
(77) He possesses hair that is untangled, due to a mind that is not disturbed by 
attachment and so forth. 
(78) He possesses hair that is not bristly  and not stiff, due to words that are always not 
harsh since he has exhaustively abandoned harsh words . 
(79) He possesses hair that is fragrant, due to having scattered the flowers of the 
branches (that serve as the causes of enlightenment) before the [Three] Jewels . 
(80) He possesses hands and feet that are adorned with shrivatsas, vajra -like patterns on 
the thumbs and the big toes,  svastikas that are squarish patterns on the palms of the hands 
and the soles of the feet , and,  on their edges, nandyavartas  of seven patterns swirling 
clockwise on the feet on the fourth toes and so forth , due to the exalted body having been 
beautiful in all ways. It has also been taught that there is a shrivatsa at the heart.  
  Regarding these exemplifications, it has been taught that, due to the presence of a certain 
inner excellent quality, a certain sign dawns externally, and that [the inner excellent quality 
and the external sign] are a pair of cause and result.   
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
568 2B2C -3B1B -4. Supreme emanation body  
2B2C -3B1B -4A. Making a connection  
2B2C -3B1B -4B. Root text  
2B2C -3B1B -4C. Commentary  
2B2C -3B1B -4A. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
In that way, having shown three exalted bodies, the fourth, the emanation body, in common 
with all childish beings:  
 
EXPLANATION  
In that way, having shown three exalted bodies, the fourth, the emanation body, in 
common with all childish beings: 
2B2C -3B1B -4B. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
8.33 The exalted body through which  
The various benefits to migrating beings are simultaneously enacted  
As long as cyclic existence exists  
Is the uninterrupted emanation body of Muni (the Subduer). 
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the exalt ed body that does not [possess] the five certainties through which 
the form bodies, such as the form body of Shakyamuni , uninterruptedly enact  exalted 
activities —is the emanation body , because it is an exalted body that simultaneously 
enacts the various be nefits of high status and definite goodness by directly appearing to 
pure and impure migrating beings as long as cyclic existence exists.  
 Sutra says, “Subhuti, moreover, someone who trains in this Mother, having realized those 
dharmas, will attain buddhah ood in unsurpassable complete enlightenment and then enact 
the welfare of all sentient beings through various emanations of a perfectly complete 
buddha at all times in the innumerable world systems of the ten directions. A great 
bodhisattva should train in  the Mother in that way.”   
2B2C -3B1B -4C. Commentary  
COMMENTARY  
So the root text is said. The exalted body through which the forms of Shakyamuni and so 
forth simultaneously enact the desired aims of sentient beings in all world systems as long 
as cyclic e xistence exists, continually, is the uninterrupted emanation body of the Buddha 
Bhagavan.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the exalted body through which the forms of Shakyamuni and so forth 
simultaneously enact the desired aims of pure and impure sentient beings by directly 
appearing —is the emanation body of the Buddha Bhagavan , because it is a final form 
body that does not [possess] the five certainties.  It uninterruptedly enacts  exalted 
activities, because it continually  enacts  exalted activities  in all world sy stems as long as 
cyclic existence exists.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
569 2B2C -3B2. The exalted activities that are deeds  
2B2C -3B2A. Actual meaning  
2B2C -3B2B. The sequences of the other topics of the words should also be understood in dependence on 
the first and last of the seventy topics  
2B2C -3B2A. Actual meaning  
2B2C -3B2A -1. Making a connection  
2B2C -3B2A -2. Root text  
2B2C -3B2A -3. Commentary  
2B2C -3B2A -1. Making a connection  
2B2C -3B2A -1A. Indicating that the three exalted bodies have been explained  
2B2C -3B2A -1B. Indicating that the exalted activities will be explained  
2B2C -3B2A -1A. Indicating that the three exalted bodies have been explained  
COMMENTARY 
In that way, the essence  of the nature body arise through the strength of cultivating, as the 
objects of buddhas and so forth , in reliance  upon exalted wisdom and so forth , having 
indicated the three exalted bodies that have been imputed,…   
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject —in that way,  the remaining three exalted bodies —are  in the essence  of the 
nature body, because that is the dharmata  of those. They are not causeless and do not arise 
from discordant causes, because they  arise  through the strength of cultivating  the two 
accumulations. The three exalted bodies that have been imputed  as real conventionalities 
do not arise causelessly, because (i) the exalted wisdom truth body that is a direct object of 
utilization of only buddhas  arises in reliance upon having gathered the accumulation of 
exalted wisdom , its cause , (ii) the complete enjoyment body that is a dire ct object of 
bodhisattva aryas and above who are [included within the expression] “ and so forth” arises 
in reliance upon having gathered the accumulation of merit, its cause, [which is included 
within the expression] “ and so forth, ” and (iii) the supreme e manation body arises from 
having gathered factors of both accumulations.  
 Regarding the meaning of this passage, someone explained that the four exalted wisdoms 
had been indicated as the basis of designation of the three exalted bodies. Another person, having refuted that, explained that the three, (i) the twenty -one uncontaminated exalted 
wisdoms, and included within the expression “and so forth” —(ii) the exalted body adorned 
with the signs and exemplifications that resides only in Akanistha , and (iii) the  exalted body 
that appears as a reflection of that —had been indicated as the remaining three exalted 
bodies. These [explanations] lie outside of the assertions of Acarya [Haribhadra], because in 
his Great Commentary  in the context of the presentation of th e corpus, the brief indication 
of this passage, he has clearly indicated that the remaining three exalted bodies respectively arise from the accumulation of exalted wisdom, the accumulation of merit, and factors of 
both. In that way, having indicated the n ature body and the remaining three exalted bodies, 
the exalted activities will be explained.  
2B2C -3B2A -1B. Indicating that the exalted activities will be explained  
COMMENTARY  
… since, by means of only the exalted wisdom conventionally generating appearan ces of 
the complete enjoyment body and so forth, activities of welfare are enacted, the activities 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
570 (based upon the appearances to beings who are the trainees) that arise in dependence on the 
owner who is that are of the truth body.   
 
EXPLANATION  
The subje ct—the  exalted activities (based upon the appearances to pure and impure 
beings who are the trainees) that arise in dependence on the owner who is that exalted 
wisdom truth body—one should know that they are exalted activities of the exalted wisdom 
truth body, since —by means of only the exalted wisdom truth body of realizations  
conventionally generating appearances of the complete enjoyment body , the emanation 
body,  and so forth —activities of welfare, those [the subject] and so forth, are enacted.  
2B2C-3B2A -2. Root text  
2B2C -3B2A -2A. Brief indication by means of duration  
2B2C -3B2A -2B. Extensive explanation by means of divisions 
2B2C -3B2A -2C. Summary by means of enumeration  
2B2C -3B2A -2A. Brief indication by means of duration  
ROOT TEXT  
8.34ab  Similarly , as long as cyclic existence exists,  
The activities of this are asserted to be uninterrupted.  
 
EXPLANATION  
The truth body is uninterrupted.  Similarly, as long as cyclic existence exists, the exalted 
activities of this truth body are asserted to be uninterrupted , because it has been 
preceded by having culminated the accumulation of causes for being uninterrupted in that way. In terms of the relationship in the root text, “Similarly” is related to the emanation 
body. However, Acarya [Haribhadra] interpreted it to be [related to] the truth body.  
2B2C -3B2A -2B. Extensive explanation by means of divisions 
2B2C -3B2A -2B1. Setting on the path  
2B2C -3B2A -2B2. Setting in the result of the path      
2B2C -3B2A -2B1. Setting on the path  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1A. Setting on t he path of accumulation  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1B. Setting on the path of preparation  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1C. Setting on the path of seeing     
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D. Setting on the path of meditation  
 The root text has been explained according to the system of interpretation of ot her pandit 
scholars through using the assertions of Arya [Vimuktisena].  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1A. Setting on the path of accumulation  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1A -1. Setting in the excellent attitude     
2B2C -3B2A -2B1A -2. Setting in the applications that ripen others’ continua  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1A -3. Setting in the view that realizes the four truths   
2B2C -3B2A -2B1A -1. Setting in the excellent attitude     
ROOT TEXT  
8.34c  The activities in which migrations have been pacified;  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
571 EXPLANATION  
(1) He initially sets [trainees] in the excel lent attitude, because he enacts the exalted 
activities  of [setting trainees in] generating the attitude that seeks liberation in which [the 
aspirations] seeking mere migrations that are happy migrations and bad migrations have 
been pacified . Through this,  setting [trainees] in a support of the path has been implied, but, 
explicitly, setting [trainees] in the attitude seeking liberation has been indicated.  
 Sutra says, “Subhuti, from here, when the eyes of the Buddha look at the worlds, from 
the grains of sand of the Ganges Rivers in the world systems in the eastern direction, great 
bodhisattvas who intentionally think, ‘Sentient beings have gone to the great hells, and 
having pacified the sufferings of the hell beings…’”  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1A -2. Setting in the ap plications that ripen others’ continua  
ROOT TEXT  
8.34d Setting in the four means of gathering [disciples];  
 
EXPLANATION  
(2) He sets [trainees] in ripening others’ continua, because he sets [trainees] in the four 
means of gathering [disciples]:  generosity, speaking pleasantly, conduct of welfare, and 
according with the meaning. 
2B2C -3B2A -2B1A -3. Setting in the view that realizes the four truths  
ROOT TEXT  
8.35ab  The realization of the thoroughly afflicted  
And the completely pure;   
 
EXPLANATION  
(3) He sets [trainees] in the wisdom that realizes the four truths, because he sets [trainees] in  
the realization that (i) sufferings and origins that are  the thoroughly afflicted causes and 
results are to be discarded and (ii) paths and cessations that are  the completely pure  causes 
and results are to be adopted . 
 Sutra says, “Such a transcendence of the cyclic existence of the five migrations that is 
either thoroughly afflicted or completely pure has never existed.”  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1B. Setting on the path of p reparation  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1B -1. Setting in the excellent attitude    
2B2C -3B2A -2B1B -2. Setting in the applications that ripen their own continua  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1B -3. Setting in the pure view   
2B2C -3B2A -2B1B -1. Setting in the excellent attitude    
ROOT TEXT  
8.35cd  Sentient beings [in] the meaning that is exactly  The meaning; …  
 
EXPLANATION  
(4) He sets [trainees] in the pure attitude of others’ welfare, because he sets sentient beings  
in the realization of the meaning that is exactly  the meaning of the mode of abida nce that 
he himself has realized. Sutra says, “By skill in means he fully ripens sentient beings.”  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
572 2B2C -3B2A -2B1B -2. Setting in the applications that ripen their own continua  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1B -2A. Setting in the actual   
2B2C -3B2A -2B1B -2B. Setting in the condu ct of the welfares of the two   
2B2C -3B2A -2B1B -2A. Setting in the actual   
ROOT TEXT  
8.35d … the six perfections;  
  
EXPLANATION  
(5) He sets [trainees] in the method to thoroughly complete the qualities of a buddha in their 
own continua, because he sets them in  the complete six perfections .  
 Sutra says, “I too performed generosity.”  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1B -2B. Setting in the conduct of the welfares of the two  
ROOT TEXT  
8.36a  The paths of buddhas; …  
 
EXPLANATION  
(6) He sets [trainees] in the conduct of the welfare s of the two, because he sets them in the 
paths of the ten virtues that progress to [the state of] buddhas .  
 Sutra says, “I too perfectly uphold the paths of action of the ten virtues.”  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1B -3. Setting in the pure view  
ROOT TEXT  
8.36ab  … the emp tiness of  
Inherent existence; …   
 
EXPLANATION  
(7) He sets [trainees] in the pure view, because he sets them in realizing the emptiness of 
inherent existence  ultimately with a mundane wisdom arisen from meditation. 
 Sutra says, “When a great bodhisattva p ractices the Mother, having seen all phenomena 
as empty of inherent existence...”  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1C. Setting on the path of seeing  
ROOT TEXT  
8.36b … duality have been extinguished;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(8) He sets [trainees] in newly realizing emptiness with direct  cognition, because he sets 
them in newly realizing the emptiness in which the elaborations of dualistic appearances 
have been  extinguished . 
 Sutra says, “A great bodhisattva practices the perfection of natural emptiness and...”  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D. Setting on the path of meditation  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -1. Setting on the two: the Stainless ground and so forth  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -2. Setting on the three: the fourth ground and so forth  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -3. Setting on the seventh ground  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -4. Setting on the eighth g round  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -5. Setting on the ninth ground  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
573 2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -6. Setting on the tenth ground  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -1. Setting on the two: the Stainless ground and so forth  
ROOT TEXT  
8.36c  Terminology; …   
 
EXPLANATION  
(9) He enacts the exalted activity of s etting [trainees] on the second and third grounds, 
because he sets them in the perfections of ethics and patience by way of understanding that 
all phenomena included within those two grounds are mere terminology , mere imputations. 
 Sutra says, “All those p henomena are held to be worldly conventions. They are 
imputations; they do not exist ultimately.”  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -2. Setting on the three: the fourth ground and so forth  
ROOT TEXT  
8.36c  … not observed;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(10) After that, he enacts the exalted act ivity of setting [trainees] on the three grounds, 
because he sets them, by means of being distinguished by realizing that all phenomena are 
not observed  ultimately, in (i) the wisdom that knows the harmonies with  enlightenment on 
the fourth ground, (ii) th e wisdom that  knows the four truths on fifth ground, and (iii) the 
wisdom that knows dependent -arising on the sixth ground. Sutra says, “When a great 
bodhisattva practices the Mother, having seen all phenomena as being devoid of  the thing...”  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D-3. Setting on the seventh ground  
ROOT TEXT  
8.36d Thoroughly ripening the embodied;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(11) After that, he enacts the exalted activity of setting [trainees] on the seventh ground, because he causes [them]  to thoroughly ripen the embodied by mea ns of  the perfection of 
skillful means included within that ground. Sutra says, “He acts to thoroughly ripen sentient beings.”  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -4. Setting on the eighth ground  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -4A. Setting in the knower of paths knowing the three paths   
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -4B. Setting in the pacification of the conception of true existence   
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -4C. Setting in the attainment of the imputed Buddha Jewel  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -4D. Setting in the application of pure land     
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -4A. Setting in the kn ower of paths that knows the three paths  
ROOT TEXT  
8.37a  The bodhisattvas’ paths;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(12) After that, he enacts the exalted activity of setting [trainees] on the eighth ground, because he sets them in the knower of paths that directly knows the three paths 
characterized by the bodhisattvas’ paths  included within that ground. Apply similarly the 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
574 predicate of the probandum and the later portion of the sign [“included in that ground”] to 
the three below. Sutra says, “Subhuti, the six perfections are  the paths to enlightenment.”  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -4B. Setting in the pacification of the conception of true existence   
ROOT TEXT  
8.37b Turning away from adherence;   
 
EXPLANATION  
(13) [After that, he enacts the exalted activity of setting trainees on the eigh th ground,] 
because he sets them in the turning away from the  manifest adherence  to true existence  
[included within that ground.] Sutra says, “One who practices the path to enlightenment should initially examine in this way; excluding manifest compositiona l actions, one should 
thoroughly investigate: ‘With respect to this, the entitiness of any phenomenon cannot be observed.’”  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -4C. Setting in the attainment of the imputed Buddha Jewel  
ROOT TEXT  
8.37c  Attaining enlightenment; …  
 
EXPLANATION  
(14) [After that, he enacts the exalted activity of setting trainees on the eighth ground,] 
because he sets them in the attaining of enlightenment that is imputed as Buddha Jewel 
[included within that ground.] Sutra says,  “Enlightenment is not attained by the  path; it is 
also not attained by a non -path.”  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -4D. Setting in the application of pure land  
ROOT TEXT  
8.37cd  … purifying of  
The buddha land; …  
 
EXPLANATION  
(15) [After that, he enacts the exalted activity of setting trainees on the eighth ground,] because he sets them in the purifying of the buddha land [included within that ground.] 
Sutra says,
 “Those roots of virtue are also shared with all sentient beings and thoroughly 
dedicated in order to thoroughly purify the buddha land.”   
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -5. Setting on the ninth ground  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -5A. Setting in the definite attaining of buddhahood themselves  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -5B. Setting in the ripening of others  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -5A. Setting in the definite attaining of buddhahood themselves  
ROOT TEXT  
8.37d … definite;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(16) After that, he enacts the exalted activity of setting [trainees] on the ninth ground, because he sets them in the definite  attaining of buddhahood without falling into other 
vehicles included within that ground. Sutra says, “A great bodhisattva is not definite with 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
575 respect to aggregates of hearers and solitary realizers, but is definite with respect to the 
aggregates of a buddha.”  
2B2C -3B2A-2B1D -5B. Setting in the ripening of others  
ROOT TEXT  
8.38a  The immeasurable welfare of sentient beings;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(17) Apply similarly the predicate and the later portion of the sign. [After that, he enacts the exalted activity of setting trainees o n the ninth ground,] because he sets them in 
accomplishing the immeasurable welfare of sentient beings  [included within that ground.] 
Sutra says,
 “Those who are skilled in means enact the welfare of sentient beings in as many 
world systems in each directio n of the ten directions as there are grains of sand of the 
Ganges River...”  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -6. Setting on the tenth ground  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -6A. Setting in relying upon the spiritual guide included within the tenth ground   
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -6B. Setting in increasing realization   
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -6A. Setting in relying upon the spiritual guide included within the tenth ground  
ROOT TEXT  
8.38b The excellent qualities of relying upon the buddhas and so forth;   
 
EXPLANATION  
(18) After that, he enacts the exalted activity of setting [trainees] on the tenth ground, because he sets them in accomplishing the special excellent qualities of relying upon the 
buddhas , hearing the excellent Dharma, making offerings, and so forth inclu ded within 
that ground. Sutra says, “… existing in as many world systems in each direction of the ten directions as there are grains of sand of the Ganges River...” Apply the predicate of the 
probandum and the later portion of the sign in that way to the o nes below. 
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -6B. Setting in increasing realization  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -6B1. Setting in the attainment of the branches of enlightenment  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -6B2. Setting in actions and results not going to waste  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -6B3. Setting in knowing the truths  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -6B4. Setting in the extinction of errors   
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -6B5. Setting in the absence of the basis  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -6B6. Setting in the completion of the completely pure  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -6B7. Setting in the completion of the accumulations  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -6B8. Setting in the realization of cyclic existence and peace as equal   
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -6B1. Setting in the attainment of the branches of enlightenment  
ROOT TEXT  
8.38c  The branches of enlightenment; …  
 
EXPLANATION  
(19) [After that, he enacts  the exalted activity of setting trainees on the tenth ground,] 
because he sets them in completing all virtues without exception that are the branches of 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
576 enlightenment [included within that ground.] Sutra says, “All virtuous qualities are 
branches of the p ath to great enlightenment.”  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -6B2. Setting in actions and results not going to waste  
ROOT TEXT  
8.38cd  … actions  
Do not go to waste; …   
 
EXPLANATION  
(20) [After that, he enacts the exalted activity of setting trainees on the tenth ground,] 
because he sets them in directly seeing that actions , no matter subtle or gross, do not go to 
waste  and are infallible [included within that ground.] Sutra says, “He will practice the 
deeds of a bodhisattva and attain clear complete  buddhahood in unsurpassable complete 
enlightenment.”  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -6B3. Setting in knowing the truths  
ROOT TEXT  
8.38d … seeing the truths;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(21) [After that, he enacts the exalted activity of setting trainees on the tenth ground,] because he sets them in directly seeing the complete four truths  [included within that 
ground.] Sutra says, “The great bodhisattva, having attained clear complete  buddhahood in 
unsurpassable complete enlightenment, teaches sentient beings the Dharma: sufferings, the 
origins of sufferings, the cessations of sufferings, and the paths that proceed to the 
cessations of sufferings.”  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -6B4. Setting in the extinction of errors   
ROOT TEXT  
8.39a  Abandoning the errors;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(22) [After that, he enacts the exalted activity of s etting trainees on the tenth ground,] 
because he sets them in exhaustively abandoning the four errors  [of apprehending] 
cleanness, happiness, permanence, self, and so forth  [included within that ground.] Sutra 
says,  “Great bodhisattva, one who is not skilled in the means of practicing the Mother 
adheres to the five aggregates by way of the four errors.”   
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -6B5. Setting in the absence of the basis  
ROOT TEXT  
8.39b The mode of the absence of the basis;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(23) [After that, he enacts the exalted activity of setting trainees on the tenth ground,] 
because he sets them in the mode of the absence of the conception of true existence, the 
basis  for generating the four errors [included within that ground.]  Sutra says,  “Excluding 
distortions, where does it abide? Regarding the things that are compositional actions of childish ordinary beings, if small, not even a mere portion of the tip of a hair exists.”  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
577 2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -6B6. Setting in the completion of the completely pure  
ROOT TEXT  
8.39c  The completely pure; …  
 
EXPLANATION  
(24) [After that, he enacts the exalted activity of setting trainees on the tenth ground,] 
because he sets them in the completion of the completely pure  that realizes the equality of 
all phenomena [included within that ground.] Sutra says,  “I taught that whatever is the 
equality of all phenomena is the completely pure.”  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -6B7. Setting in the completion of the accumulations   
ROOT TEXT  
8.39c  … the accumulations;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(25) [After that, he enacts the exalted activity of setting trainees on the tenth ground,] 
because he sets them in the completion of the two accumulations  that are the causes of 
enlightenment [included within that ground.]  Sutra says,  “It is not that all those phenomena 
serve as causes for accomplishing the path and generating the path because of attaining the result.”  
2B2C -3B2A -2B1D -6B8. Setting in the realization of cyclic existence and peace as equal  
ROOT TEXT  
8.39d Not knowing the compounded and  
 8.40a The uncompounded as different;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(26) [After that, he enacts the exalted activity of setting trainees on the tenth ground,] because he sets them in (i) not knowing the compounded samsara and the 
uncompounded nirvana as different ultimately an d (ii) directly knowing them as not 
different ultimately [included within that ground.] Sutra says,
 “The sphere of the 
uncompounded cannot be observed separate  from the sphere of the compounded .” 
2B2C -3B2A -2B2. Setting in the result of the path      
ROOT TE XT 
8.40b And setting in nirvana:  
 
EXPLANATION  
(27) After that, he sets [trainees] in the result of the path, because he sets  them in non-
abiding nirvana [included within that ground.] Sutra says,  “He asked, ‘Bhagavan, what is 
the tathagata (‘one -gone- thus’ )?’ The Bhagavan said, ‘That bearing the property of the 
absence of the confusion of inequality is one who has attained nirvana.’”   
2B2C -3B2A -2C. Summary by means of enumeration    
ROOT TEXT  
8.40cd  The exalted activities of the truth body  
Are asserted to  be of twenty -seven types. 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
578  
EXPLANATION  
The subject —the exalted activities of the exalted wisdom truth body —are asserted in 
sutra to be of twenty -seven types , because they are asserted in that way explained above . 
2B2C -3B2A -3. Commentary  
2B2C -3B2A -3A. Indi vidual explanations  
2B2C -3B2A -3B. Summary  
2B2C -3B2A -3A. Individual explanations  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1. Setting on the path  
2B2C -3B2A -3A2. Setting in the result of the path  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1. Setting on the path  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1A. Setting on the path of accumulation  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1B. Setting on the path of preparation  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1C. Setting on the path of seeing  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D. Setting on the path of meditation  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1A. Setting on the path of accumulation  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1A- 1. Setting in seeking liberation, the atti tude of middling beings  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1A- 2. Setting in the four means of gathering [disciples]  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1A- 3. Setting in knowing the four truths  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1A- 4. Setting in the attitude of other’s welfare  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1A- 5. Setting in the conduct  
2B2C -3B2A-3A1A- 6. Setting in the basis of accomplishing the two welfares  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1A- 1. Setting in seeking liberation, the attitude of middling beings  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. (1) Initially, having enacted the exalted activity in which migrations 
have been pacified, the characteristic of abiding without adherence to good migrations and 
poor migrations;   
EXPLANATION  
(1) After having set [trainees] in high status, he acts to set them initially  in the attitude 
seeking liberation, because he enacts the  exalted activity of [setting trainees in the attitude] 
seeking liberation in which the attitude of seeking migrations  in cyclic existence  have 
been pacified, the characteristic of abiding without adherence to happy migrations that 
are good migrations  and bad migrations that are  poor migrations  as objects to be attained . 
Through this, setting [trainees] in a support of the path has been indicated, but, explicitly, 
the exalted activity of setting [trainees] in seeking liberation has been indicated.   
2B2C -3B2A-3A1A- 2. Setting in the four means of gathering [disciples]  
COMMENTARY 
(2) setting in the four properties of gathering [disciples], generosity and so forth;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(2) It is not limited to just that, because he enacts the exalted activity of settin g [trainees] in 
the four properties of gathering [disciples]: generosity that acts to gather sentient beings 
and so forth.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
579 2B2C -3B2A -3A1A- 3. Setting in knowing the four truths  
COMMENTARY 
(3) having caused to realize the discordant classes and the antidotes  from the point of view 
of the objects to be discarded and to be adopted, through knowing that is arisen from 
hearing and so forth;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(3) It is not limited to just that, because he causes  [trainees] to realize the discordant 
classes , sufferings and origins, and the antidotes , cessations and paths, respectively from 
the point of view  of the objects to be discarded and to be adopted, through knowing 
that is arisen from hearing , arisen from contemplation and meditation, and so forth.  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1A- 4. Setting in the attitude of other’s welfare 
COMMENTARY 
(4) setting in the welfare of sentient beings, that is, the nature of such characteristics of love 
and so forth that are others’ welfare, through being devoid of subsequent grasping an d so 
forth, like an illusionist;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(4) It is not limited to just that exalted activity, because he then enacts the exalted activity of 
setting [trainees] in the welfare of sentient beings, that is, the nature of such 
characteristics of the four immeasurables, love and so forth that are others’ welfare, 
through being devoid of subsequent grasping, anger, and so forth with respect to 
sentient beings , like an illusionist.   
2B2C -3B2A -3A1A- 5. Setting in the conduct  
COMMENTARY 
(5) after that, in famil iarizing with the six perfections, distinguished by the purity of the 
three spheres, one’s own welfare;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(5) He sets [trainees] in special conduct, because, after that, he sets [trainees] in 
familiarizing with the six perfections, distinguished  by realizing the purity of the three 
spheres —the object, the activity, and the agent —one’s own welfare . 
2B2C -3B2A -3A1A- 6. Setting in the basis of accomplishing the two welfares  
COMMENTARY 
(6) after that, in the characteristic of one’s and others’ welfares , the path of buddhas, the 
paths of action of the ten virtues;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(6) After that, he enacts the exalted activity of setting [trainees] in the basis of all excellent 
qualities, because he sets [trainees] in the characteristic of one’s and others’ welfares, 
the paths of buddhas, the paths of action of the ten virtues , which are definitely 
necessary regardless of what is being accomplished. 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
580 2B2C -3B2A -3A1B. Setting on the path of preparation  
COMMENTARY 
(7) then, in the familiarization with the emptine ss of inherent existence of all phenomena; 
 
EXPLANATION  
(7) After setting [trainees] on the path of accumulation, then  he sets them in the path of 
preparation , because he places them in the familiarization with the emptiness of inherent 
existence ultimately of all phenomena  with a mundane wisdom arisen from meditation.  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1C. Setting on the path of seeing  
COMMENTARY 
(8) after that, in the property that is the absence  of duality, the characteristic of realizing 
progression to all, dharmadha tu, the first ground, in dependence on the perfection of 
generosity;   
 
EXPLANATION  
(8) After that, he sets them on the path of seeing, because he sets them in realizing the 
property  that is the absence  of duality  of apprehendeds and apprehenders , the 
char acteristic of newly realizing progression to all, bearing the property of 
dharmadhatu, the first ground, in dependence on the perfection of generosity. 
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D. Setting on the path of meditation  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -1. Setting on the second ground  until the fifth ground  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -2. Setting on the sixth ground  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -3. Setting on the seventh ground  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -4. Setting on the eighth ground  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -5. Setting on the ninth ground  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -6. Setting on the tenth ground  
2B2C -3B2A-3A1D -1. Setting on the second g round  until  the fifth ground  
COMMENTARY 
(9) then, setting in knowing that all phenomena are imputed as terminology, the perfections 
of ethics and so forth of the second ground and so forth, since it serves as the cause of  
thoroughly completing the accumulations;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(9) Then, he sets them in the second ground  until the  fifth ground , because he sets them in 
knowing that all phenomena are imputed as terminology, not existing ultimately and 
existing just conventional ly, by means of completing the four perfections of ethics until  
concentration and so forth of the second ground and so forth, since it serves as the 
cause of thoroughly completing the two accumulations .  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -2. Setting on the sixth ground  
COMMEN TARY  
(10) similarly, sequentially, in that all phenomena cannot be observed, the characteristic of 
not adhering to things that are knowers and objects of knowledge on the sixth ground, in 
dependence on the perfection of wisdom;  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
581 EXPLANATION  
(10) He sets t hem on the first ground until the  fifth ground . Similarly, sequentially  he sets 
them on the sixth ground, because he sets them in  realizing  that all phenomena  cannot be 
observed ultimately , the characteristic of not adhering to things that are knowers and 
objects of knowledge  as truly existent  on the sixth ground, in dependence on completing 
the perfection of wisdom  (realizing all phenomena that are dependent -arisings are like 
reflections) from the empowering condition of the perfection of concentration.   
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -3. Setting on the seventh ground  
COMMENTARY 
(11) after that, in ripening sentient beings through the strength of the perfection of means on 
the seventh ground;  
  
EXPLANATION  
(11) He sets them on the sixth ground. After that, he sets them on the seventh ground, 
because he sets them in ripening sentient beings through the strength of completing the 
perfection of skillful means on the seventh ground.  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -4. Setting on the eighth ground  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -4A. Setting in sp ecial conduct  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -4B. Setting in the extinction of the manifest conception of true existence  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -4A. Setting in special conduct  
COMMENTARY 
(12) then, in the path of the bodhisattvas that is not in common with that of the hearers and so forth on the eighth ground, through the strength of the perfection of power;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(12) He sets them on the seventh ground. Then, he sets them on the eighth ground, because 
he sets them in  the conduct of the six perfections, the path of the bodhi sattvas that is not 
in common with that of the hearers and so forth on the eighth ground, through the 
strength of completing the perfection of power .185 
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -4B. Setting in the extinction of the manifest conception of true existence  
COMMENTARY 
(13) then, in abandoning adherence to any phenomenon on that itself;   
 
EXPLANATION  
(13) It is not limited to just that, because then, he sets them in exhaustively abandoning the 
manifest adherence to any phenomenon as truly existent on that eighth ground  itself. 
Know that it is impossible for a manifest conception of true existence to occur once this 
ground is attained. 
                                              
185 Note that the perfection of power is presented after the perfection of prayer  in the outline: 2B2C -1A2A -
2B3A. How the twenty -two meanings are characterized by the twenty -two similes  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
582 2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -5. Setting on the ninth ground  
COMMENTARY 
(14) after that, in attaining enlightenment, through the force of the perfection of prayer on 
the ninth ground;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(14) After that, he sets them on the ninth ground, because he sets them in attaining the 
enlightenment that turns the wheel of Dharma well, through the force of completing the 
perfection of prayer on the ninth groun d. 
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -6. Setting on the tenth ground  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -6A. Setting in the tenth ground just attained  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -6B. Setting in being obstructed by one rebirth  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -6C. Setting in the last existence  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -6A. Setting in the tenth ground just attained  
COMMENTARY 
(15) after that, having set in various pure buddha lands on the tenth ground, through the 
strength of the perfection of exalted wisdom;   
 
EXPLANATION  
(15) After that, he sets them on the tenth ground that is just attai ned, because, having set  
them  in various pure buddha lands  of environments and inhabitants  on the tenth ground  
that is just attained , he sets them in being obstructed by one rebirth, through the strength 
of completing the perfection of exalted wisdom .   
2B2C-3B2A -3A1D -6B. Setting in being obstructed by one rebirth  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -6B1. Setting in the certainty of attaining buddhahood in the next rebirth  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -6B2. Setting in the spontaneous welfare of others  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -6B3. Setting in the comple tion of the remaining qualities of a buddha   
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -6B1. Setting in the certainty of attaining buddhahood in the next rebirth  
COMMENTARY  
(16) individually ascertaining perfect complete enlightenment, the self- entity that is 
obstructed by one rebi rth also on that itself;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(16) He sets them in that way, because he sets them in individually ascertaining perfect 
complete enlightenment in just the second  rebirth , the self- entity that is obstructed by 
one rebirth also on that tenth ground itself.  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -6B2. Setting in the spontaneous welfare of others  
COMMENTARY 
(17) the welfare of sentient beings in the world systems of the ten directions;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(17) He sets them in that, because he sets them in enacting the welfare of sentie nt beings 
in the world systems of the ten directions  equal to the buddhas . 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
583 2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -6B3. Setting in the completion of the remaining qualities of a buddha  
COMMENTARY 
(18) setting in the excellent qualities of arriving in the presence of the buddhas in  all the 
world systems;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(18) He sets them in that, because he sets  them in the excellent qualities of arriving in  the 
presence of the buddhas in all the world systems, ripening sentient beings, completing 
clairvoyances, and so forth, and then sets them in the last existence.  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -6C. Setting in the last existence  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -6C1. Setting in the distinctive abilities  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -6C2. Setting in the distinctive realizations  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -6C3. Setting in the distinctive abandonmen ts 
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -6C4. Setting in the distinctive accumulations of pure causes   
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -6C1. Setting in the distinctive abilities  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -6C1A. Setting in the ability to induce enlightenment   
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -6C1B. Setting in the ability of actions not going to waste  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -6C1A. Setting in the ability to induce enlightenment  
COMMENTARY  
(19) the branches of enlightenment, the characteristic of the qualities that act to induce all of 
enlightenment, also on that itself, the self- entity of the path of distinction, through such 
stages;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(19) He sets them in the distinction of also  that tenth ground itself through such stages , 
arriving in the presence of the buddhas and so forth , because he sets them in the complete 
branches o f enlightenment, the characteristic of the qualities that act to induce the 
production of all of the excellent qualities of unsurpassable enlightenment on that itself, 
the self- entity of the path of distinction  of the tenth ground. That very predicate of t he 
probandum should be applied also to the seven later ones. 
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -6C1B. Setting in the ability of actions not going to waste  
COMMENTARY 
(20) the relation between actions and results do es not go to waste;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(20) [He sets them in the di stinction of also that tenth ground itself through such stages, 
arriving in the presence of the buddhas and so forth,] because he sets them in directly 
realizing that the relation between actions and results do es not go to waste by way of 
high status and d efinite goodness.  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -6C2. Setting in the distinctive realizations  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -6C2A. Setting in the realization of the varieties  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -6C2B. Setting in the realization of the modes  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
584 2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -6C2A. Setting in the realization of the varieties  
COMMENTARY 
(21) realizing that all things are reality exactly;   
 
EXPLANATION  
(21) [He sets them in the distinction of also that tenth ground itself through such stages, 
arriving in the pres ence of the buddhas and so forth,] because he sets them in directly  
realizing that all things that are the four truths are reality exactly . 
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -6C2B. Setting in the realization of the modes  
COMMENTARY 
(22) having set in knowing that the compoun ded and the uncompounded are not different 
through the entitiness of emptiness;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(22) [He sets them in the distinction of also that tenth ground itself through such stages, 
arriving in the presence of the buddhas and so forth,] because having s et them in directly  
knowing that the compounded samsara and the uncompounded nirvana are not 
different ultimately  through the entitiness of emptiness, after that he sets them in the 
result.  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -6C3. Setting in the distinctive abandonments  
2B2C -3B2A-3A1D -6C3A. Setting in the extinction of errors  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -6C3B. Setting in the extinction of their bases   
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -6C3A. Setting in the extinction of errors  
COMMENTARY 
(23) the abandonment of all errors;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(23) [He sets them in the  distinction of also that tenth ground itself through such stages, 
arriving in the presence of the buddhas and so forth,] because he sets them in the exhaustive 
abandonment of all the four errors . 
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -6C3B. Setting in the extinction of their bases   
COMMENTARY  
(24) the exalted wisdom that has abandoned, without the basis of the errors;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(24) [He sets them in the distinction of also that tenth ground itself through such stages, 
arriving in the presence of the buddhas and so forth,] because he sets them in  the exalted 
wisdom that has exhaustively abandoned the conception of true existence , the basis of the 
errors .   
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -6C4. Setting in the distinctive accumulations of pure causes  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -6C4A. Setting in the accumula tion of causes for the truth body that is purity by way of 
nature  
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -6C4B. Setting in the accumulation of causes for being free from adventitious stains  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
585 2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -6C4A. Setting in the accumulation of causes for the truth body that is puri ty by way of nature  
COMMENTARY 
(25) the purity of a bodhisattva with the characteristic of purity by way of nature;  
 
EXPLANATION  
(25) [He sets them in the distinction of also that tenth ground itself through such stages, 
arriving in the presence of the bud dhas and so forth,] because he sets them in  the purity of 
a bodhisattva abiding on the tenth ground with the characteristic of purity by way of 
nature  distinguished by being free from adventitious stains. 
2B2C -3B2A -3A1D -6C4B. Setting in the accumulation of  causes for being free from adventitious stains  
COMMENTARY 
(26) the accumulation of causes for the purity that is free from all stains; and  
 
EXPLANATION  
(26) [He sets them in the distinction of also that tenth ground itself through such stages, 
arriving i n the presence of the buddhas and so forth,] because he sets them in  the complete 
accumulation of causes for the purity of the buddha ground that is free from all stains . 
2B2C -3B2A -3A2. Setting in the result of the path  
COMMENTARY 
(27) sets in nirvana on t he tathagata ground.  
 
EXPLANATION  
(27) After that, he sets them in the result of the path, because he  sets them  in non-abiding 
nirvana on the tathagata ground.  
2B2C -3B2A -3B. Summary  
COMMENTARY  
Therefore, just as the truth body, also the twenty -seven types  of exalted activities of this, 
since it is asserted as long as cyclic existence exists, are enacted.   
 
EXPLANATION  
Therefore, just as the truth body  is uninterrupted , also the twenty -seven types of exalted 
activities of this  truth body are uninterrupted , because, since it is asserted to enact the 
welfare of sentient beings as long as cyclic existence exists, the  exalted activities are 
enacted  [uninterruptedly] . 
2B2C -3B2B. The sequences of the other topics of the words should also be understood in depende nce on the 
first and last of the seventy topics  
COMMENTARY 
Through the stages of having indicated the sequences in which the first generated mind and 
the activities that is the last  have been indicated, the sequences of the remaining interceding 
topics of the words are also to be understood. Fearing wordiness, I have not written them 
down.  
 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
586 EXPLANATION  
DISPUTANT: Having explained the individual boundaries on the occasions of indicating 
the divisions of the generated mind and the exalted activities, why are the boundaries of the 
sixty -eight topics of the words not explained?  
 RESPONSE: Since it is the occasion to mostly indicate the attributes of the general path, the 
boundaries are not made definite. In some cases the boundaries have been clearly indicated; 
in those cases where the boundaries have not been clearly indicated, also [the boundaries] 
need to be realized by following the two: the first and the last. There is not the fault of not 
realizing the sequences , that is, the boundaries, of the remaining  sixty -eight interceding 
topics of the words in dependence upon this treatise, because, through the stages of 
having indicated  the sequences , that is, the boundaries, in which the generated mind , the 
first of the seventy topics, and the exalted activities that is the last have been indicated, 
the boundaries of the remaining ones are also to  be understood  in dependence on those .  
 
DISPUTANT: Although they have not been explicitly indicated in the root text, they must 
definitely be explained in the commentary . 
 
RESPONSE: I, Haribhadra, have not written down  the boundaries of the remaining topics 
of the words extensively in this small commentary, because, fearing wordiness, I have not 
written them down.   
 
DISPUTANT: You should have explained it in this way: “If it were appropriate to explain 
the remaining topics of the words as it has been done for the first and the last, then, since the 
complete stages of the Mahayana path must have been indicated seventy times, there would 
be the fault of repetition.”  
 
Respon se: According to you, is the path complete by merely that explicitly explained on the 
occasions of the generated mind and the exalted activities? This is not correct because even 
those that have not been explicitly indicated there but have been explicitly indicated on 
other occasions are definitely necessary as branches of the stages of the paths of clear 
realizations. If those that have been indicated on other occasions are explicitly indicated on 
those two occasions, then since [Maitreya] has simply writt en down the entire Ornament for 
Clear Realization  there, it follows for you that there would be a huge fault of repetition. If 
the other clear realizations have not been indicated on any occasion, there would be the fault 
that they would not be realized.  
 Therefore, although a certain portion of the  structure  and the coarse excellent qualities 
existing from the ground of a beginner until  the buddha ground has been indicated on the 
occasions of the generated mind and the exalted activities, other clear reali zations that have 
not explained there have been explained through connection with the [topics on] 
instructions, the path of preparation, and so on. Since the meanings are similar for the path 
of preparation, they must be complete on the occasion of that, b ut there are infinite 
differences in whether or not a single term is able to explicitly indicate [them].  
 It seems that many scholars have made mistakes due to not having eliminated qualms 
regarding this engagement through an eliminative expresser. Althou gh it is a single isolate, 
since it has been indicated many times by way of the differences that are dissimilar 
purposes, how could there even be a mere whiff of the fault of repetition? For, explaining an 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence            Chapter 8: The Truth Body  
 
587 isolate during the two occasions of the path of ac cumulation and the path of preparation is to 
make it known that it exists and is cultivated on both those occasions. All types of clear 
realizations are cultivated on the occasion of a single path of accumulation, but if all the 
clear realizations were ind icated there, then the author of the treatise that indicates the 
complete stages of the path would be unskillful. It seems that a single isolate has been indicated with many dissimilar names. It is for the sake of becoming skilled in the 
enumeration of nam es (synonyms); we should know them through analyzing their 
definitions. Since these points of doubt are difficult to realize and are of very great purpose, 
those who are skilled should think about them in detail.  
2B2C -3C. Summarizing the chapter  
ROOT TEXT  
The eighth chapter on the truth body from the Treatise of Quintessential Instructions of the 
Perfection of Wisdom: Ornament for Clear Realization. 
 
COMMENTARY 
The commentary on the eighth  chapter from the Treatise of Quintessential Instructions 
of the Perfection of Wisdom: Ornament for Clear Realization .  
 
EXPLANATION  
The explanation of the commentary on the eighth chapter from  the Ornament of the 
Essence, which is an explanation of the commentary on the Treatise of Quintessential 
Instructions of the Perfection of Wisdom: Ornament for Clear Realization .  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence       The Indication of Other Summarized Meanings  
 
588  
The Indication of Other Summarized Meanings  
2B3. Indicating other summarized meanings186 
2B3A. Summa rizing into six meanings  
2B3B. Summarizing into three meanings  
2B3A. Summarizing into six meanings  
2B3A -1. Making a connection  
2B3A -2. Root text  
2B3A -3. Commentary 
2B3A -1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
Having explained by means of the eight meanings in t hat way to benefit sentient beings with 
liking for the extensive, they are also explained in another way:  
  
EXPLANATION  
Having explained the summarized meanings by means of the eight meanings in that way 
in order to benefit sentient beings with faith in th e extensive  elaboration of the meanings , 
the summarized meanings are also explained in another way, other than that, through 
having been summarized into six, for persons with faith in the middling.  
2B3A -2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
9.1 The characteristics; the application of those;  
That highly; the sequence of those;  
The final; the fruition:  
Another set of summarized meanings is the set of the six types. 
 
EXPLANATION  
Another set of summarized meanings of the Ornament, other than the set of the eight, is to be known as the set of the six types , because the following six are to be known as the 
middling summarized meanings of the Ornament:  
(1) the characteristics  that are the entities of the three exalted knowers ; 
(2) the application  in complete aspects that is the practice of those  three exalted knowers ; 
(3) the peak [application] that is highly  transformed from that  application [in complete 
aspects] ;  
(4) the serial sequence of the practice of those  three exalted knowers ; 
(5) the instantaneous final  application of those three exalted knowers ; and   
(6) the truth body, the fruition  of the three exalted knowers.  
2B3A -3. Commentary 
2B3A -3A. Individual explanations  
2B3A -3B. Having summarized, making referral to the extensive meaning of the words above  
                                              
186 Here the outline is st ated slightly differently from before in the Tibetan text: Explaining other summarized 
meanings  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence       The Indication of Other Summarized Meanings  
 
589 2B3A -3A. Individual explanations  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. (1) First of all, the three exalted knowers of all, the exalted knower 
of all aspects and so forth, since they are states that are characterized, are characteristics.  
 
EXPLANATION  
(1) First of all, the subject —the three exalted knowers of all, the exalted knower of all 
aspects and so forth —since whatever is an object of cultivation of the applications needs to 
be characterized as an object of valid cognition at the start, they are characteristics  due to 
acting to characterize this . 
 Since they are states that are characterized  by means of the aspects of the three 
exalted knowers , it is reasonable to explain them as states that  are characterized by the thirty 
topics. Howeve r, they are not to be explained as above, on the occasion of the presentation 
of the corpus. According to what is overtly stated in the commentary of Arya 
[Vimuktisena], that which acts to characterize is to be taken as a characteristic.  
 
COMMENTARY 
(2) Ne xt, because of gaining control, it applies the cultivation of the three exalted knowers 
of all through this, the clear complete  realization of all aspects  is an application of the three 
exalted knowers of all.  
 
EXPLANATION  
(2) Next, the subject —the application of the clear complete  realization of all aspects —is 
an application that practices the aspects  of the three exalted knowers of all, because  it 
applies the cultivation of the aspects of the three exalted knowers of all through this  
bodhisattva’s yoga that is a union of calm abiding and special insight , therefore it is an 
application that cultivates . There is a purpose for the cultivation, because it is for the sake 
of gaining control  over the aspects of the three exalted knowers . 
 
COMMENTARY  
(3) Next, because it progresses to magnificence through great familiarity, the clear 
realization of the peak is the occasion of the excellence of the three exalted knowers of all.  
 
EXPLANATION  
(3) N ext, the subject —the clear realization of the peak —is the occasion of the excellent 
familiarization with  the aspects of  the three exalted knowers of all, because it is an 
application that progresses and has progressed to magnificence  by way of being conjoi ned 
with the wisdom arisen from meditation realizing emptiness  through great familiarity  with 
the application in complete aspects previously . 
 
COMMENTARY  
(4) Next, because of ascertaining the properties  that have been realized, through 
straightening up th e meanings cultivated individually and altogether, the clear realization of 
the serial is the occasion of the sequence of the three exalted knowers of all.  
 
EXPLANATION  
(4) Next, the subject —the clear realization of the serial —is the occasion of the seque nce 
of the aspects of the three exalted knowers of all, the sequence of cultivating them in a 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence       The Indication of Other Summarized Meanings  
 
590 single series as property -possessors,  because it is an application that cultivates  through 
straightening up (in a single series that bears order) the meanings  cultivated: (i) 
individually,  the aspects of the three exalted knowers indicated on the occasion of the first 
three chapters  and (ii) altogether , the aspects that have been indicated on [the occasion of 
the fourth chapter on the application of clear complete  realization of] all aspects . There is a 
purpose for cultivation in that way, because it is for the sake of ascertaining  in an instant 
the properties that have been realized  previously .   
 
COMMENTARY 
(5) Next, since lacking progression to distinction, perfect clear complete  enlightenment in a 
single instant is the occasion of the finality of the three exalted knowers of all.  
 
EXPLANATION  
(5) Next, the subject —the application of perfect clear complete  enlightenment in a single 
instant —is the occasion of the final application of the three exalted knowers of all , 
because it is a final application  since realizations of the learner’s path lack progression to 
distinction  beyond it .  
  
COMMENTARY 
(6) Next, si nce it is the result of those, the truth body along with the activities is the fruition 
of the three exalted knowers of all. 
 
EXPLANATION  
(6) Next, the subject —the truth body along with the activities —is the occasion of the 
fruition  of the realizations of the three exalted knowers of all, since it is the  final result 
of those  applications . 
2B3A -3B. Having summarized, making referral to the extensive meanings of the words above  
COMMENTARY 
Like that, another set of summarized meanings of all the Mothers, the set of the six types, are to be explained in accordance with only the above.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Another set of summarized meanings of all the three Mothers, other than the set of the 
eight, the set of the six types, is like that explained above. The meanings of the words of 
that set of summarized meanings are also to be known , because the meanings of the words 
are to be explained in accordance with only the occasion of the eight above.    
2B3B. Summarizing into three meanings  
2B3B -1. Making a connection  
2B3B -2. Ro ot text  
2B3B -3. Commentary  
2B3B -1. Making a connection  
COMMENTARY 
Having explained by means of the six summarized meanings in that way to benefit sentient beings with liking for the middling, they are also explained in another way to benefit 
sentient being s with liking for the brief:  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence       The Indication of Other Summarized Meanings  
 
591  
EXPLANATION  
Having explained by means of the six summarized meanings in that way in order to 
benefit sentient beings with liking for the middling  elaboration of the meanings , they are 
also explained in another way, other than that above, through having been summarized 
into three, in order to benefit sentient beings with liking for the brief elaboration of the 
meanings : 
2B3B -2. Root text  
ROOT TEXT  
9.2 The three types of objects; the cause s, 
The natures of the four a pplications; and  
The result, the truth body along with the exalted activities:  
Another set of summarized meanings is the three types.  
 
EXPLANATION  
(1) The subject —the aspects of the three types of exalted knowers —are the objects of 
cultivation of the appl ications, because they are the objects  of practice of those.  
 Just as generating the mind into the entity of compassion is called “cultivating 
compassion,” one cultivates the aspects of the three exalted knowers by generating them 
into the entity of the a pplications; it is not like looking at a visual form with an eye 
consciousness.  
 The Great Lama Lotsawa explained that, due to having been summarized into three 
objects that are to be known by hearing and contemplation, they are called “objects”. Here they are subsumed under three main objects to be cultivated through the applications, hence 
they are said to be “the three types of objects” [9.2a].   
 (2) The subject —the natures of the four applications —are the causes  for those final 
three exalted knowers, because they are the methods that act to attain them. (3) The 
subject —the truth body  along with  the exalted activities —is the result of the 
applications of the three exalted knowers, because it is the final object th at is to be attained 
through the strength of those [applications]. Another set of summarized meanings  of the 
three Mothers, other than the two above, is the three types : objects, causes, and result.  
2B3B -3. Commentary  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. (1) First of all, the entitiness of the three exalted knowers of all, the 
exalted knower of all aspects and so forth, are the causes that are the objects that are 
engaged in.  
 
EXPLANATION  
(1) First of all, the subject —the entitinesses  of the three exalted knowers of all, the 
exalted knower of all aspects and so forth —are the causes that are the objects that are 
engaged in  with respect to cultivating the applications, because one engages in cultivating 
the applications by taking them as the objects to be kno wn, the objects to be cultivated, and 
the objects to be attained, with respect to the applications . 
 
COMMENTARY 
QUALM: How are those applied?  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence       The Indication of Other Summarized Meanings  
 
592 RESPONSE: (2) After that, the four types of clear realizations, the clear complete  
realization of all aspects and so forth, are the applications.  
 
EXPLANATION  
QUALM: How are those three exalted knowers (i) cultivated  through  the applications and 
(ii) applied  as objects of the applications ? 
RESPONSE: (2) After that, the subject—the four types of clear realizations, the clear 
complete  realization of all aspects and so forth —are the applications  that cultivate the 
aspects of the three exalted knowers, because they are yogas that are a union of calm abiding and special insight in th e continuum of a bodhisattva that cultivate those .  
 
COMMENTARY 
QUALM: What is the result of those causes that possess such applications?  
RESPONSE: (3) After that, the truth body along with the exalted activities is the result.  
 
EXPLANATION  
QUALM: What is  the result of those applications, the causes that possess such 
applications  of the three exalted knowers ? 
RESPONSE: (3) After that, the subject —the truth body along with the exalted 
activities —is the result of the applications of the three exalted knowers , because it is a 
final object of attainment of those [applications].  
 
Summary:  
COMMENTARY 
Therefore, another set of summarized meanings of the three types of Mothers of the victors, 
the set of the three types, are to be explained in accordance with only t hat. 
 
EXPLANATION  
Therefore, another set of summarized meanings of the three types of Mothers of the 
victors , other than the two above , is the set of the three types . The meanings of the words 
of that are also to be known , because they are to be explained in accordance with only 
that explanation [of the summarized meanings] as eight . 
 
DISPUTANT: If the need to indicate a complete extensive explanation of the branches of 
the meanings of the words to persons with faith individually in the three sets of summarized 
meanings were uncertain, then it would contradict the explanation above with respect to the 
indication. If it were necessary to explain that extensively to all [three types of persons], 
then the differences among the three —the extensive, the m edium , and the brief—would be 
incorrect, because any sutra or treatise would be easy. If there is no difference in needing to explain them completely [to all three types of persons], then the divisions individually into 
persons with faith in the extensive, middlin g, and brief would be incorrect, yet there exists 
differences in sharpness or dullness of faculty. Also, since (i) that is similar with the 
probandum [that there are the three sets of summarized meanings], and (ii) it has been 
taught that the all three set s of summarized meanings are differentiated with respect to each 
of the three Mothers, you would definitely have to accept nine levels of sharpness or 
dullness in faculty.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence       The Indication of Other Summarized Meanings  
 
593 RESPONSE: That is true, but, although this meaning seems to be a point that is very  
difficult to understand, I have not seen the analysis performed by any scholar. Someone said 
that there are differences that distinguish the definite entity, the definite number, and the 
definite sequence of the clear realizations, but that is difficult t o posit, because there is no 
difference in the need to indicate the meaning of the words extensively [to all three types of persons].  
 OPINION: The three —the extensive, medium, and brief Perfection of Wisdom Sutras —
have been taught for the sake of the thre e: trainees of sharp, middling, and dull faculty with 
liking for extensive, middling, and brief words. Differentiating three  sets of summarized 
meanings with respect to each of the Mothers has been done not in terms of differences of sharpness or dullness in faculty, but in terms of trainees with liking for extensive, middling, 
and brief elaboration of the meanings.  
 RESPONSE: However, it would be difficult to posit that separated from the consideration of 
the levels of sharpness or dullness in faculty.  
 If the sets of summarized meanings amount to nothing more than mere differences in the 
quantity of words in the presentation of the corpus, then why are the sets of summarized meanings not summarized into the two: the path perfection of wisdom and the resul tant 
perfection of wisdom? Therefore, I thought that it is like this: all three types of trainees of, 
for instance, the Eight Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, do not differ in 
needing an explanation of the complete meaning of its words, and furt her, they act to 
generate ascertainment of all the meanings of the words by way of eliminating 
superimpositions through reasoning.  
 Regarding the three dissimilar sets of summarized meanings that have been explained, 
initially when just the summarized mean ings have been explained, one should know the 
differences in whether or not [the trainees] are able to induce the ascertainment of the coarse 
meaning of the extensive explanation of the branches through correct assumption. For 
example, it is like the diffe rence between (i) thinking that there is water in the old well 
while not seeing a reason when dwelling at home, and (ii) realizing the water with a valid cognizer. Likewise, this is also to be known with respect to the treatise. [The three sets of 
summariz ed meanings] do not differ in the quantity of words in the presentation of the 
corpus; they are not different with respect to the extensive explanation of the branches.  
OBJECTION: Well then, [the treatise] would be similar in having this fault of the corp us 
being summarized into two.   
 
RESPONSE: No, it is not similar, because, if one is able to induce correct assumption with 
respect to the coarse meaning of the words of the extensive explanation of the branches through merely those [summarized meanings of the Ornament ], then there would be no need 
to rely on the extensive explanation and the summarized explanation of a treatise such as 
this one. Thus, scholars who analyze the meanings in that way should understand them by 
having contemplated them in detail .  
 These commentaries on the root text have not been correlated with the sutras in detail and 
have not extensively explained the details of the disputes and replies. They have been composed for the sake of realization by even those who wish to engage in t he perfection of 
wisdom merely by abiding with their legs stretched. The way to practice the extensive and 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence       The Indication of Other Summarized Meanings  
 
594 brief stages of the paths of clear realizations should be known from explanations stated 
elsewhere. 
2C. The way of completing the explanation187 
2C1. D ifferences in the means of explaining the objects to be explained  
2C2. Dedicating the virtues of composition  
2C3. Discarding arrogance,  and the reason for enthusiasm in composing the commentary  
2C1. Differences in the means of explaining the objects to be explained  
2C1A. Differences in the objects to be explained  
2C1B. How they have been explained in dependence on what  
2C1A. Differences in the objects to be explained  
COMMENTARY  
By way of the meaning in some, the words in others, and   
Names that are enumerations in others:  
Those who are skilled should know just those summarized meanings  Also with respect to all the Mothers.  
 
EXPLANATION  
Those who are skilled in the meanings of the sutras and the treatises should know just those  eight, six, and three  sets of summarized meanings of the subject matter also with 
respect to all the three Mothers , because (i) some of them have been taught by way of the 
complete meaning explicitly and implicitly  in the Arya Eight Thousand Stanza Perfection 
of Wisdom , (ii) others have been taught by way of  the complete words that explicitly 
indicated the meanings in  the m edium  Mother, and (ii) others have been taught in the 
extensive [Mother]  by way of  names that are many enumerations  for each meaning, that 
is, by way of many  synonyms for each meaning.  
 
COMMENTARY  
If not like that, the levels of all  
Would not have been well summarized;  
They simply have differences only through  Classifications of brief and so forth.  
 
EXPLANATION  
QUALM: Since there are differences in the wo rds, are there not differences in the 
meanings?  
 RESPONSE: [If there were differences in the meanings, then] it follows that all  three levels 
of meanings of the subject matter of all the three Mothers  would not have been well 
summarized  in a manner of abse nce of differences by this treatise, because the three 
Mothers would not  be similar in subject matter like that.  
  
QUALM: Then, what is the point of having taught three dissimilar texts with respect to a single similar subject matter?  
                                             
 
187 Here the outline is stated slightly differently from that before in the Tibetan text: The activities for 
completing the explanation. 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence       The Indication of Other Summarized Meanings  
 
595  
RESPONSE: There is n ot the fault of repetition in the three Mothers, because they simply 
have differences only through classifications of brief,  middling, extensive words, and so 
forth. These [discussions] follow from “[To the perfection of wisdom respectfully I pay 
homage in order to thoroughly reveal its versified Ornament] as serving as an ornament of all” [at the beginning of Haribhadra’s commentary  Clear Meaning ].
188  
2C1B. How they h ave been explained in dependence on what  
COMMENTARY  
By means of having seen the meanings  Through the force of Arya Vimuktisena,   
For ease in understanding,  
Without having correlated the words, the phrases, and so forth,  
 
Having paid homage to the excellent guru,  
The perfect abbot, Vairocana,  
This clear commentary on the versified  
Was composed by Haribhadra. 
 
EXPLANATION  
This Clear Meaning,  a commentary on the versified Ornament for Clear Realization  was 
composed by the victors’ son, Haribhadra. In dependence on what  did he compose it? He 
did not compose it without the instructions of the past acaryas, because (i) he composed it 
by means of having seen the meanings through the force of having contemplated well the 
comment ary of Arya Vimuktisena, and, (ii) having first explicitly paid homage to the 
excellent guru  who had understood all the meanings of the treatise , the perfect abbot, 
Vairocana, he composed it after having asked him for permission . 
 How did he compose it? He  did not explain [the Ornament] elaborately in this 
commentary, because he clearly explained just the meaning without having explicitly correlated the words  of the sutras , the phrases  of the treatises , and so forth. 
Alternatively, it means that he composed  it through summarizing without having correlated 
it with  the words of sutras, without having correlated  it with  the words of the disputes and 
replies, and without having correlated it with  the citations from other sources and so forth. 
There is a reason f or composing it through summarizing the meanings without having 
correlated it extensively with the sutra words , because it is for the sake of ease in 
understanding.  
2C2. Dedicating the virtues of composition  
COMMENTARY 
Due to whatever virtues arisen from c ompiling that  
Attained by me,   
May all beings  
Attain the wisdom of a Sugata.  
                                             
 
188 See the outline “2A1. Expression of worship and promise to explain.”  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence       The Indication of Other Summarized Meanings  
 
596 EXPLANATION  
Due to whatever virtues arisen from compiling that commentary, Clear  Meaning , 
attained by me , Haribhadra , may all sentient beings attain the wisdom of a Sugata (One -
Gone- to-Bliss), the state of omniscience . 
2C3. Discarding arrogance,  and the reason for enthusiasm in composing the commentary  
2C3A. Discarding arrogance  
2C3B. Requesting forgiveness for mistakes 
2C3C. The reason for enthusiasm in composing the comm entary  
2C3A. Discarding arrogance  
2C3A -1. The inferiority of his own mind  
2C3A -2. The meanings of the texts are difficult to realize 
2C3A -1. The inferiority of his own mind  
COMMENTARY 
Unclear wisdom, all the treatises  
Lie beyond; how can they be mine?  
 
EXPLANATION  
How can all the meanings of the treatises be  the objects of utilization of my direct 
cognition ? For, (i) since my wisdom  is unclear, I engage by way of generalities in order to 
express the treatise, and (ii) all the meanings of the treatises li e beyond  the objects of my 
direct cognition. Alternatively, “For they are the natures that lie beyond” is explained. 
2C3A -2. The meanings of the texts are difficult to realize 
COMMENTARY 
The meanings of the treatises, objects of utilization of minds of ary as,  
The great beings; how can they be mine?  
 
EXPLANATION  
How can all the meanings of the treatises without exception be  the objects  of my direct 
cognition ? For, since  they are objects of utilization of the direct cognitions  that are minds 
of aryas, the gr eat beings , they are difficult to realize.  
2C3B. Requesting forgiveness for mistakes 
COMMENTARY 
Nevertheless, not being objects of utilization,  
May those skilled beings forgive the mistakes,  
Composed by me with effort  In the perspective of one’s and others’ welfares.  
 
EXPLANATION  
They are not objects of my direct cognition. Nevertheless, not being objects of utilization, 
if there are lots of mistakes  in the commentary that was composed by me with effort, may 
those skilled beings who possess Dharma eyes forgive them.  There is  a purpose for having 
composed it with effort, because it was done in the perspective of one’s and others’ 
welfares. [This discussion] follows from “Although not my object of utilization in all ways, 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence       The Indication of Other Summarized Meanings  
 
597 [because it accords with achievi ng merits, I generated enthusiasm, as I desire to benefit 
myself and others]” [at the beginning of Haribhadra’s commentary  Clear Meaning ].189 
2C3C. The reason for enthusiasm in composing the commentary 
COMMENTARY 
Oh! My resting place from fatigue  
Through th e various textual systems,  
The system of the perfection of wisdom,  I saw a long time ago. 
 
EXPLANATION  
From among the four cases: (1) disparagement, (2) wishing, (3) discouragement, and (4) 
amazement, here the exclamation “ Oh!” is a case of the last one. I realized and saw  this 
system of the perfection of wisdom, a special realization that is  the resting place  of my 
mind from the result of weariness and fatigue through having viewed the various textual 
systems that are the complete upper and lower tenets that I had trained well in , therefore it 
was appropriate for me to have composed the commentary. Further, I first pleased my virtuous spiritual guide for a long time and underwent much hardship, whereby I saw  it a 
long time ago. [This discussion] follows from “In that way, [scholars illuminated] all of 
these treatises [not found by just some; these which I found accordingly are amazing]” [at the beginning of Haribhadra’s commentary  Clear Meaning ].
190 
3. Meaning of the conclusion  
3A. Author of the treatise  
3B. How it was translated by whom  
3A. Author of the treatise  
ROOT TEXT  
The Treatise of Quintessential Instructions of the Perfection of Wisdom: Ornament for 
Clear Realization , composed by the Protector Venerable Maitreya, is completed.  
 
COMMENTARY 
The commen tary on the Treatise of Quintessential Instructions of the Perfection of 
Wisdom: Ornament for Clear Realization , composed by Acarya Haribhadra, is completed.  
 
EXPLANATION  
(i) The commentary on the Treatise of Quintessential Instructions of the Perfection of 
Wisdom: Ornament for Clear Realization , the stages of the path of the paramitas in 
particular, that has gone to the other side of the ocean -like tenets of oneself and others, 
composed by Acarya Haribhadra who possesses the complete instructions of 
unint errupted excellent beings beginning from Venerable Maitreya , and (ii) the Ornament of 
the Essence , an explanation of that, [composed by Gyel- tsab Dar- ma Rin -chen,] are 
completed.   
                                              
189 See the outline “2A3. Discarding arrogance and the reason for generating enthusiasm .” 
190 See the outline “ 2A2B. Proving that [Haribhadra] possesses the inner condition of wisdom realizing all 
the meanings of  the treatise .”  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence       The Indication of Other Summarized Meanings  
 
598 3B. How it was translated by whom  
COMMENTARY  
Translated, revised, and sett led upon by the Indian Abbot Vidyakara prabha and the reviser-
translator Bandhe (Monk) Pal -tseg. Excellently settled upon by the later pandit, Glorious 
Gomi (Honorable) Chi -me, and so forth, and the translator Bhiksu Lo -den She -rab. 
 
EXPLANATION  
Translated, revised, and , through explaining and hearing,  settled upon by the Indian 
Abbot Vidyakaraprabha and the reviser -translator Bandhe (Monk) Pal -tseg. 
Translated and, through explaining and hearing,  excellently settled upon by the later 
Indian Abbot  Glorious G omi (Honorable) Chi -me and so forth, and the translator Lo-
den She -rab. 
 Furthermore, through having looked well at (i) [Haribhadra’s] Great Commentary on the 
Eight Thousand  translated by the Indian abbot Subhutisri and the Great Translator initially, 
(ii) the teaching [on that Great Commentary ] given by Lord Atisha and translated by the 
Great Translator, (iii) the teaching [on it] given by that pandit translated by Drom -ton-pa, 
and (iv) all the later new translations, you should know them by checking the m eanings 
carefully. 
 
The one path traversed by all the victors of the three times, 
The meaning asserted by the speech of the excellent regent (Gyel -tsab), 
The system of the good son of the victors, the scholar among the scholars, Has been explained with speech that is clear, unmixed, and easy to understand.  
 
That which is transmitted from one to another, Dimpamkara and so forth, who possess the complete  
Magnificent essential meanings of all the scriptures and  
The instructions of the stages of the Mahayana path, has come.  
 
Furthermore, most of the beings who have entered into this mode  
Are dominated by thoughts of gain, honor, and deceptiveness, And have strayed from the proper accomplishing of the meaning of the Mothers, 
Therefore  they are limited to mere faith in this supreme text. 
 
Saying “This commentary of this root text,”  
Some, even with just that, are inflated with haughtiness. 
Others have arranged a string of praise for themselves and abuse for others;  
Realizing just a porti on of this system, they do not see it. 
 
Hence, the entity, enumeration, sequence, and so forth of the paths  
Have come excellently from the paths of correct knowledge;  
Having rejected all contradictions, lack of relation, and repetition,  
They have been expl ained well through the kindness of the venerable gurus. 
 
Having abandoned the minds of falling into the directions of hatred and desire, And having exceptional kindness for those who are less than excellent, 
Upholders of the excellent dharma of all the vic tors; 
I pay homage to the gurus.  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence       The Indication of Other Summarized Meanings  
 
599  
Due to whatever effort and wholesome virtues created here,  
May the wretched beings bound in the prison of cyclic existence,  
Having cut all lassos of craving to objects, 
Enter the city of the omniscient victors.  
 
Henceforth, in all lifetimes,  
May I never be separated from this excellent path, and  
Having pleased the virtuous spiritual guides of the supreme vehicle,  
Uphold all the excellent Dharma of the victors without exception.  
 
Having heard much this system of t he perfection of wisdom, the great tradition of the 
victors, many times from the Venerable Excellent Kumaramati, Kab -shi Dzin -pa Do -je, and 
so forth, and later,  having requested again and again Je Rinpoche, the Omniscient Losang 
Dragpa Palzangpo [Lama Tson gkhapa] who is non -different from Venerable Manjusri, in 
dependence on the force of having obtained many times the complete instruction of the paramitas, through being urged by many virtuous spiritual guides, the composition of this  
Ornament of the Essence , an explanation of the root text of the  Treatise of Quintessential 
Instructions of the Perfection of Wisdom: Ornament for Clear Realization , along with its 
commentary, by Dar- ma Rin -chen, one who abides in the modes of conduct of the supreme 
vehicle, at G eden Nampar Gyelwe Ling, is completed. 
 Sarva mangalam.  
 The indication of other summarized meanings is completed. 
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence              English -Tibetan Glossary  
 
600  
English –Tibetan Glossary 
 
English  Tibetan  
absorption of cessation  ’gog pa la snyoms par ’jug pa  
afflictive obscuration  nyon mong pa’i sgrib pa  
antidotal class  gnyen po’i phyogs  
antidote  gnyen po  
application  sbyor ba  
application in complete aspects  rnam rdzogs sbyor ba  
application of equality of cyclic existence and peace  srid zhi mnyam nyid kyi sbyor ba  
application of pure land  zhing dag sbyor ba  
application of skillful means  thabs mkhas sbyor ba  
arya ’phags pa  
Automomist  rang rgyud pa  
bodhisattva’s yoga  sems dpa’i  rnal sbyor  
branch of aryas’ paths  ’phags pa’i lam yan lag  
branch of enlightenment  byang chub kyi yan lag  
calm abiding  gzhi gnas  
characteristic  mtshan nyid  
clairvoyance  mngon shes  
clear realization  mngon par rtogs pa  
close placement of mindfulness  dran pa nyer gzhag  
complete enjoyment body (sambhogakaya)  long spyod rdzogs pa’i sku  
concentration  bsam gtan  
conjoined with  zin pa  
Consequentialist  thal ’dgyur ba  
conventional generated mind  kun rdzobs sems bskyed  
conventional truth  kun rdzob bden pa  
cooperative condition  lhan cig byed rkyen  
correct abandoning  yang dag spong ba  
definiendum  mtshon bya  
definition  mtshan nyid  
discordant class  mi mthun phyogs  
distinguishing characteristic  khyad mtshan  
dormancy  bag la nyal  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence              English -Tibetan Glossary  
 
601 emanation body (nirmanakaya)  sprul sku 
empowering condition  bdag rkyen  
emptiness  stong nyid 
entitiness characteristic  ngo bo nyid mtshan  
exalted body  sku 
exalted knower mkhyen pa  
exalted knower of all aspects  rnam mkhyen  
exalted wisdom  ye shes  
exalted wisdom truth body (jñanadharmakaya/ 
jñanakaya)  ye shes chos sku  
excellent quality  yon gtan  
fault skyon  
fearlessness  mi ’jigs pa  
form body (rupakaya)  gzugs sku 
functional characteristic  byed mtshan  
generated mind (mind generation) sems bskyed 
ground  sa 
hearer  nyan thos  
imprint  lag rjes  
individual correct knowledge  so so yang dag rig pa  
inherent existence  rang bzhin gyis grub pa  
instantaneous application  skad cig ma’i sbyor ba  
knower of bases  gzhi shes  
knower of paths  lam shes  
knowledge characteristic  shes mtshan 
knowledge obscuration  shes bya’i sgrib pa  
latency  bag chags  
leg of magical emanation  rdzu ’phrul gyi rkang pa  
liberated path  rnam grol lam  
mahayana partial concordance with definite 
discrimination  theg chen gyi nges ’byed cha mthun  
mahayana partial concordance with liberation  theg chen gyi thar pa cha mthun  
meditative equipoise  mnyam bzhag  
meditative stabilization  ting nge ’dzin  
Middle -Wayer dbu ma pa  
mundane path  ’jig rten pa’i lam  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence              English -Tibetan Glossary  
 
602 nature body (svabhavikakaya) ngo bo byid sku  
nirvana   mya ngan las ’das pa  
object of adherence  zhen yul  
object of characterization  mtshon bya  
object of knowledge  shes bya  
object of observation  dmigs pa  
obscurational truth  kun rdzob bden pa  
path of abandonment  spong lam  
path of abiding abiding happily in the present life  mthong chos la bder gnas kyi lam  
path of accumulation  tshogs lam  
path of antidotes  gnyen po’i lam  
path of buddhas  sangs rgyas nyid kyi lam  
path of emanation  sprul pa’i lam  
path of meditation  sgom lam  
path of no -more -learning  mi slob lam  
path of preparation  sbyor lam  
path of seeing  mthong lam  
peak application  rtse mo’i sbyor ba  
power  dbang po  
Proponent of Cognition -Only  rnam par rig pa tsam du smra ba  
Proponent of Mind- Only  sems tsam pa  
Propounder  of Things  dngos por smra ba 
resultant truth body  ’bras bu chos sku  
seed sa bon  
selflessness of persons  gang zag gi bdag med  
selflessness of phenomena  chos kyi bdag med  
self-sufficient substantially existent person  gang zag rang skya thub ba’i rdzas 
yod 
serial application  mthar gyis sbyor ba  
sign of irreversibility  phyir mi ldog pa’i rtags  
solitary realizer  rang sangs rgyas  
special insight  lhag mthong  
strength  stobs  
subject and object being different substances  bzung ’dzin rdzas tha dad  
subsequent attainment  rjes thob  
suchness de kho na nyid  
The Explanation: Ornament of the Essence              English -Tibetan Glossary  
 
603 supramundane path  ’jig rten las ’das pa’i lam  
thusness  de bzhin nyid 
true cessations  ’gog pa’i bden pa  
true existence  bden par grub pa  
true origins  kun ’byung bden pa  
true paths  lam bden pa  
true sufferings  sdug bsngal bden pa  
truth body (dharmakaya) chos sku 
ultimate existence  don dam par grub pa 
ultimate generated mind  don dam sems bskyed  
ultimate truth  don dam bden pa  
uncontaminated  zag med  
uninterrupted path  bar chad med lam  
 
 
 
 
 
 