Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/Transcript pdf/ORN_GTTnotes_15.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:51:46.758155
================================================================================

Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 1  
Masters Program: Ornament for Clear Realization 
Commentary by Geshe Tenzin Tenphel 
 
 
Monday afternoon, 26 May 2008 
 
Correction to last week (middle of page 100): 
 
{141} From between the two—the supports of the achi evings and the supported—[with 
regard to]  the former, is  [there are]  instructions on the Three Jewels, Buddha and so 
forth , while regarding the latter, the bases for the att ributes and the attributes. 
 
Translator: the supports of the achievings are the Three Jewels, and there are instructions on them. 
 
Gyeltsab Je says (middle of page 112): “The Mahayan a foe-destroyer is excluded from the Sangha 
Jewel of this context, since it is included within the Buddha Jewel. It is for the sake of stopping 
adherence to the Three Jewels as refuges ultimately .” The outline here is “Instructions on the 
Sangha Jewel.” When we consider the eight approache rs and eight abiders in the result, the abider 
in the result of foe destroyer is not included. For  what reason? It is because the eight Hinayana 
sangha characterize the Mahayana sangha. By means o f the eight Hinayana sangha, the eight 
Mahayana sangha are characterized. In other words, the Mahayana foe destroyer is also 
characterized when the Hinayana sangha is explained . So it seems [to say here] that since the 
Mahayana foe destroyer is included in the Buddha Je wel there is no need to present the Mahayana 
foe destroyer. For this reason there would be no ne ed to present the abider in the result of foe 
destroyer.  
 The point is that the Mahayana sangha is character ized by the Hinayana sangha. The examples 
that characterize are the Hinayana Sangha, which ar e divided into the twenty (and are in turn 
subdivided into many, many sangha). The meanings th at are characterized by them are the 
Mahayana sangha. 
 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-3. Instructions on the attributes of  the achievings 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-3A. Instructions on eliminating mani fest discordant classes 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-3B. Instructions on achieving the sp ecial paths 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-3C. Instructions on eliminating the seeds that are objects of abandonment 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-3A. Instructions on eliminating mani fest discordant classes 
The first of three: 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-3A1. Instructions on the causes of n ot degenerating the achievings 
COMMENTARY  
Since some will strongly adhere to being persistent  towards the meaning of what was 
explained by just having undertaken joyous effort, due to a mere agreeable state of body 
and so forth, instructions on not adhering which in dicate that the body and so forth lack 
entitiness, and…  
 
EXPLANATION 
“Great bodhisattva, the practice of the Perfection of Wisdom with body, speech, and 
mind…” are instructions on not adhering to negative  activities of the three doors, 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 2 because they are instructions  which indicate  “Realize that the body and so forth lack 
entitiness  ultimately.” It is appropriate to instruct in that  manner because, {160} since 
some of  dull-faculty will strongly adhere to persistently practicing  the meaning of 
what was explained on the occasion of the generated mind previously  by just having 
undertaken joyous effort  through application (if they have  not familiarized with the 
meaning of emptiness), it must be abandoned.  
 
In this outline we are looking at instructions on n on-adherence, that is, instructions that counteract  
the laziness of adhering to negative activities. He re there are instructions on not adhering to 
negative activities of the three doors, that is, ac tivities for the sake of this life alone such as th ose 
for obtaining food, clothing, and a good reputation . These activities do not bring benefit beyond this  
life and whether they benefit this life is also dou btful. For the sake of food, how many negativities 
do we accumulate? Likewise for clothing, how many n egativities do we accumulate? Also for the 
sake of our reputation, how many negativities do we  accumulate? The attachment to our reputation 
is the worst of these as it leads to quarreling and  fighting with other people. However this is not to  
say that people who are studying do not need food a nd clothing!  
 In general we see that in our society progress is measured in terms of wealth. Thus, if a country 
becomes wealthy, it is said to have improved. Howev er, we know that with material wealth there is 
not necessarily satisfaction, in fact mental happin ess can still be lacking. Material wealth alone doe s 
not dispel mental happiness. While money can elimin ate some forms of hardship, it alone does not 
bring satisfaction and happiness. In terms of devel opment, we should think mainly in terms of inner 
development. Outer development eliminates some prob lems but does not bring mental happiness, 
therefore we need to work in terms of inner mental development.  
 It is difficult to give up the mind attached to th is life. We see people who are wealthy but who 
are unhappy, cruel, and proud, who look down on oth ers, are jealous, and so forth. If we have a lot 
of attachment to this life, then we will not be abl e to give up the so-called “good things” of this li fe. 
If we cannot do this in this life, also in our next  life we will not be able to give them up, and then  in 
future lives once again it will be difficult to giv e up our attachment to this life. In this way, when  
will we be able to give up our attachment?  
 When we think about negative activities, we should  think in terms of our adherence to food, 
clothing, and the reputation of this life. If we ca nnot reverse our adherence to them, there is no way  
that we will be able to reverse or counteract our p reoccupation with this life. If we cannot do this, 
we will not be able to generate a mind genuinely co ncerned with the next life. If we cannot generate 
this mind, we will not be able to develop a mind se eking liberation from cyclic existence, and then 
we will not be able to generate a mind seeking enli ghtenment. We call ourselves Mahayanists, but 
in reality we are unable to give up attachment to t his life.  
 We need to set our priorities, asking “Is this lif e going to last a long time?” It will not. We will 
die and be reborn. Therefore, future lives are more  important than this life. So for how long are we 
going to strive for this life? For how long are we going to live? We cannot be sure. If we could be 
sure that we will live a certain number of years, s uch as 100, we could make a plan thinking to work 
for the first 50 years and then do something else. However, our lifespan is not certain so we cannot 
do this. Therefore, we need to be careful because i f we devote our energies to this life alone we will  
neglect activities that would benefit our future li ves. For those of us who are studying Dharma, our 
motivation is important because if we are not caref ul with our motivation, then our studies of the 
Dharma will become activities for this life alone. If we engage in these studies only to benefit this 
life, then, as we study and hear the instructions t o not adhere to this life, we will not able to put 
them into practice. There is no need to plan for th e future, thinking that we will live for a long tim e 
and so we need this and that. There is no certainty  that we will not die tomorrow, we can even die 
this evening. So we have to be prepared for it to h appen at any time. 
 There is a story about a meditator who was meditat ing in a cave in the mountains. In front of the 
cave there was a bush with thorns. When the meditat or went out of his cave, seeing the bush, he 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 3 thought he should cut it. But then he thought that when he went out, it was not certain that he would 
return, as he could die, so he didn’t cut it. And w hen he returned to the cave, he again thought that 
he should cut the bush, but then thought that once he went into the cave, he might not come out 
again, as he might die, so again he didn’t cut it. He was thinking like this, but did not die for many  
years. But by thinking about death, he attained inn er development. In reality, it would have been 
easy and quick to cut the bush, but he never found time to do it. We should be like this. We have 
much time to do things, but no time to think about death! 
 It is good to think, “What would I do if I were to  die in one hour?”  We should look at what is 
important and what is not important, and do what is  important more often, and do what is not 
important less often. Most of us do the opposite. W hat is not important we think is important and do 
it often, and what is important we think is not imp ortant and do not do it often. This shows that we 
do not know what is important. We must be very care ful. We need to strive to understand what is 
more important for us. Our mind is already covered with mental afflictions that prevent us from 
seeing reality. I don’t mean emptiness, but somethi ng simpler. Therefore, we need to be careful.  
 Even if we know this but continue to do unimportan t things, it means that we have not really 
understood. We may think: “I am studying, doing pra yers, reciting mantras, so everything is okay 
for my next life.” Good meditators say that in orde r to become a good meditator it is necessary to 
have some suffering. Without touching problems and suffering, we do not know what kind of mind 
we have and we think that we are okay, that we are studying and practicing and so are okay. When 
one day we meet a strong situation, we will have di fficulties. Therefore, we must not think “this is 
their suffering. This is their problem.”  
 For example, when someone has a car accident, befo re that they did not think that they would 
have an accident, they thought that they were a goo d driver. When they saw other people having 
accidents, they thought that it would not happen to  them as they are a good driver. They thought 
accidents were something that happened to others. W e should not think this until we reach nirvana. 
As long as we have mental afflictions, we should no t relax. This does not mean that we should not 
relax, it means that we should not think too much a s we are ordinary beings and if we force too 
much, we can become crazy. For this reason we need to relax. Relaxing does not mean doing 
nothing, it means making your inner winds in the ri ght way. Not just relaxing and doing nothing. 
One day His Holiness said that there are people who  go in the meditation room as normal people 
and leave it as crazy people. This is because they push too much, the winds go in the wrong way, 
and they become crazy. So relax, but do not give up .  
 Do not think that we do not have time to practice because we must cook, wash dishes, clean and 
so forth. Actually this is a good chance for practi ce. Many people do not have this chance as they 
have enough money and therefore do not need to do t hese things. They think that they do not need 
to do these things and so they relax, putting thems elves in danger. These people are in more danger 
than those who have a lot of things to do. For thos e who always have problems, when they meet 
problems it is just the same. Those who do not have  problems, they go down when meeting 
problems. Those who have to work and clean but do n ot think that they have no time to practice, do 
not have any problems. 
 
The text says that if one has not familiarized with  the meaning of emptiness, there is the danger of 
engaging in negative activities due to adhering to them. If one has familiarized with the meaning of 
emptiness, there is no such danger. Instead, when o ne practices the meaning of what was explained 
on the occasion of bodhichitta, one undertakes joyo us effort through application. The instructions 
here are mainly for bodhisattvas. Therefore, these instructions say that bodhisattvas need to 
familiarize with emptiness and that, if they have n ot done this, there will be the danger of adhering 
to negative activities. If, on the other hand, bodh isattvas have familiarized with the meaning of 
emptiness, they will be able to practice that taugh t on the occasion of bodhichitta and so forth and 
will undertake joyous effort through application in  these various practices.  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 4 Ornament of the Essence , p. 113: 
 
Owing to what cause [will they adhere]? It will be produced due to  a mere agreeable 
state of body and so forth  attached to ordinary activities . 
 
Due to what cause will they adhere to negative acti vities? They will do so due to a mere agreeable 
state of body and so forth attached to ordinary act ivities. This adherence to negative activities 
occurs because of excessive indulgence in one’s des ires. “A mere agreeable state of body and so 
forth” refers to excessive indulgence in desire, sp ecifically the objects of desire: forms, sounds, an d 
so forth. Due to overindulgence in them, one strong ly adheres to negative activities. Over time these 
various objects of desire have become more elaborat e and developed, therefore we need to be 
especially careful with respect to them.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 113: 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-3A2. Instructions on the causes of i ncreasing the achievings 
COMMENTARY 
…although one has familiarized for a long time, if the desired aim is not accomplished, 
since those bearing fearful natures will become tho roughly upset, the instructions on 
lack of weariness that indicate that clinging to fo rm and so forth through perfect 
complete enlightenment is merely not existent, and…  
 
EXPLANATION  
 “Great bodhisattva, at the time of practicing the six perfections, do not cling to forms; 
do not cling to feelings…” are instructions on lack of weariness  at the time of 
practicing, because they are instructions that  indicate  “Realize that clinging to form 
and so forth through perfect complete enlightenment  as  truly existent  is merely not 
existent .” It is appropriate to instruct in that manner, be cause although one has 
familiarized  with the achievings for a long time, if the desired aim is not 
accomplished accordingly , since some of  dull-faculty  with fearful natures will 
become thoroughly upset , it must be eliminated. 
 
Here it mentions those of dull faculty becoming ups et. Those with dull faculty are those with little 
mental strength, whereas those of sharp faculty are  those with a lot of mental strength. There are 
cases of people who meditate for a long time yet do  not see any result. Because they do not see a 
result, such people of dull faculty, or weak mental  strength, become afraid and upset. 
 When we talk about phenomena ranging from forms th rough enlightenment, it is possible to 
become discouraged thinking that there are many phe nomena whose nature of emptiness needs to 
be realized. However, in reality, when one realizes  the nature of forms, one realizes the nature of 
other phenomena. Therefore, there is no reason to b ecome discouraged regarding the number of 
phenomena whose nature is to be realized.  
 We should not involve ourselves in too many though ts about activities that we need to do. If we 
think too much about them, we will end up not accom plishing anything and only wasting our time, 
without any benefit at all. Therefore, when we want  to accomplish something, we should focus on 
just that one thing and put effort into it and try to improve the situation. If we are able to do that , we 
will be able to accomplish other aims. If instead w e try to do everything, we will end up not 
accomplishing anything.  
 In general, there are many objects of knowledge, b ut we need to mainly focus on our mind. This 
is because our mind is obscured by afflictions, kno wledge obscurations, and so forth, and by 
working on the mind and removing the obscurations, we will become able to know all objects of 
knowledge. The ability to know all objects of knowl edge does not lie in the objects of knowledge, 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 5 but lies within our own mind. Therefore, we should focus on working on our own mind.  It is said 
that a buddha knows all phenomena, that is, an exal ted knower of all aspects realizes all phenomena 
or all objects of knowledge. Does this mean that su ch a mind needs to realize every single thing in 
Italy, then the next day realize every single thing  in Germany, then the next day every single thing 
in Switzerland, and so forth? It does not. Rather, in order to gain this knowledge, we must remove 
the obscurations in our mind whereby we become able  to know all objects of knowledge. It is not 
that we need to realize one thing after another in order to attain omniscience. In order to know all 
phenomena, all that we need to do is remove the obs curations in our mind. It is not that we need to 
know this, and then that, and so forth. As soon as we remove the obscurations in our mind, we will 
be able to perceive all phenomena like a myrobalan fruit in our hand. In order to attain happiness of 
mind, we do not need to look for it outside. All we  have to do is pacify the afflictions in our mind. 
On the other hand, as long as we do not do this, we  cannot experience everlasting happiness. We 
can experience temporal happiness but we cannot ach ieve everlasting happiness. To do this we need 
to work on our own mind.  
 Think about these situations clearly and try to ge nerate a powerful state of mind by analyzing the 
causes for attaining happiness and the causes for a ttaining omniscience. It all depends on our mind. 
The causes that prevent us from attaining happiness  and omniscience lie in our own mind. 
Therefore, thinking to work on our mind, we should not be discouraged. We should maintain this 
mental strength not just for some months or some ye ars, but as long as we have not abandoned the 
afflictive obscurations and knowledge obscurations,  we should maintain our mental strength and not 
be discouraged. We have two jobs: eliminating the a fflictive obscurations, and eliminating the 
knowledge obscurations. As long as we have not elim inated them we will always experience 
hardships. We should think that as long as we have not abandoned them, we will not become 
discouraged, and thereby generate mental strength.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 113: 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-3A3. Instructions on the causes of n ot falling into the Hinayana 
COMMENTARY 
…if one must receive transmissions of the paths for  each meaning from the buddhas 
who reside in the ten directions and so forth, sinc e the mind will become discouraged, 
the instructions on the completely upheld path that  teach that phenomena are merely not 
produced by nature, and… {161}  
 
EXPLANATION 
“Shariputra, a great bodhisattva possessing such ex alted wisdom, as many grains of 
sand on the banks of the Ganges in the world system s in the eastern direction…” are 
instructions on the completely upheld path  in the Mahayana, because they are 
instructions that teach that phenomena are merely not produced b y nature . It is 
appropriate to instruct in that manner because, if one must receive transmissions of 
the paths for each meaning from the buddhas who res ide in the ten directions and 
so forth, since , thinking “How can I be able to do that?”, the mind will become 
discouraged , it must be eliminated. 
 
These are instructions on thoroughly upholding the Mahayana path. It can happen that there are 
some Mahayana lineage-bearers who enter the Mahayan a path, but then think that the Mahayana 
scriptural basket is so vast—there is so much to li sten to and so much to practice—that they will not 
be able to do it. They then become discouraged and decide to enter the Hinayana, thereby falling 
into the Hinayana. Therefore, these are instruction s to them to not become discouraged. We should 
not be worried that there is so much to learn, that  the scriptural baskets are too vast and extensive.  
The reason they are so extensive is due to sentient  beings. Sentient beings may not be able to 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 6 understand the meaning if they are given only one t eaching, therefore they need to be given another 
teaching. Not understanding that, another teaching has to be given. If someone is a suitable vessel, 
the Heart Sutra  alone would be enough. In the past, based on the s tatement “Form is empty,” some 
people realized emptiness, whereas nowadays people need to be taught starting from colors and so 
forth! They need a commentary, then a commentary to  the commentary, then a commentary to the 
commentary to the commentary, and so forth!  
 My home teacher in the monastery told me about a m onk from Chagong Monastery in Amdo 
who memorized Seventy Topics , which is only 17 folios in length. However, he to ok three years to 
memorize it! After he had memorized it, he would co ntinue to recite it with a very pure motivation 
accompanied by prayers and not thinking about too m any other things. After making this effort to 
remember and recite this text, he was able to reali ze its meaning. Then without having studied other 
texts such as Collected Topics , Ornament for Clear Realization , Supplement to the Middle Way , 
Treasury of Manifest Knowledge , Commentary to the Compendium of Valid Cognition , and so forth, 
he was able to understand them in their entirety. T here are such stories. When the mind is 
developed, it is able to perform many amazing thing s. For example, if our wisdom develops, by 
merely one word we will be able to understand the m eaning, all the various connotations of that 
word, and so forth. If one is not able to do that, even if one looks at the words of a text one by one  
with effort, one will not be able to understand the  meaning. There are people of various types of 
intelligence. Some people, even though something ha s been explained to them again and again, are 
not able to understand the meaning. Then there are other people who, simply by being taught 
something once, are able to understand it and other  associated meanings. Sometimes there are 
people who are very intelligent and understand quic kly but not deeply, whereas there are other 
people who are not so intelligent and have difficul ty understanding but when they do come to 
understand it, they understand it deeply.  
 
Q. Once one generates uncontrived bodhichitta and e nters the Mahayana middling path of 
accumulation, is bodhichitta always present in one’ s mind? 
A. Once bodhichitta has been generated and one is o n the middling path of accumulation and above, 
bodhichitta will always be present, but whether or not it is manifest is another thing. 
 
Q. Even though Mahayana foe destroyers are not incl uded in the eight, would not Hinayana foe 
destroyers be included (page 112, section on “Instr uctions on the Sangha Jewel)? 
A. The eight are further subdivided into twenty san gha, which are set out in two stanzas of the root 
text (p. 126-127): 
 
1.24 Dull and sharp faculties; 
The faithful and the attainers-by-seeing; from clas s to class; 
One obstacle; intermediate state and upon rebirth, 
Acting and not acting; progressing to Akanishta, 
 
1.25 Three leapers; progressing finally to the Peak  of Existence, 
Destroying attachment of the form realm,  
Pacifying in that present life, actualizing with a body;  
And the rhinoceros are the twenty. 
 
Foe-destroyers are not included here in the twenty.  Here in the context of instructions on the 
Sangha, they are instructions on the Mahayana Sangh a. These eight are used as examples that 
characterize the Mahayana sangha. If the Mahayana f oe-destroyer is included within the eight, there 
would be repetition because the Mahayana foe-destro yer is already included in the Buddha Jewel. 
For this reason the foe-destroyer is excluded from the eight.  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 7 Q. We are advised to think “I could die tonight” bu t if I think this I would not invest in long-term 
projects such as learning Tibetan. So how do we bea r in mind the instructions on impermanence and 
at the same time have the optimism to strive for lo ng-term goals?  
A: It is good to learn Tibetan but it is not import ant because things are translated into many 
different languages. Because texts were translated into Tibetan, I did not need to learn Sanskrit.  
 There are people who make big projects but before finishing them, they die. It is difficult to 
understand when death will come. We are like guests  who want to stay and not leave, but we are 
just temporary guests in our body and we do not kno w when we will have to leave this body. If we 
know, we could make plans for ten, twenty, forty ye ars. Sometimes the divinations come that we 
will live to an old age, but a mo is a mo. When ast rological calculations are done, they may come 
that we will die within ten years. The mo may say w e have ten years, but we die before. The mo is 
right, but we did not live as long as it said.  
Q. We still need to bring the two together, an awar eness of impermanence and some optimism. 
A. If we are good practitioners we do not need, for  example, to make plans to go to India to 
practice. However, in my case I have made plans to go to India in July 2009 with my brother. We 
have planned this, but who knows whether it will ha ppen? This shows that I am not a good 
practitioner! 
 
 
Tuesday, 27 May 2008 
 
Yesterday we discussed the three kinds of joyous ef fort : joyous effort of non-adherence to negative 
activities, joyous effort of tirelessness or lack o f weariness, and joyous effort of thoroughly 
upholding the path. These are antidotes to three ki nds of laziness: the laziness of adhering to 
negative activities, the laziness of indolence, and  the laziness of denigrating oneself, or self-
contempt. It is very important to have joyous effor t. We need to look at the goals we want to attain, 
and decide which are more important, which are less  important. For the goals that are most 
important, we have to apply great joyous effort; fo r those that are less important, we do not need to 
apply much joyous effort.  
 With regard to our studies, we should not become d iscouraged if we encounter difficulties. We 
need to keep our minds positive and avoid falling i nto the three kinds of laziness. If we fall under 
the influence of them, we will become wasted. Some of you may feel, “I have looked at this 
material, and I haven’t understood anything.” It is  good to wish to understand everything, but it is 
unrealistic to expect to know everything. In fact, if you expect to know everything and you try to 
look at everything, you may end up not knowing even  one thing. It is better to have realistic 
expectations and work on just one thing. If you try  to understand, for example, one word per day, 
after 30 days you will understand 30 words, and in a year you will understand many things. If we 
have unrealistic goals, we may generate anxiety and  fear when we see that we cannot understand 
everything. Of course, there are some very intellig ent people who are able to understand many 
things quickly, but if we have unrealistic expectat ions and are then unable to understand everything, 
we may end up being discouraged.  
 
[Geshe-la told a story about a geshe named A-long G o-go (“round ring”), who through persisting in 
his effort to memorize, managed to become a famous geshe although he was very slow at first, and 
about some monks at Sera Je who have great skills o f memorizing texts.]  
 
Ornament of the Essence , pp. 113-114: 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-3B. Instructions on achieving the sp ecial paths 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-3B1. Instructions on the five eyes: the causes of independently engaging in the achievi ngs  
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-3B2. Instructions on the six clairvo yances: the causes of quickly completing the 
achievings 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 8 2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-3B1. Instructions on the five eyes: the causes of independently engaging in the achievi ngs  
COMMENTARY 
…teaching that “(1) An eye of flesh, (2) a divine e ye, which arose from maturation, (3) 
a wisdom eye, (4) a dharma eye, and (5) a buddha ey e—respectively, the object-
possessor that (1) ascertains things individually, (2) [knows] the death-transference and 
birth of all sentient beings, (3) does not conceptu alize with respect to all phenomena, (4) 
realizes all arya persons, and (5) is manifestly co mpletely enlightened in all aspects of 
all phenomena—are established as merely one in thus ness” instructs on the five eyes, 
and… {162} 
 
EXPLANATION 
Based upon “Shariputra, a bodhisattva mahasattva se es a hundred yojanas 1 with an eye 
of flesh…,” instructions on the five eyes  are indicated, because they teach that “ The 
objects and object-possessors  of the five eyes  are established as merely one in 
thusness.”  Having indicated the ability and power to see the objects of the five eyes 
conventionally, their lack of nature ultimately is indicated. 
 With regard to them, respectively, (1) an eye of flesh is an object-possessor that 
ascertains things individually,  seeing subtle and coarse forms in the billionfold world 
systems within a hundred yojanas;  (2) a divine eye, which arose from maturation  of 
previous virtuous contaminated karma,  is an object-possessor that knows exactly  the 
death-transference and birth of all sentient beings ; (3) a wisdom eye  is an object-
possessor  that  does not conceptualize  true existence with respect to all phenomena, 
directly  realizing the lack of true existence;  (4) a dharma eye  is an object-possessor 
that  realizes all arya persons  of sharp and dull faculties;  and (5) a buddha eye  is an 
object-possessor that is manifestly, completely enlightened in all aspect s of all 
phenomena, respectively.  
 
Here, we have discussion of the five eyes :  
1.  The eye of flesh  
2.  The divine eye 
3.  The wisdom eye 
4.  The dharma eye 
5.  The buddha eye 
 
These five eyes are attained in dependence on the m editative absorption of an actual concentration. 
Without an actual concentration, there is no attain ment of the five eyes, so they arise through the 
force of concentration of meditative stabilization.  It is said that vultures have a similitude of the eye 
of flesh, because they can see from very long dista nces; it is said they can see animals and so forth 
from many yojanas away (a yojana is a measurement o f distance, which is explained in different 
ways, e.g. 6.8 km or 7.2 km).  
 
1.  Eye of flesh : [Geshe-la told a story about a man who shot a vul ture with an arrow to illustrate 
how vultures can see very far away.] The eye of fle sh can see subtle and coarse forms within a 
minimum distance of 100 yojanas. Some eyes of flesh  can see things even further away, such as 
200, 300 or more yojanas, within the billionfold wo rld systems. The stronger one’s meditative 
stabilization is, the further one can see. Merely t hrough meditation, without using a telescope, 
one can see things far away. This eye of flesh is p robably not the physical eye.  
2.  The divine eye : the divine eye “[knows] the death-transference an d birth of all sentient beings.” 
With our eyes we can see someone dying or being bor n, but this is not referring to ordinary 
                                                 
1 An Indian measure of distance, the yojana is about  7 km. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 9 instances. For example, if I had the divine eye and  I had students in India, I could see where 
they died and where they would be reborn.  
3.  The wisdom eye : A mind that directly realizes emptiness of true e xistence is pervaded by being a 
wisdom eye. Such a mind necessarily is based on med itative stabilization. There is no one who 
has not attained calm abiding and special insight w ho has a direct realization of emptiness. 
Someone without meditative stabilization can realiz e emptiness, but such a person cannot abide 
in this realization in a stable way; therefore, the y cannot directly realize emptiness. In terms of 
someone definite in Mahayana lineage, the wisdom ey e is newly attained during the meditative 
equipoise of the path of seeing.  
4.  Dharma eye : a dharma eye is able to realize the faculty of an  arya person, i.e. which aryas are of 
sharp faculty, which aryas are of dull faculty, and  so forth. 
5.  Buddha eye : A buddha eye is a buddha’s exalted wisdom, which is completely enlightened with 
regard to all phenomena.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 114: 
 
 (1) An eye of flesh exists from the path of accumu lation, (2) a divine eye from the 
path of preparation, (3) a wisdom eye from the path  of seeing, (4) a dharma eye from 
the subsequent attainment of the path of seeing, an d (5) a buddha eye from the buddha 
ground, its similitude existing from the eighth gro und. 
 
If you look at the boundaries  of these eyes, an eye of flesh exists from the pat h of accumulation, the 
divine eye from the path of preparation, the wisdom  eye from the path of seeing, a dharma eye from 
the subsequent attainment of the path of seeing, th e buddha eye from the buddha ground, and its 
similitude from the eighth ground. When it says tha t an eye of flesh exists from the path of 
accumulation, does this mean that it does not exist  before the path of accumulation? These 
boundaries are probably posited from the point of v iew of the Mahayana. Perhaps there is no 
pervasion, because someone on the path of accumulat ion is not pervaded by having attained an 
actual concentration. With the Hinayana, the situat ion is more complicated. This discussion about 
the actual concentrations and when they are attaine d and so forth will become clearer when we 
reach the topic of the twenty sangha, where various  kinds of support are explained. A preparation of 
a concentration can serve as the support of certain  achievements, whereas for other achievements 
one needs an actual concentration. After we go thro ugh that topic you will have a clearer 
understanding of the kinds of concentrations or pre parations of concentrations that are required for 
the attainment of the five eyes, for example.  
  These boundaries in Gyeltsab Je’s explanation are  posited in terms of the main boundaries; there 
is no pervasion with respect to these boundaries.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 114: 
 
 If you were to possess these five eyes: 
(1)  with the eye of flesh, you would know exactly where  the spiritual guides teaching Dharma, 
{163} your disciples, and so forth are abiding with in the billionfold world systems; 
(2)  with the second, [you would know] where your discip les die, transfer and are reborn; 
(3)  with the third, you would directly know the meaning  of the mode of abidance, the method for 
subduing trainees. 
(4)  with the fourth, you would know well the particular ities of the faculties of the trainees who are 
objects to be assisted and taught the Dharma; and  
(5)  even when having merely attained a similitude of th e fifth, through knowing most of the varieties 
of objects of knowledge, you would be urged from wi thin towards the achievings and would 
independently engage in the achievings without depe ndency upon others. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 10   
What are the benefits of having the five eyes? As i t says in the outline heading, the five eyes are 
“causes of independently engaging in the achievings ,” so with these five eyes you will be able to 
engage in the achievings independently. The specifi c benefits of the five eyes are explained in the 
passage above. With the eye of flesh, you would be able to see exactly where the spiritual guides 
teaching Dharma, your disciples, and so forth were abiding within the billionfold world systems and 
to know where the disciples who are suitable vessel s were, so you can go to those places. With the 
divine eye, you would know where your disciples die , transfer, and are reborn, so you could go to 
those places. With the wisdom eye, you would know d irectly the mode of abidance for subduing 
trainees. With the dharma eye, you would know which  trainees are of dull, middling, and sharp 
faculty, and so on, so you can teach them Dharma an d help them accordingly. If you even had a 
similitude of the Buddha eye, by knowing most of th e varieties of objects of knowledge you would 
be able to explain them, and of course when you act ually attain the buddha eye, you know all 
phenomena.  
 
Definitions of the five eyes : The descriptions are already in Gyeltsab Je’s tex t, but to make more 
precise definitions, I can supplement these descrip tions a bit. 
 
• The definition of an eye [in general] : A knower that (i) arises in dependence on the min d of an 
actual concentration that is its empowering conditi on, and (ii) abides in a class distinguished by 
directly seeing its object. All five eyes satisfy t his definition, and therefore, understand that 
they all arise in dependence on the mind of an actu al concentration that is its empowering 
condition. 
1.  The definition of an eye of flesh : One of the five eyes that is a knower which direc tly sees the 
subtle and coarse forms within 100 yojanas in depen dence on an eye of flesh that is its 
uncommon empowering condition.  
There is one subtle point we need to observe. In th e expression “eye of flesh,” which appears in the 
definition, it is not the same “eye of flesh” that is the definiendum, in  that the Tibetan term for the 
definiendum is honorific, whereas the one in the de finition is non-honorific. The eye of flesh in the 
definition refers to the eye sense power; the eye o f flesh in the definiendum arises in dependence on 
the eye sense power.  
 When we talk about the tongue consciousness, where  do you think this is? Is it all over your 
tongue? The tongue consciousness that knows taste i s not at the center of the tongue, it is situated 
along the edge of the tongue. If you put a sweet ob ject on the center of your tongue, without it 
touching other parts of the tongue, you will not ta ste it. Try it! 
 
2.  The definition of a divine eye : One of the five eyes that is a knower that direct ly sees the death-
transference and birth of all migrating beings in d ependence on a divine eye that is its 
uncommon empowering condition. Note again that the definiendum, the divine eye, is honorific, 
while the one in the definition is non-honorific.  
3.  The definition of a wisdom eye : One of the five eyes that is observed as a non-co nceptualizing 
exalted wisdom. In fact, it is a non-conceptualizin g exalted wisdom.  
4.  The definition of a dharma eye : One of the five eyes that is an exalted knower wh ich realizes 
exactly the levels of faculty, whether sharp or dul l, of arya persons.  
5.  The definition of a buddha eye : One of the five eyes that is a culminated exalted  wisdom directly 
realizing all phenomena.  
 
Let us look more closely at the definition of the f ourth eye, the dharma eye. The definition says that  
it is an exalted knower which realizes exactly the levels of faculty, whether sharp or dull, of arya 
persons. With this dharma eye, someone on the path of seeing, on the first ground, would be able to 
realize exactly the levels of faculty of those belo w him, but for those above him—on the second 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 11  ground, third ground, and so forth—he would be able  to know roughly their faculties, but would not 
be able to know exactly. Using this example, we sho uld understand that someone on the first ground 
can know the faculties of aryas whose realizations are lower than his, for example, he could know 
the faculty of Hinayana aryas.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 115: 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-3B2. Instructions on the six clairvo yances: the causes of quickly completing the achiev ings 
COMMENTARY 
… indicating that “The clairvoyances of (1) magical  emanation, (2) divine ear, (3) 
knowing others’ minds, (4) recalling previous state s, (5) divine eye that arises from 
manifest compositional action, and (6) knowing the extinction of contaminations: (1) 
moves the earth and so forth, (2) hears faint and o ther sounds abiding in all the world 
systems, (3) thoroughly knows others’ minds, such a s those with attachment, (4) recalls 
many past lives of oneself and others, (5) sees all  forms, and (6) abandons afflictive and 
knowledge obscurations—are to be realized as merely  pacified from the beginning,” 
instructs on the six clairvoyances, and…  
 
EXPLANATION 
“A great bodhisattva who practices the Perfection o f Wisdom will attain the perfection 
of clairvoyance; he experiences many types of magic al emanation…” {164} instructs on 
the six clairvoyances, because it instructs by way of indicating how the six 
clairvoyances arise in the continuum conventionally  and that they “ are to be realized 
as merely pacified from the beginning  ultimately .”  
 
Here, we have instructions on the six clairvoyances . There are two points of view: one from the 
conventional point of view, one from the ultimate p oint of view. From the conventional point of 
view, how the six clairvoyances arise in the contin uum is indicated; from the ultimate point of view, 
they “are to be realized as merely pacified from th e beginning”—this basically regards whether or 
not they are truly existent. So one is instructed t o train in these clairvoyances in terms of these 
instructions, how they arise conventionally in the continuum, and that they should be realized as 
empty of true existence. The last phrase—“they “are  to be realized as merely pacified from the 
beginning ultimately”—means that the six clairvoyan ces are to be realized as lacking ultimate 
existence, or true existence. 
 
There are six clairvoyances: 
1.  Clairvoyance of magical emanation 
2.  Clairvoyance of divine ear 
3.  Clairvoyance knowing others’ minds 
4.  Clairvoyance recalling previous states 
5.  Clairvoyance of divine eye that arises from manifes t compositional action 
6.  Clairvoyance of the exhaustion of contaminations 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 115: 
 
 With regard to them:  
(1)  the clairvoyance of magical emanation  possesses special power, because it is that concom itant 
with meditative stabilization and wisdom which is a ble to move the earth , transform into one, 
emanate into many, and so forth ;…  
 
The clairvoyance of magical emanation arises in dep endence on an actual concentration.  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 12   
Ornament of the Essence , p. 115: 
 
…apply similarly to those below: 
(2)  the clairvoyance of divine ear  possesses special power, because it is that concom itant with 
meditative stabilization and wisdom which hears faint and other loud  sounds  abiding in all the 
world systems, is included in the level of equipois e arisen through the force of meditation, and 
has a transparent physical material as its empoweri ng condition; 
(3)  the clairvoyance knowing others’ minds  [possesses special power, because] it is that 
concomitant with meditative stabilization and wisdo m which directly, thoroughly  knows 
others’ minds,  such as those  free from being with  attachment ; 
(4)  the clairvoyance recalling previous states  [possesses special power, because it is that 
concomitant with meditative stabilization and wisdo m] which recalls  many , such as a hundred 
or a thousand, past lives of oneself and others , through the force of experience; 
(5)  the clairvoyance of divine eye that arises from the  manifest compositional action  of 
cultivating a concentration in this life [possesses  special power, because] it is a mental 
consciousness concomitant with the two qualities [m editative stabilization and wisdom] which 
sees all  subtle and gross forms  that are remote or not remote, is included within a level of 
equipoise arisen from meditation, and is a clairvoy ance supported on its empowering condition, 
a transparent physical material; {165}  
(6)  the clairvoyance of the exhaustion of contamination s  possesses special power, because it is 
that concomitant with the two qualities [meditative  stabilization and wisdom] which is a method 
abandoning the afflictive and knowledge obstruction s , and directly knows the separations 
that are the abandonments. 
 
First we will look at the definition of a clairvoya nce, and then the individual definitions of the 
clairvoyances (from Jetsun Chogyi Gyeltsen’s General Meaning ).  
 The definition of a clairvoyance  is similar to the definition of an eye, although i t does not 
mention the term “knower:” That which abides in a c lass distinguished by directly seeing its object 
in dependence on the mind of an actual concentratio n that is its empowering condition.  
1.  Definition of a clairvoyance of magical emanation : one of the six clairvoyances that is a knower 
which is able to move the earth, transform into one , emanate into many, and so forth.  
2.  Definition of a clairvoyance of divine ear : one of the six clairvoyances that (i) arises from  a 
divine ear which is its empowering condition, and ( ii) knows faint and loud sounds in the world 
systems.  
3.  Definition of a clairvoyance knowing others’ minds : one of the six clairvoyances that abides in a 
class of knowing whether or not others’ minds are w ith attachment and so forth.  
4.  Definition of a clairvoyance recalling previous sta tes : one of the six clairvoyances that abides in 
a class of recalling many past lives of oneself and  others.  
5.  Definition of the clairvoyance of divine eye : one of the six clairvoyances that (i) arises in 
dependence on a divine eye that is its empowering c ondition, and (ii) directly sees the subtle and 
coarse forms in the world systems.  
6.  Definition of the clairvoyance of the exhaustion of  contaminations : one of the six clairvoyances 
that has exhaustively abandoned the afflictive obsc urations. This definition does not mention the 
knowledge obscurations. Here, we should understand “contaminations” to refer to the 
afflictions. This word (in Tibetan) literally means  “falling down,” in that due to afflictions, one 
falls down.  
 
What are the boundaries of these six clairvoyances ? The first five can be found in non-Buddhists, 
hearers, solitary realizers, and bodhisattvas who have attained an actual concentration .  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 13   As for the sixth clairvoyance, if we do not discus s this in terms of those definite in the Mahayana 
lineage, the sixth clairvoyance can be found in the  continua of hearer and solitary realizer foe-
destroyers who have attained an actual concentratio n. It can be the case that one is a foe-destroyer, 
but if such a person has not attained an actual con centration, he has not attained this clairvoyance. 
In fact, such a foe-destroyer does not have any of the six clairvoyances. Does this seem strange? A  
foe-destroyer who does not have any of the six clai rvoyances? If you understand the essential point 
here, you may be surprised that such a foe-destroye r exists.  
 If we look at the sixth clairvoyance in terms of t hose who have not previously entered a 
Hinayana path, then this sixth clairvoyance exists only in buddhas, that is, only on the buddha 
ground.  
 We talked about a foe-destroyer who does not have an actual concentration, but such a person 
does not stay this way for long. One attains the st ate of foe-destroyer upon attaining a liberated 
path. If such a person has not attained an actual c oncentration, in the next instant he or she will 
attain all six clairvoyances. Upon attaining foe-de stroyer, s/he does not have an actual 
concentration, but in the next instant s/he attains  all six clairvoyances. This particular type of 
Hinayana foe-destroyer is actually a foe-destroyer of sharpest faculty among the various types of 
foe-destroyers, because such a person is able to at tain the state of foe-destroyer without depending 
on an actual concentration; s/he attains it on depe ndence on a preparation of a concentration. This 
person is said to be “one who abandons simultaneous ly.” This person attains the state of foe-
destroyer either (1) in that very life, (2) in the intermediate state following that life, or (3) upon  
taking rebirth. So there are three possibilities. T here are many people who have clairvoyance, but 
are not able to attain the state of foe-destroyer t hat quickly.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 116: 
 
If you were to possess these six clairvoyances, you  would directly hear even the faint 
and loud sounds revealing the Dharma in the infinit e world systems. You would directly 
know the teachers and disciples with whom you were related in past lives and also 
where they are in the present. Having caused yourse lf to excellently [appear] before 
your disciples through magical emanation, you exami ne well whether or not these 
vessels have attachment and so forth in their conti nua. By revealing the methods for 
attaining liberation that you directly know, you wi ll quickly complete the achievings in 
your own continuum. Through completing those, you w ill swiftly complete 
omniscience. 
 
This explains the benefits of the six clairvoyances . In this way, we have gone through the five eyes 
and six clairvoyances. If you have doubts, you can ask about them tomorrow morning.  
 
 
Wednesday 28 May, 2008 (morning) 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 116: 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-3C. Instructions on eliminating the seeds that are objects of abandonment 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-3C1. Instructions on the antidotes t o the acquired objects of abandonment 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-3C2. Instructions on the antidotes t o the innate objects of abandonment 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-3C1. Instructions on the antidotes t o the acquired objects of abandonment 
COMMENTARY 
…indicating that “With respect to the path of seein g, the very entity of the sixteen 
instants included within the four truths—the nature  of forbearances and knowledges of 
dharma and subsequent knowledge—a yogi realizing al l phenomena to lack entitiness, 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 14  like an illusionist, he, bearing a body without str ong adherence to all phenomena, 
performs thorough meditation on the very direct ant idotes to the objects to be 
abandoned by that,” instructs on the path of seeing , and…  
 
EXPLANATION 
“Subhuti, the bodhisattva mahasattvas, based on the  Perfection of Wisdom, generate 
confidence” instructs on the path of seeing, {166} because it instructs by way of 
indicating “ perform  thorough meditation on the very direct antidotes to  the  
acquired that are the objects to be abandoned by that  path of seeing.” What is the path 
of seeing? The very entity of the sixteen instants, the object-possessors  included 
within the four truths , the objects —the nature of forbearances and knowledges of 
dharma and subsequent knowledge [dharma-forbearance, dharma-knowledge, 
subsequent-forbearance, and subsequent-knowledge]. By which person? By a yogi 
realizing all phenomena to lack  truly existent entitiness.  Further,  like an illusionist,  
he,  bearing a body without strong adherence to all phen omena  as truly existent, 
meditates. 
 The path of seeing, as well as the way of generati ng it, will be explained below. In this 
context, just understand the explanation in [Vimukt isena’s]  Illuminating the Twenty  
Thousand  on the reason spoken by Subhuti to indicate the pat h of seeing. 
 
In this section, we are talking about the path of s eeing; what is mainly indicated is the Mahayana 
path of seeing, but we can discuss the path of seei ng in general. The path of seeing is divided into 
two types:  
1.  Path of seeing during meditative equipoise  
2.  Path of seeing during subsequent attainment.  
Meditative equipoise can be divided into three: 
1.  Uninterrupted path 
2.  Liberated path 
3.  Exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise that is neit her an uninterrupted path nor a liberated 
path  
The first two of these divisions are quite clear. W hat do we mean by the third, the exalted wisdom of 
meditative equipoise that is neither an uninterrupt ed path nor a liberated path ? When one newly 
attains the path of seeing, one is on the uninterru pted path. Following this, one attains the liberate d 
path, and then arises in subsequent attainment. Dur ing subsequent attainment, one can sometimes 
enter meditative equipoise on selflessness of perso ns or even on emptiness; this meditative 
equipoise is a meditative equipoise that is neither  an uninterrupted path nor a liberated path.  
 
When we divide the path of seeing [more] strictly, there are three divisions:  
1.  Exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise  
2.  Exalted wisdom of subsequent attainment.  
3.  Exalted wisdom that is neither meditative equipoise  nor subsequent attainment  
Among these divisions, the first two are clear. The  third, the exalted wisdom of the path of seeing 
that is neither meditative equipoise nor subsequent  attainment , can be posited as the direct 
realization of emptiness in the continuum of someon e on the subsequent attainment of the path of 
seeing. We can also posit conventional bodhicitta i n the continuum of someone on the uninterrupted 
path of the path of seeing; we can also posit conve ntional bodhicitta in the continuum of someone 
on the liberated path of the path of seeing. This is the case in general.   
 
Gyeltsab Je asks, “What is the path of seeing?” and  the answer is “The very entity of the sixteen 
instants, the object-possessors included within the  four truths, the objects—the nature of 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 15  forbearances and knowledges of dharma and subsequen t knowledge [dharma-forbearance, dharma-
knowledge, subsequent-forbearance, and subsequent-k nowledge].”  
 The path of seeing can also be presented as being the sixteen instants : eight uninterrupted paths 
and eight liberated paths. These can be divided int o two groups: eight of the desire realm, and eight 
of the upper realms (the form and formless realms).  Among these sixteen, the eight of the desire 
realm are in two groups: four uninterrupted paths a nd four liberated paths. Likewise, the eight of the  
upper realms consist of four uninterrupted paths an d four liberated paths.  
 The eight instants of the desire realm consist of four uninterrupted paths and four liberated paths. 
The uninterrupted paths are the dharma forbearance regarding true sufferings, dharma forbearance 
regarding true origins, dharma forbearance regardin g true cessations, and dharma forbearance 
regarding true paths. There are four liberated path s: dharma knowledge regarding true sufferings, 
dharma knowledge regarding true origins, dharma kno wledge regarding true cessations, and dharma 
knowledge regarding true paths.  
 There are eight instants related to the upper real ms: four uninterrupted paths and four liberated 
paths. The four uninterrupted paths are subsequent forbearances regarding true sufferings, true 
origins, true cessations, and true paths. The four liberated paths are subsequent knowledges 
regarding true sufferings, true origins, true cessa tions, and true paths.  
 Next we need to posit the respective objects of abandonment of these sixteen instants. To 
understand these various types of object of abandon ment, you just need to understand one type well, 
and it is easy to understand the rest. Regarding ob jects of abandonment related to the desire realm, 
there are forty.  
 [See Chart 15 on the left side at the bottom] Here , there are five views :  
1.  view of the transitory collection 
2.  view holding to an extreme 
3.  view holding a bad view as supreme 
4.  view holding bad ethics and modes of conduct as sup reme 
5.  wrong view 
and five non-views : 
1.  attachment 
2.  anger 
3.  afflicted ignorance 
4.  pride 
5.  afflicted doubt 
 
These ten afflictions are related to the four noble  truths: with regard to true sufferings, there are ten, 
with regard to true origins, there are ten, and so on, giving us forty with respect to the desire real m.  
 When we consider the form and formless realms, amo ng these views, we need to omit anger, 
because there is no anger in the form and formless realms, leaving us with nine afflictions with 
respect to each of the four noble truths, which mak es thirty-six with respect to the form realm and 
thirty-six with respect to the formless realm.  
 If we look at these afflictions in terms of a Maha yana path, a Mahayana path of seeing does not 
directly abandon these afflictions, because in rela tion to a Mahayana person, the objects of 
abandonment are the acquired  conception of true existence . However, such afflictions that are 
mentioned are abandoned by the way . 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 117: 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-3C2. Instructions on the antidotes t o the innate objects of abandonment 
COMMENTARY 
Because—just as, due to the compounded and the unco mpounded being merely the 
same  one  entity, one is unable to realize them as mutually different—it observes non-
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 16  differently from the property that was made direct by the path of seeing which was 
explained, since seeing and meditation do not have [types] that are different, presenting 
the fully qualified path of meditation does not exi st. However, that [abandons] by the 
nature of dependent arising. “Perform thorough medi tation as the direct antidote to the 
objects to be abandoned by that,” instructs on the path of meditation.  
 
EXPLANATION 
“Subhuti, in the absence of compounded sphere, one is unable to impute uncompounded 
sphere …” instructs on the path of meditation by me ans of simile, because it instructs 
that “ Perform thorough meditation  as the direct antidote to the innate objects of 
abandonment that are the objects to be abandoned by that path of meditation.”  
 
Let us first discuss roughly the objects of abandonment of the path of meditation . In terms of the 
afflictions to be abandoned by the path of meditati on, there are eighty-one, or nine sets of nine, 
related to nine levels. The nine levels are:  
1.  The desire realm 
2-5. Four levels of the form realm  
6-9. Four levels of the formless realm.  
[These divisions can be seen in detail on chart 13:  “The World and its Inhabitants.”] The afflictions 
related to each of these levels are sub-divided int o nine levels: great-great, middle-great, small-
great, great-middle, and so on. Corresponding to th e nine divisions of each of the nine levels, there 
are nine uninterrupted paths and nine liberated pat hs. There are nine uninterrupted paths that are 
direct antidotes to the afflictions included in the  desire realm. Similarly, there are nine uninterrup ted 
paths for each of the upper levels; thus there are nine uninterrupted paths that are direct antidotes to 
the afflictions in the first concentration of the f orm realm, nine that are direct antidotes to the 
afflictions in the second concentration, and so for th, up to the nine uninterrupted paths that are 
direct antidotes to the afflictions in the Peak of Existence [the highest level of the formless realm] . 
There are also eighty-one liberated paths. The last  of these does not belong to the path of 
meditation, but is included in the Buddha ground. I f we discuss this in terms of the Hinayana, the 
eighty-first would be in the continuum of a Hinayan a foe-destroyer.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 117: 
 
With respect to that, there are: 
 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-3C2A. The nature of the path: the ob ject to be meditated upon 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-3C2B. Dispelling objection 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-3C2A. The nature of the path: the ob ject to be meditated upon 
Thoroughly presenting the uncontaminated fully qualified  path of meditation that is 
a different type from the path of seeing which dire ctly realizes dharmata does not exist , 
since seeing and meditation that are direct equipoise on dharmata do not have types  
that are different.  They do not have types that are different, due to the 
compounded— true paths directly realizing selflessness— and the uncompounded—
their separation from seeds of stain— being  merely the same  one  entity , since it would 
follow that they [the true paths  cessations] are not free from stains if they [the true paths 
and their separation from seeds of stain] were diff erent entities;  
 
Here we will look at a somewhat complicated point. We are not talking about the path of seeing or 
path of meditation in the continua of different per sons, but in the continuum of a single person. A 
person first generates the path of seeing and then generates the path of meditation. They are one 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 17  continuity. If we were to examine the uninterrupted  path of the path of seeing and the uninterrupted 
path of the path of meditation, we would say that t hey are not different in entity; this is because 
these two do not have different aspects . They have the same aspect, referring to the aspec t realizing 
dharmata, or selflessness. Here, selflessness refer s to the selflessness of phenomena ; thus the aspect 
is the realization of emptiness of true existence. They have the same aspect because they have the 
same object, i.e. they are the same in observing dh armata, the object. Here, the uninterrupted path of  
the path of seeing and the uninterrupted path of th e path of meditation are the same entity . 
 Although the uninterrupted path of the path of see ing and the uninterrupted path of the path of 
meditation are the same entity , they are not one entity . This is because we say they are cause and 
effect and, being so, they cannot be one entity.  
 For compounded phenomena, or products, the followi ng expressions are mutually inclusive: one 
nature, one essence, one entity, and one substantia l entity. Likewise, the following expressions are 
mutually inclusive: different natures, different es sences, different entities, and different substanti al 
entities. The point of this passage is that the uni nterrupted path of the path of seeing and the 
uninterrupted path of the path of meditation have t he same object—emptiness; thus they have the 
same aspect, the realization of emptiness; therefor e, they have no difference in terms of entity, i.e.  
they are the same entity. Just as we say that the u ninterrupted path of the path of seeing and the 
uninterrupted path of the path of meditation are th e same entity, in general, we can also say that the  
path of seeing and the path of meditation are the s ame entity.  
 
There is a consequence presented in Gyeltsab’s comm entary. “They do not have types that are 
different, due to the compounded— true paths directly realizing selflessness— and the 
uncompounded— their separation from seeds of stain— being  merely the same  entity .” Here, true 
paths realizing selflessness refers to the uninterr upted path, and “ the uncompounded— their 
separation from seeds of stain” refers to true cess ations. They are the same entity, “since, it would 
follow that they are not free from stains.” The fir st “they” refers to true cessations, and the second  
“they” refers to true paths and true cessations. We  are presenting the consequence that if true paths 
and true cessations were different entities, it wou ld follow that true cessations are not free from 
stains. Therefore, we conclude that true paths and true cessations are the same entity. When we 
throw this consequence, it is an undesired conseque nce. In fact, true paths directly realizing 
selflessness in this context refer to uninterrupted  paths, and uninterrupted paths are in reality not 
free from stains. If we were to fling this conseque nce, saying “it would follow that true paths are no t 
free from stains,” the opponent would say, “I accep t.” It is true that uninterrupted paths are not free 
from stains.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 117: 
 
because—just as one is unable to impute  them as mutually different entities—also 
that path of meditation directly observes the property which was made direct by the 
path of seeing which was explained  above to be non-different from dharmata. For, 
since dharmata has no differences that are dissimil ar types by means of entity, the 
earlier and later paths that are direct meditative equipoise upon it also have no 
differences that are dissimilar types by means of e ntity. This is in turn because both 
directly observe thusness, the negation of the obje ct of adherence of the innate 
conception of true existence. However, know that th e dissimilar superimpositions that 
are objects to be removed are removed individually.   
 
The compounded is imputed in dependence on the unco mpounded, and the uncompounded is 
imputed in dependence on the compounded. If the unc ompounded and the compounded were 
different entities, one would not be able to impute  them in this way. The last part of this passage 
mentions the two paths not being different in entit y, but being different in terms of the objects to b e 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 18  abandoned. Gyeltsab says, “For, since dharmata has no differences that are dissimilar types by 
means of entity, the earlier and later paths that a re direct meditative equipoise upon it also have no  
differences that are dissimilar types by means of e ntity;” here, “earlier and later paths” are the pat h 
of seeing and the path of meditation. There are no differences in terms of entity of emptiness, 
therefore the path of seeing and the path of medita tion “that are direct meditative equipoise upon it 
also have no differences that are dissimilar types by means of entity.” “This is in turn because both 
directly observe thusness, the negation of the obje ct of adherence of the innate conception of true 
existence,” so both the path of seeing and the path  of meditation realize the absence of the object of  
adherence of the innate conception of true existenc e. “However, know that the dissimilar 
superimpositions that are objects to be removed are  removed individually,” means that they have 
different objects of abandonment, or superimpositio ns, to be removed. The respective objects of 
abandonment of the path of seeing and path of medit ation are different, but the path of seeing and 
the path of meditation do not differ in terms of object of observation and aspect .  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 117: 
 
{168} In this context: 
 
SOMEONE FROM THE PAST: Although the meditative equi poises of the ten grounds 
do not differ with respect to the seeing of dharmat a, there are differences in the seeing 
of the truth body.  
RESPONSE: If one were to assert that a  true cessations  were  is  an ultimate truth, then 
that is  would be  appropriate, but if it were to be an obscurational  truth, then the direct 
comprehension of an obscurational truth by that ver y exalted wisdom of someone on a 
learner’s path that directly realizes dharmata woul d transgress the path of reasoning; it 
would follow that meditative equipoise and subseque nt attainment would become one 
entity on a learner’s path;  it would follow that the stains of apprehending th e two truths 
as different entities would be exhaustively abandon ed; and there would not be the 
slightest fault in a bodhisattva’s having brought a bout the perfect end without having 
completed [prayers], ripened [sentient beings], and  purified [his buddha land]. 
 
This person is saying that the meditative equipoise s of the ten grounds have differences in the 
seeing of the truth body. Our own system, the Auton omist school, says that this assertion is alright 
if you say that a true cessation is an ultimate tru th, but according to our system, a true cessation i s 
an obscurational truth, or conventional truth. When  we talk about the truth body in this person’s 
opinion, it is a true cessation. In our system, a t rue cessation is not an ultimate truth; it is a 
conventional truth. The exalted wisdom of a learner ’s meditative equipoise directly realizing 
dharmata does not  realize a conventional truth. If such a meditative  equipoise were to directly 
realize conventional truth, then it would directly realize the two truths simultaneously, but in fact it 
doesn’t, since a learner has not eliminated the sta ins that prevent the direct realization of the two 
truths simultaneously. A learner still has the conc eption of the two truths as separate entities, and 
has not exhaustively abandoned the stains of the co nceptions of the two truths as different entities. 
Our own system flings a series of absurd consequenc es:  
• the direct comprehension of an obscurational truth by that very exalted wisdom of someone on a 
learner’s path that directly realizes dharmata woul d transgress the path of reasoning. Further,  
• it would follow that meditative equipoise and subse quent attainment would become one entity on 
a learner’s path, 
• it would follow that the stains of apprehending the  two truths as different entities would be 
exhaustively abandoned, and  
• there would not be the slightest fault in a bodhisa ttva’s having brought about the perfect end 
without having completed [prayers], ripened [sentie nt beings], and purified [his buddha land]. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 19  If, on a learners’ path, meditative equipoise and s ubsequent attainment were not contradictory, there 
would be no fault in a bodhisattva actualizing the perfect end on a learner’s path.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 118: 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-3C2B. Dispelling objection 
OPINION: If those two paths do not have different c haracteristics, then they would also 
not have difference with regard to the ability to a bandon the objects of abandonment. 
RESPONSE: Indeed, the two are not different in type . However,  it is not that they do 
not have difference with regard to the ability to a bandon the objects of abandonment 
because, even though the seeds of the innate [objec ts of abandonment] are not 
abandoned by the earlier path, that later path, through the force of having greatly 
advanced in familiarization compared to the former,  by the nature of dependent 
arising , is able to abandon the seeds of the innate [objec ts of abandonment]. For 
example, even though an inferential valid cognizer realizing that sound is impermanent 
realizes the non-existence of the object of adheren ce of the innate conception of sound 
as permanent, it harms the manifest acquired [objec ts of abandonment]; it does not harm 
the innate [objects of abandonment]. 
 
The essential point here is that although the path of seeing and path of meditation are not different 
in type, they are different in their ability to aba ndon their respective objects of abandonment. The 
path of seeing abandons the acquired objects of aba ndonment and the path of meditation abandons 
the innate objects of abandonment. This is because the path of meditation is more strongly 
familiarized with emptiness, due to which it is abl e to abandon the innate objects of abandonment. 
An example explains this point: when a person reali zes that sound is impermanent, he will not have 
a manifest  acquired  conception that sound is permanent; but this perso n can still have the innate 
conception of sound as permanent.  
 
Questions and answers 
 
Now we will have question time. We will discuss the  answers this evening.  
 
Q: A sharp-facultied foe-destroyer is able to reali ze the state of foe-destroyer without having an 
actual concentration. Can he become a foe-destroyer  even without having the preparation of a 
concentration? 
 
Q: My understanding is that the first two truths (t rue sufferings, true origins) are conventional 
truths, and the last two are ultimate truths (true cessations and true paths). Is that correct? On p. 117, 
is it the case for our system that the truth body, which is a true cessation, is a conventional truth?  
GTT: Think about this: an emptiness is necessarily an ultimate truth, and an ultimate truth is 
necessarily an emptiness. Phenomena other than empt inesses are conventional truths. You can 
check to see which of the four truths are conventio nal truths and which are ultimate truths. To see if  
a true cessation is an ultimate truth, you need to see if it is an emptiness.  
 
Q: Regarding the definition of the Mahayana path of  seeing in the context of knower of paths: “A 
Mahayana clear realization of truth conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing emptiness in the 
continuum of the person who possesses it in his con tinuum.” What is the meaning of “being 
conjoined” in this context, since it seems there is  a wisdom directly realizing emptiness conjoined 
with a wisdom directly realizing emptiness? 
GTT: You have to look carefully at the expression “ clear realization of truth.” Does this have to be 
a mind directly realizing emptiness? Remember that a path of seeing is divided into meditative 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 20  equipoise, subsequent attainment, and path of seein g that is neither of the two. Meditative equipoise 
is divided into uninterrupted path, liberated path,  and exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise that is  
neither of the two. Think about this and see if a c lear realization of truth has to be a direct 
realization of emptiness. This morning when we went  through that section, we gave examples of a 
path of seeing that is neither meditative equipoise  nor subsequent attainment, but we can also come 
up with other examples, so think about this.  
 
 
Wednesday 28 May 2008 (afternoon) 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 118: 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1C. Summary {169} (This outline comes from p. 100) 
 
COMMENTARY 
Thus, concerning the Perfection of Wisdom which is the mind of enlightenment and the 
very entities of the phenomena entailed by that, al l of these—(1) not observing, which 
are the aspects of achievings; (2) the four truths of the aryas, which are the objects of 
observation of those; (3) the three refuges, which are the support; (4) non-attachment, 
which is the cause of distinguished progress; (5) l ack of weariness, which is the cause of 
irreversible progress; (6) thoroughly upholding the  path, which is the cause of not 
progressing by way of other vehicles; (7) the five eyes, which are the causes of 
progressing without dependency on others; (8) the s ix clairvoyances, which are the 
causes of thoroughly completing an exalted knower o f all aspects; and (9-10) the paths 
of seeing the truth and meditation, which are the c auses  that complete—are indicated in 
the context of instructions. Since by only just the se all aims will become fulfilled, the 
instructions are of ten types. 
 
EXPLANATION 
Thus, the Mahayana instructions  indicated here are  definite as ten types . All of these  
ten are indicated in the context of instructions, since  by only just these  ten, all  
desired aims  of beings seeking omniscience will become fulfilled , that is, completed. 
 
QUALM: The other paths that will be explained below  would be unnecessary. 
RESPONSE: Do not hold that position because, while a Mahayana path that is not 
subsumed under them is not possible, since not all the divisions that are instances are 
indicated in these, they must be realized from else where. This is just like, while a thing 
that is not subsumed under product is not possible,  the term expressing “product” does 
not necessarily indicate all things. {170}  
 
The definition of Mahayana instructions is “Mahayan a speech that teaches a method for attaining 
the object of striving of the Mahayana generated mi nd.” We can say that “the object of striving of 
the Mahayana generated mind” is mainly enlightenmen t. There are ten divisions of Mahayana 
instructions, which we have gone through. The metho ds taught for attaining enlightenment are 
many; if we summarize them, we get the ten division s of Mahayana instructions. But this does not 
mean that all of the fine divisions of the methods are indicated in these ten. This is related to the 
qualm and response above, in which the person says there would thus be no need to look at other 
paths. Our system says that not all of the fine div isions are indicated here, which is why it is 
necessary to go on to understand other explanations . An example is given: “This is just like, while a 
thing that is not subsumed under product is not pos sible, the term expressing ‘product’ does not 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 21  necessarily indicate all things.” A thing is necess arily a product, but just the word “product” does 
not indicate all the things that exist. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 119: 
 
 Concerning the practice of the Perfection of Wisdom in which  the ten paths  are 
included within the stages of the Mahayana path, the mind of enlightenment and the 
very entities of the phenomena entailed by  and conjoined with that, the instructions 
that instruct on— (1) “what is uncommon to the hearers and not observing  what does 
not pass beyond the two truths, which are the aspects of the modes of cultivation, (2) 
the objects of observation of those  achievings;”  (3) “the support  of achievings;”  (4) 
“distinguished  higher and higher achievings;”  (5) “irreversible from the practice of the 
achievings;”  (6) “having degenerated from the Mahayana, by way of other vehicles  of 
the hearers and solitary realizers;”  (7) “due to independently engaging in the achievings, 
by way of others ; (8) “due to quickly  completing the accumulations, all aspects ;”  and 
(9-10) the paths of seeing and meditation which are  the causes that complete the 
achievings by means of exhausting all of the two ob scurations—are ten . 
 
(1) In relation to the first instruction, “Not obse rving” means not observing as truly existent, and 
“what is uncommon to the hearers” refers to the Mah ayana achievings. At the time of practicing the 
achievings, one should “not pass beyond the two tru ths,” that is, conventional truth and ultimate 
truth; 
(2) “objects of observation of those achievings” re fers to the four noble truths; 
(3) “the support of achievings” refers to the Three  Jewels; 
(4) “distinguished higher and higher achievings” re fers to the joyous effort of non-adherence; 
(5) “irreversible from the practice of the achievin gs” refers to instructions on the joyous effort of 
tirelessness; 
(6) “having degenerated from the Mahayana, by way o f other vehicles of the hearers and solitary 
realizers” refers to instructions on the joyous eff ort of thoroughly upholding the path, that is, one 
should not degenerate from the Mahayana and fall to  the vehicles of the hearers and solitary 
realizers; 
(7)   the seventh refers to instructions on the five eye s, which allow one to independently engage in 
the achievings; 
(8)   “quickly completing the accumulations, all aspects ” refers to the six clairvoyances; 
(9)   and (10) “the paths of seeing and meditation which  are the causes that complete achievings by 
means of exhausting all of the two obscurations” re fers to the path of seeing and the path of 
meditation.  
In this way, the ten types of Mahayana instructions  are summarized.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 119: 
 
 The instructions by way of having qualified each o f the ten instructions by the 
realization of emptiness are for the sake of (i) in dicating that, in general, all Mahayana 
paths need to be conjoined with that wisdom, and (i i) making known that, in particular, 
by meditating upon most of the achievings bearing t he aspect of conventionalities 
during subsequent attainment, and emptiness during meditative equipoise on the 
occasion of the path of accumulation, the partial c oncordances with definite 
discrimination that will be explained below—the wis doms arisen from meditation that 
observe emptiness—will be generated. 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 22  The instructions here are instructions that one sho uld not adhere to true existence; one needs to view  
phenomena as being empty of true existence. The pur pose is indicated by “in general, all Mahayana 
paths need to be conjoined with that wisdom” i.e. t he wisdom realizing emptiness. During 
meditative equipoise, on the occasion of the path o f accumulation, one meditates on emptiness, and 
during subsequent attainment, one meditates on “mos t of the achievings bearing the aspect of 
conventionalities,” and by doing this, “the partial  concordance with definite discrimination,” the 
path of preparation which is a “wisdom arisen from meditation observing emptiness, will be 
generated.”  
 
The following outlines on the Sangha Jewel come fro m p. 100. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 119: 
2B2C-1A2B-1B2. Explaining the Sangha Jewel in particu lar 
2B2C-1A2B-1B2A. General meaning 
2B2C-1A2B-1B2B. Meaning of the branches 
2B2C-1A2B-1B2A. General meaning 
2B2C-1A2B-1B2A-1. Examples that characterize 
2B2C-1A2B-1B2A-2. Meanings that are objects to be c haracterized 
2B2C-1A2B-1B2A-1. Examples that characterize 
2B2C-1A2B-1B2A-1A. Presentation of the results 
2B2C-1A2B-1B2A-1B. Presentation of the persons {171}   
2B2C-1A2B-1B2A-1A. Presentation of the results 
Regarding the results of the mode of a trainee-in-v irtue, the mode of a trainee-in-virtue 
is a mode in which one is set in the ultimate train ing in virtue by way of having 
abandoned the afflictions; further, regarding an un interrupted path, an abandonment is a 
result of separation; a liberated path is a result concordant with its cause. Thus it is  they 
are  called “results  of the mode of a trainee-in-virtue.” Also, due to the particularities of 
occasion, four results are taught in the sutras. Th e reason for positing them is the three 
objects of abandonment: (1) the three entwinements that are hindrances to embarking on 
liberation, (2) the five partial concordances with the bottom, and (3) the five partial 
concordances with the upper. With respect to these:  
• the first result is presented by way of having aban doned the first;  
• the middle two results by way of having abandoned [ respectively] most of the second and 
all of the second without exception; and  
• the result of foe-destroyer by way of having abando ned the last. 
 
Here, we are discussing the results. I have explain ed that there are eight persons: four approachers , 
and four abiders in the result . There are the:  
1.  approacher to stream-enterer 
2.  approacher to once-returner 
3.  approacher to non-returner 
4.  approacher to foe-destroyer 
and  
1.  abider in the result of stream-enterer 
2.  abider in the result of once-returner 
3.  abider in the result of non-returner 
4.  abider in the result of foe-destroyer.  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 23  What is the meaning of “approacher,” as in “approac her to stream-enterer”? This means someone 
striving to attain the result of stream-enterer, st riving to attain the result of once-returner, striv ing to 
attain the result of non-returner, and so on. We ca n describe these approachers as abiding in the 
stream , or continuity, of the applications which will att ain the corresponding results.  
 In order to understand Gyeltsab Je’s explanation, you need plenty of background information; 
otherwise, it is difficult to follow if you just re ad through the text. Let’s begin by trying to 
understand the first pair: the approacher to the re sult of stream-enterer and abider in the result of 
stream-enterer. This way, it will be easier to unde rstand the other pairs. In order to attain the resu lt 
of stream-enterer, one needs to abandon the respect ive objects of abandonment. These are known as 
the “ three entwinements .” They are: 
1.  Acquired view of the transitory collection  
2.  View holding bad modes of conduct as supreme 
3.  Afflicted doubt 
Without abandoning these three, one cannot attain t he result of stream-enterer, whereas if one 
abandons them, one will attain the result of stream -enterer.  
 
This morning, we mentioned the sixteen instants of the path of seeing. With respect to the desire 
realm , there are eight: 
1.  Dharma forbearance regarding true sufferings  
2.  Dharma knowledge regarding true sufferings  
3.  Dharma forbearance regarding true origins  
4.  Dharma knowledge regarding true origins  
5.  Dharma forbearance regarding true cessations  
6.  Dharma knowledge regarding true cessations 
7.  Dharma forbearance regarding true paths  
8.  Dharma knowledge regarding true paths 
(Note: The four dharma forbearances are uninterrupted paths , and the four dharma knowledges are 
liberated paths .) 
 
Likewise, there are eight with regard to the form and formless realms :  
9.  Subsequent forbearance regarding true sufferings 
10.  Subsequent knowledge regarding true sufferings 
11.  Subsequent forbearance regarding true origins 
12.  Subsequent knowledge regarding true origins 
13.  Subsequent forbearance regarding true cessations 
14.  Subsequent knowledge regarding true cessations 
15.  Subsequent forbearance regarding true paths 
16.  Subsequent knowledge regarding true paths 
(Note: The four subsequent forbearances are uninterrupted paths , and the four subsequent 
knowledges are liberated paths .) 
All sixteen of these are explained in relation to t he path of seeing.  
 
Let us examine an approacher to stream-enterer . Such a person has not attained an actual 
concentration, but has attained a preparation of a concentration. The boundaries  of an approacher to 
stream-enterer are from the meditative equipoise of  a single session path of preparation through the 
subsequent forbearance regarding true paths. Once o ne attains the subsequent knowledge regarding 
true paths, one attains the result of stream-entere r, and becomes an abider in the result of stream-
enterer . If we consider the boundaries of this approacher to stream-enterer, we see that from within 
the sixteen instants of the path of seeing, the bou ndaries include the first fifteen instants. On top of 
that, we need to include the instant of the single session path of preparation. Thus the boundaries of  
this approacher to stream-enterer cover sixteen ins tants. The sixteenth instant of the path of seeing,  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 24  the subsequent knowledge regarding true paths, is w here one finds the abider in the result of stream-
enterer.  
 To make one point very precise: there is an approa cher to stream-enterer on the fifteenth instant 
of the path of seeing; when this person moves on an d attains the sixteenth instant of the path of 
seeing, this person becomes an abider in the result  of stream-enterer. It is good if you understand 
the main points regarding the approacher to and abi der in the result of stream-enterer. Once you 
have understood this and dispelled doubts regarding  this, than the same reasoning regarding these 
two persons can be applied to the other persons. In  that it will become easier. 
 
Q: What does the single session path of preparation  refer to? 
A: This refers to someone who, from the meditative equipoise of the path of preparation, attains the 
uninterrupted path of the path of seeing without ar ising from the session. In one session, without 
rising, this person moves from a meditative equipoi se of the path of preparation to the uninterrupted 
path of the path of seeing.  
 
Q: So it’s the last instant of the path of preparat ion? 
A: This single session of the path of preparation c an last many moments. There are two modes, 
according to the Mahayana point of view and the Hin ayana point of view.  
 From the Mahayana point of view, one starts with t he meditative equipoise on the supreme 
mundane level of the path of preparation. Then one attains the uninterrupted path of the path of 
seeing, then in the next instant, one attains the l iberated path of the path of seeing, then one attai ns 
the subsequent attainment of the path of seeing.  
 From the Hinayana point of view, the sixteen insta nts are said to be sequential. From the path of 
preparation, one attains the uninterrupted path of the path of seeing, then the liberated path of the 
path of seeing, and in the next instant, one attain s the next set of uninterrupted path of the path of  
seeing and liberated path of the path of seeing, th en again, one attains the next set, and so on, 
because according to Hinayana, the sixteen instants  are sequential. The Mahayana says there is one 
uninterrupted path on the path of seeing and one li berated path on the path of seeing. Hence, the 
eight uninterrupted paths and eight liberated paths  are isolates, i.e. the eight uninterrupted paths 
within the sixteen instants of the path of seeing a re one entity but different isolates, while the eig ht 
liberated paths within the sixteen instants of the path of seeing are one entity but different isolate s.  
 
[A student expressed his strong confusion in relati on to this topic, so Geshe-la gave a basic 
presentation:] 
 
There are afflictions to be abandoned by the path o f seeing. Do you agree? These afflictions have to 
be correlated with the four noble truths. We can ta lk about the objects to be abandoned by the path 
of seeing related to true sufferings, true origins,  and so forth. There are not objects to be abandone d 
by the path of seeing that are not correlated to the four noble truths. If we examine the afflictions in 
our continua, we will see that they are related to sufferings, the origins of suffering, and so forth.  
Based on this description of the existence of diffe rent kinds of afflictions, there is much to be 
explained: there are manifest afflictions, differen t kinds of afflictions that need to be abandoned by  
meditating on selflessness, generating an uninterru pted path, and so forth. The main antidote to the 
afflictions is the wisdom directly realizing selfle ssness of persons.  
 From the point of view of the hearers’ paths, ther e are the hearers’ path of accumulation, the 
hearers’ path of preparation, the hearers’ path of seeing, the hearers’ path of meditation, and the 
hearers’ path of no-more-learning. Before attaining  the hearers’ path of accumulation, there are 
obstacles to be overcome. For instance, if one is u nhappy due to various circumstances, or if one 
has a very narrow outlook on things, and so forth, such states of mind prevent one from attaining 
the hearers’ path of accumulation. With strong mani fest afflictions, one is unable to attain calm 
abiding, and without that, one is unable to generat e a hearers’ path of accumulation; therefore one 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 25  needs to start by working on the manifest states of  the afflictions. Although there are manifest 
afflictions on the small, medium, and great levels of the hearers’ path of accumulation, these 
afflictions are weaker than those in ordinary perso ns. As one progresses to the heat, peak, 
forbearance, and supreme mundane quality levels of the path of preparation, the afflictions are even 
weaker; in particular, the sixteen wrong conception s with regard to the four noble truths become 
much weaker. One on the path of preparation also ha s the seeds of the acquired afflictions, which 
are abandoned on the path of seeing, and the seeds of the innate afflictions, which are abandoned on 
the path of meditation.  
 One trains in meditative stabilization and the wis dom realizing selflessness on the path of 
preparation, and from there one transfers to the un interrupted path of the path of seeing; this 
uninterrupted path of the path of seeing abandons t he seeds of the acquired afflictions as well as the  
manifest acquired afflictions. On the occasion of t he path of preparation, one has suppressed the 
manifest afflictions, but they have not been abando ned, although they are not able to arise. When 
one attains the uninterrupted path of the path of s eeing, the manifest acquired afflictions are 
abandoned.   
 
Q: Regarding either the Hinayana or Mahayana path, is the approacher in the single session of the 
path of preparation up to the fifteenth moment nece ssarily in meditative equipoise?  
A: From the hearers’ point of view, this is correct . From the meditative equipoise of a single session  
path of preparation through the fifteenth instant o f the path of seeing, this is a single session. Fro m 
the Mahayana point of view, this explanation is not  entirely accurate, because in the Mahayana 
system we say that the eight uninterrupted paths oc cur simultaneously, and the eight liberated paths 
occur simultaneously. One starts from a single sess ion path of preparation, continues without 
getting up to attain the eight uninterrupted paths of the path of seeing, and then attains the eight 
liberated paths of the path of seeing, all in one s ession, and then one arises in subsequent 
attainment.  
 
Q: According to Mahayana, at what point does one tr ansfer from being an approacher to stream-
enterer to abider in the result of stream-enterer, since the uninterrupted paths occur simultaneously 
and the liberated paths occur simultaneously? 
A: In terms of the Mahayana, we do not use expressi ons such as approacher to stream-enterer and 
abider in the result of stream-enterer. 
 
Q: Is it the case that the uninterrupted path abandons the seeds of the acquired afflictions, and that 
they have been abandoned when one attains the liberated path? 
A: That is correct. The manifest acquired afflictio ns are abandoned by the uninterrupted path, and 
upon attaining the liberated path, they have been a bandoned. On the occasion of the uninterrupted 
path, the manifest acquired afflictions are not pre sent, but they have not been abandoned. When one 
attains the liberated path, they have been abandone d. This is the same for the seeds: the 
uninterrupted path is the direct antidote to them, so they are not present on the uninterrupted path, 
but they have not been abandoned. When one attains the liberated path, they have been abandoned.  
 
Answer to a question from this morning:  
 
Q: Yesterday we saw that a sharp faculty foe destro yer is able to realize the state of foe-destroyer 
without having an actual concentration. Can someone  attain the state of foe-destroyer without 
having attained even a preparation of the 1 st  concentration? Also, generally it is said that to attain 
calm-abiding it is necessary to be able to stay at least 4 hours in meditative equipoise, but maybe 
even in 3 hours one can have the result of realizin g the selflessness of persons.  
Student 1: This is not possible, because by definit ion, in order to enter a path, a Hinayana 
practitioner has to develop spontaneous renunciatio n on the basis of a preparation of a 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 26  concentration, and a Mahayana practitioner has to r ealize bodhichitta on the basis of a preparation 
of a concentration. This is by definition, so there  is nothing to do. 
 
GTT: Indeed it is like you say, but we need to be a ble to explain why without calm abiding or a 
preparation of a concentration one cannot generate a path. You mentioned a person remaining in 
meditative equipoise for four hours, but such abili ty does not mean that the person has attained calm 
abiding or a preparation of a concentration. In fac t when one has attained the 9 th  mental abiding, one 
can remain in single pointed concentration for four , five or more hours, but one has not attained 
calm abiding. Why is such a good state of concentra tion, being able to stay single-pointed for four 
hours, not good enough to assist a generation of a path? Why is a calm abiding, or a preparation of 
an actual concentration, indispensable?  What is th e reason for saying that calm abiding is necessary 
for the generation of a path? What is the reason th at in dependence on the ninth mental abiding one 
cannot attain a path, one needs an actual calm abid ing? 
Student 2: You need calm abiding to support analyti cal meditation to generate the path. 
Geshe-la: That is a very good answer. In order to g enerate the path one needs to perform analytical 
meditation that is supported on calm abiding. 
 The ninth mental abiding which will lead to the at tainment of calm abiding is still a desire realm 
mind; it is a coarse mind that is not able to be us ed as a support of a path. Once one has attained 
calm abiding, such meditative stabilization can ser ve as a basis for analytical meditation of special 
insight.  One is not able to induce the bliss throu gh the force of analysis from within the state of t he 
ninth mental abiding. But the analytical meditation /analysis is able to induce bliss from within the 
state of calm abiding. When one trains in dexterity  of meditative stabilization this does not mean 
that one simply trains in calm abiding alone, one t rains in many levels of meditative stabilization, 
desire realm, form realm, and so forth. It is throu gh such training in dexterity in meditative 
stabilization that one is eventually able to attain  special insight.  
 
Thursday 29 May 2008 
 
[Geshe-la began with a story about the importance o f making effort in study as a basis for 
meditation and developing realizations.] 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 119: 
2B2C-1A2B-1B2A-1A. Presentation of the results (cont inued) 
 
Here we are mainly talking about the hearer sangha.  The respective objects of abandonment of 
hearers are the various types of afflictive obscura tions, which are divided into two types: acquired 
afflictive obscurations and innate afflictive obscurations . Between these two types of afflictive 
obscurations, the acquired afflictive obscurations are abandoned by the path of seeing, while the 
innate afflictive obscurations are abandoned by the  path of meditation. Before the attainment of the 
path of seeing, hearers need to subdue the afflicti ons. Although the actual abandonment of the 
afflictive obscurations begins on the path of seein g, afflictions such as anger and so forth need to b e 
suppressed to some extent prior to the path of seei ng. Prior to the attainment of the path of seeing, 
on the path of preparation, a hearer places himself  or herself in the meditative equipoise of 
selflessness of persons. When this becomes a direct  antidote to the afflictive obscurations, the 
hearer attains the path of seeing.  
 On the path of seeing, a hearer passes through the  sixteen instants of the path of seeing, starting 
with dharma forbearance regarding true sufferings, and so forth, as we discussed previously. These 
instants will be passed through rather quickly. In this way one passes through the sixteen instants, 
first abandoning the acquired afflictive obscuratio ns with regard to true sufferings, then abandoning 
the acquired afflictive obscurations with regard to  true origins, then true cessations, then true path s. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 27  Thus there is dharma forbearance, dharma knowledge,  subsequent forbearance, and subsequent 
knowledge with respect to true sufferings, then the se four with respect to true origins, and so forth.  
The presentation we had yesterday was that the eigh t instants with regard to the desire realm were 
presented first, followed by the eight instants wit h regard to the upper realms. In this presentation 
[given here], first there are four instants regardi ng true sufferings, then four with regard to true 
origins, and so forth. Let’s stick to the one that was given yesterday. We can bear in mind both 
presentations and compare them. In the monastery, w e use the presentation of the eight of the desire 
realm first, followed by the eight of the upper rea lms.  
 When a hearer attains the sixteenth instant, the s ubsequent knowledge regarding true paths, he 
attains the last liberated path of the path of seei ng. After this he arises in subsequent attainment o f 
the path of seeing. When one attains the sixteenth instant of the path of seeing, there is no pervasio n 
that the result one attains is the result of a stre am-enterer. There are various possibilities; it is 
possible, for instance, that on attaining that inst ant, one attains the result of once-returner. Later  we 
will be considering these various possibilities.  
 Without passing through the five hearers’ paths—pa th of accumulation, path of preparation, path 
of seeing, path of meditation, and path of no-more- learning—there is no attainment of the state of 
foe-destroyer, so one must necessarily pass through  these paths to attain the foe-destroyer state. In 
terms of the four results—stream-enterer, once-retu rner, non-returner, and foe-destroyer—there is 
no pervasion that one must attain the previous thre e serially in order to attain the state of foe-
destroyer.  
• In the most straightforward case, a serial attainer  will attain the result of stream-enterer, then 
once-returner, then non-returner, then the state of  foe-destroyer.  
• We can also have someone who attains the state of s tream-enterer, then skips the second and 
third results, attaining the state of foe-destroyer .  
• We can also have someone who attains stream-enterer , skips the second result (once-returner), 
attains the state of non-returner, and then attains  the state of foe-destroyer.  
• There is another possibility of someone who skips t he first result and attains the state of once-
returner, then the state of non-returner, then the state of foe-destroyer.  
• There is also someone who skips stream-enterer and once-returner, attains non-returner, and then 
becomes a foe-destroyer.  
• A hearer of the dullest faculty will attain the foe -destroyer state serially: first stream-enterer, th en 
once-returner, then non-returner, then foe-destroye r.  
• A person called a “leaper” is pervaded by skipping the first result, that of stream-enterer.  
 
We will look at the passage in Ornament of the Essence  that we were discussing yesterday. 
 
The mode of a trainee-in-virtue, “a mode in which o ne is set in the ultimate training in virtue by 
way of having abandoned the afflictions,” is an uni nterrupted path. There are two types of results of 
uninterrupted paths. The first result of an uninter rupted path is a result of separation; another resu lt 
of an uninterrupted path is a liberated path, and s uch a result is a result concordant with the cause.  
Therefore there is the expression, “a result of the  mode of a trainee-in-virtue,” which is a result of  
an uninterrupted path. The two types are an abandonment and a liberated path . The mode of a 
trainee-in-virtue is an uninterrupted path, and a r esult of the mode of a trainee-in-virtue is the two  
types of results of the uninterrupted path: an aban donment that is a result of separation, and a 
liberated path.  
 There are four types of result of the mode of a tr ainee-in-virtue: 
1.  Result of stream-enterer 
2.  Result of once-returner 
3.  Result of non-returner 
4.  Result of foe-destroyer  
The objects of abandonment are summarized in three types: 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 28  1.  The three entwinements that are hindrances to embar king on liberation 
2.  The five partial concordances with the bottom 
3.  The five partial concordances with the upper 
The first result, stream-enterer, is presented by h aving abandoned the first of these objects of 
abandonment; the result of once-returner is present ed by way of having abandoned most of the five 
partial concordances with the bottom; the result of  non-returner is presented by way of having 
abandoned all of the five partial concordances with  the bottom; the result of foe-destroyer is 
presented by way of having abandoned the last, the five partial concordances with the upper.  
 
The three entwinements are  
1.  The acquired view of the transitory collection 
2.  View holding bad modes and conduct as supreme 
3.  Afflicted doubt 
The five partial concordances with the bottom are: 
1-3. The three entwinements 
4. Aspiration for the desire realm 
5. Harmful intent 
The five partial concordances with the upper: 
1.  Attachment of the form realm 
2.  Attachment of the formless realm  
3.  Excitement 
4.  Pride 
5.  Afflicted ignorance  
 
Let us discuss the objects of abandonment with rega rd to these four results. We will begin with a 
serial attainer , one who attains the results serially. If one aban dons the three entwinements, one 
attains the result of stream-enterer. For the secon d result (once-returner), one needs to have 
abandoned most of the five partial concordances wit h the bottom, meaning that after one has 
attained the result of stream-enterer, one goes on to abandon up to the sixth degree of afflictions of  
the desire realm; such a person already abandoned t he three entwinements as a stream-enterer and 
still needs to abandon the aspiration for the desir e realm and harmful intent. Aspiration for the 
desire realm has nine degrees. When this person aba ndons the sixth level among the nine levels of 
attachment of the desire realm, this person attains  the state of once-returner. When this person goes 
on to abandon all nine levels of attachment of the desire realm, this person abandons all the five 
partial concordances with the bottom, attaining the  state of non-returner. He then goes on to 
abandon all the five partial concordances with the upper, at wh ich point he attains the state of foe-
destroyer. This is in regard to a serial attainer; the details will come as we go along.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 120: 
 
In dependence on which levels are they attained? 
• The first two results are attained in dependence on  the preparations of the first 
concentration; 
• if one attains the third result serially or by way of having largely separated from 
attachment previously, the mind support is similar to the above; if one has separated from 
attachment previously, it is supported on any of th e actual concentrations; 
• with respect to the fourth result, if one attains i t in the two lower realms [desire and form 
realms], it is supported on any of the six levels o f concentrations; if it is attained in the 
formless realm, it is supported on any of the first  three formless absorptions. 
 
On which levels are these results attained?  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 29  • The first two results—stream-enterer and once-retur ner—are attained in dependence on a 
preparation of the first concentration.  
• For the result of non-returner, if attained seriall y or by way of having largely separated from 
attachment previously, the mind support is a prepar ation of the first concentration (here, the 
word “previously” means prior to the path of seeing ). “Having largely separated from 
attachment previously” refers to a leaper, who has separated from the sixth level of attachment 
of the desire realm. “If one has separated from att achment previously, it is supported on any of 
the actual concentrations,” means that one has sepa rated from all nine levels of attachment of 
the desire realm prior to the path of seeing.  
• With respect to the fourth result, the foe-destroye r, if one attains it in the two lower realms, the 
desire and form realms, it is supported on any of t he six levels of concentrations. The six levels 
of concentration are: 
1.  the preparation called Not Unable 
2.  the mere first concentration 
3.  the special first concentration 
4.  the second actual concentration 
5.  the third actual concentration 
6.  the fourth actual concentration 
If it is attained in the formless realm, it is supp orted on any of the first three formless absorption s.  
 
When we go through these results individually, you will understand this generic description better.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 120: 
 
In dependence on which—the path of seeing or the pa th of meditation—are they 
attained? 
• The first result is attained only by way of the pat h of seeing;  
• if the middle two are attained serially, then they are attained by way of the path of 
meditation; if one has largely separated from attac hment previously, or one has separated 
from attachment with respect to the desire realm pr eviously, then they are attained by 
way of the path of seeing; and  
• the last result is attained in dependence on the pa th of meditation, because it must be 
attained through having exhaustively abandoned the objects to be abandoned by the path 
of meditation of the Peak of Existence. {172}  
 
This passage says the first result, that of stream- enterer, is attained only by way of the path of 
seeing. This is attained when one attains the sixte enth instant of the path of seeing (the subsequent 
knowledge regarding true paths). We can say this in  general. From the fifteenth instant of the path 
of seeing, one moves to the sixteenth instant of th e path of seeing, and attains the result of stream-
enterer.  Therefore, the first result is attained b y way of the path of seeing. 
 The middle two results—once-returner and non-retur ner—if attained serially, are attained by the 
path of meditation, meaning that if one first attai ns the result of stream-enterer and goes on to atta in 
the result of once-returner, it is attained by way of the path of meditation. If this person goes on t o 
the result of non-returner, this is attained by way  of the path of meditation. If one has largely 
separated from attachment previously or from all at tachment with respect to the desire realm 
previously, then the results are attained by way of  the path of seeing. We are talking about persons 
who have separated from the first six levels of att achment of the desire realm or all nine levels 
before the path of seeing. Such persons attain the results of once-returner or non-returner by way of 
the path of seeing.  
 
Now there is another question: 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 30   
Ornament of the Essence , p. 120: 
 
By which—a mundane path or a supramundane path—are they attained? 
• the first and the last results are attained only by  way of a supramundane path;  
• the middle two are attained after the path of seein g; if that person has familiarized with 
practice predominant in calm-abiding, then they are  attained by way of a mundane path 
bearing the aspects of peace and coarseness.  
 
The results of stream-enterer and foe-destroyer are  attained only by way of a supramundane path; 
they are pervaded by being attained by a supramunda ne path.  The middle two results—once-
returner and non-returner—are attained after the pa th of seeing. This refers to the serial attainers. “If 
that person has familiarized with practice predomin ant in calm-abiding, then they are attained by 
way of a mundane path bearing the aspects of peace and coarseness,” this means that if this person 
is familiar with practice predominant in calm abidi ng, then when this person abandons the first six 
afflictions of the desire realm by a mundane path, s/he attains the state of once-returner. When s/he 
abandons all nine levels of attachment of the desir e realm, s/he attains the result of non-returner. 
This is someone who has mainly familiarized with pr actice in calm abiding. If they have not mainly 
familiarized with practice in calm abiding, they wi ll attain the middle two results by way of a 
supramundane path. You should know that if someone is a leaper, this person will attain the middle 
two results by way of a supramundane path.  
 
What is a supramundane path? In general, it is an arya path; a path that i s not an arya path is a 
mundane path. In this passage, it talks about “a mundane pa th bearing the aspects of peace and 
coarseness.” This is a path in which one views the upper realms as peaceful, and the lower realms as 
coarse. You may wonder, after one attains the path of seeing, is there a mundane path? Yes, after 
the path of seeing, one can rely on a mundane path bearing the aspects of peace and coarseness. 
There is an arya who has attained a path of seeing and yet relies on a mundane path bearing the 
aspects of peace and coarseness. Such an arya has a lready directly realized selflessness of persons, 
so instead of relying on meditative equipoise direc tly realizing selflessness, due to familiarization 
with calm abiding, this person can use the mundane path bearing the aspects of peace and 
coarseness to abandon the afflictions of the desire  realm.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 120: 
 
In dependence on which support are they attained? 
• The first three are attained in dependence on a des ire realm support;  
• the fourth is attained on a support of all three re alms.  
 
The first three results—stream-enterer, once-return er, and non-returner—are attained in dependence 
on a desire realm support, while the fourth, the fo e-destroyer, is attained on a support of all three 
realms (desire realm, form realm, or formless realm ).  
 
Questions and answers 
 
Q: On p. 117, it says “if one were to assert that a  true cessation were an ultimate truth, then that i s 
appropriate, but if it were to be an obscurational truth…” Since, according to the Autonomist 
school, true cessations are an obscurational truth,  why do they say this?  
Student 2: Because true cessations are separations from certain conventional truths, therefore true 
cessations are conventional truths.  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 31  Translator: According to the Autonomist school, tru e cessations are obscurational truths, not 
ultimate truths. We are trying to prove that the op ponent’s position is wrong. We say that if one 
says true cessations are ultimate truths, then your  position is all right, no fault; but in fact they are 
obscurational truths, and in that case your positio n entails these various faults. Therefore your 
position is wrong. So the faults do not ensue from our  position that true cessations are obscurational 
truths; they ensue from the opponent’s position. 
 
Q: What is the definition of an actual  refuge? 
Student: A refuge that can actually protect from fe ar.  
GTT: Good.  
Another student: It also has to protect from the causes of fear.  
GTT: Okay.  
Student: I would say that both the causal refuge an d the resultant refuge are actual refuges. 
GTT: In general, we say the Buddha Jewel is the tea cher of refuge, the Dharma Jewel is the actual 
refuge, and the Sangha Jewel are the companions for  accomplishing refuge. One views the Buddha 
Jewel as the teacher, the Dharma as the actual refu ge, and the Sangha as the companions. What does 
it mean when we say the Dharma refuge is the actual  refuge? Dharma Jewel is true paths and true 
cessations; true paths cause us to separate from su fferings, and true cessations are the separation 
from suffering.  
Student: So true cessations are obscurational truth s, but they are the actual refuge?  
GTT: Yes, the Dharma Jewel is an obscurational trut h.  
 
 
Friday 30 May, 2008 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 120: 
2B2C-1A2B-1B2A-1B. Presentation of the persons 
With respect to persons who are stream-enterers, th e first of the four, the definition of 
the first from between the two, approacher and abid er [i.e., the definition of an 
approacher to stream-enterer ] is: a person who strives for the sake of attainin g the result 
distinguished by having abandoned the three entwine ments.  
 
Here, “the four” are stream-enterers, once-returner s, non-returners, and foe-destroyers. To make the 
description complete, we would say that the four ar e the following pairs:  
1.  “the first of the four” are the pair, approacher to  stream-enterer and abider in the result of 
stream-enterer; 
2.  the second is the approacher to once-returner and a bider in the result of once-returner; 
3.  the third is the approacher to non-returner and abi der in the result of non-returner; 
4.  the fourth is the approacher to foe-destroyer and a bider in the result of foe-destroyer.  
 Gyeltsab Je’s definition of an approacher to strea m-enterer  is “a person who strives for the sake 
of attaining the result distinguished by having aba ndoned the three entwinements.” We discussed 
the three entwinements yesterday; the result distin guished by having abandoned the three 
entwinements is the result of stream-enterer. This definition needs to be annotated; it is posited her e 
in this way by Gyeltsab Je mainly for the sake of u nderstanding. Jetsun Chogyi Gyeltsen’s General 
Meaning posits the definition of an approacher to stream-en terer  as “one of the four approachers 
who abides in the stream of applications of strivin g for the sake of attaining the result of the mode 
of a trainee-in-virtue which abides in a class dist inguished by having abandoned the three 
entwinements, the objects to be abandoned by the pa th of seeing.”  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 32   This definition can be applied similarly to the th ree other approachers; we just need to change 
the object of abandonment, and omit the last phrase  “the objects to be abandoned by the path of 
seeing.” Thus,  
• The definition of an approacher to once-returner  is “one of the four approachers who abides in 
the stream of applications of striving for the sake  of attaining the result of the mode of a 
trainee-in-virtue which abides in a class distingui shed by having abandoned most of the five 
partial concordances with the bottom .”  
• The definition of an approacher to non-returner  would be “one of the four approachers who 
abides in the stream of applications of striving fo r the sake of attaining the result of the mode of 
a trainee-in-virtue which abides in a class disting uished by having abandoned the five partial 
concordances with the bottom .”  
• The definition of an approacher to foe-destroyer  would be “one of the four approachers who 
abides in the stream of applications of striving fo r the sake of attaining the result of the mode of 
a trainee-in-virtue which abides in a class disting uished by having abandoned the five partial 
concordances with the upper .” 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 120: 
 
When divided, there are two:  
(1) followers of faith, and  
(2) followers of Dharma. 
 The boundaries are: from a single-session path of preparation onwards, as long as one 
has not attained the liberated path included within  the result of stream-enterer.  
 
The followers of faith  are those who mainly follow the texts. It is not t hat they do not follow 
reasoning, but they mainly  follow texts. Followers of Dharma  are those who mainly follow 
reasoning, although it is not the case that they do  not follow the texts.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 121: 
 
With respect to abiders in the result of stream-ent erer, there are:  
(1) those who are serial, and  
(2) those who are simultaneous.  
 
The word “serial” can be interpreted in two ways: ( 1) sequential with respect to the objects of 
abandonment, or (2) sequential with respect to the result. These are divisions of abiders in the resul t 
of stream-enterer.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 121: 
 
With respect to first, the definition [of a serial abider in the result of stream-enterer ] is: a 
person (abiding in the result distinguished by havi ng abandoned the three 
entwinements) who does not abandon simultaneously, by way of aspects, the objects to 
be abandoned by the path of meditation of the three  realms.  
 
In this definition, we see the words “abandon simul taneously.” Abandoning simultaneously does 
not mean that all objects of abandonment of the thr ee realms are abandoned simultaneously, but 
rather that all the great of the great afflictions of the three realms (desire realm, form  realm, and 
formless realm) are abandoned simultaneously, the middle of the great  objects of abandonment of 
the three realms are abandoned simultaneously, and so forth.  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 33  Ornament of the Essence , p. 121: 
 
The three entwinements are: (1) the view of the tra nsitory collection, (2) the view 
holding bad modes of conduct as supreme, and (3) do ubt.  
 
These three entwinements are the objects of abandon ment of the path of seeing. They are:  
1.  the view of the transitory collection 
2.  the view holding bad modes of conduct as supreme 
3.  doubt 
To be more precise, we should say the acquired view of the transitory collection for the first 
entwinement, and afflicted  doubt for the third entwinement; the second is oka y as it is.   
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 121: 
 
 When divided, differentiated by faculty, there are  the two: believers-by-faith and 
attainers-by-seeing; differentiated by application,  there are the two: mere and special 
abiders in the result—those who abide in that very result, who  do not strive and those 
who strive for the sake of the special  result which is the special abidance . Know the 
two—differentiation through faculty and differentia tion through application—similarly 
for the two middle results. When differentiated by way of the attribute of rebirth, there 
are two: maximum-seven-timers and those born from c lass to class. {173}  
 
The first division is differentiated by faculty into the two:  
1.  believers-by-faith and  
2.  attainers-by-seeing.  
They are of dull faculty and sharp faculty [respect ively].  
 
The next division is by way of application :  
1.  mere abiders in the result and  
2.  special abiders in the result.  
Mere abiders in the result of stream-enterer are those who, after attaining the result of stream -
enterer, do not strive for the sake of a higher result. The special abider in the result of stream-
enterer is a person who, after attaining the result of stre am-enterer, strives for the sake of a higher 
result. With respect to the special abider in the r esult of stream-enterer, there are further sub-
divisions, which are not mentioned here: 
1.  serial special abider in the result of stream-enter er, and  
2.  special abider in the result of stream-enterer who abandons simultaneously. 
The first of these [the serial special abider in the result of stream-enter er ] is mutually inclusive 
with a serial approacher to once-returner. The reas on these two are mutually inclusive is that we say 
that a special abider in the result of stream-enter er is someone who strives for a higher result. So 
when we talk about a serial  special abider in the result of stream-enterer, th is is a person who 
strives for the next result, and the next result is  a once-returner. Therefore, this person satisfies the 
definition of a serial approacher to once-returner.  
 The second, the special abider in the result of stream-enterer who abandons simultaneously  is 
mutually inclusive with approacher to foe-destroyer  who abandons simultaneously.  
 You may be wondering, “What happened to the two mi ddle results?” The answer is that there are 
no simultaneous approachers to once-returner, and n o simultaneous approachers to non-returner. A 
once-returner who abandons simultaneously does not exist; also a non-returner who abandons 
simultaneously does not exist. Such an abider in th e result of stream-enterer who abandons 
simultaneously, without attaining the result of onc e-returner and non-returner, proceeds to attain the  
result of foe-destroyer. More details will come lat er. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 34   
“Know the two—differentiation through faculty and d ifferentiation through application—similarly 
for the two middle results.” The “two middle result s” are the results of once-returner and non-
returner. These two also have divisions by faculty into believers-by-faith and attainers-by-seeing, 
and by application into mere abiders and special ab iders in the result.  
 
There is also another division by way of attribute of rebirth: “When differentiated by way of the 
attribute of rebirth, there are two: maximum-seven- timers and those born from class to class.” The 
maximum-seven-timers  take rebirth a maximum of seven times. “Seven time s” means seven times 
by way of similar class. There are two [rebirths] i n each similar class, so when we talk about these 
maximum-seven-timers, we are actually talking about  taking a maximum of fourteen rebirths. The 
maximum-seven-timers can be divided into two types:  
1.  definite maximum-seven-timers and  
2.  indefinite maximum-seven-timers. 
An abider in the result of stream-enterer is an ary a being, so this being does not accumulate new 
karma to be reborn in cyclic existence, but can tak e rebirth due to karma accumulated before 
attaining the arya path.  
 The two types of maximum-seven-timers are because of faculty. The indefinite maximum- 
seven-timers are those of sharper faculty, because they know how to engage in confession and 
restraint, and so are able to purify their karma to  take rebirth in cyclic existence. This is why they  
are not definite to take fourteen rebirths in cycli c existence. The definite maximum seven-timers are 
of dull faculty; since they do not know how to enga ge in confession and restraint to purify the 
karma to take rebirth in cyclic existence, they are  definite to take fourteen rebirths in cyclic 
existence.  
 
The definite maximum-seven-timers can be sub-divided: 
1.  those who bear the support of a human being  
2.  those who bear the support of a desire realm god. 
 
Q: Why is this person called a “maximum-seven-timer ” if he actually takes fourteen rebirths? 
A: An analogy is used to explain why the name “seve n-timers” actually refers to fourteen rebirths; 
why, due to similar class, there are fourteen rebir ths. There is a type of tree called the “seven-leaf  
tree,” because each leaf has seven lobes. The tree doesn’t actually have just seven leaves, it has 
thousands of leaves, but it is named in this way. S imilarly, although we use the expression “seven-
timer,” it is not that such a person takes only sev en rebirths, in fact s/he takes fourteen rebirths b y 
way of similar class. From within these fourteen re births, there are two that are of similar class, 
another two of similar class, and so on, making sev en pairs, each pair of a similar class, so in this 
way there is the expression “seven-timer.”  
 
[Regarding the two divisions of the definite maximu m-seven-timers]: What is the difference 
between those who bear the support of a human being  and those who bear the support of a desire 
realm god? Are they merely different in terms of su pport, i.e. one having the support of a human 
being and one of a god? No. Those who have the supp ort of a human being attain the state of foe-
destroyer on the support of a human being; those wh o have the support of a desire realm god attain 
the state of foe-destroyer on the support of a desi re realm god.  
 How are the fourteen rebirths taken? Let us consid er the definite maximum seven-timer with the 
support of a human being . This person has 7 pairs of rebirths, and in each pair s/he is first a desire 
realm god, and then a human being. This is repeated  seven times, so that the last existence is that of  
a human being. Why do we say that they are of simil ar class, if one is a human being and one a 
desire realm god? It is because both belong to the desire realm, therefore are of similar class.  
 What about the definite maximum seven-timer who bears the support of a desire realm god ? 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 35  Again, there are fourteen rebirths in seven pairs. First this person is a human being, then is reborn as 
desire realm god, then again as a human being, and so forth. This is repeated seven times, so the last  
existence is the support of a desire realm god. In this way can you see that if one starts with a 
human being support, then one will end up with a de sire realm god support, and if one begins with a 
desire realm god support, one will eventually end u p with a human being support. There is more to 
be said about that.  
 In general, a maximum seven-timer is such that bef ore the path of seeing, not even one desire 
realm affliction has been abandoned.  
 
Now we will look at the second division of those di fferentiated by way of the attribute of rebirth: 
those born from class to class . Those born from class to class are such that prio r to the path of 
seeing, they have abandoned three of the desire rea lm afflictions, from among the nine desire realm 
afflictions. Some have abandoned four desire realm afflictions, while some have not abandoned 
four. All of them are pervaded by not having abandoned five desire realm afflictions. 
  In terms of the number of rebirths, those born fr om class to class are pervaded by taking two 
sets of rebirth, one set being a pair of similar cl ass, so this means they are pervaded by taking four  
rebirths. There are some who take three sets of reb irths and some who do not take three, but all are 
pervaded by not taking four sets of rebirths.  
 Why do we say that those born from class to class are pervaded by not having abandoned five 
afflictions of the desire realm? Because if they we re to abandon five afflictions of the desire realm,  
this means that they would have only the sixth affl iction left to abandon before they attain the resul t 
of once-returner. If they abandon the first five, t hey would abandon the sixth and attain the result o f 
once-returner.   
 Remember that when we say they have abandoned thre e afflictions of the desire realm, and that 
some have abandoned four, and none have abandoned f ive, this description applies to them before  
the path of seeing. When we speak of those born fro m class to class definitely taking two pairs of 
rebirth, some taking three, and so on, this descrip tion is applicable to them after  the path of seeing. 
We say that they definitely have not abandoned the fifth affliction of the desire realm before the 
path of seeing, because if they have, since they ar e so near to attaining the result of once-returner—  
they are separated by only one affliction— they wou ld go on to abandon the sixth affliction. For this 
reason, they are pervaded by not having abandoned t he five afflictions of the desire realm prior to 
the path of seeing.  
 
Those born from class to class can also be describe d in this way, so they are divided into: 
1.  those with human support and  
2.  those with desire realm god support. 
Those with human support are born from a class of h uman being to a class of human being. But this 
does not mean they are always human beings of the S outhern Continent (Jambudvipa). They are 
always reborn in the class of human beings, but the y can be born in the various continents; for 
example, they could be born in the Southern Contine nt, and then take rebirth in the Northern 
Continent, and then in the Western Continent, and s o on. Eventually, such a person will attain 
nirvana on the support of a human being.  
  Those with desire realm god support are born from  a class of desire realm god to a class of 
desire realm god. There are six levels of the desir e realm gods, and one does not always have to be 
in the same level of the desire realm gods. First o ne may be in the level “Without Combat,” and 
later in the realm of the Heaven of the Thirty-thre e. Eventually this person will attain nirvana on th e 
support of a desire realm god. One born from class to class on the support of a human being has the 
support of a human being, is reborn as a human bein g, and attains nirvana on the support of a 
human being; one with desire realm god support has the support of a desire realm god, is reborn as a 
desire realm god, and attains nirvana on the suppor t of a desire realm god.  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 36   Clarification : For the maximum-seven-timers, there are seven pai rs of rebirth in similar class: 
human/god, human/god, and so forth, whereas those b orn from class to class are born in one class 
throughout, i.e. human to human or god to god. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 121: 
 
The boundaries are: from the sixteenth instant of t he path of seeing through abiding on 
the uninterrupted path that abandons the sixth affl iction that is an object to be 
abandoned by the path of meditation of the desire r ealm. 
 
These are the boundaries of serial abiders in the result of stream-enterer . With regard to the phrase, 
“uninterrupted path that abandons the sixth afflict ion that is an object to be abandoned by the path 
of meditation of the desire realm,” there are nine afflictions of the desire realm. These are objects to 
be abandoned by the path of meditation. The uninter rupted path mentioned here abandons the sixth 
affliction of the desire realm that is to be abando ned by the path of meditation. One abiding on this 
uninterrupted path has not abandoned the sixth affl iction; if one goes on to attain the liberated path  
and has abandoned the sixth affliction that is an o bject of abandonment of the path of meditation of 
the desire realm, then one becomes an abider in the  result of a once-returner.  
 These boundaries can be related to yesterday’s dis cussion on whether it is by a mundane path or 
supramundane path that the results are attained. It  was said (on p. 120) that “the middle two 
[results] are attained after the path of seeing…” S o you should relate the description of the 
boundaries here to that explanation.  
 
 
Questions and answers 
 
Q: Is “the entity of the achievings” the two truths  or the wisdom realizing the two truths (this is 
related to p. 101, Instructions on the entity of th e achievings themselves)? 
A: We would say that the entity of the achievings i s “the union of the stages of the path based upon 
obscurational truth and the stages of the path base d upon ultimate truth.”  
 
Q: Re. p. 112: “Since some of dull-faculty will str ongly adhere to persistently practicing the 
meaning…” Does this mean that dull-facultied traine es will have grasping at true existence when 
they engage in practicing generated mind and so for th, and that this grasping is an adherence to 
negative activities? 
A: Indeed, when we say “strongly adhere,” it means strongly adhere to true existence, so for 
example, practicing bodhicitta as truly existent is  something that should be abandoned. Is this strong  
adherence to true existence the laziness of negativ e activities? No, but it will lead to negative 
activities of the three doors. If one were to reali ze emptiness, one would not adhere to true 
existence, and as a result would not engage in nega tivities of the three doors.  
 
Q: It is said that some beings abandon afflictions before the path of seeing—does this mean 
abandonment from the root ? 
A: No. when we talk about abandonment of affliction s prior to the path of seeing, this is 
abandonment by way of a mundane path ; it is not an abandonment from the root. For examp le, if 
there is someone who, prior to the path of seeing, has abandoned the six afflictions of the desire 
realm, they have abandoned them by way of the munda ne path, not from the root. When this person 
attains the sixteenth instant, the subsequent knowl edge regarding true paths, he attains the state of 
abider in the result of once-returner. He has aband oned the three entwinements. Because this person 
has abandoned the six afflictions of the desire rea lm before the path of seeing, then after attaining 
the path of seeing, he does not need to put effort into abandoning the seeds of the six afflictions of  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 15: 26-30 May, 2008 
 
 37  the desire realm. When he attains the subsequent kn owledge regarding true paths, he has abandoned 
the seeds of the six afflictions of the desire real m. Although the seeds of the six afflictions of the  
desire realm have been abandoned, it is not that he  abandons them intentionally; he does not need to 
do that. Such an abandonment is included within the  result of once-returner that he attains.  
 
 
 
 
/wheel END /wheel 