Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/Transcript pdf/ORN_GTTnotes_05.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:51:37.266612
================================================================================

Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 5: 25– 29 February, 2008 
 
 
 1UTechnical notes: U  
• In these notes, corrections and additions to th e translation of Maitre ya’s, Haribhadra’s, and 
Gyeltsab’s texts are indicated by explicitly indicating the changes and underlining the 
altered or added text . If underlining is notexplicitly indicated as a correction, it is a part of 
the translation.  
• These notes include the outline headings and an indented quotat ion of the first part of the 
section of text being explained, followed by ellipses (…). Students are expected to refer to 
Explanation: Ornament of the Essence  to see the text in its entirety.  
Masters Program: Ornament for Clear Realization 
Notes on commentary by  Geshe Tenzin Tenphel 
 
 
Monday, 25 February 2008 
        
 
   
TOrnament of the Essence, Tp. 12:  
2B1A. Making a connection (continued)  
  
Debate re. Maitreya’s own purpose 
 
The debate in this paragraph is in the context of the expression of wors hip. This expression of 
worship fulfills two purposes: Maitreya’s and othe rs’ welfare. This was discussed in previous 
passages. This person says it is not correct to a pply this statement to one’s own purpose, because 
Maitreya does not have a mind seeking his own pur pose, because he composed the treatise only to 
cause others to engage in it. It is composed only for others’ sake.  
 Our system responds in this paragraph, saying th at this person has not looked carefully at the 
Mahayana texts.   In terms of Maitreya being someone who has gained enlightenment, this text is taught for the sake 
of taking care of common trainees . In perspective of these comm on trainees, Maitreya is not a 
buddha; in the perspective of the unc ommon trainees, he is a buddha.  
 
• Common perspective = common trainees  
• Uncommon perspective (i.e. the situation in reality) = Maitreya is a buddha Correction: “Regarding the assertion that the Vene rable [Maitreya] does not seek his own 
welfare and the like, grueling detailed effort ha s not been made in the Mahayana texts…” should 
read:  
 
UThose who assert that Venerable Maitreya UT Tdoes not seek his own welfare and the like, 
Uhave not made U grueling detailed effort in the Mahaya na texts [to explai n it]. In terms of 
the Venerable being someone who has ga ined manifest complete buddhahood, [the 
assertor] failed to differentiate between the common and uncommon occasions….  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 5: 25– 29 February, 2008 
 
 
 2 
This disputant has failed to distinguish between the common and uncommon contexts.  
 
TOrnament of the Essence:  
 
In terms of him as a bodhisattva, if he does Unot U see the need for the truth body 
(dharmakaya) in regards to fully completing his own welfare, then, being satisfied with 
solitary peace in regards to his own welfare,  he cannot reverse th e grasping to it, and 
without reversing that, the de finition of the Mahayana gene rated mind [of enlightenment] 
would not be complete.  
    
In terms of a bodhisattva, the dis putant needs to see the necessity for the truth body in regard to 
fully completing one’s own welfare; otherwise, he would be  satisfied with attaining solitary peace, 
and would not be able to reverse grasping to it and the characteristics of Mahayana generated mind 
would thus be incomplete.  Ornament of the Essence :  
 
This is because intere st in one’s own welfar e, the truth body, is not needed on the occasion 
of a tenth-grounder [based on the assertion th at Maitreya is a bodhi sattva abiding on the 
tenth ground who does not seek his own welfar e]. The division of a buddha’s exalted body 
into the two—an exalted body of one’s own welfare and an exalted body of others’ 
welfare—would also be unnecessary…. 
 This is said from the point of view of the perspective of appearan ce of common trainees.  
 Our system posits the need to divide buddha’s exalted body into two—an  exalted body of one’s 
own welfare and an exalted body of others’ welfare. Whether we e xplain Maitreya as a buddha or a 
bodhisattva, there is a mind s eeking one’s own welfare.  
 
• “Mind seeking own welfare” does not mean that one has not completed one’s own welfare and 
needs to seek it.  
• In this context, mind seeking one’s own welfare is mind seeking exalted body of one’s own 
welfare; mind seeking others’ welfare is mind seeking exalted body of others’ welfare. 
 There is very extensive discussion of this in Jedzun Chogyi Gyeltsen’s 
TOcean of Sport T. This is very 
important, since it pertains to Maitreya’s own text. T T 
 
Ornament of the Essence : 
 
To summarize the essence and indicate it, th e purpose of Venerable [Maitreya] composing 
the expression of worship here is that faith precedes all, just as it has been said: “Generate 
the preliminary of faith like a mother…” [in the Jewel Lamp Sutra ] and “Firmly stabilize 
the root of faith” [in Shantideva’s Compendium of Trainings  ( TSiksasamuccaya T)].…  
 
• “…faith precedes all” means that fa ith precedes all wholesome qualities. Correction : “if he does Unot U see the need…”
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 5: 25– 29 February, 2008 
 
 
 3• Maitreya composed the expressi on of worship in which three ex alted knowers ar e praised. He 
wanted to generate faith in the trainees. By pr aising the three exalted know ers, trainees generate 
faith and aspiration is produced. With production of aspiration, trainees will engage in hearing, 
contemplation, and meditation on the treatise and will be able to generate renunciation, a mind 
practicing the Mahayana path, etc.  
• Maitreya, by praising three exalte d knowers in expression of worshi p, causes trainees to generate 
faith. From this, aspiration arises, and they  will engage in hearing, contemplation, and 
meditation on the treatise that ta kes the three exalted knowers (the Mothers) as subject matter.  
•  T“…the Sangha Jewel, who practices it properly” T refers to the Sangha Jewel who practices the 
practice of the three exalted knowers properly by means of cultivating aspects of the three 
exalted knowers, either by gathering them together or serially. “It” = Dharma Jewel, i.e. this is 
the Sangha Jewel who practices the Dharma Jewe l properly. The arya sangha directly practices 
the Dharma Jewel, and they also practice the Buddha Jewel, because the Buddha is the one who reveals the Dharma.  
 Ornament of the Essence :  
 
With respect to the qualm, “By what measure is one considered to be skilled in the practice 
of the stages of the path of clear realization?,” it is indicated below that one needs to be skilled in the five objects, faith and so forth.…  
  
• Explanation of the five objects and the unco mmon Mahayana refuge will come later.  
• 
UFive objects U:  
1. Faith: faith in Mahayana paths and their results, such as the Buddha.  
2. Joyous effort: enthusiasm in six perfections, generosity and so forth. 
3. Mindfulness: mindfulness conjoined with mind of  enlightenment that is perfect attitude 
for others’ welfare 
4. Meditative stabilization: meditative stabilizati on that realizes lack of true existence. 
5. Wisdom: wisdom that realizes  all aspects of all phenomena, i.e. modes and varieties 
(conventional truths and ultimate truths) 
• Someone skilled in this way is skilled in five objects. To be skilled in  faith means being able 
to generate faith observing Mahayana paths, re sults, etc. Being skille d in joyous effort = 
observing appropriate objects and generating enthusiasm. 
 
2B1B. Root text 
2B1B-1. Meaning of the words 
2B1B-2. Determining through disputes 
2B1B-1. Meaning of the words 
2B1B-1A. Praise  
2B1B-1B. Homage 
2B1B-1A. Praise 
2B1B-1A1. Praise by means of the qualities of the three exalted knowers  
2B1B-1A2. Praise due to acting as Mothers of the four aryas  
2B1B-1A1. Praise by means of the qualities of the three exalted knowers  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 5: 25– 29 February, 2008 
 
 
 4• Outline 2B1B-1A1: Praise by means of the qualities of the three exalted knowers  has 
three parts:  
1. praise by means of the quali ties of a knower of bases 
2. praise by means of the quali ties of a knower of paths 
3. praise by means of the qualities of an  exalted knower of all aspects  
 
• Praise by means of knower of bases:  
 
Ornament of the Essence:   
 
ROOT TEXT  
1.1a That which through the knower of all l eads hearers seeking pa cification to peace…  
 
EXPLANATION  
Praise by means of the knower of bases: Homage to that which leads ….  
 
 
Here, we just see Gyeltsab Je’s explanation; Ha ribhadra doesn’t comment on this line of the root 
text.  This explanation occurs from  three points of view:  
1. 
USupport U: refers to person, i.e. le arner hearer aryas and lear ner solitary realizer aryas 
2. UMethod U: knower of bases  
3. UResult U: peace in which suffering and origins of suffering have been pacified. 
 
• “hearers seeking pacification” indicates support, i.e. the persons seeking pacification 
• “through the knower of all” indicates method, i. e. knower of bases (here, knower of all = 
knower of bases). This method is the direct realization of selflessness. 
• “peace” indicates result, i.e.  that which they seek. 
• “That which…leads” is paid homage to in the fourth line of the stanza.  
 
Here, it doesn’t mention solitary realizers, but Gyelts ab Je’s explanation mentions solitary realizers. 
When the root text explicitly mentions hearers, solitary realizers are implicitly indicated. Hearers and solitary realizers are the same in seeking pacification of  suffering and its origins.  
 
• The phrase “praise by means of knower of bases” should perhaps come 
Tbefore T the root text 
1.1a, in order to be consistent.   
 Ornament of the Essence : 
 
Praise by means of the knower of paths:   
ROOT TEXT  
1.1b That which through the knower of paths cau ses those benefiting migrating beings to 
achieve the aims of the world… 
 
EXPLANATION  
Homage to that which causes to achieve . By what support? Those  bodhisattvas achieving 
temporal and final benefit for migrating beings ….  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 5: 25– 29 February, 2008 
 
 
 5 
As before, we can understand this passage in terms of Usupport U, Umethod U, and Uresult U. The support is 
the bodhisattva aryas; the method is the knower of  paths; the result is enacting aims of three 
lineage-bearers of the world. To achieve what goals?  The aims of the three lineage-bearers of the 
world.   Maitreya composed the Ornament to reveal the hidden meaning of the Perfection of Wisdom sutras. 
Commentators mainly commented on Ornament for Clear Realization  from the point of view of the 
Autonomist system, but it can also  be commented on from the Cons equentialist point of view.  
 A bodhisattva explicitly seeks others’ we lfare; in order to do this, he must think of what they need 
and explain the methods to them. As he does this , his own mind develops  more and more, through 
accumulation of experience, etc. Through this proces s of enacting others’ we lfare, he attains the 
truth body. In order to benefit others, a bodhisattva must eliminate his own faults. This process of 
explaining Dharma to others i nvolves the bodhisattva dispelling negativities from his mind, and 
depends on his own qualities and realizations. In order to eliminate faults of others, we must 
eliminate our own faults.   
UArising of mind of enlightenment U: one checks and sees th at one lacks ability to benefit others, and 
sees that only a buddha can fully accomplish others’ we lfare. The aspiration thinking “I must attain 
enlightenment” thus arises. For a bodhisattva, seeki ng his welfare is seeking others’ welfare, and 
seeking others’ welfare is seeking his own welfare.  
  Explanation: Ornament of the Essence :  
 
Praise by means of the exalted knower of all aspects:  
 
ROOT TEXT {20}  
1.1c And through the perfect possession of Uwhich U the subduers teach these varieties 
having all aspects;  
 
EXPLANATION 
Homage to those who teach . Which persons [teach]? The subduer  buddha bhagavans….  
  Likewise, we can discuss this passage in terms of support, method, and result.  
• 
USupport U: mainly refers to supreme emanation body (supreme nirmanakaya) 
• UMethod U: exalted knower of all aspects  
• UResult U: complete turning of wheel of Dharma for trainees who are three lineage-bearers 
 That which performs activity of turning the three Dharma wheels for all thr ee lineage-bearers is the 
supreme emanation body, not, for instance, the enjoyment body.  The word “which” is a general te rm, but “is to be understood as referring only to omniscience” 
(note that omniscience and exalted knower of all aspects are the same term in Tibetan: rnam 
mkhyen ). “The subduers” refers to the persons who are the support . The words “through the Correction : “To achieve what goal? UTo achieve U the aims of the  three lineage-bearers 
of the world …” 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 5: 25– 29 February, 2008 
 
 
 6perfect possession of Uwhich U” indicate the method ; “teach these varieties having all aspects” indicate 
the result .  
 “Which” is a general word, but occurs in the cont ext of praising the three exalted knowers; since the 
other two have already been  praised, it refers to the third exalte d knower. It is imp licit and related to 
the word “subduers.”   Ornament of the Essence : 
2B1B-1A2. Praise due to acting as Mothers of the four aryas 
ROOT TEXT  
1.1d To the Mothers of the buddhas as well as the host of hearers and bodhisattvas, I pay 
homage.  
 
EXPLANATION  
To the Mothers of the buddhas as well as the host of arya hearers and arya 
bodhisattvas, I pay homage. 
 
2B1B-1B. Homage 
“I pay homage” indicates the manner of bowing respectfully. These meanings have already 
been explained above. 
  Homage is paid to the mothers of the four childre n, meaning hearer aryas, solitary realizer aryas, 
bodhisattva aryas, and buddha aryas. “Solitary realizer” does not appe ar in the root text, but is 
indicated by “hearers.” The thr ee exalted knowers act as the mo thers of the four aryas.  
 Is the knower of bases the mother of the hearer aryas? Is a hearer  arya the “child ” of a knower of 
bases? The explicit words seem to say this, but th ere is a fault if we sp eak like that, because 
someone who has generated a knower of bases simultaneously becomes a hearer arya. It seems from 
saying this as if one first attain s the knower of bases, then becomes a hearer arya. We should say 
(being more precise) that the knower of bases is the mother of the hearer ar yas and solitary realizer 
aryas who are its children  (or “result”) , but the knower of bases is not the mother of hearer aryas 
and solitary realizer aryas. In general, the knower  of bases is not the mother of hearer aryas.  
 We can say that a knower of bases of  the first instant is the mother of a hearer arya in the second 
instant. Exalted wisdom of supr eme mundane quality of path of preparation is “mother of first 
moment of arya hearer.”   A mother does not have to be any one of three ex alted knowers, but a path is pervaded by being a 
mother.    
 
Tuesday, 26 February 2008 
 
 
Review of yesterday’s teaching  
 
The debate in 2B1A: Making a connection regards whether Maitreya has “purpose of his own 
welfare.” The objector thinks that Maitreya com posed the expression of worship only for others’ 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 5: 25– 29 February, 2008 
 
 
 7welfare. Gyeltsab states the re sponse: you who assert that Maitre ya doesn’t seek his own welfare 
have not made enough effort to read the Mahayana texts.   In case 1, Maitreya is a buddha. In case 2, Maitreya is  a bodhisattva. If it is Case 1, there are faults 
based on saying Maitreya doesn’t seek his own welf are; if Case 2, there are other faults. If you 
assert that it is inappropriate for him to ha ve the purpose of his own welfare, you haven’t 
distinguished between common and unc ommon contexts. It is incorrect to say that if Maitreya is a 
buddha, he doesn’t have the purpos e of own welfare. The expressi on of worship is composed for 
common trainees, in whose perspective Maitreya is a bodhisattva. If Maitreya is a bud dha, he taught 
the expression of worship for comm on trainees; so in perspective of  common trainees, he is not a 
buddha, he is a bodhisattva. If he is  a bodhisattva, then saying he doe sn’t seek his own welfare is 
incorrect. This would mean he w ould seek solitary peace, and not generate the Mahayana generated 
mind. (This person says) it is not appropriate to say that Maitreya, as a buddha, doesn’t seek his 
own welfare. If you assert this, there are faults bo th with saying Maitreya is  buddha and that he is a 
bodhisattva.   In perspective of what appears to common trai nees, Maitreya is not a buddha, because a buddha 
doesn’t appear to common trainees; he appears as a 10
Pth
P ground bodhisattva. Although he is not 
buddha in the Tperspective of appearance T, in the Tperspective of ascertainment, The is a buddha. 
Ascertainment means known by valid cognizer. If a buddha appeared, he would appear with signs 
and exemplifications.   Ex.: Asanga saw Maitreya as a dog; he didn’t see Buddha Mait reya. The dog, i.e. that which 
appears, is Maitreya. Appearance as a dog was due  to Asanga’s karma. Although it was Maitreya, 
he was not able to appear as Maitreya. Another ex ample is that some hunters in Tibet would go to 
the Jowo Temple in Lhasa, and, due to negative ka rma, not see any statue of the Buddha, although it 
was there.   
UThere are two cases regarding emanations U:  
1. Buddha appearing as supreme emanation body:  ex. = Shakyamuni Buddha. One monk was 
very skilled in three baskets, etc., but saw himself as equal to Buddha.  
2. Buddha can also manifest as a deer, a crazy person, etc.  
  
TOrnament of the Essence: T 
2B1B-2. Determining through disputes {21} 
2B1B-2A. Ascertaining the sequence 
2B1B-2B. Definiteness in number 
2B1B-2C. Meaning of Mothers and Children  
2B1B-2D. Identifying the three exalted knowers which are the objects of praise  
 
There are disputes, and then a response.  
2B1B-2A. Ascertaining the sequence 
Just as it has been said in the Treatise Precious Lamp , it is incorrect to claim that “This is 
explained in accordance with the sequence of the sutras’ se tting,” because the expression 
of worship and the setting are correlated by neither of the two—Acarya [Haribhadra] and 
Arya [Vimuktisena]—and an explanation of the setting is given by the Acarya elsewhere. 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 5: 25– 29 February, 2008 
 
 
 8 
• A sutra’s setting is the place of  a discourse, retinue, etc.  
 
T“‘This is explained in accordance w ith the sequence of the sutras’ setting”  Tis incorrect, because 
neither Haribhadra nor Vimuktisena correlated th e expression of worship with the setting.  
 In sutra settings, we see Hinaya na arhats; in the c ontext of the supports of the three exalted 
knowers, there are no Hinayana foe-destroyers, so  the expression of worship and sutra setting are 
not correlated. In the expression of worship, Hinayana foe-destr oyers are not mentioned. Acharya 
Haribhadra and Vimuktisena did not explain this  correlation. The Acharya explained the sutra 
setting elsewhere, in contex t of exalted activities of a buddha, near end of text.  
 
Ornament of the Essence: 
   
OPINION: The knower of bases is praised fi rst for the sake of making hearer lineage-
bearers enter the three vehicles successively. 
RESPONSE: You do not realize who the trainees  that are the intended objects of this 
treatise are, because here it is for the sake of making solely the Ma hayana lineage-bearers 
enter by means of hearing and so forth after generating faith in the Mothers… 
 
UOpinion U: In the expression of worship, the knower of ba ses is praised first, for the sake of making 
hearer lineage-bearers enter th e three vehicles successively. 
 
UResponse U: you don’t realize who the inte nded trainees are;  this is solely for making Mahayana 
lineage-bearers enter by means of hearing and so fo rth after generating faith in the Mothers; if all 
three lineage-bearers are presen t among the trainees, it becomes a treatise common to all three 
vehicles.   Ornament of the Essence : 
 
OPINION: It is for the sake of making trai nees enter the three vehicles successively. 
RESPONSE: This is also not th e meaning, because, although such  a trainee is a possibility 
in general, the time has arrived for revealing th e stages of engaging in the path for a person 
definite in the Mahayana lineage here, and ther e is not the slightest need for indicating the 
way of entering through the hearers’ path at  first by means of the very occasion of the 
expression of worship.  
 
UOur system’s response U: It is not for the sake of making trai nees enter successively, although such a 
lineage-bearer is possible (one  who enters successively).  
 
• Meaning of a hearer lineage-bearer who Uenters the three vehicles successively U:  
→ It is Unot U correct to say one enters the hearer vehi cle, attains hearer foe-destroyer, enters 
the solitary realizer path and attains solitary realizer foe-destroyer, and then enters the 
Mahayana path.  
→ It means that one first attains the hearer path, and before attaining hearer’s path of 
meditation, switches to the solitary realizer path , attains foe-destroyer of solitary realizer 
path, then enters the Mahayana path.  
• Here, knower of bases is praised first, but Unot U to make someone enter the vehicles 
successively. Is taught for those Udefinite in Mahayana lineage U.  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 5: 25– 29 February, 2008 
 
 
 9Ornament of the Essence: 
 
Thus in the context of indicati ng the stages of the eight clear realizations in the section on 
making a connection at the Truth Body [explanation] of the Great Commentary [on the 
Eight Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sutra] , {22} just as it has been said that “engaging 
in by way of the knower of all itself…,” it is taught in acco rdance with the stages for 
trainees who are the intended objects of the Ornament  themselves to enter the path….  
 “Ascertaining the sequence” (the se ction title) refers to the knower of bases coming first, then the 
knower of paths, then exalte d knower of all aspects.  
 An upcoming section of the root text of the 
TOrnament T talks about stages of cl ear realization; there, 
there is an explanation in regard to the TGreat Commentary; it is Ttaught in accord with stages of the 
intended trainees.   The stages are knower of bases, knower of path s, and exalted knower of all aspects. It is 
Unot correct U 
to think they are generate d in this order. To atta in the exalted knower of al l aspects, first one needs 
to generate the knower of paths, but we do Unot U need to generate the knower of bases before 
generating knower of paths. The expression of wors hip states this order (knower of bases, knower 
of paths) because one need s to train in the 16 at tributes of four noble truths: impermanence, etc.; 
only on this basis can one gene rate fully qualified great compassion, and then fully qualified 
Mahayana generated mind. In the pa th of the great scope, one must  generate the path that is 
common with middling capacity first; to generate th is, one must generate path common with small 
scope.   In terms of objects of observation and knower-aspects of the knower of  bases, it is not that one 
generates knower of bases, then knower of paths, then exalted know er of all aspects: we have to 
train in path that is common with small scope, then path common with middling scope, then based 
on that, generate great compassion. It is “taught in  accordance with the stages for trainees who are 
the intended objects of the 
TOrnament T.” 
 The order in the first chapter of 
TOrnament is to present the Texalted knower of all aspects first, then 
knower of paths, then knower of bases. Teaching the order as knower of bases, knower of paths, 
then exalted knower of all aspects, is in accordan ce with trainees. In firs t chapter, the exalted 
knower of all aspects is explained first for train ees to develop enthusiasm  regarding the result.  
 Ornament of the Essence : 
2B1B-2B. Definiteness in number 
 
Simply just these stages of the path (that are to be practiced by a Mahayana person who 
wishes to take care of trainees  of all three lineage-bearers) will be ideal, because they are 
neither too many nor too few…. 
  
UThree exalted knowers is ideal U: no need for more, and they are not too few. But there are eight clear 
realizations: three exalted knowers, four applic ations, and exalted wisdom truth body. The three 
exalted knowers can be said to Tinclude Tthe eight clear realizations Tby way of practice T.  
  
Four different meanings of “include” 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 5: 25– 29 February, 2008 
 
 
 10 
1. UBy way of subject matter U: e.g. eight categories are included in treatise TOrnament for Clear 
Realization. T  
2. UBy way of being U: e.g. ultimate truth is included w ithin either of the two truths.  
3. UBy means of practice U: e.g. three exalted knowers include eight clear realizations; and vice 
versa. 
4. UBy way of retinue U: e.g. king’s retinue includ es ministers, etc.  
 How are eight clear realizations included in thr ee exalted knowers? By way of practice. Application 
in complete aspects as an exam ple: this practices the three exalted knower s; similarly, peak 
application, serial application, a nd instantaneous application practi ce the three exalted knowers. The 
four applications practice the practice of applicati ons of the three exalted knowers. What is practice 
of application of the three exalted knowers? For in stance, the application in complete aspects, the 
peak application, the serial application, and the instantaneous applicati on. There is no need to 
mention the eighth clear realization, exalted wi sdom truth body, because it is included in exalted 
knower of all aspects.  There is nothing that practices the application of three exalte d knowers but does not practice the 
application of the eight  clear realizations.  
  
Wednesday, 27 February 2008 (morning) 
 
TOrnament of the Essence T: 
2B1B-2C. Meaning of Mothers and Children  
Since the exalted knowers existing earlier pr oduce the aryas existing later and accomplish 
the goals of peace and so forth, understand th at the Mothers and the Children are objects 
produced and producers [where, respectively,  the Mothers are the producers and the 
Children the objects produced]. 
  “Mothers” refer to objects expressed in the stanza of expression of worship of 
TOrnament for Clear 
Realization T: 
 
To the Mothers of the buddhas as well as U[of] U the host of hearers and bodhisattvas, I 
pay homage.   
   
 
UDefinition of “mother that is obj ect of expression of worship of Ornament for Clear Realization ” U 
(in Jedzun Chogyi Gyeltsen’s TOcean of Sport T, p. 50): An exalted knower th at is able to accomplish 
the aims of the aryas who are its children.   
UThis is divided into fifteen paths U: five paths of hearers, five of solitary realizers, and five Mahayana 
paths. Five paths = path of accumulation, path of preparation, path of seei ng, path of meditation, 
path of no-more-learning. If sub-divi ded, there are many more divisions.  
 We have already discussed the ro ot text, in which the knower of bases leads hearers who are its 
children to peace:  Correction :  “…as well as U[of] U the host of hearers…” 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 5: 25– 29 February, 2008 
 
 
 11 
1.1a That which through the knower of all leads hearers seeki ng pacification to 
peace…  
 There, the three exalted knowers are mothers for th eir respective children. But how do the path of 
accumulation and path of preparation serve as moth ers? The hearers’ path of accumulation is the 
mother of hearer aryas. It is not the 
Tdirect cause Tof hearers’ path of seeing, but is a cause of the 
hearers’ path of seeing. “Hearers seeking paci fication” includes hearer s on path of accumulation 
and path of preparation, not just hearer aryas. By explicitly indicating hearer s, solitary realizers are 
implicitly indicated in this stanza.   In the second lin e of the stanza: 
 1.1b That which through the knower of pa ths causes those benefiting migrating 
beings to achieve th e aims of the world… 
 Bodhisattvas on the Mahayana path of accumula tion and Mahayana path of preparation are 
indicated (as well as those on the path of seeing). 
T“…[T]hose benefiting migrating beings” Tis not 
just bodhisattva aryas, but also those on the first two paths. In this way, we’ve gone through the 
fifteen paths.    Ornament of the Essence : 
 
2B1B-2D. Identifying the three exalted knowers which are the objects of praise  
Just as explained in the su mmary of the sutra question and answer section below, the 
knower of bases also bears the aspects of the sixteen [aspects of the four noble truths], 
impermanence and so forth.… 
 
  
• In a later section, ther e is a question and answer regardin g a sutra passage, in which the 
knower of bases is said to b ear the aspects of impermanence,  etc., the knower of paths to 
realize the lack of true existence of the thr ee types of paths, and th e exalted knower of all 
aspects as being exalted wisdom realizing a ll phenomena as empty of true existence.  
• In this way, we understand the other two exalted knowers through understanding the knower 
of bases.  
 In the context of the knower of ba ses: “bearing aspect of not being produced” means the self of this 
knower of bases is not produced. Saying the knower of  paths bears the aspect of not being produced 
means the knower of paths is not produced truly. Saying the exalted knower of all aspects bears the 
aspect of not being produced means the exalted knower of all aspects is not produced truly.  
 With respect to the knower of bases, this refers to the lack of production by a self. With respect to 
knower of paths and with respect to an exalted knower of all aspects, refers to lack of truly existent 
production.  Correction : “The explanation immediately below on how all three exalted knowers bear the 
aspect of Ulacking production U is for the sake of identifyi ng an isolate of the Mothers.”  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 5: 25– 29 February, 2008 
 
 
 12T“…For the sake of identifying an isolate of the Mothers:” this Tmeans that saying “the knower of 
bases is such and such,” “the knower  of paths is such and such,” etc., is done in  order to identify the 
isolates of the Mothers; however, there is no pervasion.  
 To illustrate this: an exalted know er directly realizi ng selflessness is a knower of bases, but if it is 
an exalted knower directly realiz ing selflessness, is it pervaded by being knower of bases? No. If it 
is a knower of paths, is it pervaded by directly realizing emptiness? No.  
 Ornament of the Essence :  
 
Just as it has been explained that “Mother is wisdom and father is method,” since it has 
been described that “The common cause whic h is the factor of wisdom is the Mother, 
while the uncommon cause which is the factor of method is the Father,” having asserted 
the identification of an isolate of the Mothers, it indicates that the principal wisdom is that 
very wisdom realizing selflessness; it is no t indicated that the Mothers and the exalted 
knowers are pervaded by it.   
• Mother is a common cause, i.e. a ca use common to all three vehicles. 
• Father is an uncommon cause, i.e. sp ecific to a particular vehicle.  
 In the Yogic Autonomist system, there are:  
• three lineage-bearers:  
1. hearers 
2. solitary realizers 
3. bodhisattvas 
• three objects of cultivation: 
1. for learner hearers: subtle  selflessness of persons 
2. for learner solitary realizer: emptiness of duality 
3. for learner bodhisattvas: emp tiness of true existence  
• three objects of abandonment 
1. Hearers: conception of self of persons 
2. Solitary realizers: conception of forms as external objects 
3. Mahayana: conception of true existence  
• three results  
1. Hearers: peace of nirvana in whic h conception of self is abandoned 
2. Solitary realizers: peace of nirvana in which conception of forms as external objects is 
abandoned 
3. Mahayana: nirvana in which conception of true existence is abandoned   
 
Since there are three dissimilar types of wisdom, it is difficult to posit a common cause for all three. 
There is no arya who has not direct ly realized selflessness of persons , so this could be the “mother 
that is wisdom that is common cause.”  
 This is difficult to posit in the Yogic Auto nomist School, but easi er in the Middle Way 
Consequentialist school, where there is no differen ce in the object of cultivation (i.e. the wisdom 
realizing emptiness) for the three vehicles. In the Consequentialist school , the wisdom realizing 
emptiness becomes “mother that is co mmon cause of all three vehicles.” 
 
UFather that is uncommon cause: method  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 5: 25– 29 February, 2008 
 
 
 13• For hearers, method is the mind seeking solitary peace 
• Bodhisattvas, method is bodhicitta  
 
UMother and father U: in ordinary sense, a woman can have babies in dependence on an “uncommon” 
man; when a father has a child, the child is “unc ommon” to him. The mother is the common cause, 
the father is uncommon cause. For example (in anci ent Indian context), a father could only have 
children of his caste while the mother could have children of various castes in  dependence on 
various fathers. In this sense, method is uncommon.   If wisdom is connected with the wish for solitary peace, it produces solitary peace; if it is connected 
with the wish for enlightenment, it will lead to enlightenment.  
 
TOrnament of the Essence T: 
2B1C. Commentary  
2B1C-1. Summary 
2B1C-2. Meaning of the purpose 
2B1C-3. Dispelling arguments 
2B1C-4. Meaning of the words 
2B1C-1. Summary 
COMMENTARY  
So the root text is said. This stanza expre sses the possession of th e outstanding nature of 
the greatness of this. 
 
EXPLANATION  
This stanza  of the root text expresses the possession of the outstanding nature of the 
greatness of this  property-bearer, the Mothers, because praise to the Mothers is expressed 
by means of the three exalted knowers. 
  
• The first three lines of the root verse expr ess the three exalted knowers, expressing their 
qualities. The praise to the mothers is expressed in the fourth line:  
 1.1 That which through the knower of all lead s hearers seeking pacification to peace…  
 That which through the knower of paths cau ses those benefiting migrating beings to 
achieve the aims of the world… 
 And through the perfect possession of which the subduers teach these varieties 
having all aspects;  
 To the Mothers of the buddhas as well as [of] the host of hearers and bodhisattvas, I 
pay homage.  
 Ornament of the Essence : 
2B1C-2. Meaning of the purpose 
2B1C-2A. Extensive explanation 
2B1C-2B. Summary 
2B1C-2A. Extensive explanation 
2B1C-2A1. How to generate faith 
2B1C-2A2. From that, generating the aspiration which seeks 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 5: 25– 29 February, 2008 
 
 
 142B1C-2A3. From that, how to attain the result after having entered 
2B1C-2A1. How to generate faith 
2B1C-2A1A. How those of dull faculty generate faith 
2B1C-2A1B. How those of sharp faculty generate faith 
2B1C-2A1A. How those of dull faculty generate faith  
 
COMMENTARY  
TIn that time after having heard, followers of fa ith quickly generate lu cidity free from doubt 
TUin these UT. 
 
EXPLANATION 
The subject— in that time after having heard  that stanza , followers of faith  who are 
trainees of the Ornament —generate faith TPF1
FPT in these  Mothers, because they  quickly 
generate  strong faith  free from doubt wondering “Do they definitely have such excellent 
qualities?” 
  
• “Followers of faith” are dull-facultied; after hear ing the stanza of expr ession of worship, they 
generate faith 
Uwithout analysis U.  
 
 
TOrnament of the Essence: 
2B1C-2A1B. How those of sharp faculty generate faith 
COMMENTARY 
Also followers of Dharma—by means of a valid cognizer of “because of being free of an 
entitiness of one or many” and so fort h; not seeing dama ge to the Mothers  with the 
characteristic of the meaning of the stanza thoroughly understanding that  bases, paths, and 
aspects are not produced; havi ng definitely apprehended that  “The perfection of wisdom, 
the nature of the three exalted knowers of all, bearers of the three modes giving birth to the 
buddhas and so forth is without  doubt”—generate lucidity Uin those U. 
 
EXPLANATION  
The subject— also followers of Dharma , sharp-faculty trainees who are the intended 
objects of the Ornament —generate lucidity in those  Mothers  by the hearing of that stanza 
acting as a condition…. 
  “Followers of Dharma” are followers of reas oning, sharp-facultied tr ainees. They do not 
immediately believe in the Mothers when hearing th e stanza of expression of  worship, but engage in 
analysis before generating faith. They check whet her is true if three exalted knowers know all 
bases, paths, and result s as not being produced.  
 The knower of bases is said to r ealize that bases lack self of persons; the know er of paths directly 
realizes paths as lacking true existence; the exalted knower of all aspects knows aspects of all 
phenomena as lacking true existence. Sharp-faculty tr ainees check to see if entities of three exalted 
                                                
 
TP1
PT TRab tu dad pa T (faith) should perhaps read Trab tu dang ba T (lucidity) to correspond with the root text, although 
various editions of the text agree with what has been printed here. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 5: 25– 29 February, 2008 
 
 
 15knowers are as explained and if the three exalted knowers have the capacity  as explained. After 
seeing that there is no damage to this presentation, then sharp-facultied trainees develop faith with 
regard to entity and capacity.  
Capacities of three exalted knowers 
 
• 
UKnower of bases U: capacity to lead  to pacification 
• UKnower of paths U: causes accomplishment of aims of the three lineage-bearers 
• UExalted knower of all aspects U: capacity to cause turning of wheel of Dharma for three 
lineage-bearers.  
 
Ornament of the Essence:   
 
The mention of “in these” [under outline 2B1C-2A1A] and “in those” [under outline 
2B1C-2A1B] above is due to their being [resp ectively] near to and far from the expression 
of worship; others’ explanations do not  engage the meaning of the words. 
  Why does it say “these” and “those”? It is because of  the distance from the expression of worship; 
the passage with the word “those” is further away from the expression of worship, the passage with 
“these” is closer. This does not refer to the physical distance from the expression of worship: dull-
facultied people generate faith more quickly, and thus are “nearer;” sharp-facultied people take longer to generate faith, and thus are “further.” 
 
• Sharp-facultied trainees devel op “irreversible faith,” dull-facu ltied develop “great faith” 
 
T“…[O]thers’ explanations do not engage the meaning of the words” means that other T explanations, 
such as explaining distance in terms of physi cal distance, miss the meaning of the words. 
  Ornament of the Essence : 
 
QUALM: How is lucidity generated? RESPONSE: [Having defin itely apprehended that] “The perfection of wisdom, the 
nature of the three exalted knowers of  all, bearers of the three modes  of the path is 
without doubt,”  lucidity in their entity is generated, and having definitely apprehended 
that “Their giving birth to  the four aryas, the buddhas and so fo rth is without doubt ,” 
lucidity in their ability is generated…. 
  
Three types of phenomena 
1. 
UManifest U: e.g. forms, sounds, etc., which can be established without relying on a sign or 
reason 
2. USlightly hidden U: e.g. impermanence, selflessness, emptiness of true existence, etc. One needs 
to rely upon a reason to realize them; cannot realize without a reason.  
3. UVery hidden: U phenomena realized in dependence on script ure of belief, i.e. a scripture with 
respect to which you generate belief.  → This isn’t just any scripture th at you believe in. If a treatise  has as its subject manifest 
forms, e.g. forms, etc., it is a scripture in belief in general but not one 
Tof this context. T Can 
also have impermanence, etc., as its subject; one  can generate belief in such a scripture.  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 5: 25– 29 February, 2008 
 
 
 16→ In this context, one needs to rely on a scripture of belief that indicates Tvery hidden 
phenomena T.  
→ A person can investigate whether a scripture is  valid with respect to manifest phenomena; 
if it is valid, checks to see if is valid re. slightly hidden phenomena; if is valid, then can 
temporarily believe in presentation of very hidden phenomena. Checks to see if there is 
contradiction, or damage, betw een earlier and later words. Through analysis, eventually 
generates valid belief that asce rtains very hidden phenomena.  
→ Ex. of very hidden phenomena  = subtle cause and effect. Fi rst, understanding of coarse 
cause and effect; then through analysis, one even tually realizes subtle cause and effect.  
  
Wednesday, February 27, 2008 (evening) 
 Clarification re. very hidden phenomena
: the working of coarse ka rma is not a very hidden 
phenomenon; subtle karma is. Some aspects of act ions and results are co arse. E.g. the immediate 
result of hitting someone with a stic k is that person’s feeling pain.  
 Ornament of the Essence : 
2B1C-2A1B. How those of sharp faculty generate faith (continued) 
 
Since those of sharp faculty generate faith relying upon reason, the no t seeing of damage 
itself is the reason; it is inappropriate to cite the passage of the expre ssion of worship as the 
reason, because those of sharp faculty accept sc ripture as a proof through purity by way of 
analysis TPF2
FPT regarding the meaning of the scripture, whereby it is untenable in this context…. 
  Those of dull faculty generate fa ith quickly upon hearing the expres sion of worship, while those of 
sharp faculty generate it in dependence on reasoni ng. The expression of worship is not the reason 
for their generating faith; they are able to analyze its meaning and arrive at the conclusion that there is no damage to the entity and ability of the three exalted knowers, and develop faith. 
 Ornament of the Essence : 
 
OPINION: This indicates how those of sh arp faculty generate faith; it does not 
demonstrate even slightly th e reason for generating faith. 
RESPONSE: Your assertion is incorrect…. 
  Our system says this does demonstrate how one gene rates faith and the reasons for generating faith.  
 Ornament of the Essence :  
 
In the context of those of sharp faculty, if we we re to assert that it is established by valid 
cognition that, having established well by means of valid cognition that the three—bases, 
paths, and aspects—are not produced, and familiarized with their meanings, there is the state of an arya who directly realizes the meaning of the ob ject of familiarization, what 
fault would there be? 
                                                
 
TP2
PT TDpyad pa dag T emended to read Tdpyad pas dag T in accordance with page 53 of the Ganden Jangtse Library 
edition of Jetsun Chokyi Gyeltsen’s Ocean of Sport . 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 5: 25– 29 February, 2008 
 
 
 17 
TOPINION: In that case, there would be cont radiction with the explanation that, due to 
having generated faith, one engage s progressively in the three— Thearing, contemplation, 
and meditation. T 
 
RESPONSE: If, by way of the reason “being free of one or many,” one is able to prove the 
property of the subject and the pervasion, and one  is able to achieve the occurrence of clear 
appearance from familiarizing with the meaning of  the thesis, then one must assert that the 
Ornament for Clear Realization  has been well understood.... 
  In our system
, T“it is established by valid cognition that, having established well by means of valid 
cognition that the three—bases, paths, and aspe cts—are not produced and familiarized with their 
meanings, there is the state of an arya who di rectly realizes the meaning of the object of 
familiarization.”   This person
 (the objector) sees contradiction with saying that T“due to having generated faith, one 
engages progressively in the three—h earing, contemplation and meditation.” T 
 
Our response : if one can prove the property of the subj ect and pervasion usi ng the reasoning “free 
of being one or many” and can generate clear a ppearance from familiarizing with the meaning of 
the thesis, then the Ornament has been understood.  
• Thesis = probandum , i.e. that which is to be proved . Here the thesis is “bases, paths, and 
aspects are not truly existent.”  
 The objector
: once you have achieved this clear a ppearance, there is no need to engage 
progressively in hearing, contemplation, and med itation. One can achieve this clear appearance and 
understand the Ornament well, so there is no need to engage progressively in hearing, 
contemplation, and meditation. Based on the reas oning of free of bei ng one or many, clear 
appearance arises, so there is no need to  [continue to] engage in hearing, etc. 
 Our system
: even after having analyzed and achieved this clear appearance, one still needs to 
engage progressively in hearing, contemplation, and meditation on the Ornament.   
• The sharp-facultied trainee doesn’t generate faith immediately upon hearing the expression 
of worship; when he hears that bases, path s, and results lack pr oduction, he generates 
lucidity, but continues to engage in hearing, contemplati on, and meditation.  
• Sharp-facultied trainees who are intended object of Ornament realize bases, paths, results as 
not produced, and also generate fa ith in the three exalted knowers,  but still have to engage in 
Ornament for Clear Realization  because the Ornament  hasn’t yet been understood well.  
• Clear appearance  of emptiness  = clear appearance of bases, pa ths, results as empty of true 
existence. This is necessarily a direct realiza tion. Clear appearance is direct realization that 
arose from familiarizing with the meaning of the thesis. 
• T “…bases, paths, and aspects—are not produced…” Tmeans they are not produced truly . 
• When one realizes bases, paths, and aspects as  not truly existent, on e realizes that it is 
possible to achieve clear appearan ce, the state of an arya, or th e state of a foe-destroyer, but 
this doesn’t mean they have achieved such a state.  
 
Ornament of the Essence :  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 5: 25– 29 February, 2008 
 
 
 18QUALM: What establishes by means of valid c ognition that the three—bases, paths, and 
aspects—are not produced? RESPONSE: It is first established on the occasion of the path of accumulation by means 
of a valid cognition  that is supported on signs, such as  “because of being free of an 
entitiness of one or many”  and the reason of the diamond fragments…. 
 
• Many reasonings prove that bases, paths, and as pects lack production; here, the main reason is 
“being free of one or many.” 
• 
T“It is first established on the o ccasion of the path of accumulation Tby means of a valid cognition T 
that is supported on signs…” c ould be read as “The result  is first established on the occasion of 
the path of accumulation...” This is the result included in the path, i.e. the path that cultivates the aspects of the three exalted knowers through gath ering them together. Re alization of bases, 
paths, and aspects as lacking true existence occurs prior to attainment of path of accumulation.  
• Both types of trainees (sharp and dull) realize emptiness before entering Mahayana path of 
accumulation; a sharp trainee who is an object of the Ornament  is pervaded by realizing 
emptiness before the Mahayana path of accumulation.
TPF3
FPT 
• Sharp-facultied trainees realize emptiness before the path of accumulation: before their practice 
of refuge, they analyze objects of  refuge; to do this, they must an alyze four noble truths; this is 
based on analysis of the two tr uths. Thus they real ize emptiness. This is an inferential 
realization of emptiness, through a meaning-generality. 
• For sharp-facultied trainees, ref uge is not just out of blind faith, while dull-facultied trainees 
take refuge without analyzing.  
• One can have a realization of emptiness with out having calm abiding, but it is difficult to 
remain single-pointedly on emptiness.  
• When you realize emptiness inferentially, yo u realize the possibility of abandoning the 
conception of true existence, t hus a strong wish fo r attaining calm abiding arises and becomes 
very strong.  
 Ornament of the Essence : 
 
Although the two later exalted know ers realize that the three types of phenomena lack truly 
existent production, a knower of  bases that is distinguished by realizing subtle selflessness 
of phenomena is not explicitly indicated in this context…. 
  
• 
T“two later exalted knowers” = knower of paths, exalted knower of all aspects  
• TThe knower of bases that realizes  subtle selflessness of  phenomena is not ex plicity indi cated in 
this context. “Neverthel ess, the explanation that ‘it knows that bases are not produced’ should 
be taken to mean that it knows [they]  are not produced by a self of persons” T—it should not  be 
taken to mean it knows that bases are  not truly produced . A knower of bases does not  realize 
that bases, paths, and aspects lack truly existent production.  
• TBases are not produced by a self of persons becaus e there is no self of persons; because there is 
no self of persons, there is no production by a self of persons.  
• TBecause there is no true existence, there is no truly existent TT production. 
• T“…[I]solate of the Mothers:”  an TTisolate of a knower of bases is the knower of bases itself; an 
isolate of a knower of paths is the knower of paths itself. “Isolate” ( ldog pa ) literally means 
“reverse.” The isolate of knower of ba ses is “the reverse of what is n TTot the knower of bases.” TTPF4
FPTT 
                                                 
TP3
PT Note here that this is not referring to a direct  realization of emptiness. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 5: 25– 29 February, 2008 
 
 
 19 
 
TThursday, February 28, 2008 
 
 
Geshe-la began by giving a talk on practicing our st udies with effort, having patience, etc., when we 
study, encouraging students not to give up their stud ies and not to become frustrated. “Don’t push 
too much!”  
Question re. the “three Mothers” 
 
In the following passage (p. 6, outline 2A1: Expression of worshi p and promise to explain ), the 
“three mothers” refers to the extensive, medium , and brief Perfection of Wisdom sutras, not the 
textual, path, and result ant perfections of wisdom. Sometimes “m other” refers to a text, sometimes 
to an exalted wisdom. 
 
Respectfully I pay homage . To what? To the  textual, path, and resultant perfection of 
wisdoms . By mentioning the textual, the other two will also be established. However, it 
should be taken to be all three he re. For the sake of what purpose? In order to thoroughly 
reveal  by means of this commentary the versified ornament of  the Mothers  as serving as 
an ornament of all  three Mothers . 
 
2B1C-2A1B. How those of sharp faculty generate faith (continued) 
 Ornament of the Essence (p. 18):  
 These [objectors] having generated the basis of  mistakes, appear to also assert that the 
realization of selflessness pervades the knower of bases and the knower of paths…. 
  “Basis of mistakes” refers to the previous identifi cation of the isolates of the Mothers. This objector 
also asserts that realization of selflessness pervades knower of base s and knower of paths. This is 
incorrect according to our system.   This person says the knower of bases explicitly indicated exists  only among Hinayanists. This is 
incorrect according to our system. “[T]he early line [of the stanza]…” refers to the first line of 
stanza 1.1: “That which through the knower of all leads hearers s eeking pacification to peace…” 
Saying that this line mentions th e knower of bases and that it ex ists only among Hinayanists is 
incorrect. Although this line menti ons hearers, it does not mean th at only hearers generate the 
knower of bases. All aryas
 generate the knower of bases.  
 
“These” here refers to th e previous assertions.  
  
                                                                                                                                                                 
 
TP4
PT This relates to a subject that is discussed at length in the Collected Topics texts. See D. Perdue, Debate in Tibetan 
Buddhism,  pp. 410-422.   Correction: “I take these to be like seeing a bad omen  [and cultivate] pure appearance.” should 
read “ UIt appears that they take thes e to be like seeing a bad omen. U”  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 5: 25– 29 February, 2008 
 
 
 20Ornament of the Essence :  
 Although there are many reasons that are accep ted by the Middle-Wayers, just the reason 
“being free of one or many”  shall be explained…. 
 
2B1C-2A1B-1. Identifying the predicate of the negandum that is asserted by Acarya [Haribhadra] 
2B1C-2A1B-2. The reason that refutes it in terms of other bases 
2B1C-2A1B-1. Identifying predicate of the negandum that is asserted by Acar ya [Haribhadra] {27}  
 
For example, suppose something such as a pebble or a stick appears as a horse or an elephant at the time of em anation by an illusionist…. 
  Middle Wayers use many reasons to prove emptiness, but here just one is us ed: that of “being free 
of one or many.”   
The magician’s illusions  
 
Here, we have an example
, or analogy, and the meaning .  
 Example/analogy
: an illusionist emanating ho rses or elephants. He can cause a pebble or stick to 
appear as a horse, etc., at the time of emanation. If this appearance were to exist from the side of the 
pebble or stick without being posited through the fo rce of mistaken awareness, also those whose 
eyes are unaffected would see the horse or  elephant, but this is not the case.  
 Meaning
: if the person and aggregates were establis hed from side of the object’s uncommon mode 
of subsistence without being posit ed through the force of appearing to an awareness, then (1) the 
person and aggregates would be able  to withstand reasoning that analyzes the ultimate, but this is 
not the case. (2) If they were established fr om the side of the obj ect’s uncommon mode of 
subsistence without being posited through the force of  appearing to an awareness, they would have 
to be seen by an arya’s meditative equipoise, but this is not the case.  
 Therefore, the predicate of the negandum
 (the property to be refuted) is that which is established 
from the side of the objects’ uncommon mode of subsistence without bei ng posited through the force 
of appearing to an awareness . 
 To explain this in greater detail, there are three persons
: (1) the illusionist, (2) the spectators who 
arrived on time, and (3) the latecomers. The illusionist has the appearance  of the horse or elephant, 
but does not have adherence to it (i.e. does not “believe” in the appearance). The spectators who 
arrived on time  have both the appearance and the adherence. The latecomers have neither the 
appearance nor adherence. The il lusionist does not have adherenc e because he un derstands the 
horse and elephant are illusions.   Applying this to the meaning
: group 1 has appearance of true exis tence, but not adherence; group 2 
has both appearance and adhe rence; group 3 has neither a ppearance nor adherence. Ordinary 
persons who have not realized emptiness have both  appearance and adherence. Learner aryas who 
have realized emptiness  have appearance of true existence but not adherence to true existence. 
Buddha aryas  have neither  the appearance of nor adherence to true existence. 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 5: 25– 29 February, 2008 
 
 
 21…if the person and the aggregates were estab lished from the side of the objects’ own 
uncommon mode of subsistence without being po sited through the force of appearing to an 
awareness, then they would be able to withst and analysis by a reasoning that analyzes the 
ultimate… 
 One analyzes using reasoning on the basis of the person and the aggregates, checking if they are 
“established from the side of the objects’ ow n uncommon mode of subsistence without being 
posited through the force of appear ing to an awareness.” If the person and aggregates were 
established in that way, then when one checks,  such an uncommon mode of subsistence would 
become clearer and clearer, but it cannot be f ound. The person and aggregat es are “not able to 
withstand analysis by a reasoning th at analyzes the ultimate.”  
 If the person and aggregates were established fr om the side of the objec ts’ own uncommon mode of 
subsistence and so forth, they would have to be  seen by an arya’s med itative equipoise realizing 
emptiness, but they are not seen by that meditativ e equipoise. Therefore, person and aggregates are 
not established from the side of the objects’ ow n uncommon mode of subsistence without being 
posited through the force of app earing to an awareness.  
 All phenomena are posited “through the force of appearing to an awareness.” If phenomena were 
posited without appearing to an  awareness, they would exis t “by their uncommon mode of 
subsistence.” “Uncommon” ( thun mong ma yin pa ) refers to a mode of subsistence that does not 
depend on others, because one can  be established without depe nding on others in  its uncommon 
mode.    
The Autonomist school and “e xisting from its own side” 
 
In this context, this is different from “existing fr om its own side.” In this  context, established by 
way of its own character, existing from its own si de, and existing inherently are the same. In the 
Autonomist school, there is establishment by way of its own character, there is existence from its 
own side, and there is inherent existence. They assert a common locus between existing from its 
own side and being “merely imputed by conception.”   Merely imputed by conception
: here, the word “merely” does not eliminate inherent existence; it 
eliminates true existence .  
 
 
Different systems on modes of existence 
 
• Autonomy school : that which is established by its unc ommon mode of subsistence without 
being posited through the force of appearing to an awareness is the property to be refuted.  
• Mind-Only school : this is not to be refuted; there is  establishment by its  uncommon mode of 
subsistence without being posited  through the force of appearing to an awareness. For them, 
this type of establishment is the measure of establishment by way of its own character. 
• The Autonomy school’s measure of being estab lished by way of its own character is an 
object to be refuted in the Consequence school.  
• For the Consequence school, th e “findability” of the imput ed object that is imputed 
conventionally when sought is the criterion of es tablishment by way of its own character, i.e. 
when you look for an object that is imputed conventionally, you find it.  According to the 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 5: 25– 29 February, 2008 
 
 
 22Consequence school, this is to be refuted;  according to the Autonomist school, this 
findability exists and is not  to be refuted. This can  be found.  
  
Two types of objects of negation  
 
When we talk about the “object of negation,” there are two types: (1) objects and (2) object-
possessors. As an object, we posit true existence ; the object-possessor is the conception of true 
existence. That object of negation which is an object does not exist
. If it existed, it could not be 
refuted or negated. That which is an object-possesso r must exist; otherwise, there would be no need 
to refute or negate it.   In general, true existenc e cannot be refuted, because it does not exist. When we ta lk about refuting 
an object of negation, it refers to refuting the conception of true existence. In order to refute this 
conception, we need to establish th e lack of true existence. Refu tation is done in relation to the 
conception of true existence; if we establish the lack of true existence, it does not mean phenomena 
become empty of true existence—they are empty since beginningless time.  
 Ornament of the Essence : 
 
2B1C-2A1B-2. The reason that refutes it in terms of other bases 
2B1C-2A1B-2A. Stating the sign 
2B1C-2A1B-2B. Proving the modes 
2B1C-2A1B-2A. Stating the sign 
If it is established neither as a truly existent  one nor many, then it is pervaded by being not 
truly existent, just as in the example of a reflection.  
 If we make a syllogism, it is “The subject—bases, pa ths and aspects—do not exist truly because 
they do not exist as a trul y existent one or many, just as in th e example of a reflection.” We came 
across this expression, being free of one or many be fore, which refers to what we are discussing 
now.   Ornament of the Essence : 
2B1C-2A1B-2B. Proving the modes 
2B1C-2A1B-2B1. Proving the property of the subject 
2B1C-2A1B-2B2. Proving the pervasion 
2B1C-2A1B-2B1. Proving the property of the subject 
2B1C-2A1B-2B1A. Proving as free of being a truly existent one 
2B1C-2A1B-2B1B. Proving as free of being a truly existent many 
2B1C-2A1B-2B1A. Proving as free of being a truly existent one 
The subject—it—is not established as a trul y existent one, because of having parts…. 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 5: 25– 29 February, 2008 
 
 
 23 
In this passage, “it” refers to bases, paths, and aspects as the subject. They  are not established as a 
truly existent one because of having parts. Th e subject—bases, paths, and aspects—have parts 
because (i) an established base that is a partless object of knowledge is not possible, and (ii) having 
parts and being partless are direct  contradictions. The reason—having parts—establishes that bases, 
paths, and aspects are not establis hed as being a truly existent one. 
 “Truly existent one”
 means it is a self-sufficient singularit y that does not depend on others. Having 
parts thus “damages” a truly exis tent one. “Having parts” implies relying on parts and thus not 
being self-sufficient, so that which has parts cannot be a truly existent one.  
 Ornament of the Essence : 
 
In terms of a basis of dispute that is not established by way of valid cognition, it is established in dependence on th e two: (1) a valid cognizer re futing the possibility of a 
partless object of knowledge, and (2) a valid cognizer ascertaining th at having parts and 
not having parts are direct contradictions…. 
 
 Previously, we stated the sign fo r proving that the subject—bases, paths, and aspects—have parts. 
Although that sign is not stated e xplicitly, it is mentioned here.  
 There are two parts of this  reason: (1) a partless object of knowledge is impo ssible; (2) having parts 
and not having parts are direct contradictions. this implies that the subject has parts.  
 
 
Being without parts and having parts 
 
(A student gives an electron as an example of some thing that is partless.) If something (such as an 
electron) does not have parts, we cannot form a composite; we cannot collect them into a mass of 
electrons. In order to collect them into a mass, they  must have parts. If there is no southern part, 
northern part, etc. it cannot contact an adj acent particle and thus cannot form a mass.  
 If you say that bases have parts be cause of possessing the sixteen parts (i.e. the sixteen attributes of 
the four noble truths), or that paths have parts because  of there being five paths, etc., this would be a 
coarse way of looking at it. If we look at one of the sixteen attributes, such as impermanence, does 
it have parts? We can talk about impermanence that  is produced, abiding, di sintegrating, etc. These 
are attributes of impermanence. We can talk about the “factor of di sintegration,” etc., of 
impermanence; these are the parts of impermanence . These parts exist simultaneously.  
 A vase as an example
: when a vase is produced , it is established in the entity of disintegration  as it 
is abiding —all three exist simultaneously. There is no mome nt in which it is no t disintegrating, i.e. 
in which there is a momentary transformation.   Corrections :  
• “The sign is established by way of  valid cognition in terms of a basis of dispute, such as a 
vase” should read “The sign is established by way of Udirect U cognition…” 
• “In terms of a basis of dispute that is not established by way of valid cognition…” should 
read “In terms of a basis of dispute th at is not established by way of Udirect U cognition…” 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 5: 25– 29 February, 2008 
 
 
 24All tenet systems accept this explanation of production, abiding, and disintegration. In the 
Vaibhashika system, there is an explanation of activity of production, followed by activity of 
abidance, followed by activity of disintegration, bu t this is in terms of a coarse activity.  
 
   
  
END There were no teachings on Friday, March 1, 2008