Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/Transcript pdf/ORN_GTTnotes_08.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:07.689046
================================================================================

Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 8: 17-20 March 2008 
 
1 Masters Program: Ornament for Clear Realization 
Notes on commentary by Geshe Tenzin Tenphel 
 
Monday afternoon, 17 March 2008 
 
Clarifying the dispute of past Tibetan scholar   
Ornament of the Essence , translation p. 33 (Tibetan p. 47): 
 
OPINION: Regarding that, also in this context, a pa st Tibetan scholar, without realizing the 
occurrence of the dispute (that it follows that com posing the treatise would be without 
purpose if all the three were included as the subje ct matter), through making the 
connection of the purpose-and-relationship, through  thinking that the dispute and answer 
regarding that are implicitly indicated here, state d the dispute as, 
• PERSON A : “It follows that there are three bodies of the tr eatise if all the three 
are included” {48} and  
• PERSON B : the reply as, “Since the circumstance of a single  person attaining 
enlightenment is indicated, there would not be thre e bodies.”  
• PERSON A : Well, the three exalted knowers would be the clea r realizations of 
only one person. 
[THE TIBETAN SCHOLAR CONTINUES :] Although they are determined as the 
circumstance of one person, it has been explained t hat, “The three exalted knowers are the 
clear realizations of individual persons; it is thu s.”  
OUR OWN SYSTEM RESPONDS : That [posited above] is very incorrect, (i) becau se the 
rejection of the dispute of the parts singly is an ordinary one, and (ii) because—that it 
follows that composing the treatise is without purp ose if all the three are included—is the 
principal dispute, whereby it is inappropriate to e xplain it as the implicitly indicated 
meaning of this commentary.  
 
Q: As an example of an existent imputational nature,  Geshe-la mentioned “the basis adhered to by 
the conception apprehending form.” Is this related to the meaning generality that is the conception 
apprehending form? 
A: The meaning generality of form is the basis adher ed to by the conception apprehending it. This 
basis is permanent and an imputational nature. But we cannot say “a basis adhered to by the 
conception apprehending form is a meaning generalit y of form.” 
 
Q: Does “form” refer to form in general or a specifi c form? 
A: We would have to say that it is a specific form, because there would be a fault in saying it refers 
to form in general. We can talk about this in relat ion to a specific form, such as a vase, the form 
aggregate, etc. We can talk about vase in general o r a specific instance of vase, such as a gold vase.   
 
Q: What is an example of a wheel of Dharma of realiz ation turned by a supreme emanation body? 
A: A supreme emanation body explains, for example, t he sevenfold instruction on causes and 
effects for generating bodhichitta and then the tra inees generate this bodhichitta. If it is a path, i t is 
pervaded by being a wheel of Dharma of realization . It would be strange to talk about turning the 
wheel of Dharma of realization. Rather, in dependen ce on the wheel of Dharma of scripture, a 
wheel of Dharma is produced.  
 
 
 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 8: 17-20 March 2008 
 
2  
Ornament of the Essence , p. 34 says: 
2B2A-1B2A-1. Brief indication (continued) 
 
OPINION by someone of the past: Although both a kno wer of bases and a knower of paths 
are generated in a bodhisattva’s continuum, they ar e of different entities and all three 
exalted knowers in a buddha’s continuum are generat ed as different entities. Further, an 
exalted knower of all aspects directly knows all as pects without exception, because  but  
they are not known by 1 the other two exalted knowers of a buddha. Even th ough a knower 
of paths directly knows the general characteristics  of paths, they are not known by a 
knower of bases. Hence, a knower of bases (belongin g to the divisions into three exalted 
knowers) solely knows bases and a knower of paths [ belonging to the divisions into three 
exalted knowers] solely knows bases and paths. Ther efore, three exalted knowers are only 
of different entities. 
 
OPINION by someone else regarding that: If an exalt ed knower of all aspects does not 
realize bases, this contradicts that it realizes th e aspects based upon it  them . If it does 
realize bases, then the position that it is not of one entity with a knower of bases will 
degenerate. 
 
Here the second person is refuting the first. 
 
Our own system 
 
What is the opinion of our own system concerning th e three exalted knowers being different entities 
or contradictory? The three exalted knowers are not  contradictory.  
 
In the case of a buddha arya  
• A knower of bases in the continuum of a buddha arya  is also an exalted knower of all 
aspects and a knower of paths, and is therefore all  three exalted knowers.  
• An exalted knower of all aspects in the continuum o f a buddha arya is not a knower of 
bases, but is a knower of paths and an exalted know er of all aspects.  
• Likewise, a knower of paths in the continuum of a b uddha arya is a knower of paths and an 
exalted knower of all aspects, but it is not a know er of bases.  
 
In the case of a bodhisattva arya  
• A knower of bases in the continuum of a bodhisattva  arya is a knower of bases and also a 
knower of paths, but it is not an exalted knower of  all aspects.  
• A knower of paths in the continuum of a bodhisattva  arya is a knower of paths but is not a 
knower of bases and is not an exalted knower of all  aspects. 
 
In the case of a Hinayanist  
In the continuum of a Hinayanist, there is no knowe r of paths and no exalted knower of all aspects, 
but there can be a knower of bases. A knower of bas es in the continuum of a Hinayanist is pervaded 
by not being a knower of paths and not being an exalted kn ower of all aspects.  
 
Q: Geshe-la said that a knower of bases in the conti nuum of a buddha arya is also an exalted 
knower of all aspects, but that would contradict it  being a knower of bases. 
                                                 
1 Kyi  emended to read kyis . 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 8: 17-20 March 2008 
 
3 A: Just as a buddha’s eye consciousness knows all ph enomena, a knower of bases in the continuum 
of a buddha arya knows all aspects. Seventy Topics  says that an exalted knower of all aspects is 
mutually inclusive with an exalted knower in the co ntinuum of a buddha arya.  
Q: Is a knower of bases knowing all aspects in the c ontinuum of a buddha pervaded by being an 
exalted knower of all aspects? 
A: A knower of bases in the continuum of a buddha ar ya is pervaded by being an exalted knower of 
all aspects, but an exalted knower of all aspects i s not pervaded by being a knower of bases. There 
is no problem in saying that “A knower of bases in the continuum of a buddha arya knowing all 
aspects is an exalted knower of all aspects.” In fa ct, a knower of bases in the continuum of a buddha 
arya knows all phenomena, and knows them simultaneo usly, because a buddha has no obscurations 
to seeing phenomena. You can say “If it is an exalt ed knower of all aspects, it is not pervaded by 
being a knower of bases,” and you can also say “If it is an exalted knower of all aspects, it is not 
pervaded by being a knower of bases in the continuu m of a buddha arya.” You can also say “If it is 
an exalted knower of all aspects, it is not pervade d by not  being a knower of bases.”  
 
The first opinion 
 
The first person  says: “Although both a knower of bases and a knowe r of paths are generated in a 
bodhisattva’s continuum, they are of different enti ties.”  
Our own system  says: This is not correct, because they are not di fferent entities. 
 
The first person  continues: “All three exalted knowers in a buddha’ s continuum are generated as 
different entities.” 
Our own system  responds: This is not correct because they are not  different entities. 
 
The first person  continues: “Further, an exalted knower of all aspe cts directly knows all aspects 
without exception, but they are not known by the ot her two exalted knowers of a buddha.” In other 
words, while an exalted knower of all aspects knows  all aspects directly, a knower of bases and 
knower of paths in the continuum of a buddha do not  directly know all aspects without exception. 
Our own system  responds: This is not correct, because in addition  to an exalted knower of all 
aspects directly knowing all aspects without except ion, also a knower of bases and knower of paths 
in the continuum of a buddha arya know all aspects without exception. 
 
The first person  continues: “Even though a knower of paths directly  knows the general 
characteristics of paths, they are not known by a k nower of bases. Hence, a knower of bases 
(belonging to the divisions into three exalted know ers) solely knows bases, and a knower of paths 
[belonging to the divisions into three exalted know ers] solely knows bases and paths.” 
Our own system  responds: You contradict yourself because first, y ou say “Even though a knower of 
paths directly knows the general characteristics of  paths, they are not known by a knower of bases,” 
and then say “Hence, a knower of bases solely knows  bases, and a knower of paths solely knows 
bases and paths.” What is “a knower of paths direct ly knowing the general characteristics of paths”? 
is it a knower of paths knowing paths? 
 
Our own system : In terms of etymology, a knower of paths  knows that the three paths are empty of 
true existence. In terms of etymology, a knower of bases  knows that the aggregates and so forth lack 
a self. However, a knower of paths is not  pervaded by knowing that the three paths lack true  
existence. In order for there to be pervasion, one has to mention the words “conjoined with” in the 
definition of a knower of paths: a Mahayana clear r ealization conjoined with  the wisdom directly 
realizing emptiness in the continuum of the person who possesses it in his continuum.  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 8: 17-20 March 2008 
 
4 Therefore, the opinion of this first person that th e three exalted knowers are only of different 
entities is incorrect.  
 
The second opinion 
 
The second person  says: “If an exalted knower of all aspects does no t realize bases, this contradicts 
that it realizes the aspects based upon these bases . If it does realize bases, then the position that it is 
not of one entity with a knower of bases will degen erate.” 
 
This would seem to be a good refutation, in that it  is true that “If an exalted knower of all aspects 
does not realize bases, this would contradict that it realizes the aspects based upon those bases.” 
And it would follow that “If it does realize bases,  then the position that it is not of one entity wit h a 
knower of bases would degenerate.” 
 
Response of our own system  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 34: 
 
RESPONSE: It is difficult for a repudiation to beco me correct, but a buddha never has 
conceptions or mistaken non-conceptual [minds], whe reby we must assert that a knower of 
bases in the mental continuum of a buddha is an unm istaken non-conceptual [mind]. In that 
case, if a basis appears, the aspect must also appe ar to it. An awareness that does not see it 
(even though it appears directly) does not exist in  a buddha, because he has exhaustively 
abandoned all seeds of mistakes. Acarya Haribhadra must assert that even a buddha’s eye 
consciousness knows all objects of knowledge, just as it has been taught, whereby it is 
difficult to posit that the three exalted knowers o f a buddha are of different entities.  
 
“It is difficult for a repudiation to become correc t” means that it is difficult for the opinion 
expressed by the second person to be a correct repu diation. Since a buddha never has conceptions or 
mistaken non-conceptual minds, a knower of bases in  the continuum of a buddha must be an 
unmistaken, non-conceptual mind.  
 
Q: In regard to the statement “In that case, if a ba sis appears, the aspect must also appear to it,” 
could Geshe-la please given an illustration in term s of a common object of daily life? 
A: This statement is made in terms of appearing to a n unmistaken, non-conceptual mind. For 
example, in the case of a watch, the watch is the b asis. When an unmistaken non-conceptual mind 
apprehends the watch, various aspects appear to it,  for example, the watch’s aspect of being 
impermanent, aspect of being a product, and aspect of being a functioning thing. This statement is 
easy to understand in the case of a buddha, because  everything appears to a buddha. Since a knower 
of bases in the mental continuum of a buddha is an unmistaken, non-conceptual mind, when a basis 
appears to it, its aspects also appear to it. An aw areness that does not see it (even though it appear s 
directly) does not exist in a buddha, because he ha s exhaustively abandoned all seeds of mistakes. 
This contradicts the above position, in that there is nothing that appears directly to a buddha but is  
not seen.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 35: 
 
QUALM: What is the explanation that knowers of base s are clear realizations of hearers 
and solitary realizers in this context like? {51}  
RESPONSE: It boils down to merely different support s of presentation  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 8: 17-20 March 2008 
 
5 (i) because knowers of bases are necessary in order  for hearer and solitary realizer aryas to 
achieve mere peace, and they are able to achieve th at merely by means of the knowers of 
bases;  
(ii) because bodhisattvas must know the three paths  in order to generate the exalted 
knowers of all aspects, and they are able to achiev e that merely by means of those 
[knowers of paths]; and  
(iii) since the exalted knowers of all aspects are definitely needed in order to turn all the 
wheels of Dharma without exception.  
Thus, there are different presentations of the diss imilar imprints of the individual exalted 
knowers.  
 
This is simply a case of identifying the different supports of presentation. As mentioned before, a 
knower of bases and a knower of paths are explained  here in terms of their supports of presentation, 
there being no pervasion in terms of their supports  of generation.  
 
A support of presentation  is: the person with respect to which the presentat ion is made. 
 
The support of presentation of a knower of bases is  learner hearer and solitary realizer aryas. Why 
are they the support of presentation? Since in depe ndence on a knower of bases, learner hearer and 
solitary realizer aryas are led to peace, learner h earer and solitary realizer aryas are the support o f 
presentation. The same is true of a knower of paths  and an exalted knower of all aspects. However, 
the results are different and therefore, the imprin ts are different. Because of dissimilar functions o r 
activities, there are dissimilar imprints or result s. 
 
Q: Since the Mothers of the aryas were said to inclu de the path of accumulation and path of 
preparation, why do we posit the support of present ation as “learner hearer and solitary realizer 
aryas ” and not just “learner hearers and solitary realiz ers”? 
A: When we talk about “the supports of presentation, ” we are talking about the support of 
presentation of a knower of bases  and not of a path in general, therefore we have to  say “learner 
hearer and solitary realizer aryas .” When verse 1.1a says “That which through the kno wer of all 
leads hearers seeking pacification to peace,” all f ive paths are included, not just the arya paths. In  
that way, all five persons on the five paths are in cluded. However, if we look at the explicit words, 
“the knower of all leads hearers seeking pacificati on to peace,” who are the ones seeking 
pacification? We would posit learner hearer and sol itary realizer aryas. In general, those who seek 
pacification would have to be posited as all learne r hearers and solitary realizers, and not just arya s. 
But if we ask, “Who are those seeking pacification in dependence on being led by a knower of all ?,” 
then we would have to say that they are learner hea rer and solitary realizer aryas . 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 35: 
 
2B2A-1B2A-2. Extensive explanation 
First of the three subsections: 
2B2A-1B2A-2A. How the clear realizations of hearers  and solitary realizers are included within the kno wers of 
bases 
2B2A-1B2A-2A1. Question 
COMMENTARY 
"Bhagavan, on account of what are the wants of all,  [those] of hearers and solitary buddhas  
realizers ?" 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 8: 17-20 March 2008 
 
6 EXPLANATION 
"Bhagavan, on account of what  reason and purpose are the wants of all , the clear 
realizations of hearers and solitary buddhas  realizers ?" 
2B2A-1B2A-2A2. Reply 
COMMENTARY 
"Subhuti, all are merely these: however many outer and inner phenomena there are. 
Hearers and solitary realizers also know them; they  are not, however, by all paths; they 
also do not in all aspects. Because of that, [those ] of the hearers and solitary realizers are 
said to be the very knowers of all." 
 
EXPLANATION {52} 
Having called out, “Subhuti,” all  bases are merely these: however many outer and 
inner phenomena , the twelve sources, 2 there are. Hearers and solitary realizers also  
directly know them  distinguished by the sixteen [aspects of the four noble truths], 
impermanence and so forth, whereby they have the kn owers of bases; they are not, 
however,  definitely  emerging by all  three paths , whereby they do not have the knowers of 
paths; they also do not  directly 3 realize all aspects,  whereby they do not have the exalted 
knowers of all aspects. Because of that,  the clear realizations of the hearers and solitary 
realizers are said to be  included within the very knowers of all.   
 
This passage explains the sutra citation. Because h earers and solitary realizers directly know all 
bases distinguished by impermanence and so forth, t hey have a knower of bases. However, they do 
not have a knower of paths because they are not def initely emerging by the three paths, and they do 
not have an exalted knower of all aspects because t hey do not directly realize all aspects. Therefore,  
the clear realizations of hearers and solitary real izers are included in a knower of bases.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 35: 
 
 This shows that hearers and solitary realizers hav e knowers of bases, but not knowers of 
paths and exalted knowers of all aspects. However, this does not even slightly indicate that 
the other two persons 4 do not have the knowers of bases. 
 
“This shows” means “this sutra passage shows.” A “k nower of all” is merely another name for a 
knower of bases, in that it means a knower of all  bases.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p.35: 
2B2A-1B2A-2B. How the clear realizations of bodhisa ttvas are included within the knowers of paths 
2B2A-1B2A-2B1. Question 
COMMENTARY 
"Bhagavan, on account of what are the wants of the aspects of the paths [those] of 
bodhisattvas?" 
 
                                                 
2 These are the 6 outer sources—forms, odors, sounds , tastes, objects of touch, and phenomena—and the 6  inner 
sources—eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mental so urces. 
3  Gsum  emended to read sum  in accordance with page 38 of the Drepung Loseling  Library Society’s 1996 edition of 
Ornament of the Essence . 
4  The other two persons are bodhisattvas and buddha s. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 8: 17-20 March 2008 
 
7 EXPLANATION 
"Bhagavan, on account of what are the wants of the aspects of the  three paths  the clear 
realizations of bodhisattvas?" 
2B2A-1B2A-2B2. Reply 
2B2A-1B2A-2B2A. Meaning of the words 
2B2A-1B2A-2B2B. Decisive analysis 
2B2A-1B2A-2B2A. Meaning of the words 
Advice to  by  those possessing pure wisdom: 
 
COMMENTARY  
“Subhuti, bodhisattvas should generate all paths: ( i) that which is the paths of the hearers, 
(ii) that which is the paths of the solitary realiz ers, and (iii) that which is the paths of the 
buddhas; and they should know all paths.”  
 
EXPLANATION  
"Subhuti, bodhisattvas should  first generate  in their continua all  the three: (i) that 
which is the path of the hearers,  the exalted wisdom realizing the selflessness of p ersons; 
(ii) that which is the path of the solitary realizer s,  the exalted wisdom realizing 
apprehendeds and their apprehenders as empty of bei ng different substances; and (iii) that 
which is the path of the buddhas,  the path realizing all phenomena as lacking true 
existence; and  then they should  directly know all paths.” 
 
 
• The exalted wisdom realizing the selflessness of pe rsons is the path of hearers  
• The exalted wisdom realizing apprehendeds and their  apprehenders as empty of being different 
substances is the path of solitary realizers  
• The path realizing all phenomena as lacking true ex istence is the path of buddhas  
 
In addition to generating all paths, bodhisattvas s hould know all paths. There is a lot of debate abou t 
this subject of generating all paths and knowing all paths. According to our own system, 
bodhisattvas need to generate all these paths in th eir continua. They need to know the path of 
hearers by generating it in their path. When it is said that they need to know all paths, this means 
that bodhisattvas need to actually generate hearers ’ paths and so forth in their continua. In other 
words, it does not mean “knowing” in the way that t he eye consciousness knows forms. Thus, 
bodhisattvas 
• need to know hearers’ paths by way of generating th em in their continua  
• need to know solitary realizers’ paths by way of ge nerating them in their continua  
• need to know buddhas’ paths by way of generating th em in their continua  
 
“Advice to those possessing pure wisdom” refers to advice by bodhisattvas possessing pure 
wisdom. 
 
This concludes the section on possessing special wi sdom. Next, there is a section on possessing 
special method. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 36:  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 8: 17-20 March 2008 
 
8 COMMENTARY  
“They should also fully complete those, and also pe rform the activities  of those paths.  But, 
not having fully completed prayers, not having full y ripened sentient beings, and not 
having completely purified the buddha land, they do  not actualize the perfect end. Because 
of that, those of bodhisattvas are called ‘the very  knowers of aspects of paths.’" 
 
EXPLANATION  
“They should also fully complete those  three paths by means of abandonment and 
realization , and also perform the activities of those three paths , the activities of ripening 
sentient beings in that way . Because of that, the clear realizations of bodhisattvas are 
called ‘the very knowers of aspects of paths.’" 
 
“They should also fully complete those” refers to f ully completing those very three paths mentioned 
above—the path of hearers, path of solitary realize rs, and path of buddhas. This is done by means of 
abandonment and realization . 
 
“And also perform the activities  of those paths” refers to the attainment of peace: 
• in dependence on the path of hearers , one attains the peace of nirvana in which the 
conception of a self of persons has been abandoned 
• in dependence on the path of solitary realizers , one attains the peace of nirvana in which the 
conception of apprehendeds and apprehenders being d ifferent substances has been 
abandoned  
• in dependence on the path of buddhas , one attains the peace of non-abiding nirvana in w hich 
the conception of true existence has been abandoned  
 
When is this done ? Without “having fully completed prayers, not havi ng fully ripened sentient 
beings, and not having completely purified the budd ha land, they do not actualize the perfect end.” 
The “perfect end” refers to this peace, the results  of the three paths. 
 
 
Tuesday, March 18, 2008 
 
Questions 
 
Q:  It is said (in section 2B2A-1B2A-1) that “a buddha  never has conceptions or mistaken non-
conceptual [minds].” How does a buddha give teachin gs, if he doesn’t have conceptions?  
A:  He gives teachings in an effortless, spontaneous m anner. A buddha doesn’t have to think “How 
should I explain to this person?” 
 
Q:  Doesn’t the use of words necessarily involve conce pts? 
A:  Even when a buddha uses words, he doesn’t use conc eptions; if he used conceptions, he would 
have a mistaken mind. A buddha has no obscurations;  he has abandoned the afflictive obstructions 
and the knowledge obstructions. Conceptions involve  obscurations, because a conception does not 
get at its object directly, in a naked way; it know s its object through the medium of a meaning 
generality. This inability to get at the object dir ectly means that a conception involves obscurations .  
 
Q:  In the following passage (p. 36, section 2B2A-1B2A -2B2A): “‘Subhuti, bodhisattvas should 
first generate in their continua all the three…and then they should directly know all paths,’” 
does the first part refer to an inferential cognize r, and “they should directly know all paths” 
refer to a direct realization?  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 8: 17-20 March 2008 
 
9 A:  When it says “bodhisattvas should first generate i n their continua all the three…”, this means 
bodhisattvas should generate the three conceptually , and afterwards should directly know all paths. 
In this context, since they are bodhisattvas defini te in the Mahayana lineage, they are pervaded by 
having realized emptiness before entering the Mahay ana path. They would have realized 
selflessness of persons, non-duality, and emptiness  of true existence before entering the Mahayana 
path. Then on the Mahayana path of seeing, they dir ectly  know all the three paths.  
 
Q:  on p. 35, in the qualm, “because bodhisattvas must  know the three paths in order to generate the 
exalted knowers of all aspects, and they are able t o achieve that merely by means of those,” it seems 
to say they are able to attain omniscience merely t hrough the knower of paths. Could Geshe-la 
explain? 
A:  In this phrase, the term “those” refers to the kno wer of paths that knows the three paths. It is 
saying that just the knower of paths is sufficient,  because all clear realizations of bodhisattva arya s 
are included in the knower of paths. A bodhisattva does need the knower of bases as well, because 
that knower of bases is a knower of paths. Also, fo r example, conventional bodhicitta in the 
continuum of a bodhisattva arya is a knower of path s. Remember that a knower of paths is mutually 
inclusive with a Mahayana arya’s exalted knower.  
 
Q:  Why does it say here that the knower of paths is g enerated “in order to generate the exalted 
knowers of all aspects,” rather than to enact the a ims of the three lineage-bearers, as was said in 
previous passages? 
A:  We said before that bodhisattvas use the method of  a knower of paths to accomplish the welfare 
of the three lineage-bearers, so what is the best a ccomplisher of the welfare of sentient beings? It i s 
the exalted knower of all aspects. Bodhisattvas, in  dependence on the knower of paths, enact the 
welfare of sentient beings, and they also attain th e state of omniscience in dependence on a knower 
of paths. By attaining the exalted knower of all as pects, bodhisattvas can enact the welfare of 
sentient beings in a perfect way.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 36: 
2B2A-1B2A-2B2A. Meaning of the words (continued) 
 
COMMENTARY  
“They should also fully complete those, and also pe rform the activities  of those paths.  But, 
not having fully completed prayers, not having full y ripened sentient beings, and not 
having completely purified the buddha land, they do  not actualize the perfect end. Because 
of that, those of bodhisattvas are called ‘the very  knowers of aspects of paths.’” 
 
Here, there are five essential points  for bodhisattvas. They should:  
1.  fully complete the three paths by means of abandonm ent and realization 
2.  fully complete prayers 
3.  fully ripen sentient beings 
4.  completely purify their buddha land 
5.  actualize the perfect end 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 37: 
 
EXPLANATION  
“They should also fully complete those  three paths by means of abandonment and 
realization , and also perform the activities of those three paths , the activities of ripening 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 8: 17-20 March 2008 
 
10 sentient beings in that way . Because of that, the clear realizations of bodhisattvas are 
called the very knowers of aspects of paths." 
 {54} The subject—bodhisattva aryas—(i) possess pur e wisdom, because they are 
skilled in generating in their continua the complet e classes of abandonment and realization 
of the three paths, and (ii) possess pure method wi th respect to the latter  for those who are 
lower than them , because they are skilled regarding the proper and  improper times for 
actualizing the perfect end. 
 
“With respect to the latter” refers to method. This  syllogism includes all the five essential points 
mentioned before. “[B]odhisattva aryas—(i) possess pure wisdom, because they are skilled in 
generating in their continua the complete classes o f abandonment and realization of the three 
paths”: in this phrase, the three paths are hearers ’ paths, solitary realizers’ paths, and buddhas’ 
paths. “Buddhas’ paths” actually refers to Mahayana  paths, so it is not necessary to say that 
bodhisattvas are skilled in generating bodhisattva paths. They are also skilled in generating hearers’  
and solitary realizers’ paths.  
 
Actualizing the “perfect end” at the proper time 
 
Bodhisattva aryas “possess pure method with respect  to the latter, because they are skilled regarding 
the proper and improper times for actualizing the p erfect end.” Actualizing the perfect end at the 
proper time refers to actualizing it after one has fully completed prayers, fully ripened sentient 
beings, and fully ripened one’s buddha land. If the y have done these three activities, they can 
actualize the perfect end at the proper time . If they actualize the perfect end before these ha ve been 
completed, that is a case of actualizing it at an improper time . In this way, all five essential points 
have been covered.  
 
• The abandonment of a hearer  is the abandonment of the conception of a self of persons, or 
the abandonment of the afflictive obscurations. The  abandonment of a solitary realizer  is the 
abandonment of the conception of duality, or of app rehendeds and apprehenders being 
different substances.  
• The realization of a hearer  is the selflessness of persons; the realization of  a solitary realizer  
is the realization of the emptiness of duality.  
 
Here, we are discussing bodhisattva aryas who are d efinite in the Mahayana lineage. They complete 
the abandonment and realization of hearers and soli tary realizers when they attain buddhahood. This 
is because the three types of obscurations—afflicti ve obstructions, coarse knowledge obscurations, 
and subtle knowledge obscurations—are abandoned sim ultaneously upon attaining buddhahood.  
 
Abandonment and realization  
 
Here, we talk about abandonment and realization . When we talk about the class of abandonments, 
they are obtained upon attaining buddhahood. Are th e class of realizations only attained upon 
attaining buddhahood? This explanation is not clear  here in Gyeltsab Je’s explanation, but it is 
clearly stated in Lama Tsong Khapa’s Golden Rosary, in which it say that the class of realizations 
of hearers and solitary realizers are attained on t he first ground, because the bodhisattva arya 
completes the realization of selflessness of person s and the realization of the emptiness of duality 
on the first ground. Although such a bodhisattva co mpletes the direct realizations of selflessness of 
persons and emptiness of duality on the first groun d, he has not completed the “traversing of the 
path.” This is like the example of the sun dawning at the peak of a mountain in the eastern direction:  
the orb of the sun is complete, but the sun has not  completely traversed the path.  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 8: 17-20 March 2008 
 
11 • Measure of having fully completed prayers : The measure of fully completing prayers talks 
about what one needs to do in terms of the supreme emanation body, and so forth. Gyeltsab 
Je’s explanation seems to be a general explanation,  but if we do not add certain 
qualifications, there is a fault in it. What is the  criterion for having fully completed prayers? 
It is having fully completed the potency of the pra yers of the roots of virtue that have been 
promised for the sake of trainees of one’s special buddha land.  
 
• Measure of having fully ripened sentient beings : This is explained further down in Gyeltsab’s 
commentary: “being satisfied due to having subdued,  having ripened as many sentient beings 
as there are countless sentient beings (in each ret inue of as many displays of exalted bodies 
as there are in a billion lands simultaneously) who  are placed on the arya path.”  
 
• Measure of having completely purified the buddha la nd : “…fully completing roots of virtue 
that are the causes accomplishing the special lands  of a complete enjoyment body and lands 
of an emanation body such as Sukhavati.” 
 
Meaning of “perfect end” 
 
“Perfect end” has many meanings. Here, we must add the qualification that it is the “perfect end 
indicated here,” which means indicated in the conte xt of the sutra. Regarding the proper and 
improper times for actualizing the perfect end, if one has completed the three activities—fully 
completing prayers, fully ripening sentient beings,  fully purifying one’s buddha land—and then 
actualized the perfect end, this refers to the perf ect end indicated here “at the proper time,” becaus e 
then one would be able to enact the welfare of sent ient beings in an effortless, spontaneous manner. 
If one actualizes the perfect end indicated here before  completing the three activities, it is an 
improper time, because in that case the welfare of migrating beings would be discontinued, or 
interrupted.  
 Perfect end here means to enter meditative equipoi se on the perfect end. The perfect end 
indicated here  is the sphere of peace in which pervasive compound ed suffering has been pacified, as 
it says on p. 42, the third line of the response: “ here it is the very sphere of pacification of perva sive 
compounded suffering.”  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 37: 
 
QUALM: Do they also perform all the activities of t he three paths? 
RESPONSE: They do not actualize the perfect ends of  those three paths.  “By way of those 
three paths” [rather than “of those three paths”] h aving emerged, explanation that the text 
is corrupted does not seem to be taken as erroneous . 
 
Regarding “By way of those three paths” or “of thos e three paths,” saying “of those three paths” is 
correct.  
 
QUALM: Is it [that they do not actualize the perfec t end] at all times? 
RESPONSE: In terms of the emanation body ( nirmanakaya ), one makes a promise for the 
sake of trainees of a special land of the emanation  body, such as the Victor Amitabha 
(Infinite Light), who promised, “I will not attain enlightenment until there is no one who 
does not possess the five clairvoyances in the land  where I become enlightened.” And in 
terms of the complete enjoyment body ( sambhogakaya ), a promise is made that until one 
has completed the ability for only Mahayana aryas t o occur in one’s retinue, one will not 
attain enlightenment.  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 8: 17-20 March 2008 
 
12  Not having fully completed prayers  wishing thus , not having fully ripened sentient 
beings —like a ripened boil that is ready to be squeezed,  being satisfied due to having 
subdued, 5 having ripened as many sentient beings as there ar e countless sentient beings (in 
each retinue of as many displays of exalted bodies as there are in a billion lands 
simultaneously) who are placed on the arya path— or not having completely purified the 
buddha land  by means of fully completing roots of virtue that are the causes 
accomplishing the special lands of a complete enjoy ment body and lands of an emanation 
body such as Sukhavati (Blissful Land of Amitabha B uddha) , they do not actualize the 
perfect end  in a manner of abiding in absorption in the sphere  of peace unless they are 
roused from it, and the like. {55} 
 
We say the perfect end should be actualized at the proper times. Here, there are certain parts that 
need to be qualified, without which there would be faults in the explanation.  
 
• Measure of having fully completed prayers in terms of the emanation body : “In terms of the 
emanation body ( nirmanakaya ), one makes a promise for the sake of trainees of a special 
land of the emanation body, such as the Victor Amit abha (Infinite Light), who promised, ‘I 
will not attain enlightenment until there is no one  who does not possess the five 
clairvoyances in the land where I become enlightene d’” is the measure in terms of the 
emanation body. This sentence should not be taken to explain the measure of having fully 
completed prayers, but it is the measure of having fully completed prayers in terms of the 
emanation body,  such as Victor Amitabha.  
• Measure of having fully completed prayers in terms of the complete enjoyment body : “And 
in terms of the complete enjoyment body ( sambhogakaya ), a promise is made that until one 
has completed the ability for only Mahayana aryas t o occur in one’s retinue, one will not 
attain enlightenment.” Again, this is not the measu re of having fully completed prayers, but 
is the measure of having fully completed prayers in  terms of the complete enjoyment body.  
• Measure of fully ripening sentient beings : What Gyeltsab says in terms of fully ripening 
sentient beings here is sufficient. Having fully ri pened sentient beings means “such as being 
satisfied due to having subdued, having ripened as many sentient beings as there are 
countless sentient beings (in each retinue of as ma ny displays of exalted bodies as there are 
in a billion lands simultaneously) who are placed o n the arya path…” “[L]ike those who like 
a boil that is ready to be squeezed”: you should on ly squeeze a boil once it is “ripened,” or it 
will be very difficult; similarly, you should only ripen sentient beings when they are ready. 
Sentient beings are full of afflictions, so when th e Dharma is explained to them, they become 
able to eliminate suffering. It is as though the ex planation of Dharma removes the suffering. 
 
“[T]hey do not actualize the perfect end in a manne r of abiding in absorption in the sphere of peace 
unless they are roused from it, and the like:” in t he case of hearers and solitary realizers, they ent er 
the sphere of peace for eons, according to their in tention. They are aroused from this absorption by 
the buddhas, who say they have only attained libera tion from suffering, and there is still a nirvana t o 
be obtained. Bodhisattvas are told not to abide in the sphere of peace in this manner, i.e. “abiding i n 
absorption in the sphere of peace.”   
 
Q:  What is the meaning of a bodhisattva’s attaining t he realizations of hearers and solitary realizers 
on the first ground, and not attaining the abandonm ents until attaining buddhahood? This seems to 
be a contradiction. 
A:  It is not a contradiction. Realizations are genera ted for the sake of the abandonments, but when 
the realizations are generated, the abandonments ar e not completed. When realizations are 
                                                 
5 Btol  should perhaps be emended to read bdul . 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 8: 17-20 March 2008 
 
13 generated, the abandonments will take place gradual ly; it is not that as soon as an antidote is 
generated, all abandonments are completed.  
 The direct antidote to the afflictive obscurations  of a hearer is the direct realization of 
selflessness. The direct antidote of a solitary rea lizer is a realization of emptiness of duality, or of 
forms not being external objects. This is the direc t antidote to the conception of forms as external 
objects; it is not  the direct antidote to the afflictive obscurations . However, when there is this direct 
realization of non-duality, the afflictive obscurat ions are abandoned.  
 For a bodhisattva, the direct antidote to the conc eption of true existence is the realization of 
emptiness of true existence, but this is not the direct antidote to the conception of self of pe rsons or 
to the conception of duality. However, when this di rect antidote that is the direct realization of 
emptiness of true existence is generated, the conce ption of self is abandoned and the conception of 
apprehenders and apprehendeds being different subst ances is abandoned.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 37:  
 
 Explaining that the criterion for having completed  one’s prayers is that one is able to 
effortlessly spontaneously accomplish others’ welfa re while being set in meditative 
equipoise on dharmata (the final nature of phenomen a) becomes [like] saying, “Do not 
actualize the truth body as long as you have not at tained the truth body,” whereby a topic 
of doubt does not exist. Taking the criterion for r ipening sentient beings to be completing 
trainees of the bodhisattva’s path is also similar to the former and is only a probandum 
(object to be proven). 
 
In terms of a bodhisattva who is definite in the Ma hayana lineage, he should not actualize the 
perfect end indicated here if he has not fully comp leted prayers. This person (objector) says that the  
criteria for having fully completed prayers is that  “one is able to effortlessly, spontaneously 
accomplish others’ welfare while being set in medit ative equipoise on dharmata.” In fact, this 
ability only belongs to buddhas. As long as one has  not attained the truth body, one cannot do this. 
If one were to posit this as the criteria for havin g completed prayers, this becomes like saying “Do 
not actualize the truth body as long as you have no t attained the truth body.” Attainment of the truth  
body and having completed one’s prayers are simultaneous , because the criterion, according to this 
person, for having completed one’s prayers, is that  one is able to “effortlessly, spontaneously 
accomplish others’ welfare while being set in medit ative equipoise on dharmata,” and only when 
one has actualized the truth body is one able to “e ffortlessly, spontaneously accomplish others’ 
welfare while being set in meditative equipoise on dharmata.” Therefore, “A topic of doubt does not 
exist,” meaning that “Do not actualize the truth bo dy as long as you have not attained the truth 
body” is a statement that is not a topic of doubt, because one cannot actualize the truth body when 
one has not attained the truth body.  
 
“Taking the criterion for ripening sentient beings to be completing trainees of the bodhisattva’s path  
is also similar to the former and is only a proband um (object to be proven).” This is similar to the 
above. We say that one should not actualize the per fect end before having fully ripened sentient 
beings. Here, it is saying that if one were to say that the criterion for ripening sentient beings is 
having completed trainees of the bodhisattva’s path , this is like saying “Do not actualize the truth 
body as long as you have not attained the truth bod y.” If this is taken as the criterion for ripening 
sentient beings, then after one has completed the t rainees of the bodhisattva path, one should 
actualize the perfect end, but what is the use of a ctualizing the perfect end after the trainees have 
been completed?  
 
 
Wednesday, 19 March 2008 (morning) 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 8: 17-20 March 2008 
 
14  
Ornament of the Essence , p. 37: 
 
2B2A-1B2A-2B2A. Meaning of the words (continued) 
 
Taking the criterion for ripening sentient beings t o be completing trainees of the 
bodhisattva’s path is also similar to the former an d is only a probandum (object to be 
proven). 
 
If we were to take the criteria for ripening sentie nt beings to be “completing trainees of the 
bodhisattva’s path,” there would be a mistake. When  one is practicing the path, one benefits the 
three types of trainees. It seems from this stateme nt that one would have to do all of that before 
actualizing the perfect end, and thus that one woul d not benefit trainees after actualizing the perfec t 
end. This would be “similar to the former” thought.  Just as we mentioned earlier, if one were to 
actualize the perfect end indicated here before  completing the three activities—fully completing 
prayers, fully ripening sentient beings, purifying the buddha land—the welfare of migrating beings 
would be interrupted. But if one were to do it after having completed those activities, there would 
be effortless, spontaneous enactment of others welf are. If, as stated here, the criterion for ripening  
sentient beings were completing trainees of the bod hisattva’s path, there would be no spontaneous 
and effortless enacting of the welfare of sentient beings.  
 
Essential point : the three types of activities that need to be com pleted are:  
1.  fully completing prayers 
2.  fully ripening sentient beings 
3.  purifying the buddha land.  
These are completed at the end of a sentient beings ’ continuum; this is the boundary. In the next 
instant, a bodhisattva passes to the buddha ground and attains enlightenment.  
 
At this last instant of the sentient being’s contin uum, the bodhisattva is in meditative equipoise. 
What does it mean that he has “fully ripened sentie nt beings”? Does it mean he has “ripened as 
many sentient beings as there are countless sentien t beings (in each retinue of as many displays of 
exalted bodies as there are in a billion lands simu ltaneously)” and placed them on the arya path? At 
this point, the bodhisattva possesses the potential to do so, but it does not mean that he is doing tha t 
in the last instant. In that last instant, he has c ompleted the potency of the roots of virtue that is  a 
cause to place sentient beings in that state; he is  not placing countless sentient beings in the state  of 
an arya, but he possesses the potency to do so.  
 “…[I]s only a probandum (object to be proven)…” this means that the criteria mentioned 
earlier are to be proven. In this paragraph, there are two criteria: the criteria for fully 
completing one’s prayers is to be “able to effortle ssly spontaneously accomplish others’ 
welfare while being set in meditative equipoise on dharmata,” the second, “completing trainees 
of the bodhisattva’s path,” is to be proven.  
 
Various points 
 
Q: It would seem that when Amitabha (Infinite Light ) promised, “I will not attain enlightenment 
until there is no one who does not possess the five  clairvoyances in the land where I become 
enlightened” ( Ornament of the Essence , p. 37), he is actually postponing his enlightenme nt. Why 
would he do that? 
A: This means that until everyone in this land has attained the five clairvoyances, I (Buddha 
Amitabha) will not display  enlightenment. Buddhas make different kinds of pra yers, e.g. Buddha 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 8: 17-20 March 2008 
 
15 Shakyamuni made the prayer to display the supreme e manation body at the time of the five 
degenerations, when the lifespan of human beings is  100 years. Others made prayers to display the 
supreme emanation body at other times, when the lif espan was longer, but due to Buddha 
Shakyamuni’s prayer, many bodhisattvas sang praises  of him. The types of bodhisattvas’ prayers 
are very diverse, in dependence on the faculties, m ental strength, etc., of those making the prayers, 
as well as due to the various conditions of sentien t beings. After having made a prayer, a 
bodhisattva has to try to accomplish it through pur ification and accumulation of merit and exalted 
wisdom. Ordinary beings, on the other hand, make pr ayers but do not engage in the methods to 
accomplish them, asking instead for the buddhas to help them.  
 
Q: What is a buddha land, or a pure land? 
A: There are pure and impure buddha lands. For inst ance, Bodhgaya, where the Buddha displayed 
the supreme emanation body, is an impure buddha land . When we talk about a buddha land in this 
context, it is the buddha land where one will displ ay either a supreme emanation body or a complete 
enjoyment body, not just any land where the buddha’ s activities are displayed.  
 
 
2B2A-1B2A-2B2A. Meaning of the words (continued) 
 
 Further, someone who claims that only a pure land is seen with respect to a buddha’s 
self-appearance and an impure land is posited from the trainees’ other-appearance does not 
know how to posit a faultless exalted wisdom knowin g varieties 6 that is included within a 
buddha’s own continuum. Saying that is only a wrong  conception that has failed to 
understand the presentation of reasoning that “By r eversing what is seen by an omniscient 
mind, one is caused to understand that it does not exist at all.” [For,] if the appearance of 
an impure land does not dawn to a buddha’s self-app earance, then an impure land would 
not be directly seen by a buddha and it must defini tely become ascertained as non-existent, 
since an implicit realization is also untenable. 
 
Pure lands and impure lands 
 
Here, it mentions a pure land and an impure land . For example, is Pomaia a pure land or an impure 
land? Visitors who come to the Institute for the we ekend feel that Pomaia is very special, being 
close to the teachers, receiving their blessings, e tc. Some try to stay longer, for a month or more, 
and when they stay longer, their view of Pomaia cha nges. Whose fault is that, that is, what is pure 
or impure? This has to do mainly with the mind, or one’s viewpoint. One becomes happy or 
unhappy due to one’s mind. If an ordinary person sa ys “this is not a nice place,” we cannot 
conclude that it is not a nice place, and vice vers a, because this depends on the appearance to an 
ordinary person.  
 We can say that this “continent” that we live on i s an impure land. To be reborn in a pure land, 
one needs to fulfill certain criteria. Once born th ere, one finds that the land is pleasant in every w ay. 
It is pleasant to a person born there due to the ch aracter, or qualities, of the person, and from the 
side of the pure land, there is a pleasant appearan ce. If a buddha arya were to abide in an impure 
land, it would appear as an impure land, but not in  the same way as it would appear to an ordinary 
person. The way it appears to an ordinary person is  not stable—when one is in a good mood, it 
appears pleasant, if one is in a bad mood, it appea rs as unpleasant.  
 
An impure land is the result of afflictions , or the impure collected karma of sentient beings.  
                                                 
6 “Varieties” refers to obscurational truths, as opp osed to “the mode,” which refers to ultimate truth.  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 8: 17-20 March 2008 
 
16  
Q: When Buddha Shakyamuni was alive, was the land w here he lived an “impure buddha land”? 
A: Yes, we could say that. We are referring to Bodh gaya as an impure land, but it is a special 
impure land.  
 
Q: What is the difference between an impure buddha  land and an impure land? 
A: There are certain places that are impure lands, but not impure buddha  lands. For example, there 
are “border areas,” as mentioned in the Lam Rim, wh ere there is no Dharma. However, it would be 
difficult to say that a place where there is Dharma  is an impure buddha land. It has to be a place 
where the buddha has displayed his deeds, i.e. the twelve deeds. When we talk about the land of an 
emanation body or of an enjoyment body, it does not  have to be a pure land. When we say a 
bodhisattva has to complete the three activities be fore actualizing the perfect end, it specifically 
refers to purifying the land of the enjoyment body and the emanation body. 
 
Q: Can ordinary beings be reborn in a pure land? 
A: Yes. For example, ordinary beings can be reborn in Tushita, where Buddha Maitreya lives.  
 
Q: What is the difference between a god realm and a  pure land? For example, Theravadins describe 
Tushita as a god realm.  
A: We can distinguish between Tushita, as a level o f the desire realm, or as a pure land. The one in 
the desire realm is like a city, whereas the one wh ich is a pure land is like a monastery in the 
countryside. This relationship is similar to when w e speak about Akanishta, where we say that the 
enjoyment body abides in Akanishta—Akanishta can be  either a pure land or a division of the 
fourth concentration; the relationship between thes e is similar to that for the two types of Tushita.  
 
 
Regarding the preceding paragraph, in Lama Chöpa, there is a line that says that the pure land is 
accomplished through the buddha’s qualities. We do say that only a pure land is seen with respect 
to a buddha’s self-appearance , but it is not  that only pure lands appear to buddhas . “Self-
appearance” means appearance to the side of the bud dha; other-appearance means here that an 
impure land appears to the trainees, and this appea rance appears to the buddhas.  
 “Saying that is only a wrong conception that has f ailed to understand the presentation of 
reasoning that ‘By reversing what is seen by an omn iscient mind, one is caused to understand that it 
does not exist at all.’” If something does not appe ar to a buddha, it does not exist. There is no such  
thing as an implicit realization for a buddha.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 38: 
 
 Hence, the earlier [regarding fully completed pray ers] is just as explained above. The 
middle one [regarding fully ripened sentient beings ], being able to place the numberless 
sentient beings (in the retinue of each display of as many exalted bodies displayed in a 
billion lands) in the state of an arya with each st anza, is (i) also contingent upon doing so 
in a single time, simultaneously, becoming effortle ss and spontaneous (since one is unable 
to do that as long as there is conceptual motivatio n) and (ii) relies upon entering the 
absorption in the sphere of peace, in a manner of n ot arising again, after having abandoned 
the levels of latencies of ignorance and uncontamin ated karma. {56} It is implicitly 
indicated that, when such trainees have already bee n placed in the ripening paths (from 
between the two—ripening paths and liberating paths ), then one actualizes the perfect end. 
The criterion of fully purifying the land is to hav e fully completed the ability of the roots 
of virtue that will accomplish not just any land, b ut rather the special land of a complete 
enjoyment body and the land of an emanation body.  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 8: 17-20 March 2008 
 
17  
“The earlier” refers to fully completed prayers, an d the “middle one” refers to fully ripened sentient  
beings. “Being able to place the numberless sentien t beings (in the retinue of each display of as 
many exalted bodies displayed in a billion lands) i n the state of an arya with each stanza” depends 
on two conditions:  
1.  that one can do so “in a single time, simultaneousl y, becoming effortless and spontaneous.” 
As long as one has conceptual motivation, one canno t do this.  
2.  it “relies upon entering the absorption in the sphe re of peace, in a manner of not arising 
again, after having abandoned the levels of latenci es of ignorance and uncontaminated 
karma.” 
 
• “levels of latencies of ignorance :” seeds of conceptions of true existence   
• “uncontaminated karma :” subtle exertion of the knowledge obscurations. I t is said that when 
one attains an arya path, one attains a mental body . This is caused by this uncontaminated 
karma. 
 
“It is implicitly indicated that, when such trainee s have already been placed in the ripening paths 
(from between the two—ripening paths and liberating  paths), then one actualizes the perfect end.” 
This is a bit awkward, so we can add a qualificatio n to make this more accurate. “Ripening paths” 
refers to the aryas’ paths. When one has completed the ability to place such trainees in the arya 
paths, then one actualizes the perfect end. In gene ral, attaining the arya path refers to attaining th e 
path of seeing.  
 “The criterion of fully purifying the land is to h ave fully completed the ability of the roots of 
virtue that will accomplish not just any land, but rather the special land of a complete enjoyment 
body and the land of an emanation body.” This means  one needs to have fully completed the ability 
of the roots of virtue to accomplish the land of a complete enjoyment body or an emanation body, 
not just any land.  
 
Q: Do hearers and solitary realizers also attain th e mental body? 
A: This is in the case of Mahayana aryas; hearers a nd solitary realizers attain a mental body when 
they attain a nirvana without remainder.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 38: 
2B2A-1B2A-2B2B. Decisive analysis 
2B2A-1B2A-2B2B-1. Identifying the modes of generali ty and exception 
2B2A-1B2A-2B2B-2. Explaining the meaning of the teac hing that bodhisattvas complete the abandonments 
and realizations of hearers and solitary realizers 
2B2A-1B2A-2B2B-3. Having identified the perfect end , explaining how it is actualized 
 
(This outline follows from page 36: 2B2A-1B2A-2B2: Reply, which is divided into 2B2A-1B2A-
2B2A:  Meaning of the words and 2B2A-1B2A-2B2B: Dec isive analysis) 
 
2B2A-1B2A-2B2B-1. Identifying the modes of generali ty and exception 
As terminologies of generality and exception are te rminologies that are only overt, it is 
incorrect to apply them to what is indicated implic itly. However, in terms of what is 
indicated explicitly in this context, stemming from  the generality, “They should also fully 
complete those, and also perform the activities  of those paths” [from the commentary 
under 2B2A-1B2A-2B2A], if one wonders whether they complete all activities of the 
paths, then there comes the exception, “They do not  actualize the perfect ends of those 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 8: 17-20 March 2008 
 
18 three paths” [from the explanation under 2B2A-1B2A- 2B2A]. Since this is a small topic of 
doubt, I will not elaborate more beyond just this. 
 
The generality and the exception 
 
If we look at the statement (p. 36), ““They should also fully complete those, and also perform the 
activities  of those paths,” this is a generality . The following sentence, “But, not having fully 
completed prayers, not having fully ripened sentien t beings, and not having completely purified the 
buddha land, they do not actualize the perfect end”  says they should not actualize the perfect end if 
they have not completed the three activities; there fore, it is an exception , i.e. what they should not 
do. 
 
Q: On p. 36, in the question,  “‘Bhagavan, on account of what are the wants of the  aspects of the 
three paths the clear realizations of bodhisattvas? ,’” what does “wants” refer to?  
A: We could rephrase the question to say, “Why are the knowers of paths the clear realizations 
of bodhisattvas?” In general, this refers to the ob ject that is being sought. In this context, the 
question has to do with how the clear realizations of bodhisattva are included in the knower of 
paths. This refers to the knowers of all.  
 
 
Wednesday, 19 March 2008 (afternoon) 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 38: 
 
2B2A-1B2A-2B2B-2. Explaining the meaning of the teac hing that bodhisattvas complete the abandonments an d 
realizations of hearers and solitary realizers 
OPINION: It is not the assertion of the Acarya that  “The realizations of the hearers and 
solitary realizers are completed on the first groun d, but the abandonments are completed on 
the eighth ground. The abandonment of the abidance of the afflicted mentality 7 and all 
afflictive obscurations without exception is taken as the reason for the latter [that 
abandonments are completed on the eighth ground].” {57} For, it has been taught that, 
“Having made divisions of the objects of abandonmen t of the path of meditation of the 
three realms into the sixteen afflictions in the Great Commentary [on the Eight Thousand 
Stanza Perfection of Wisdom ], there is a presentation of the ten grounds, Very  Joyous and 
so forth, by way of division of the completely puri fied phenomena on the paths of seeing 
and meditation, also in the Great Commentary .” Hence, it is explained that afflictive 
obscurations even exist on the occasion of the tent h ground. 
 
This opinion says : It is not the assertion of Haribhadra that “The r ealizations of the hearers and 
solitary realizers are completed on the first groun d, but the abandonments are completed on the 
eighth ground.” The reason for the latter is that t he abandonment of the abidance of the 
afflicted mentality and all afflictive obstructions  without exception is on the eighth ground, 
therefore we have to assert that abandonments are c omplete on eighth ground. The Great 
Commentary  says,  “For it has been taught that, ‘Having made division s of the objects of 
abandonment of the path of meditation of the three realms into the sixteen afflictions in the 
Great Commentary [on the Eight Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom ], there is a 
presentation of the ten grounds, Very Joyous and so  forth, by way of division of the completely 
purified phenomena on the paths of seeing and medit ation, also in the Great Commentary .’ 
                                                 
7 This is one of the eight collections of consciousn ess asserted by the Mind-Only School following Asan ga. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 8: 17-20 March 2008 
 
19 Therefore, it is explained that ‘afflictive obscura tions even exist on the occasion of the tenth 
ground.’” 
 
Afflicted mentality : This is an assertion of the Mind-Only Followers o f Scripture (i.e. following 
Asanga). They assert eight collections of conscious nesses, which consist of (1-6) the usual six 
consciousnesses plus (7) the mind-basis-of-all and (8) the afflicted mentality. The afflicted 
mentality takes the mind-basis-of-all as its object  of observation and apprehends it as self-
sufficient, substantially existent.  
 
“Sixteen afflictions:”  
• Six desire realm afflictions : attachment, anger, ignorance, pride, view of the transitory 
collection, view holding to extremes 
• Five form realm afflictions : the above six desire realm afflictions, without a nger 
• Five formless realm afflictions : six desire realm afflictions, without anger  
 
These can be sub-divided into either 46 or 414 affl ictions, as follows:  
 
Divided into forty-six : 
• Six for desire realm  
• Five form realm afflictions, multiplied by four (fo r each of the four levels of the form 
realm) = 20 
• Five formless realm afflictions multiplied by four (each of the four levels of the formless 
realm) = 20  
 
Divided into 414 : 
• First, count the nine realms: desire realm, four fo rm realms, four formless realms  
• First, we leave aside the anger of the desire realm  and think of five afflictions in each of 
the nine realms, making forty-five afflictions. Eac h of these can be sub-divided into nine 
levels: great, middling, small, each divided into g reat, middling, small (45 x 9 = 405). 
Adding the nine levels of anger to these (of the ni ne realms) gives 414.  
 
The nine levels of afflictions are abandoned by the  ten grounds. Therefore, in this person’s 
opinion, it is not  correct to say that all afflictions are abandoned on the eighth ground.  
 
Q:  What is the view of the transitory collection? 
A:  Having observed the I or mine in one’s continuum, this view apprehends the I to be self-
sufficient, substantially existent. 
 
In the view holding to an extreme, “extreme” refers  to the view of permanence or severance (or 
“annihilation”). This is an afflicted view apprehen ding either the extreme of permanence or the 
extreme of  severance.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 39: 
 
 Having refuted that system, the expresser of the o pinion propounds, “Both realizations 
and abandonments are completed on the first ground.  The meaning of having completed 
abandonment is that the afflictive obscurations tha t bind one to cyclic existence are 
abandoned even from the first ground, but the dorma nt afflictive obscurations are not 
abandoned even by hearer and solitary realizer foe- destroyers, because they take a body of 
the nature of mentality from the cause that is the latencies of ignorance. Therefore, both 
realizations and abandonments are completed on the first ground.”  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 8: 17-20 March 2008 
 
20  
RESPONSE: Someone who propounds that is only propou nding an erroneous presentation 
of the objects of abandonment and antidotes, as wel l as the way of abandoning the objects 
of abandonment, (i) because that the hearer and sol itary realizer foe-destroyers have not 
exhaustively abandoned the seeds of the afflictive obscurations has not been taught by any 
of the great charioteers and has been well refuted and (ii) because that is also incorrect by 
way of reasoning.  
 
The expresser of this opinion divides afflictive ob scurations into two:  
1.  those that bind one to cyclic existence, which are abandoned even from the first ground 
2.  dormant afflictive obscurations, which “are not abandoned even by hearer and solitar y 
realizer foe-destroyers.”  
 
Our system : All afflictive obscurations are abandoned by hear er and solitary realizer foe-destroyers. 
Hearer and solitary realizer foe-destroyers have ab andoned the ignorance that is the conception of 
self, but need not have abandoned ignorance that is  the conception of true existence.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , pp. 39-40: 
 
 Thus, since the seeds of acquired afflictive obscu rations would not have been 
exhaustively abandoned on the path of seeing of the  hearers and solitary realizers, it would 
be inappropriate to posit learner arya persons to b e the Sangha Jewel, because, according to 
you, immediately after the path of seeing has been attained, they  the seeds of doubt 
regarding the perfect objects of refuge  would not have been  exhaustively abandoned 
through the path of seeing the seeds of doubt re garding the perfect objects of refuge . {58} 
If you say that it is not established, then it cont radicts [your statement above] that afflictive 
obscurations have not been exhaustively abandoned b y hearer and solitary realizer foe-
destroyers, and [your] stating it as the reason for  the taking of a body of the nature of 
mentality in dependence on the levels of latencies of ignorance is irrelevant, because the 
so-called “levels of latencies of ignorance” that h ave been explained—which are present in 
the continua of hearer and solitary realizer foe-de stroyers, as well as in bodhisattvas who 
have attained mastery—are taken to be knowledge obs curations, not afflictive 
obscurations, by the great charioteers. 
 
OPINION: We also assert that dormant afflictive obs curations are knowledge obscurations. 
RESPONSE: This is even more greatly amazing, becaus e knowledge obscurations are 
inappropriate in any way as objects of abandonment in the analysis of whether or not the 
abandonments of hearers and solitary realizers have  been completed on the first ground. 
Therefore, you should not, like enthroning a fox as  the king, enter into the Buddha’s 
teachings and repudiate them.  
 
This person says that afflictive obscurations that bind one to cyclic exi stence are abandoned on the 
first ground but dormant afflictive obscurations, that is, imprints of afflictions, are not. It shoul d 
thus be possible to posit imprints of acquired affl ictive obscurations on the occasion of the path of 
seeing. We could posit, for example, the seed of do ubt regarding the perfect objects of refuge. We 
could have an arya who has seeds of doubt regarding  the objects of refuge in his continuum, and 
thus it would not be appropriate to posit this pers on as Sangha Jewel.  
 
 
Abandoning doubt  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 8: 17-20 March 2008 
 
21 What is this “seed of doubt?” When we looked at the  sixteen afflictions earlier, doubt is not one of 
them, but it is an object of abandonment of the pat h of seeing. There is doubt re. the four noble 
truths even on the path of seeing, because on the u ninterrupted path of the path of seeing, the direct  
antidote is present, but doubt has not been abandon ed. It would thus seem that there is a fault of an 
arya person who is not the Sangha Jewel, because he  has not abandoned the seeds of doubt 
regarding the perfect objects of refuge. However, a lthough the seeds of doubt have not been 
abandoned, doubt is not present, so we can  posit this person as the Sangha Jewel.  
 After having generated an uninterrupted path, the person will generate a liberated path and then 
arise in subsequent attainment; there is no reason to abide for a long time in an uninterrupted path. 
The relationship between an uninterrupted path and a liberated path is explained using the analogy 
of throwing out a thief: if you find a thief in you r house, you kick him out; this is analogous to the  
uninterrupted path . Then you lock the door, which is analogous to the  liberated path .  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 39: 
 
If you say that it is not established, then it cont radicts [your statement above] that afflictive 
obscurations have not been exhaustively abandoned b y hearer and solitary realizer foe-
destroyers, and [your] stating it as the reason for  the taking of a body of the nature of 
mentality in dependence on the levels of latencies of ignorance is irrelevant, because the 
so-called “levels of latencies of ignorance” that h ave been explained—which are present in 
the continua of hearer and solitary realizer foe-de stroyers, as well as in bodhisattvas who 
have attained mastery—are taken to be knowledge obs curations, not afflictive 
obscurations, by the great charioteers. 
 
“If you say that it is not established” means that the previous reason (that seeds of doubt would not 
have been exhaustively abandoned) is not establishe d. If you say that, “then it contradicts [your 
statement above] that afflictive obscurations have not been exhaustively abandoned by hearer and 
solitary realizer foe-destroyers, and [your] statin g it as the reason for the taking of a body of the 
nature of mentality in dependence on the levels of latencies of ignorance is irrelevant.” This is 
related to the reason, because this person says dor mant afflictive obscurations are not abandoned by 
hearer and solitary realizer foe-destroyers, becaus e they take “a body of the nature of mentality in 
dependence on the levels of latencies of ignorance. ” Our own system says that this is irrelevant, 
because “the so-called ‘levels of latencies of igno rance’ that have been explained—which are 
present in the continua of hearer and solitary real izer foe-destroyers, as well as in bodhisattvas who  
have attained mastery—are taken to be knowledge obs curations, not afflictive obscurations, by the 
great charioteers.” 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 39: 
 
OPINION: We also assert that dormant afflictive obs curations are knowledge obscurations. 
RESPONSE: This is even more greatly amazing, becaus e knowledge obscurations are 
inappropriate in any way as objects of abandonment in the analysis of whether or not the 
abandonments of hearers and solitary realizers have  been completed on the first ground. 
Therefore, you should not, like enthroning a fox as  the king, enter into the Buddha’s 
teachings and repudiate them.  
 
That this person says that he also asserts that dor mant afflictive obscurations to be knowledge 
obscurations is an even more amazing assertion.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 40: 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 8: 17-20 March 2008 
 
22 Hence, [Vimuktisena’s]  Illuminating the Twenty Thousand  teaches:  
 
Furthermore, it has been taught, “That which is a k nower and an abandonment of 
someone—ranging from stream-enterers to solitary re alizers—is a forbearance of 
a bodhisattva who has attained forbearance with reg ards to phenomena that are 
not produced.” What is forbearance? It is the forbe arance of dharma knowledge 
with respect to sufferings 8. From what is this known? If another path  is different, 
then it is because lineage, power, and accumulation  will be superior.  
 
First, we have an explanation from the text Illuminating the Twenty Thousand,  then the opinion of 
a “great lama translator,” after which comes our sy stem’s opinion. This response, that 
abandonments and realizations of hearers and solita ry realizers are completed on the eighth ground, 
is the opinion of this lama translator.  
 In this passage, we should not think that “That wh ich is a knower and an abandonment of 
someone—ranging from stream-enterers to solitary re alizers—is a forbearance of a bodhisattva;” it 
is qualified by being one “ who has attained forbearance with regards to phenom ena that are not 
produced .” Then we have the question, “What is forbearance? ,” and the answer, “It is the 
forbearance of dharma knowledge with respect to suf ferings.” “From what is this known? If another 
path is different, then it is because lineage, powe r, and accumulation will be superior.” “Another 
path” is the hearer and solitary realizer paths; li neage is Mahayana lineage, which is superior to tha t 
of hearers and solitary realizers; and power refers  to the five powers, faith and so forth. 
“Forbearance of a bodhisattva” refers to the forbea rance of dharma knowledge with respect to true 
sufferings.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , 
 
For the functions of a forbearance of a bodhisattva  subsume all functions of the 
realizations 9 of others without exception. That which is a knowe r and an 
abandonment of them is a forbearance of [such a bod hisattva]; the statement, ‘The 
criterion of realization is not just this’ is anoth er enumeration.  
 
The “forbearance of a bodhisattva” refers to the fo rbearance of dharma knowledge with respect to 
sufferings. Why do the functions of a forbearance o f a bodhisattva subsume all functions of the 
realizations of others without exception? It is bec ause the forbearance of a bodhisattva is able to 
abandon the afflictive obscurations as well as the solitary realizers’ conception of apprehendeds as 
external objects. 
 
Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
According to the meaning said above, the explanatio n has been taught to mean that, 
“Having intended that the functions of a forbearanc e of dharma knowledge with respect to 
sufferings of a bodhisattva on the path of seeing s ubsume all functions of the realizations 
of the selflessness of persons of hearers and solit ary realizers without exception, {59} it 
signifies that the abandonments and realizations of  hearers and solitary realizers are 
subsumed in the forbearance of a bodhisattva; this does not signify that all the ability of a 
realization of selflessness of persons without exce ption is complete on the path of seeing.” 
Hence, it is not asserted that both the abandonment s and realizations of hearers and solitary 
                                                 
8 This is one of the sixteen instants of forbearance  and knowledge of dharma and subsequent knowledge w ith respect to 
the four noble truths. 
9 Rtog pa  emended to read rtogs pa  in accordance with the explanation below. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 8: 17-20 March 2008 
 
23 realizers, or either of them, is complete on the fi rst ground. Then what? If one asserts that 
those indicated to be the objects of abandonment—th e afflictive obscurations in the case of 
the hearers and solitary realizers, and the uncommo n knowledge obscurations of the 
conceptions of apprehendeds of the solitary realize rs—are abandoned exhaustively, then, 
by intending that they have the ability that is abl e to abandon them on the path of seeing, it 
is explained that the functions of a forbearance of  a bodhisattva subsume all functions of 
the realization of others. If the reason for the pr esence of such ability lies in another path 
mentioned above [in Illuminating the Twenty Thousand  cited above]—the exalted wisdom 
directly realizing all phenomena as being empty of true existence—being superior to that 
of hearers and solitary realizers, then the reason “because of being superior to the hearers 
and solitary realizers by means of possessing the M ahayana lineage, very sharp powers of 
faith and so forth, and the vast accumulation of me rit, in addition to that” is stated. 
 
Here, there is an explanation according to Illuminating the Twenty Thousand , after which there is an 
explanation of a great lama translator, which is th en followed by the assertion of our own system. 
 
Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
 In dependence on the teaching in the commentary of  the  Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum (Mahayanottaratantrasastra ) that the very knower of paths that is 
included within non-conceptual exalted wisdom arise s naturally on the eighth ground, a 
great lama translator says that the paths of the he arers and solitary realizers are generated 
in a manner of reflections on the eighth ground, no t before, because there is the doubt of 
falling into becoming hearers or solitary realizers  [before the eighth ground]. 
 
This response, that the abandonments and realizatio ns of hearers and solitary realizers are 
completed on the eighth ground, is the opinion of t he lama translator. The reason given is “the paths 
of the hearers and solitary realizers are generated  in a manner of reflections on the eighth ground, 
not before, because there is the doubt of falling i nto becoming hearers or solitary realizers [before 
the eighth ground].”  
 Previously, Haribhadra’s Clear Meaning  (2B2A-1B2A-2B2A, p. 36) said: “They should also 
fully complete those, and also perform the activiti es  of those paths.  But, not having fully completed 
prayers, not having fully ripened sentient beings, and not having completely purified the buddha 
land, they do not actualize the perfect end. Becaus e of that, those of bodhisattvas are called ‘the 
very knowers of aspects of paths.’” Prior to that, it was said “Advice to those possessing pure 
wisdom.” Who are those possessing pure wisdom? They  are bodhisattvas, specifically, bodhisattva 
aryas, and more specifically, bodhisattva aryas on the eighth ground. The giver of the advice is a 
supreme emanation body. This advice is mainly given  to the bodhisattva aryas. There is a third 
party, those who might generate doubts. The buddhas  do not have doubts, but this third party might 
have doubts about bodhisattva aryas falling into be coming hearers or solitary realizers prior to the 
eighth ground. The third party who hears this advic e given by a supreme emanation body to the 
bodhisattva aryas have a smaller doubt about the po ssibility of bodhisattva aryas falling into 
becoming hearers or solitary realizers before the e ighth ground, and they have a greater doubt about 
bodhisattva aryas falling into becoming hearers or solitary realizers on the eighth ground. This 
doubt does not belong to the supreme emanation body  or the bodhisattvas themselves, but to the 
third party. In order to dispel this doubt, the bud dha gives this advice. Thereby, these persons are 
made to understand that bodhisattvas possess pure w isdom and pure method. When these persons 
hear the advice given by a supreme emanation body, their misapprehensions are dispelled and they 
relax. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 8: 17-20 March 2008 
 
24  “The paths of hearers and solitary realizers are g enerated in a manner of reflections” means that 
the paths of hearers and solitary realizers are not  actually generated, but are generated in a manner 
of reflections.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p, 41: 
 
QUALM: How is “What is forbearance? It is the forbe arance of dharma knowledge with 
respect to sufferings” [in Illuminating the Twenty Thousand  cited above] explained?  
RESPONSE: It indicates the object to be known—the f orbearance that is included within 
the path of the hearers; it does not indicate the k nower—the uncommon forbearance of a 
bodhisattva. Thus, it is asserted that the abandonm ents and realizations of hearers and 
solitary realizers are completed on the eighth grou nd. 
 
There is the object to be known and the knower . The object to be known is the forbearance that is  
included within the path of the hearers; the knower  is the uncommon forbearance of a bodhisattva. 
Here, what is indicated is the object to be known. Thus, it is asserted that the abandonments and 
realizations of hearers and solitary realizers are completed on the eighth ground. This assertion is 
related to the previous explanation that the functi ons of a forbearance of a bodhisattva subsume all 
functions of the realization of others. The reason for saying that that the abandonments and 
realizations of hearers and solitary realizers are completed on the eighth ground is mentioned in 
Illuminating the Twenty Thousand . 
 
 
Thursday, 20 March, 2008 
 
The line “advice to those possessing pure wisdom” ( 2B2A-1B2A-2B2A: Meaning of the words, p. 
36) means advice regarding wisdom to those possessi ng pure wisdom, given by a supreme 
emanation body. There is also advice regarding meth od, which comes later. 
 
 
Our own system  
 
The following is the presentation of our own system : 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p, 41: 
 
2B2A-1B2A-2B2B-2. Explaining the meaning of the teac hing that bodhisattvas complete the abandonments an d 
realizations of hearers and solitary realizers (con tinued) 
 
{60} The meaning of this citation from Illuminating the Twenty Thousand  is as follows: if 
someone, such as a bodhisattva abiding on the forbe arance level of the path of preparation, 
were to principally make effort in abandoning the s eeds of the afflictive obscurations, then 
the measure of having attained the path of seeing w ould be his having been able to 
exhaustively abandon the afflictive obscurations an d to attain the liberated path in which 
they have been abandoned.  
 
This says that a bodhisattva abiding on the forbear ance level of the path of preparation could  
principally make effort to abandon the seeds of aff lictive obscurations. If a bodhisattva were to do 
this , then the measure of his having attained the path of seeing would be that he had been able to 
exhaustively abandon the afflictive obscurations an d to attain the liberated path in which they had 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 8: 17-20 March 2008 
 
25 been abandoned. However, according to our own syste m, a bodhisattva abiding on the forbearance 
level of the path of preparation does not  principally make effort to abandon the seeds of af flictive 
obscurations.  
 
Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
Hence, it indicates the ability and force of the pa th with the mode of having held to the 
extreme of permanence attained if someone abiding o n the dharma forbearance of the 
Mahayana path of seeing were to also make effort in  that way, just as explained before. If 
it is  It not being  like that, then – (i) the exhaustive abandonment of the seeds of aff lictive 
obscurations (by a bodhisattva arya who has not pre viously traversed the Hinayana paths) 
and (ii) its liberated path – would  do  not arise until he has attained buddhahood. This a lso 
is the assertion of the Acarya.  
 
The extreme of permanence has the sense of a possib ility. According to our own system, a 
bodhisattva who has who has not previously traverse d the Hinayana paths abandons all the afflictive 
obscurations and the knowledge obscurations upon at taining buddhahood, not before. A bodhisattva 
does not principally make effort to abandon the see ds of the afflictive obscurations, but  if a 
bodhisattva were to make effort to abandon those se eds, he would have the ability to abandon them 
before attaining buddhahood. However, it is not lik e this. Rather, the exhaustive abandonment of 
the seeds of afflictive obscurations (by a bodhisat tva arya who has not previously traversed the 
Hinayana paths) and its liberated path do not arise  until he has attained buddhahood. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 41: 
2B2A-1B2A-2B2B-3. Having identified the perfect end , explaining how it is actualized 
QUALM: With regards to that, what is the perfect en d? How is it actualized?  
RESPONSE: It is asserted that (i) by taking the per fect end to be mere thusness, the 
meaning of actualizing it is taken to be placed in meditative equipoise in a manner of not 
rising again and (ii) by taking the cessation that is a dharmata free from stains to be the 
perfect end, attaining that is to actualize it. The se assertions would mean “One should not 
actualize buddhahood until buddhahood is attained,”  whereas  whereby  it is difficult for 
that  them  to be correct. This is because, although referring  to the nirvana of severance, that 
contradicts the implied teaching that one should ac tualize it after having completed 
[prayers], ripened [sentient beings] and purified [ one’s buddha land]. 
 
First assertion 
• Someone asserts : The perfect end is mere thusness; the meaning of actualizing the perfect end 
is to be placed in meditative equipoise in a manner  of not rising again.  
• Refutation : “To be placed in meditative equipoise in a manner  of not rising again” cannot be 
achieved until buddhahood is attained. While one ca n be placed in meditative equipoise, only 
buddhas are placed in meditative equipoise in a man ner of not rising again. Therefore, this 
assertion is incorrect. 
 
Second assertion 
• Someone else asserts : The cessation that is a dharmata free from stains  is the perfect end, and 
to attain that cessation is to actualize the perfec t end.  
• Refutation : The attainment of a cessation that is a dharmata free from stains only occurs upon 
attaining buddhahood.  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 8: 17-20 March 2008 
 
26 A “nirvana of severance” is a cessation in which th e afflictive obscurations have been abandoned. 
This nirvana of severance is a Hinayana nirvana. Th ese assertions contradict the teaching that a 
bodhisattva should only actualize the perfect end a fter having completed prayers, ripened sentient 
beings, and purified one’s buddha land. 
 
Another opinion 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 41: 
 
 Someone makes a distinction between being able or not being able to (i) place in 
meditative equipoise on mere thusness in a manner o f not rising and (ii) set in meditative 
equipoise on the thusness free from stains by way o f not rising. This claim is suitable as an 
object of laughter.  
 
The perfect end indicated here has three attributes : 
1.  A bodhisattva arya definite in the Mahayana lineage  is able  to actualize  the perfect end 
before having completed the three activities (havin g completed prayers, ripened sentient 
beings, and purified one’s buddha land) 
2.  Although such a bodhisattva is able to do so, he does not actualize  the perfect end before 
completing the three activities 
3.  He actualizes the perfect end after having complete d the three activities. 
 
• Assertion : There is a distinction between being able or not being able to (i) place in meditative 
equipoise on mere thusness in a manner of not risin g and (ii) set in meditative equipoise on the 
thusness free from stains by way of not rising. In other words, this person says that if one is 
able to do both of those, one should actualize the perfect end. On the other hand, if one is not 
able to do so, one should not actualize the perfect  end. 
• Refutation : Only buddhas have the ability to place in meditat ive equipoise on mere thusness in 
a manner of not rising and to set in meditative equ ipoise on the thusness free from stains by 
way of not rising. Hence, bodhisattvas do not have this ability, whereby it is incorrect to make 
a distinction between those bodhisattvas who are or  are not able to do this. 
 
Q: What is the difference between (i) place in medi tative equipoise on mere thusness in a manner of 
not rising, and (ii) set in meditative equipoise on  the thusness free from stains by way of not rising ? 
A: They are the very same. The first mentions “mere  thusness” whereas the second mentions 
“thusness free from stains.” Mere thusness is empti ness, for example, the emptiness of a vase. 
“Thusness free from stains” probably refers to true  cessations, not just any emptiness.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , pp. 41-42:  
 
 Therefore, these oral instructions are instruction s mainly for persons definite in the 
Mahayana lineage; further, the instructions are to begin from generating the mind 
[aspiring] towards supreme enlightenment, {61} with  the exception, “Do not actualize the 
perfect end on any occasion where the three [proper ties] 10  have not been completed.” In 
terms of ordinary disciples, hearer and solitary re alizer foe destroyers , the instructions are, 
having been roused from the sphere of peace , to begin from generating the mind [aspiring] 
towards the Mahayana, with the exception, “Do not a ctualize the perfect end from now 
onwards in any interval where the three [properties ] have not been completed.”  
 
                                                 
10  Annotated in accordance with page 62 of this Tibet an text. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 8: 17-20 March 2008 
 
27 These instructions are explicitly given to those wh o are definite in the Mahayana lineage, but 
implicitly they are also given to ordinary disciple s – that is, to hearer and solitary realizer foe 
destroyers. The instructions are, after having been  roused from the sphere of peace, “to begin from 
generating the mind [aspiring] towards the Mahayana , with the exception, ‘Do not actualize the 
perfect end from now onwards in any interval where the three [properties] have not been 
completed.’” 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 42: 
 
Understand that if it is  were  impossible for anyone to be able to actualize the perfect end 
during that time, explaining such instructions on t his occasion would be without purpose.  
 
“During that time” refers to the period from having  generated the mind of enlightenment for as long 
as one has not completed the three properties. Sinc e there is  someone – a bodhisattva arya – who is 
able to actualize the perfect end before completing  the three properties, this advice to not actualize  
the perfect end is given before completing the thre e properties.  
 
Q: Does a bodhisattva definite in the Mahayana line age attain liberation on the eighth ground? 
A: A bodhisattva definite in the Mahayana lineage a ttains liberation only upon attaining 
buddhahood. 
 
Q: When is a bodhisattva able to actualize the perf ect end? 
A: He is able to do so from the first ground onward . Thus, having attained the path of seeing, he is 
able to actualize the perfect end. Since he has the  ability on the first ground, it is needless to say  that 
he has it on the eighth ground. 
 
Q: Is a bodhisattva actually able to abandon all th e afflictive obscurations on the first ground? 
A: He is able  to exhaustively abandon all the afflictive obscura tions and actualize the perfect end on 
the first ground, but he does not do that.  
 
Q: Does the text not say that a bodhisattva does no t exhaustively abandon all the afflictive 
obscurations until he attains buddhahood? 
A: It is our own system’s assertion that a bodhisat tva exhaustively abandons the afflictive 
obscurations only upon attaining buddhahood. Howeve r, our own system also says that if  a 
bodhisattva were to principally make effort in aban doning the afflictive obscurations, he could do 
so on the first ground. He is able to do that; othe rwise, if he were not able to actualize the perfect 
end on the first ground, what would be the point of  this advice not to actualize the perfect end 
before having completed the three properties? 
 
Q: Does this mean a bodhisattva could abandon the i nnate afflictive obscurations on the first 
ground? Does this not occur on the path of meditati on? 
A: A bodhisattva is able to abandon the innate affl ictive obscurations on the path of seeing if he 
wants to, but he does not do that. He abandons them  on the path of meditation.  
 
Hinayana and Mahayana views of the perfect end 
 
Two things that need to be understood:  
1.  The measure, or criterion, of actualizing the perfe ct end indicated here from the point of 
view of the Hinayana 
2.  The measure, or criterion, of actualizing the perfe ct end indicated here from the point of 
view of the Mahayana 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 8: 17-20 March 2008 
 
28  
The perfect end indicated here  is: the sphere of pacification of pervasive compou nded suffering. 
 
Q: What is pervasive compounded suffering? 
A: It is the contaminated aggregates. Someone who i s abiding in a nirvana with remainder abides 
together with contaminated aggregates. When he atta ins a nirvana without remainder, he separates 
from contaminated aggregates. His attainment of a n irvana without remainder occurs 
simultaneously with entering into meditative equipo ise on the perfect end.  
 
• The measure of actualizing the perfect end indicate d here from the point of view of the 
Hinayana  is: to enter absorption in the sphere of pacificat ion of pervasive compounded 
suffering in a manner of not rising again, in relia nce on attitude. 
• This measure is mutually inclusive with actualizing  the perfect end without having completed 
the three properties: having fully completed prayer s, having fully ripened sentient beings, and 
having completely purified one’s buddha land. 
 
• The measure of actualizing the perfect end indicate d here from the point of view of the 
Mahayana  is: to place in meditative equipoise in a manner o f not rising again in the sphere of 
pacification of pervasive compounded suffering. Thu s, the main difference between the two 
measures is that the first mentions “in reliance on  attitude.” 
• This measure is mutually inclusive with actualizing  the perfect end after having performed the 
three: having fully completed prayers, having fully  ripened sentient beings, and having 
completely purified one’s buddha land.  
 
We need to know what the perfect end indicated here  is, the three attributes of the perfect end 
indicated here, and the measure of actualizing the perfect end in terms of Hinayana and in terms of 
Mahayana. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 42: 
 
QUALM: In that case, what is the perfect end? How i s it actualized?  
RESPONSE: In general, even thusness is the perfect end. When arya bodhisattvas have 
actualized the perfect end, they must be in direct meditative equipoise on thusness. 
However, here it is the very sphere of pacification  of pervasive compounded suffering.  
 
“In general, even thusness is the perfect end.” Thu sness is emptiness, and therefore even emptiness 
is the perfect end. For this reason, the perfect en d must be qualified saying “the perfect end 
indicated here .” 
 
Criteria for actualizing the perfect end in terms o f Hinayana lineage-bearers 
 
Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
The setting in absorption in the sphere of peace by  hearer and solitary realizer foe-
destroyers (for up to an eon in a manner of not ris ing again in reliance on attitude, due to 
having been captivated by the bliss of peace prior to entering absorption) is the meaning of 
having actualized the perfect end in terms of Hinay ana lineage-bearers themselves.  
 
This criteria set out here is slightly different fr om my previous explanation, in that Gyeltsab Je add s 
the words “for up to an eon.” Keep that in mind.  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 8: 17-20 March 2008 
 
29 Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
Such trainees definite in the Hinayana lineage, eve n if given the previously explained 
instructions right from the start, will also degene rate from the lower lineage.  
 
Here we are discussing someone definite in the Hina yana lineage. If, right from the start, such a 
person is given the instruction “Do not actualize t he perfect end before the three properties have 
been completed,” he will even degenerate from the l ower lineage. In other words, if he is given this 
instruction before he enters the Hinayana path, he will not even enter the Hinayana path.  
 
Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
Having risen from the sphere of peace, the person w ho has generated a mind [aspiring] 
towards supreme enlightenment will enter absorption  on that again and again through the 
force of previous habituation. However, analytical ones should understand that they lack 
even the mere stain of giving up the Mahayana gener ated mind [of enlightenment]. 
 
A Hinayana person, having risen from the sphere of peace, generates a mind of enlightenment but, 
in spite of this, occasionally enters absorption me rely through the force of his previous habituation 
with it. However, he does not enter absorption in r eliance upon the attitude, that is, the wish to ent er 
absorption due to being captivated by the bliss of absorption, and he does not give up the Mahayana 
generated mind of enlightenment.  
 
Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
 {62} According to the assertions of the great char ioteers who accept that true cessations 
are ultimate truths, the perfect end indicated in t his context of the Perfection of Wisdom 
Sutras should only be explained to be solely thusne ss.  
 
“The great charioteers” are Asanga and Nagarjuna. T hey say that the perfect end in this context is 
just thusness.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , 
 
The assertion of this Acarya who composed the comme ntary is, as explained above, also 
the assertion of Acarya Dharmamitra.  
 
“This Acarya” is Acarya Haribhadra. His assertion i s different from that of the great charioteers, in 
that it is based on the Autonomist school; he says that the perfect end is the pacification of 
pervasive compounded suffering. His assertion is th e same as that of Acarya Dharmamitra. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , 
 
In view of the expression “bearing the support of n ot actualizing suchness,” those who 
identify “the end that is the absence of self in a person, peace itself” as the perfect end and, 
as proof of that, cite the passage with the reason of not indicating the path of meditation 11  
have realized well the Acarya’s thought, but failed  to examine the saying that Dharmamitra 
asserted the perfect end to be the nirvana of sever ance.  
                                                 
11   Smon  emended to read sgom  in accordance with page 46 of the Drepung Loseling  Library Society’s 1996 edition of 
Ornament of the Essence . 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 8: 17-20 March 2008 
 
30  
Somebody says that Dharmamitra asserts that the per fect end is the nirvana of severance, but this is 
not correct. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 42: 
 
QUALM: Are bodhisattvas who have not previously tra versed the Hinayana path able or 
not able to actualize the perfect end before comple ting the three properties? What is it like 
when they have actualized it? 
 
RESPONSE: In asserting that they actualize it, if t hey are able to do so immediately after 
having attained the Mahayana path of seeing, what n eed to mention about the eighth-
grounders? However, the misgivings  regarding seventh-grounders and below actualizing it 
is smaller ; the misgivings  regarding eighth-grounders is greater , whereby, having attained 
the eighth ground, the Victors rouse them from cess ation. That also is merely having held 
as the extreme of permanence; having attained the e ighth ground, how can it be possible to 
actualize the perfect end before completing the thr ee properties? This means that if they 
were to actualize it, then, the mind having been we ll induced by the bliss of pacification of 
pervaded compounded suffering upon thusness, they w ould enter absorption for an eon or 
more in the sphere of peace. How can there be the m isgiving that, although the exception is 
to actualize the perfect end after having completed  the three [properties], due to being  
captivated by that bliss, they will come under its influence?  
 
It is not possible for a bodhisattva to actualize t he perfect end prior to completing the three 
properties. If a bodhisattva were to actualize the perfect end before completing the three properties,  
then, his mind having been well induced by the blis s of the pacification of pervaded compounded 
suffering upon thusness, he would enter absorption for an eon or more in the sphere of peace.  
 
Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
 Hearers and solitary realizers who have risen from  the sphere of peace and entered the 
Mahayana actualize the perfect end from time to tim e, nevertheless this is nothing but mere 
habituation; {63} the impelling of the thought, “I shall place myself in meditative 
equipoise on this for a long time” does not even sl ightly exist. Since these topics are very 
difficult to realize, it is only appropriate for an alytical ones, without being decisive in 
contexts where the generation of doubt is appropria te, to analyze them well.  
 
That hearers and solitary realizers who have risen from the sphere of peace and entered the 
Mahayana actualize the perfect end from time to tim e occurs only due to mere habituation. 
 
The intelligent should analyze these points well.  
 
END 
 
 
 
No teachings from Friday, March 21 until Monday, Ma rch 31 for spring break. 
 