Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/Transcript pdf/ORN_GTTnotes_09.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:11.564304
================================================================================

Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 9: 31 March–3 April, 2008 
 
1 Masters Program: Ornament for Clear Realization 
Notes on commentary by Geshe Tenzin Tenphel 
 
Monday afternoon, 17 March 2008 
 
(Note: there were no teachings over the Easter week end and the following week) 
 
Corrections to Ornament of the Essence : 
 
The following corrections are to be inserted in the  previous notes (based on what it says in Jetsun 
Chokyi Gyeltsen’s General Meaning and later on in Gyeltsab Je’s Ornament of the Essence , it 
seems that there is a spelling mistake in the Tibet an text). 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 40 (2B2A-1B2A-2B2B-2: Explaining the meaning o f the teaching that 
bodhisattvas complete the abandonments and realizat ions of hearers and solitary realizers): 
 
(In the paragraph beginning “According to the meani ng said above….”): 
 
Then what? If [a bodhisattva] wishes to exhaustivel y abandon  one asserts that  those 
indicated to be the objects of abandonment—the affl ictive obscurations in the case of the 
hearers and solitary realizers, and the uncommon kn owledge obscurations of the 
conceptions of apprehendeds of the solitary realize rs –are abandoned exhaustively , then, 
by intending that he has  they have  the ability that is able to abandon them on the pa th of 
seeing, it is explained that the functions of a for bearance of a bodhisattva subsumes all 
functions of the realization of others.  
 
p. 41 (paragraph beginning “{60} The meaning of thi s citation…”):  
 
Hence, it indicates the ability and force of the pa th with the mode of having held to the 
extreme of permanence  in a manner of examining a possibility  attained if someone abiding 
on the dharma forbearance of the Mahayana path of s eeing were to also make effort in that 
way, just as explained before. If it is  It not being  like that, then—(i) the exhaustive 
abandonment of the seeds of afflictive obscurations  (by a bodhisattva arya who has not 
previously traversed the Hinayana paths) and (ii) i ts liberated path—would  do  not arise 
until he has attained buddhahood.  
 
Therefore, cross out the words “The extreme of perm anence has the sense of a possibility ” in the 
commentary by Geshe Tenzin Tenphel.  
 
p. 42 (2B2A-1B2A-2B2B-3: Having identified the perf ect end, explaining how it is actualized; the 
paragraph beginning “Therefore, these oral instruct ions…”): 
 
In terms of ordinary disciples, hearer and solitary  realizer foe destroyers having risen from 
the sphere of peace,  the instructions are to begin from generating the mind [aspiring] 
towards the Mahayana, with the exception, “Do not a ctualize the perfect end from now 
onwards in any interval where the three [properties ] have not been completed.”  
 
and: 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 9: 31 March–3 April, 2008 
 
2 RESPONSE: In asserting that they actualize it, if t hey are able to do so immediately after 
having attained the Mahayana path of seeing, what n eed to mention about the eighth-
grounders? However, the misgivings  regarding seventh-grounders and below actualizing it 
is smaller ; the misgivings  regarding eighth-grounders is greater , whereby, having attained 
the eighth ground, the Victors rouse them from cess ation. That also is merely having held 
as the extreme of perma nence  examining a possibility ; having attained the eighth ground, 
how can it be possible to actualize the perfect end  before completing the three properties? 
…. How can there be the misgiving that, although th e exception is to actualize the perfect 
end after having completed the three [properties], due to being  captivated by that bliss, 
they will come under its influence?  
 
Questions and Answers 
 
Q: What does “another path” in the following passag es refer to ( Ornament of the Essence , p. 40)? 
 
Hence, [Vimuktisena’s]  Illuminating the Twenty Thousand  teaches:  
 
Furthermore, it has been taught, “That which is a k nower and an abandonment of 
someone—ranging from stream-enterers to solitary re alizers—is a forbearance of 
a bodhisattva who has attained forbearance with reg ards to phenomena that are 
not produced.” What is forbearance? It is the forbe arance of dharma knowledge 
with respect to sufferings . From what is this known? If another path  is different, 
then it is because lineage, power, and accumulation  will be superior.  
 
If the reason for the presence of such ability lies  in another path  mentioned above [in 
Illuminating the Twenty Thousand  cited above]—the exalted wisdom directly realizing  all 
phenomena as being empty of true existence—being su perior to that of hearers and solitary 
realizers, then the reason “because of being superi or to the hearers and solitary realizers by 
means of possessing the Mahayana lineage, very shar p powers of faith and so forth, and 
the vast accumulation of merit, in addition to that ” is stated. 
 
A: “Another path” refers to the exalted wisdom real izing emptiness. 
 
Bodhisattvas: the perfect end and the two obscurati ons  
 
Q: Why is to not actualize the perfect end consider ed an exception in the case of a bodhisattva, as a 
bodhisattva should never actualize the perfect end before completing the three properties? 
A: In general, a bodhisattva would not actualize th e perfect end without having completed the three 
properties. Only having completed the three propert ies does a bodhisattva actualize the perfect end. 
Because of this, it is considered to be an exceptio n. If a bodhisattva were to actualize the perfect e nd 
prior to completing the three properties, it would not be an exception because hearers and solitary 
realizers also actualize the perfect end without ha ving actualized the three properties.  
 
Q: Although a bodhisattva could actualize the perfe ct end from the first ground, the thought never 
arises in his mind to actualize the perfect end pri or to completing the three properties. Therefore, i t 
seems that the exception should be that the bodhisa ttva would actualize the perfect end prior to 
completing the three properties. 
A: Here, we are not talking about a bodhisattva act ualizing the perfect end before completing the 
three properties but are talking about the ability  of a bodhisattva to actualize the perfect end befo re 
completing the three properties. Although a bodhisa ttva arya has the ability to do so, he does not do 
so. Why? Because if he were to actualize the perfec t end before completing the three properties, the 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 9: 31 March–3 April, 2008 
 
3 welfare of sentient beings would be interrupted. Th erefore, he actualizes the perfect end only after 
completing the three properties, whereby the welfar e of sentient beings is enacted effortlessly and 
spontaneously. 
 
Q: But if a bodhisattva can abandon all the afflict ive obscurations right from the first ground, why 
would he not do this? 
A: It is not better for a bodhisattva to abandon th e afflictive obscurations on the first ground rathe r 
than on the buddha ground, because if a bodhisattva  were to abandon all the afflictive obscurations 
on the first ground, he would become a foe destroye r. If a bodhisattva were to manifest a meditative 
stabilization that is either a preparation to a con centration or an actual concentration, the afflicti ons 
would not need to be suppressed. It is still possib le that within such a meditative stabilization, the  
afflictions of the desire realm can manifest. What is the purpose of manifesting the desire realm 
afflictions? It is in order to enact the welfare of  others. For a bodhisattva, even if attachment, for  
example, becomes manifest, it does not harm the gen eration of a path. In the case of a Hinayanist, if 
attachment or other afflictions manifest, they will  harm his progress on the path. In the case of 
ordinary beings, there are people with different di spositions. There are some who, even engaging in 
a lot of contemplation, are able to remain relaxed and calm, whereas others become tense and 
nervous. Bodhisattvas have a vast mind, such that e ven if the afflictions arise, they do not harm 
their mind. Likewise, some ordinary people become a gitated when even slight adverse conditions 
arise and other people remain calm no matter what h appens to them. Of course, a bodhisattva on the 
first ground is in a very different situation than an ordinary being. In short, bodhisattvas do not 
intentionally abandon the afflictive obscurations; they use them as a branch for enacting others’ 
welfare.  
 
Q: It seems that in this system, the afflictive obs curations are abandoned and the perfect end that is  
the pacification of pervasive compounded suffering is achieved upon attaining buddhahood. 
However, according to Prasangika, the afflictive ob scurations are abandoned on the eighth ground. 
In this case, the abandonment of the afflictive obs curations would not be the perfect end described 
in this text. 
A: The Prasangika system asserts that one starts to  abandon the knowledge obscurations only after 
the afflictive obscurations have been abandoned. Th e Svatantrikas say that the afflictive 
obscurations and knowledge obscurations are abandon ed together. However, the illustrations of the 
afflictive obscurations and knowledge obscurations in the two schools are very different. According 
to the Svatantrika school, the conception of a self  is an afflictive obscuration, whereas the 
conception of true existence is a knowledge obscura tion. In this school, the conception of a self is a  
conception of a self-sufficient substantially exist ent person. In the Prasangika school, a conception 
of a self is pervaded by being an afflictive obscur ation. The imprints or latencies of the conception 
of a self, which are the appearance of true existen ce, are knowledge obscurations. According to the 
Prasangikas, the reason that there is the appearanc e of true existence on the three pure grounds—the 
eighth, ninth, and tenth grounds—is because there i s still conception.  
 However, it is awkward to say there is still the a ppearance of true existence at the end of the 
continuum of a sentient being, because at this poin t, the direct antidote to the knowledge 
obscurations is manifest. It is also awkward to say  that there is no appearance of true existence 
because there is still conception at the end of the  continuum of a sentient being. The conclusion is t o 
say: true existence appears, but there is no appear ance of true existence.  
 Since in the Prasangika system, a bodhisattva who has previously entered the Hinayana path and 
attained foe destroyer and then enters the Mahayana  has already abandoned the afflictive 
obscurations when he enters the Mahayana, what does  he abandon from the first to the seventh 
grounds? He still has a lot to do on the impure gro unds. Although he does not generate the direct 
antidote to the conception of true existence, he st ill has to gather the accumulations. Therefore, he 
progresses through the seven grounds by gathering t he accumulations. This also happens on the 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 9: 31 March–3 April, 2008 
 
4 paths of accumulation and preparation. Therefore, s uch a bodhisattva enters the Mahayana from the 
path of accumulation and progresses through the pat hs of accumulation and preparation because he 
needs to gather the accumulations. Then on the firs t ground he needs to accumulate merit and train 
in dexterity in meditative stabilization. Only havi ng done this can he transfer to the next ground. 
This is explained in detail in the fifth chapter of  the Ornament . 
 
Imputational natures in Chittamatra  
 
Q: In the Chittamatra system, if the existent imput ational factor—the meaning generality of form—
does not exist by way of its own character, how doe s it exist? 
A: An imputational factor such as the basis adhered  to by the conception apprehending form does 
not exist by way of its own character but exists by  being merely imputed by conception. Form does 
not appear to conception apprehending form in the w ay that form appears to an eye consciousness. 
The form that is a basis adhered to by the concepti on apprehending it is a superimposition. It is a 
superimposition of the conception apprehending it. While form itself is not a superimposition, the 
basis adhered to by the conception apprehending for m is a superimposition.  
 
Q: We can also posit an imputational nature that is  non-existent. How is a non-existent imputational 
factor related to an existent imputational factor?  
A: It is not necessary to talk about a sequential g eneration of these two. In the case of a particular  
form that appears to my eye consciousness, the form  exists before I look at it, but when I look at it,  
two imputational factors can arise: one in relation  to the entity and one in relation to the attribute . If 
we talk about different objects, we can posit a dif ference in time in relation to imputational natures . 
But in the case of a single object, the imputationa l nature that is a superimposition with respect to 
the entity and the imputational nature that is a su perimposition with respect to the attributes arise 
simultaneously. For example, a certain form comes i nto existence and we have a conception 
apprehending form. Is there a difference in time be tween the establishment of the form and the 
conception apprehending form? There is not, in that  as soon as the form is established, there is a 
conception apprehending form. It appears to our min d that there is a time difference between these 
two, in that it seems that first we see form and th en we think about form. However, in general we 
cannot say this. 
 
Q: It seems that there is an existent imputational nature and right after that, there is a non-existen t 
imputational nature.  
A: It is not that first there is an existent imputa tional factor and then a non-existent imputational 
factor, such as the form that exists by way of its own character as the basis for imputing the 
convention “form.” 
 
 
Ornament of the Essence,  p. 43, says: 
2B2A-1B2A-2C. How the clear realizations of buddhas  are included within the exalted knower of all aspe cts  
2B2A-1B2A-2C1. Question 
COMMENTARY 
“Bhagavan, on account of what are the exalted knowe rs of all aspects [those] of Tathagata 
Foe-destroyer Samyak Sambuddhas (the one-gone-thus,  foe-destroyer, perfectly complete 
enlightened ones)?” 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 9: 31 March–3 April, 2008 
 
5 EXPLANATION 
“Bhagavan, on account of what are the exalted knowe rs of all aspects [those] of 
Tathagata Foe-destroyer Samyak Sambuddhas (the one- gone-thus, foe-destroyer, 
perfectly complete enlightened ones)?” 
2B2A-1B2A-2C2. Reply 
COMMENTARY  
"Subhuti, phenomena are strongly expressed by (i) w hatever aspects there are, (ii) 
whatever marks there are, and (iii) whatever signs  there are 1. The Tathagatas comprehend 
those aspects, those marks, and those signs; becaus e of that, [those ] of the Tathagata Foe-
destroyer Samyak Sambuddhas are called the exalted knowers of all aspects." 
 
EXPLANATION 
Having called out, “ Subhuti,” phenomena —ranging from forms to the exalted knowers of 
all aspects— are strongly expressed by (i) whatever aspects ther e are , the entities, (ii) 
whatever marks there are , the results, and (iii) whatever signs there are , the causes. 
The Tathagatas comprehend those aspects designating conventions and so forth; 
because of that  reason, [those clear realizations of the Tathagata  Foe-destroyer Samyak 
Sambuddhas are called the exalted knowers of all as pects ]. {64}  
 
“Aspects” refers to entities, “marks” to results, a nd “signs” to causes. Because of this reason—that 
tathagatas comprehend those aspects  designating conventions and so forth, it is said th at exalted 
knowers of all aspects are those of tathagata foe d estroyer samyak sambuddhas.  
 
Q: What is the meaning of “strongly expressed”? 
A: “Strongly expressed” ( rab tu brjod pa ) means clearly expressed, correctly expressed, and  
unmistakenly expressed. 
 
Q: When the text says “The Tathagatas comprehend th ose aspects designating conventions and so 
forth,” designating conventions  implies conceptuality, but buddhas do not have con ceptuality. 
A: This does not say that tathagatas designate conv entions, that is, that they superimpose by way of 
designating conventions. Rather it says that they c omprehend those aspects designating 
conventions. In general, tathagatas designate conve ntions, for example, His Holiness can address 
me, saying “Geshe Tenphel.” Even Buddha Shakyamuni designates conventions when he says 
“Subhuti,” “Shariputra,” “Maudgalyana,” and so fort h.  
 “They comprehend those aspects designating convent ions” is said in the context of the third 
wheel of Dharma, in which the three natures—imputat ional natures, other-powered natures, and 
thoroughly established natures—are taught. Imputati onal natures are superimpositions designated 
by conventions.  
 
Ornament of the Essence, p. 43, says: 
2B2A-1B2B. Stating the proof from the brief Mother 
 
This outline comes from p. 33 (Tibetan text p. 48),  which says: 
2B2A-1B2. Stating passages of proof 
2B2A-1B2A. Stating the proof from the medium Mother 
2B2A-1B2B. Stating the proof from the brief Mother 
                                                 
1 Gang ngag  emended to read gang dag  in accordance with page 47 of the Drepung Loseling  Library Society’s 1996 
edition of Ornament of the Essence .  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 9: 31 March–3 April, 2008 
 
6 2B2A-1B2C. Making referral to the proof from the ex tensive Mother 
 
Ornament of the Essence,  pp. 43-44, says: 
 
COMMENTARY  
Similarly, also in the brief it is taught, “also th ose who wish to train in the grounds of 
hearers” and so forth. 
 
EXPLANATION 
The way the clear realizations of the four aryas ar e included within the three exalted 
knowers is taught in the medium Mother . Similarly, it is taught also in the brief , the Eight 
Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom Sutra , because  there it is taught that “also those 
who wish to train in  the grounds of hearers train in the Mothers ” and so forth. 
2B2A-1B2C. Making referral to the proof from the ex tensive Mother 
COMMENTARY 
It is extensively taught also in the extensive [ Mother ]. 
 
EXPLANATION 
It is taught also in the extensive , because it is extensively  taught, “also those who wish to 
train in the grounds of stream-enterers…” 
 
In this case there is no actual citation in the Commentary: Clear Meaning  from the extensive 
Mother ; it is merely referred to.  
 
Ornament of the Essence  says: 
2B2A-1B3. Explaining the meaning of the passages 
 
This outline comes from p. 32: 
2B2A-1B. Reply 
2B2A-1B1. Actual reply 
2B2A-1B2. Stating passages of proof 
2B2A-1B3. Explaining the meaning of the passages 
2B2A-1B4. Summary 
 
Ornament of the Essence  says: 
 
COMMENTARY 
Regarding that, a knower of all (i) bears the suppo rt of impermanence and so forth (with 
respect to phenomena, forms and so forth), (ii) is the result, and (iii) bears the 
abandonment of confusion as a self.  
 
EXPLANATION {65}  
Regarding that  indication of the three exalted knowers, a knower of all  possesses three 
attributes, because it  (i)  (ii)  bears the support of the sixteen aspects, the aspect of  
impermanence and so forth (i)  (with respect to phenomena that are the objects of 
observation,  forms and so forth) ; (ii)  (iii)  is the result  of separation;  and (iii)  bears  the 
abandonment of confusion as a self of persons . 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 9: 31 March–3 April, 2008 
 
7 A knower of all, or a knower of bases, has three at tributes .  
1.  The first attribute is that of the objects of observation,  forms and so forth.  
2.  The second attribute is the aspect : the sixteen aspects of impermanence and so forth.   
3.  The third attribute is the result, the result of separation. A knower of bases is sepa rated from 
the confusion regarding a self of persons, that is,  has abandoned the conception of a self of 
persons.  
 
Ornament of the Essence  says: 
 
COMMENTARY  
A knower of paths (i) is definite emergence by way of all vehicles, (ii) bears the support of 
not actualizing 2 suchness, and (iii) bears the function of gatherin g sentient beings not 
gathered and so forth, the result.  
 
EXPLANATION 
The subject— a knower of paths —possesses special method and wisdom, because it (i) is  
the wisdom of definite emergence by way of all  the three vehicles , (ii)  is the method 
which bears the support of not actualizing suchness at an improper time, and (iii) bears 
the function of gathering sentient beings not gathe red and so forth,  by way of 3 the 
result  of function (action) of beings.  
 
The three attributes of a knower of paths are: 
1.  special wisdom 
2.  special method 
3.  the result  
 
• “A knower of paths… is the wisdom of definite emerg ence by way of all the three vehicles.” 
This means that a knower of paths knows all three p aths as empty of true existence, whereby 
it is able to lead the three lineage-bearers to the ir respective enlightenments, that is, whereby 
these three lineage-bearers are able to definitely emerge to their respective enlightenments. 
In this way, a knower of paths is a wisdom of defin ite emergence by way of all the three 
vehicles.  
• “A knower of paths… is the method which bears the s upport of not actualizing suchness at 
an improper time.” In this context, “suchness” refe rs to the perfect end. A knower of paths is 
the method whereby one does not actualize the perfe ct end at the wrong time.  
• “A knower of paths… bears the function of gathering  sentient beings not gathered and so 
forth.” This means that sentient beings who have no t been gathered into one’s retinue are 
gathered into one’s retinue. The purpose of doing s o is that in this way, the sentient beings 
are ripened, that is, caused to become suitable ves sels for the path. 
 
Ornament of the Essence,  p. 44, says: 
 
COMMENTARY  
The exalted knower of all aspects (i) bears the sup port of the lack of production of all 
phenomena; (ii) does not discontinue the welfare of  sentient beings reaching the limits of 
space, the result; (iii) realizes the perfect end; and (iv) bears the abandonment of 
connection of latencies. 
                                                 
2 Gsum  emended to read sum. 
3 The instrumental particle connected to the word “r esult” (‘bras bus ) in the Tibetan text appears in both this edition and 
the Loseling Edition. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 9: 31 March–3 April, 2008 
 
8  
EXPLANATION 
The exalted knower of all aspects  has culminated the two welfares, because it (i) bears 
the support  of the aspect of the lack of  ultimate production of all phenomena  that are 
the objects of observation; (ii) does not discontinue the welfare of sentient b eings 
reaching the limits of space, the result  of others' welfare; (iii)  directly realizes the 
perfect end  in a manner of not rising again, one's own welfare ; and (iv) bears the 
abandonment of connection  to a later similar type of latencies  of non 4-afflicted 
ignorance, one’s own welfare . 
 
An exalted knower of all aspects has culminated the  two welfares.  
• The objects of observation of an exalted knower of all aspects are all phenome na.  
• The aspect of an exalted knower of all aspects is the lack of ultimate production.  
• The result is of two types: one’s own welfare and others’ welf are. Others’ welfare is “not 
discontinuing the welfare of sentient beings  reaching the limits of space.” One’s own 
welfare has two parts: 
1.  directly realizing the perfect end in a manner of n ot rising again 
2.  bearing the abandonment of connection to a later si milar type of latencies of non-
afflicted ignorance  
Therefore, again there are the three: the objects o f observation, the aspect, and the result. 
 
 
Tuesday afternoon, 1 April 2008 
 
Questions and answers  
 
Svatantrika and Prasangika on afflictive obscuratio ns and knowledge obscurations  
 
Q: When the Svatantrika system asserts that hearer and solitary realizers have latencies of 
ignorance, does this ignorance refer to the concept ion of a self of persons? 
A: Hearer and solitary realizer foe destroyers have  the latencies of the conception of true existence.  
However, the latencies of ignorance and the latenci es of the conception of true existence are not 
mutually inclusive; for example, we can posit the l atencies of the afflictive obscurations, which are 
levels of latencies of ignorance. In the Prasangika  school, the assertions regarding this subject are 
very different. The Prasangikas posit the levels of  the latencies of ignorance as the latencies of the  
conception of a self of persons and the latencies o f the conception of true existence. In the 
Prasangika system, both the conception of a self an d the conception of true existence are afflictive 
obscurations, whereas in the Svatantrika system the  conception of a self of persons is an afflictive 
obscuration and the conception of true existence is  a knowledge obscuration. “The conception of a 
self” refers to the subtle conception of a self of persons, and “the conception of true existence” 
refers to the subtle conception of a self of phenom ena. The levels of the latencies of ignorance and 
the latencies of ignorance are one and the same.  
 
Q: According to the Svatantrika school, is there a difference between a latency and a seed? 
A: When this subject is debated, the conclusion tha t is reached is that while seeds are latencies, 
latencies are not necessarily seeds.  
 
Q: What can be posited as a latency of afflictions but not a seed of afflictions? 
                                                 
4 Tsam  emended to read ma  in accordance with page 48 of the Drepung Loseling  Library Society’s 1996 edition of 
Ornament of the Essence .  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 9: 31 March–3 April, 2008 
 
9 A: The latency to which the vajra-like meditative s tabilization acts as a direct antidote. The vajra-
like meditative stabilization in terms of the Mahay ana is the uninterrupted path at the end of the 
continuum of a sentient being. Why is it a latency but not a seed? Because that latency does not give 
rise to an affliction. In the Prasangika school, th e latencies are knowledge obscurations, as is the 
appearance of true existence. This is not so accord ing to the Svatantrika school, which says that the 
latencies of afflictive obscurations are afflictive  obscurations, whereas the latencies of knowledge 
obscurations are knowledge obscurations.  
 
Q: Why in the Svatantrika school is the conception of a self considered to be an afflictive 
obscuration and the conception of true existence co nsidered to be a knowledge obscuration? 
A: According to the Svatantrika school, there are t hree vehicles, and the trainees of the three 
vehicles have dissimilar objects of cultivation. Ac cording to them, it is not necessary to realize the  
emptiness of true existence in order to attain the state of an arya. For that reason, they say that a 
conception of true existence is a knowledge obscura tion. In order to attain the state of a foe 
destroyer, it is not necessary to realize the empti ness of true existence, but it is necessary to real ize 
the lack of a self-sufficient substantially existen t person. In order to attain the state of foe destr oyer 
it is not necessary to abandon the conception of tr ue existence. Why? Because it is not necessary to 
realize the emptiness of true existence. This is a matter of tenets. 
 
Q: It was said that a bodhisattva manifests afflict ions such as attachment in the desire realm in orde r 
to benefit sentient beings. Could Geshe-la please e xplain what this means? 
A: A bodhisattva can use attachment to produce a th ousand sons in order to enact the welfare of 
sentient beings.  
 
Q: Are there other examples? 
A: This is the main example that is given. 
 
Abandoning pervasive compounded suffering  
 
Q: Does pervaded compound suffering refer to the co ntaminated aggregates according to the 
Mahayana? 
A: Pervaded compounded suffering and contaminated a ggregates are the same. They both exist at 
the time of a nirvana with remainder and do not exi st at the time of a nirvana without remainder. 
When we say “aggregates,” do not just think of the form aggregate alone; the word “aggregates” 
refers to the form aggregate, feeling aggregate, di scrimination aggregate, compositional factors 
aggregate, and consciousness aggregate. Otherwise, we would have to say that there are no 
contaminated aggregates in the formless realm, wher eas there are contaminated aggregates in the 
formless realm. Although there is no form aggregate  in the formless realm, the other four 
aggregates do exist in the formless realm. 
 
Q: Does this mean that a human being cannot actuali ze the perfect end, since a human being has 
contaminated aggregates? 
A: That is not the case. For example, Buddha Shakya muni was a human being, a fully ordained 
monk, who had actualized the perfect end. If we lea ve aside buddhas, the answer is not certain. For 
example, a person who has attained a nirvana withou t remainder through the Hinayana path and 
then enters the Mahayana path can take the form of a human being in the desire realm, but this 
person has a perfect end in his continuum. When we speak of human beings, we should not think 
that a human being necessarily has the contaminated  aggregates of a human being; for example, 
there are bodhisattva aryas who are human beings bu t do not have the contaminated aggregates of a 
human being. According to tantra, a person can atta in enlightenment in one life, in that very body. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 9: 31 March–3 April, 2008 
 
10 Also according to the sutra system it is possible f or a human being to attain enlightenment. There 
are many bodhisattva aryas who have a human body.  
 
Q: But then they have not pacified pervasive compou nded suffering, since they have a human body. 
A: While bodhisattvas on the paths of accumulation and preparation have suffering aggregates, 
upon attaining the first ground their aggregates tr ansform. This does not mean that they die and are 
reborn, but that their actual aggregates transform,  although this change cannot be seen. There are 
accounts of people who can pass through walls due t o having a mental body. 
 
Q: Is the mental body of a bodhisattva on the first  ground free of pervasive compounded suffering? 
A: It is not a pervasive compounded suffering. Howe ver, this bodhisattva has not pacified pervasive 
compounded suffering. 
 
Q: Does a bodhisattva arya experience physical suff ering? 
A: No. Although that is the case, in the perspectiv e of ordinary beings who are trainees, the 
appearance of suffering in a bodhisattva can arise.  Ordinary beings cannot be certain about what 
appears to them.  
 
Q: So a bodhisattva on the first ground has a menta l body that is not a pervasive compounded 
suffering, but he is not free from pervasive compou nded suffering? 
A: A bodhisattva on the first ground does not have physical suffering. He has not abandoned 
pervasive compounded suffering, but his mental body  is not a pervasive compounded suffering. 
There is a saying that bodhisattva aryas do not age , fall sick, or die. However, to our appearances 
there is aging, sickness, and death. Why? Because t he bodhisattva aryas display the modes of aging, 
sickness, and death. Bodhisattva aryas can come to the desire realm in a similar form to us and it is 
of benefit for them to appear like us in terms of a ging, falling sick, and dying. If they were to 
display the mode of high realizations, then ordinar y beings seeing them would feel discouraged.  
 
Performing the activities of the three paths 
 
Q: what is the meaning of “perform the activities o f those three paths” in the following citation 
(Ornament of the Essence , p. 37)? 
“They should also fully complete those three paths by means of abandonment and 
realization, and also perform the activities of tho se three paths, the activities of ripening 
sentient beings in that way. Because of that, the c lear realizations of bodhisattvas are called 
‘the very knowers of aspects of paths.’” 
A: “The three paths” are hearers’ paths, solitary r ealizers’ paths, and bodhisattvas’ paths. A hearers ’ 
path is a knower of bases. The activity  of a knower of bases is to lead those seeking paci fication to 
peace. The activity  of a knower of paths is to enact the welfare of th e three lineage-bearers.  
 A solitary realizers’ path is the realization of t he emptiness of non-duality. Mahayana paths, or 
bodhisattvas’ paths, can be posited as a knower of paths. 
 
Q: Would it be correct to posit fully completing pr ayers, fully ripening sentient beings, and 
completely purifying the buddha land as the activit ies of the three paths? 
A: It would be strange to do so.  
 
Various questions 
 
Q: It is said that a bodhisattva comes to the desir e realm by the force of his prayers. Is this activi ty 
the same as that of a buddha? 
A: In order for a buddha to be born somewhere, pray ers are not necessary. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 9: 31 March–3 April, 2008 
 
11  
Q: What does the birth of a buddha depend on? 
A: On us. If we are ready, he comes. If we are not ready, he does not come.  
 
Q: So would it be correct to say that for us a bodh isattva is more precious than a buddha? 
A: It depends, because it depends on who is kinder to us. The one who is kinder to us is more 
important. We ordinary beings cannot meet the truth  body. Due to this, the buddhas display forms 
that are coarser, for example, the complete enjoyme nt body. However, even this is hard for us to 
meet, therefore they display the supreme emanation body. But only those with pure karma, 
bodhisattvas with high realizations, can meet a sup reme emanation body. Therefore, in order for 
sentient beings to come into contact with them, bud dhas must display even coarser forms. For this 
reason, they take the form of teachers who are huma n beings with arms and legs and who display 
ordinary behavior of quarreling and so forth. In de pendence on these buddhas appearing in the form 
of teachers, the excellent qualities of the buddhas  arise in us. Hence, it is possible for buddhas to 
enact the welfare of sentient beings by appearing i n the form of ordinary beings so that we can meet 
them. Buddhas have the mind of equality toward all sentient beings. There is no difference in their 
compassion toward all sentient beings. Therefore, i ndependent of whether trainees are Buddhists, 
Hindus, Muslims, and so forth, buddhas have the sam e compassion for them.  
 As Buddhists, we perform rituals in order to propi tiate the protectors, playing cymbals and so 
forth energetically, but if we do not take care of our karma, these rituals will be of little benefit.  
This is because these protectors are protectors of the Dharma and so if we do not guard our actions 
and instead engage in negative actions such as stea ling, manipulating others, and so forth, the 
protectors will not take care of us. If, on the oth er hand, someone who is not a Buddhist refrains 
from negative actions such as stealing, he or she i s taking care of his or her karma. Therefore, when 
we say “Dharma protectors,” it means that they prot ect those who practice the Dharma, and do not 
protect those who do not practice the Dharma. If th ere were protectors who only took care of those 
who play cymbals energetically but who did not take  care of their karma, they would not be real 
protectors. In terms of protection, it is mainly we  who need to protect ourselves by protecting 
ourselves from negative karma, in which case there is no need for other protectors. However, if we 
protect our karma, the protectors will also protect  us. It is mainly up to us to protect ourselves by 
protecting our actions, as otherwise we will suffer . We need to protect ourselves against creating 
non-virtue, which ripens in suffering. If we do not  do this, what is the point in engaging in rituals to 
propitiate the protectors? So what is the role of t hese rituals related to protectors? They are done o n 
the basis of us guarding our karma.  
 There are actually many types of protectors, there fore we should not carelessly reply on just any 
protector whosoever. Who is the best protector? The  best protector is to protect ourselves against 
creating negative karma. If we are able to do that,  that will be enough. 
 
Q: What type of being is a protector? Is he a bodhi sattva, a buddha, or what? 
A: there are many thangkas with images of protector s. Those protectors who wear shoes are 
mundane beings, whereas those who do not wear shoes  are supramundane beings. Supramundane 
beings can be buddhas or aryas. 
 
Q: In the following passage ( Ornament of the Essence , p. 44) what does “the function of gathering 
sentient beings, by way of the result of function ( action) of beings” refer to? 
 
The subject—a knower of paths—possesses special met hod and wisdom, because it (i) is 
the wisdom of definite emergence by way of all the three vehicles, (ii) is the method which 
bears the support of not actualizing suchness at an  improper time, and (iii) bears the 
function of gathering sentient beings not gathered and so forth, by way of the result of 
function (action) of beings.  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 9: 31 March–3 April, 2008 
 
12  
A: It means that whether sentient beings are gather ed depends on their karma or actions. There are 
various methods of gathering sentient beings; for e xample, one can hang prayer flags with the 
motivation thinking “May the sentient beings who ar e touched by the wind that has touched the 
prayer flags achieve enlightenment.” Also when doin g the practice of making tsa-tsas in water, one 
should think “May the sentient beings who are touch ed by this water have the seeds of liberation 
planted in their minds.” In this way, sentient bein gs are benefited. Therefore, the process of 
gathering sentient beings is a long-term project. T his is because sentient beings are very hard-
headed and therefore it needs time. 
 
General advice on practice 
 
I want to say that this kind of study is very impor tant because having understood it deeply, one can 
put it into practice. When you live here [in Pomaia ], you must be careful. Anything can happen to 
us, but we should not think that it is due to someo ne else. We should make our body and mind 
strong. If we do not do this, when small things hap pen, our mind will change. Then another thing, a 
third thing, a fourth thing happens and we think th at it is too much and we want to leave. What is 
the benefit of this? There is none. It is not that when we study we have problems. In general, life is  
not easy if we do not take care of ourselves. We wi ll pass our lives in suffering. There are many 
conditions that bring suffering. If you think in th e wrong way, it will bring more pain. That is not 
good. We should try to understand it and face it. T hat does not mean that we need to go there and 
fight something; it means we need to make our mind strong so that when someone says something, 
we should not think badly, as this will make us ner vous and cause us to suffer. In this way, we lose 
the opportunity to change our mind. Instead we make  suffering for ourselves rather than making 
ourselves stronger and more peaceful. Therefore, we  need to stop thinking like this. If we do this, 
things will not change suddenly, but slowly we will  become stronger. Otherwise, things will always 
harm us. We should think that our life is here in s amsara, in this world, and there are always 
problems. When we have pain, we should not become u nhappy and worry.  
 Perhaps from the beginning we cannot do this, but by trying we will gradually become able to do 
this, to take care of our way of thinking, thinking  about what is going wrong and trying to change 
our habit. If you can do this, there will not be an y problems. No conditions will harm us. We think 
that when someone says something, that person is ha rming me, making problems for me. Instead we 
should think, Why am I suffering? Why is this harmi ng me? Why does this sound harm me? It is 
not only that; there is some mistake inside us. We need to try to change this. I already said that you  
should not think too much, but make things easy for  yourself. You should not make life hard for 
yourself, but make it easy for yourself. You should  not think that others are harming you.  
 If we ask people if they want suffering or peace, they will say that they want peace. The 
important thing is not to make problems for ourselv es, but to make our lives easy and happy. If we 
understand something, we can be happy, if we don’t understand, we should not worry, but be 
happy. We should think that not many people in this  world have the opportunity to study.  
 
 
Wednesday, April 2, 2008 (morning) 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 45:  
2B2A-1B4. Summary {66}  
COMMENTARY 
Therefore, this statement, “The Ornament for Clear Realization  completely reveals the 
clear realizations” is correct, since it includes a ll the bases, antidotes, and aspects . 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 9: 31 March–3 April, 2008 
 
13 EXPLANATION 
All the clear realizations of the four aryas are in cluded within the three exalted knowers.  
Therefore, this statement, “ The subject— the Ornament for Clear Realization —
completely reveals the clear realizations  of the four aryas in their entirety ” is correct, 
since it includes all the bases, antidotes, and asp ects. 
 
This outline comes from p. 32:  
 
2B2A-1B. Reply 
2B2A-1B1. Actual reply 
2B2A-1B2. Stating passages of proof 
2B2A-1B3. Explaining the meaning of the passages 
2B2A-1B4. Summary 
 
This is a summary, and doesn’t require additional c ommentary. It means everything said above is 
summarized here.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 45: 
 
2B2A-2. Having rejected the fault of repeating the sutras, establishing that a purpose exists 
2B2A-2A. Having set forth a qualm, making a connect ion 
2B2A-2B. Root text 
2B2A-2C. Commentary 
 
This outline follows from p. 29 (Tib. p. 42): 
 
2B2A. Meaning of the purpose of the treatise 
2B2A-1. Having individually rejected doubts concern ing a lack of purpose in composing the treatise, 
explaining the general presentation of the subject matter, the three exalted knowers 
2B2A-2. Having rejected the fault of repeating the sutras, establishing that a purpose exists 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 45: 
2B2A-2A. Having set forth a qualm, making a connect ion 
QUALM: When determining all the bases, antidotes, a nd aspects, it is necessary to 
extensively determine the three exalted knowers. In  that case, since the Perfection of 
Wisdom Sutras are repeated, there would be no purpo se in composing the Ornament for 
Clear Realization .  
 
COMMENTARY 
In order to eliminate the qualm of beings of low in telligence: "Did not the Bhagavan, 
bearer of exalted compassion desiring to benefit th e sentient beings with faith in the 
extensive, medium, and brief, clarify all meanings of the Perfection of Wisdom, and the 
stages of the eight clear realizations in the vario us Victors’ Mothers? What significance is 
there for the Bhagavan One Victorious Over the Non- victorious Aryas to show those 
again?", through generating doubt about the meaning , the branches of engaging—the 
subject matter, the purpose, the purpose of even th e purpose, and the internal relationship 
of his own treatise—are taught. 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 9: 31 March–3 April, 2008 
 
14 In the commentary, it talks about “sentient beings with faith in the extensive, medium, and brief,” 
referring to sentient beings with faith in the exte nsive, medium, and brief Perfection of Wisdom 
sutras:  
• Extensive: 100,000 verse Perfection of Wisdom sutra  
• Medium: 20,000 stanza Perfection of Wisdom 
• Brief: 8,000 stanza Perfection of Wisdom.  
These are taught respectively for those with sharp,  middling, and dull faculties. The brief is taught 
for disciples of dull faculties, because they canno t understand many words and have difficulties 
absorbing them; those of middling faculty are inten ded trainees for the medium Perfection of 
Wisdom sutras; the extensive is taught for those of  sharp faculty. In the Perfection of Wisdom 
sutras, the stages of emptiness are explicitly taug ht, and the stages of clear realization are taught in a 
hidden manner. The Ornament for Clear Realization  clearly reveals the stages of clear realization 
that were taught in a hidden way in the Perfection of Wisdom sutras.  
 
If we were to condense the Ornament for Clear Realization , we would end up with the eight clear 
realizations, or eight categories. If we expand the se by way of the topics characterizing them, we 
end up with seventy topics.  
 
Qualm and our system’s reply 
 
Here, there is a qualm: the eight clear realization s have already been indicated in the Perfection of 
Wisdom sutras, so there is no purpose to indicate t hem in the Ornament for Clear Realization ; if the 
Ornament were to indicate the eight clear realizations, ther e would be the fault of repetition. Our 
own system rejects this, saying there is no fault o f repetition, because there is a purpose in 
composing the Ornament for Clear Realization : for easily realizing the sutras. Our system thus 
presents:  
1.  the purpose 
2.  the subject matter 
3.  the essential purpose 
4.  the relationship  
 
The rejection of this qualm is actually presented i n the two stanzas of the root text in the following  
section of the text ( Ornament of the Essence , p. 46):  
 
1.2 The path of the exalted knower of all aspects,  
That which is explained in these by the Teacher, 
Is not experienced by others.  
Because the intelligent see 
 
1.3 By placing in mindfulness the meaning of the su tras  
Of the nature of the ten Dharma practices, 
“Realizing easily”  
Is the purpose of composing. 
 
 
Ornament of the Essence , pp. 45-46: 
 
EXPLANATION {67}  
This is the branch of eliminating qualms  making decision  in order to prove that there is a 
special purpose for composing the Ornament for Clear Realization by explicitly setting 
forth here the rejection of the principal qualm. In order to eliminate the qualm of those 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 9: 31 March–3 April, 2008 
 
15 of low intelligence  who do not understand the feature of uncommon purp ose of the Sutras 
and the treatise, the subject matter, the purpose, and the purpose of even the purpose  
are  explicitly indicated , and the internal relationship of Maitreya’s own treatise is  
taught.  What is the qualm like?  "What significance of purpose  is there  for the 
Bhagavan One Victorious Over the Non-victorious Ary as to show those stages of the 
eight clear realizations again? There is none. " 
 
“This is the branch of eliminating qualms in order to prove that there is a special purpose for 
composing the Ornament for Clear Realization by explicitly setting forth here the rejection of t he 
principal qualm:” here, the rejection of the princi pal qualm is explicitly stated. This branch of 
eliminating qualms is a branch of engaging, specifi cally, in the Ornament for Clear Realization. 
The statement of purpose and relationship is the br anch of engaging. “In order to eliminate the 
qualm of those of low intelligence who do not under stand the feature of uncommon purpose of the 
Sutras and the treatise...” mentions the subject matter , purpose , and purpose of the purpose  (the 
essential purpose ), which are explicitly indicated. The doubt says t hat if the treatise is composed, 
there is the fault of repeating the sutras.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 46: 
 
 The reason for the wrong conception is as follows.  Whether in terms of those of sharp, 
middling or dull faculties, did not the Bhagavan, bearer of exalted compassion desiring 
to benefit the sentient beings with faith in the ex tensive, medium, and brief, clarify all 
meanings of the Perfection of Wisdom?  For, he already did. Where? In the various  three 
Victors’ Mothers.  What are the meanings? The stages of the eight cle ar realizations. 
Having eliminated the qualm, there is a need to set  forth a statement of the purpose-and-
relationship, because it is a branch of the method of engaging in this treatise. By setting 
forth a statement of the purpose and relationship, one will engage, because  through 
generating doubt about the meaning  in dependence on this statement, thinking that the re 
is probably a purpose, one engages . 
 
A qualm can be of two types:  
1.  one that does not engage the meaning 
2.  one that does engage the meaning  
In this case, the qualm is one that does not engage the meaning , in that it thinks that there is no 
purpose. One that does engage the meaning would be one that things that th ere probably is a 
purpose. This would actually be a branch of engagin g, because through thinking there probably is a 
purpose, one would go on to conclude that there pro bably is a purpose and engage in the treatise 
through understanding the purpose and relationship.  “Engaging the meaning”  or “not engaging the 
meaning” could also be translated as having “doubt that tends toward fact” and “doubt that does not 
tend toward fact.” The one not tending towards fact  is the one that thinks there is no purpose, while 
that tending towards the fact thinks there probably  is a purpose. When that doubt is dispelled, one 
engages in the treatise.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 46: 
 
 The former  qualm above  is erroneous, and is very forceful  but is mostly permissible , 
whereby one does not hold it to mean “generating do ubt by eliminating doubt.” In brief, it 
indicates the branch of engaging, where doubt tendi ng towards the factual is generated 
regarding the four—the purpose and so forth—which c ontradicts the doubts tending 
towards the non-factual: (1) thinking that there is  probably no purpose of accomplishing 
the temporal and final welfare of beings in composi ng this treatise;  (2) even if there is a 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 9: 31 March–3 April, 2008 
 
16 purpose, that is not the object of seeking of being s; {68} (3) even if it is, that purpose 
cannot be accomplished;  and (4) even if it can be accomplished in general,  it is unrelated to 
the method shown here.  
 
“The former qualm is erroneous” refers to thinking there is no purpose. “Generating doubt by 
eliminating doubt” means it is not  that more doubt will come from eliminating doubt. Four kinds of 
wrong conceptions are listed here:  
1.  “Thinking that there is probably no purpose of acco mplishing the temporal and final welfare of 
beings in composing this treatise”: An example of a  treatise with no purpose is a treatise that 
says that crows have teeth. It is said that there w as a non-Buddhist who went with his wife to the 
river. When his wife hung her clothes on a line and  went swimming in a river, a crow took her 
clothes, so her husband, angered by this, wrote a t reatise explaining that crows have teeth. This 
is a treatise without purpose. 
2.  “Even if there is a purpose, that is not the object  of seeking of beings:” an example of such a 
treatise is one expounding taking one’s mother as a  bride.  
3.  “Even if it is, that purpose cannot be accomplished ”: an example is a treatise expounding taking 
the crown ornament of the king of nagas. There is a  purpose, since this ornament is sought by 
beings, but the purpose cannot be accomplished, bec ause nobody can take this ornament away 
from the king of nagas.  
4.  “Even if it can be accomplished in general, it is u nrelated to the method shown here”: an 
example is a treatise that expounds sacrificing ani mals, such as cattle, for the sake of attaining 
high status (rebirth as a god or human). The method  shown is not related. 
 
These four wrong conceptions: 
1.  thinking there is no purpose 
2.  even if there is a purpose, it cannot be sought 
3.  purpose cannot be accomplished 
4.  unrelated to method shown here. 
prevent one from engaging in the treatise.  
 
In relation to the Ornament for Clear Realization, there is a purpose, it can be sought, it can be 
accomplished, and it is related to the method shown  here. If one has the above doubts, one will not 
engage in the treatise. By thinking “Maybe there is  such a purpose,” and seeing the statement of 
purpose and relationship, one eliminates doubt and engages in the treatise.  
 
Q: If a treatise is that which “cures and protects, ” how can a treatise on crows’ teeth be a treatise?  
A: That definition of a treatise is in relation to a pure treatise; cure and protection are qualities of a 
pure treatise.  
 
Q: We covered the essential purpose, etc., earlier (p. 7, Ornament of the Essence ; 2A1: Expression 
of worship and promise to explain). How is that rel ated to the present passage? 
A: In this context, there is a difference. In the e arlier section, they are four properties of 
Haribhadra’s commentary, whereas now we are looking  at the section before engaging in the corpus 
of the Ornament for Clear Realization . There are two sets of four properties. The first set is:  
1.  Subject matter : the four properties of Ornament for Clear Realization  
2.  Purpose : to show that the treatise has four properties 
3.  Essential purpose : in dependence on realizing that four properties e xist, engaging in the 
treatise 
4.  Relationship : in dependence on the subject matter, one realizes  that the treatise has these four 
properties. In dependence on realizing that the tre atise has these, one engages in treatise.  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 9: 31 March–3 April, 2008 
 
17 The second set is: 
1.  Subject matter  of Ornament for Clear Realization: the eight clear realizations. 
2.  Purpose : to easily realize the meaning of the sutras 
3.  Essential purpose : in dependence on easily realizing meaning of sutr as, to attain omniscience 
through seeing the meaning of the sutras of the nat ure of the ten Dharma practices—
bodhicitta, etc. 
4.  Relationship : the subject matter is related to the purpose, the  purpose is related to the 
essential purpose.  
 
The structure of the Ornament for Clear Realization  is that it begins with the expression of worship, 
which is followed by the corpus of the treatise. Be fore beginning the corpus, there is the statement 
of purpose and relationship in order to dispel the qualm of there being no purpose.  
 
The statement of purpose and relationship is for th e benefit of those other than the two main types 
of trainees mentioned earlier (dull- and sharp-facu ltied). Those of dull faculty generate great faith , 
those of sharp faculty irreversible faith . However, this is faith in the Mothers, and does n ot 
necessarily mean they do not have any qualms about the Ornament for Clear Realization . The 
Mothers here refer to the objects of praise of the expression of worship. Although having faith in 
these, when they see the Ornament for Clear Realization , it is still possible that they have doubts. 
The intended trainees of this context are not those  who would just read the text in its entirety and 
accept it; they would engage in studying and contem plation of the treatise. The Ornament for Clear 
Realization  begins with the expression of worship and before g oing into the corpus, establishes that 
there is a purpose, essential purpose, etc., so som eone reading will generate the thought that this is  a 
good text. After seeing the expression of worship, they could wonder “What is the corpus of the text 
like,” and go on to engage in the text. If one does n’t eliminate these qualms, one will not engage in 
the treatise.  
 
Before this section, there were debates regarding w hether bases, antidotes, or aspects alone were 
taken as the subject matter. These debates contain essential points; for instance, having generated 
faith in the three exalted knowers, it is not neces sarily the case that one develops faith in the corp us 
of the text, so if one does not have doubts regardi ng the three Mothers, one can still have doubts 
about the corpus.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , pp. 46-47: 
 
2B2A-2B. Root text 
There is no fault of repeating the Mother Sutras in  composing this treatise…  
 
ROOT TEXT  
1.2 The path of the exalted knower of all aspects,  
That which is explained in these by the Teacher, 
Is not experienced by others.  
Because the intelligent see 
 
1.3 By placing in mindfulness the meaning of the su tras  
Of the nature of the ten Dharma practices, 
“Realizing easily”  
Is the purpose of composing. 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 9: 31 March–3 April, 2008 
 
18 …because “ realizing easily ” the meaning of the Mother Sutras in dependence on  this is 
the purpose of composing  this treatise . There is a purpose for easily realizing the meanin g 
of the Sutras , because, in dependence on it, the intelligent bodhisattvas will directly see 
the meaning of the sutras of the nature of the ten Dharma practices , such as the 
generated mind [of enlightenment], which characteri ze an exalted knower of all aspects. It 
is not that there is no method to directly see the meaning of the sutras, because it  they  will 
become manifest through having cultivated  by placing in mindfulness with hearing and 
contemplation. This treatise possesses a special me aning that is to be realized, {69} 
because it is directly seen by the exalted knower of all aspects, and  the path  which 
proceeds there, differentiated by way of the ten to pics and eight occasions,  that which is 
explained in these  three Mothers  by the Teacher, is  determined as the subject matter . The 
subject—the stages of the eight clear realizations— are not completely experienced by any 
person, because they are  not completely experienced by others , such as non-Buddhists, 
hearers, and solitary realizers . By the first two lines indicating the entity of th e subject 
matter, then one [line indicating] the distinction,  then three [indicating] the essential 
purpose, and the last two [indicating] the purpose,  the relationship is inferred.   
 
This passage explains the root text. In the root te xt, we have the subject matter, the purpose of the 
purpose, the subject matter, and the distinction.  
 
• Purpose : “realizing easily the meaning of the Mother Sutra s in dependence on this.”  
• Purpose of the purpose : “There is a purpose for easily realizing the mean ing of the Sutras, 
because, in dependence on it, the intelligent bodhi sattvas will directly see the meaning of the 
sutras of the nature of the ten Dharma practices, s uch as the generated mind [of 
enlightenment], which characterize an exalted knowe r of all aspects….” This says that one 
repeatedly listens to the explanation and contempla tes the meaning that has been heard. 
With mindfulness, one contemplates the meaning of t he sutras.  
• Subject matter : “This treatise possesses a special meaning that i s to be realized, because it is 
directly seen by the exalted knower of all aspects,  and the path which proceeds there, 
differentiated by way of the ten topics and eight o ccasions, that which is explained in these 
three Mothers by the Teacher, is determined as the subject matter.” 
• Distinction : “The subject—the stages of the eight clear realiz ations—are not completely 
experienced by any person, because they are not com pletely experienced by others, such as 
non-Buddhists, hearers, and solitary realizers.” 
 
In the root text: 
• the first two lines express the subject matter (“The path of the exalted knower of all aspects,  
/ That which is explained in these by the Teacher”)  
• the third line (“Is not experienced by others”) exp resses the distinction  
• the next three lines express the essential purpose : “Because the intelligent see / By placing 
in mindfulness the meaning of the sutras / Of the n ature of the ten Dharma practices”  
• the last two lines express the purpose : “‘Realizing easily’ / Is the purpose of composing .”  
 
One first learns the meaning of the sutras, then ho lds it with mindfulness, then meditates on that 
meaning, coming to directly realize it. This is ver y relevant advice for us: we need to train in 
mindfulness. For instance, if one reads about a fac t, one needs to recall it again and again and hold 
it in the mind; in this way one will eventually dev elop stable mindfulness of that fact. Instead, if o ne 
is inattentive and does not recall that fact, one w ill soon forget it.  
 
 
Wednesday, 2 April 2008 (afternoon) 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 9: 31 March–3 April, 2008 
 
19 Questions and answers 
 
Q: According to the Consequentialists, the latencie s of afflictive obscurations are knowledge 
obscurations. Does this mean latencies of anger, at tachment, etc., or just latencies of ignorance?  
A: This includes latencies of all types of afflictions.  
 
Q: On p. 41 of Ornament of the Essence , in the “response” it says, “Thus, it is asserted that the 
abandonments and realizations of hearers and solita ry realizers are completed on the eighth 
ground.” How do we explain this? 
A: This is a response given by a “great lama transl ator;” it is not our system. According to the 
Autonomy school, the realizations are completed on the first ground. This is also acc epted by the 
Consequence school, but they assert that the abandonments are completed on the eighth ground. 
Completing the realizations of hearers on the first  ground refers to directly realizing selflessness o f 
persons; this means the class of realizations of he arers is complete. If one realizes selflessness by 
means of a meaning generality, we cannot say the cl ass of realizations is completed. However, the 
activities of hearers are not completed because the  activity of abandoning the conception of self of 
persons has not been completed. According to the Au tonomists, the activities [of hearers and 
solitary realizers] are completed at the Buddha gro und; for the Consequence school, they are 
completed at the eighth ground. Here, “activity” me ans abandoning the conception of self. One 
attains selflessness of persons in order to abandon  the conception of the self of persons. The Tibetan  
term “bak chak” ( bag chags ), translated as latency, refers to potential.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 47: 
2B2A-2C. Commentary 
COMMENTARY  
So the root text is said. The exalted knower of all  aspects, the path of the buddhas 
themselves, is taken earnestly to closely character ize all the clear realizations. The 
Bhagavan, through the three types of miracles, subs equently taught to all migrating beings, 
by he himself, whatever is shown as the very subjec t matter in all three types of the 
Victor’s Mothers . The expresser and the subject matter expressed ar e made related by way 
of manner of a method and the object to be achieved  by that method. That not experienced 
through the levels with the knowers arisen from hea ring and so forth by those who have 
not familiarized with the selflessness of all pheno mena—non-Buddhists and those 
separated from attachment and so forth, who are the  others; having placed well all the 
meanings of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras without  exception, the natures of the eight 
clear realizations—the deeds that achieve, the mind  of enlightenment and generosity and 
so forth—in the consciousness of mindfulness that a rose from the latencies which were 
deposited by very clear experiences by only the bod hisattvas who set out, without 
depending upon anyone, to achieve the fulfillment o f their own and others' welfare; 
“through the levels of realizing the Very Joyous gr ound and so forth, the characteristic of 
realizing the sphere of dharma progressing everywhe re, they will be actualized in all 
aspects” is strongly desired for the sake of the pu rpose of even the purpose.  
 That the meanings of the Perfection of Wisdom—the mind of enlightenment and the 
characteristics of achieving and so forth—will be e asily realized by the trainees is the 
purpose of composing the treatise. 
 
Here, the “root text” refers to stanzas 1.2 and 1.3 . In the phrase “by those who have not familiarized  
with the selflessness of all phenomena,” notice tha t selflessness of all phenomena refers to 
selflessness of phenomena, not  selflessness of persons. This passage discusses th e subject matter, 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 9: 31 March–3 April, 2008 
 
20 the purpose, and the essential purpose. It comments  on the root text, but it seems to be even more 
difficult!  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 47:  
 
EXPLANATION  
2B2A-2C1. Purpose  
2B2A-2C2. Essential purpose 
2B2A-2C3. Subject matter 
2B2A-2C1. Purpose  
There is a purpose in composing this treatise; that the meanings of the Mothers will be 
easily realized by the trainees  who are the intended objects of the Ornament  is the 
purpose of composing the treatise. What will be easily realized?  The meanings of the 
Perfection of Wisdom Sutras  differentiated into the stages of eight clear real izations by 
taking the ten topics— the mind of enlightenment and the characteristics o f the 
achievings  and so forth— as the basis. 
 
The purpose of composing the treatise is “so that t he meanings of the Mothers will be easily 
realized;” the eight clear realizations will be eas ily realized.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 48: 
2B2A-2C2. Essential purpose 
The aim that is  strongly desired for the sake of the purpose of eve n the purpose  is the 
essential purpose. It is not that there is no essen tial purpose because, in dependence on this 
purpose [explained above], “ through the levels of realizing and attaining  the Very 
Joyous ground and so forth, the characteristic of r ealizing the sphere of dharma 
progressing everywhere  to all property-possessors , all the stages of clear realizations will 
be actualized in all aspects ” will be attained. 
 
 “The aim that is strongly desired” refers to the s tate of omniscience. “Sphere of dharma” refers to 
emptiness, which progresses everywhere; “all proper ty-possessors” refers to all phenomena. One 
directly realizes the emptiness of all phenomena, a nd thus realizes the Very Joyous ground and so 
forth. One first listens to the meaning of the eigh t clear realizations, and then contemplates it and 
meditates on it. In this way, one enters the path o f accumulation and proceeds through the path of 
preparation and the path of seeing, attaining the f irst ground, Very Joyous.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 48:  
 
 What is the method that will manifest the essentia l purpose? Having placed well in the 
consciousness of mindfulness , it will be actualized later. What is placed? All the 
meanings of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras without  exception —the ten topics which 
characterize the exalted knower of all aspects;  the mind of enlightenment and generosity 
and so forth;  the generated mind, the support of deeds;  the deeds that achieve  which 
practice the deeds; and the summarized result that is the object of attainment. {71} Further, 
in terms of the principal objects to be determined by the eight chapters, they are divided 
into the natures of the eight clear realizations .  
 
The “method that will manifest the essential purpos e” is to place well in the consciousness of 
mindfulness. Having heard the meaning, one follows that with contemplation, not forgetting what 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 9: 31 March–3 April, 2008 
 
21 has been contemplated, but holding it with mindfuln ess. With that basis, one meditates on the 
meaning and comes to a direct realization, thus man ifesting the essential purpose. 
 
In the passage, “All the meanings of the Perfection  of Wisdom Sutras without exception,”  
• “The ten topics which characterize the exalted know er of all aspects” means that by way of 
the ten topics, one can traverse the entire Mahayan a path;  
• “Generosity and so forth” means that by way of the ten perfections , one can traverse the 
entire Mahayana path; 
• “The deeds that achieve which practice the deeds” r efers to the four applications;  
• “The summarized result that is the object of attain ment” refers to the truth body.  
 
Relating the ten topics to this passage 
 
Among the ten topics that characterize the exalted knower of all aspects (see the chart from Seventy 
Topics, “Category 1: Exalted knower of all aspects” ):  
• the generated mind is first;  
• “The deeds that achieve which practice the deeds” r efers to the four achievings (the seventh 
through tenth topics of the ten topics); 
• the “summarized result that is the object of attain ment” refers to the sixth topic, the object of 
intent  
In this way, we include the first, the sixth, and t he seventh through tenth topics. The other four are  
implicitly mentioned by the phrase “the generated m ind.”  
 
• The Mahayana instructions  (second topic) are implicitly indicated, because t hey are what 
purifies.  
• In order to generate the mind of enlightenment, we need to awaken the lineage abiding  in 
the nature (fourth topic). 
• In order to awaken the lineage, we have to eliminat e the superimpositions on the objects of 
observation (fifth topic). 
• In order to purify the generated mind, we need the union of calm abiding and special insight, 
and so the Mahayana path of preparation (third topic) is implicitly indicated.  
• In addition, Mahayana generated mind is purified by  the four achievings and one attains the 
object of intent. The phrase “the mind of enlighten ment and generosity and so forth” relates 
to the seventh topic, the achieving of armor.  
   
Ornament of the Essence , p. 48: 
 
 What is the feature of the consciousness of mindful ness? Having contemplated well, 
through reasoning, the meaning of the stages of the  clear realizations that has been heard, it 
is a mindfulness that arose from the latencies which were deposited by very clear 
experiences  that is able to induce an ascertaining consciousne ss in accordance with how it 
has been asserted. Who, having experienced it with hearing and contemplation at the 
beginning, will eventually actualize it?  It will be experienced by only the bodhisattvas 
who set out and begin without depending upon anyone , since they definitely engage in 
such a path to achieve the fulfillment of their own and others'  welfare  and do not rely 
upon others. The assertion—that the principal objec t to be determined of the third chapter 
is the knowers of bases in the continua of hearers and solitary realizers themselves—is well 
refuted by these [explanations].  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 9: 31 March–3 April, 2008 
 
22 What is the “consciousness of mindfulness”? One hea rs the meaning, then contemplates it well with 
reasoning. This refers to “a mindfulness that arose  from the latencies which were deposited by very 
clear experiences that is able to induce an ascerta ining consciousness in accordance with how it has 
been asserted.” This consciousness of mindfulness a rises from the latencies deposited by the clear 
experiences. As a result of contemplation, very cle ar experiences will come about. This does not 
arise in a short period of time—we need a lot of he aring and a lot of contemplation—the clear 
experiences deposit latencies, from which a mindful ness will arise.  
 
“Who, having experienced it with hearing and contem plation at the beginning, will eventually 
actualize it?” At the beginning, there is hearing, contemplation, and realization; the bodhisattvas 
will realize it. “It will be experienced by only th e bodhisattvas who set out and begin without 
depending upon anyone, since they definitely engage  in such a path:” “such a path” is that 
explained previously. Only the bodhisattvas are abl e to experience this path, not others, e.g. non-
Buddhists, hearers and solitary realizers, etc.  
 
“The assertion—that the principal object to be dete rmined of the third chapter is the knowers of 
bases in the continua of hearers and solitary reali zers themselves—is well refuted by these 
[explanations]” means that if someone were to say t hat the principal object of the third chapter were 
the knower of bases of hearers and solitary realizers , that would be wrong, because all stages of the 
eight clear realizations are to be realized by bodh isattvas. If the principal object of third chapter is 
the knower of bases of hearers and solitary realize rs, then it would not need to be generated in the 
continua of bodhisattvas.  
 
Q: What does it mean to “set out and begin without depending upon anyone”? 
A: This means they don’t rely on non-Buddhists, hea rers, and solitary realizers, who have not 
experienced the meaning.  
 
 
Thursday, 3 April 2008 
 
Re. Ornament of the Essence , p. 46:  
 
Having eliminated the wrong conception , qualm  there is a need to set forth a statement of 
the purpose-and-relationship, because, through generating doubt about the meaning  in 
dependence on this statement, thinking that there i s probably a purpose, one engages . 
 
Here, there are two qualms: one tending towards the  factual, one toward the non-factual. The qualm 
tending toward the non-factual is stated in relatio n to the purpose and relationship, then the second 
one is generated, whereby one engages in the treati se (“through generating doubt about the meaning 
in dependence on this statement, thinking that ther e is probably a purpose, one engages”).  
 
The Tibetan text here seems to say that first one e liminates the wrong conception and then the 
purpose and relationship is stated, but in fact the  sequence of dispelling the qualms is that first on e 
dispels the doubt tending toward the non-factual, t hen generates doubt tending towards the factual, 
then engages in the treatise. To make more sense, w e could alternately phrase this passage as 
“There is a need to set forth a statement of the pu rpose-and-relationship by eliminating the wrong 
conception…”  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 48: 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 9: 31 March–3 April, 2008 
 
23 2B2A-2C3. Subject matter 
Whatever is shown as the very subject matter in all  three types of the Victors’ 
Mothers  is the subject matter of the treatise. Who showed it? The Bhagavan, through the 
three types —the miracle  of magical emanation, the miracle  of expressing all exalted 
minds, and the miracle  of subsequent demonstration— subsequently taught  the paths of 
the three vehicles to all migrating beings by he himself .  
 
This says that the subject matter is whatever is sh own as the subject matter in the three Mothers. 
This was shown by the Bhagavan, through the three t ypes of miracles:  
1.  The miracle of magical emanation , or the miracle of the exalted body, which is disp layed in 
order to outshine other persons. 
2.  The miracle of exalted mind : by knowing exactly the mentalities of the trainee s, a buddha is able 
to teach accordingly, so that faith will be generat ed. The buddha’s mind is able to see exactly 
what trainees are thinking, and by expressing what they are thinking, the trainees are surprised 
and generate faith. “Expressing all exalted minds” means expressing all known by the exalted 
mind. 
3.  The miracle of subsequent demonstration : having generated faith, the buddha teaches them 
Dharma, and conviction arises. By understanding the  wishes of trainees, buddha is able to teach 
them the paths of the three vehicles. By knowing ex actly the mentalities of trainees, buddha is 
able to teach according to that, whereby they gener ate faith. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 48: 
 
What is the subject matter? It possesses a special subject matter. An exalted knower of all 
aspects is,  through direct realization of which [the subject ma tter], the path of the 
buddhas themselves  which engage in an exalted knower of all aspects, ranging from the 
generated mind to the achievings. Through division into eight occasions, having taken that 
as the basis, the ten topics which closely characterize all the clear realizations are  taken 
earnestly  by the Teacher. In brief, [the subject matter is] the eight clear realizations. {72}  
 
It is sometimes said that if it is a path, it is pe rvaded by being a path of the buddhas, but if it is  a 
path of the buddhas, it is not pervaded by being included in the continuum of a bu ddha. “The path 
of the buddhas” means a path that proceeds to the b uddha ground; it is mutually inclusive with a 
path.  
 
In the phrase “ranging from the generated mind to t he achievings,” “achievings” refers to the four 
achievings: achieving of armor, and so forth, which  are among the ten topics of the exalted knower 
of all aspects. When we talk about the “path of the  buddhas themselves which engage in an exalted 
knower of all aspects,” this is an indication of th e subject matter, i.e. the eight clear realizations . 
The first one is the exalted knower of all aspects,  which is indicated in the first chapter by way of 
teaching the ten topics that characterize it. In th e first chapter, the words “exalted knower of all 
aspects” are not explicit, but it is indicated by w ay of teaching the ten topics, ranging from 
generated mind through the achievings. How is the e xalted knower of all aspects indicated through 
these? The ten topics are the paths of the buddhas who engage in an exalted knower of all aspects; 
by indicating them, one will engage in an exalted k nower of all aspects.  
 In the phrase “through direct realization of which ,” “which” refers to the eight clear realizations, 
which are the subject matter. The phrase could be r ead as “An exalted knower of all aspects is the 
path of the buddhas themselves which engage in an e xalted knower of all aspects, ranging from the 
generated mind to the achievings, which directly realize the subject matter .” This is similar to our 
earlier discussion of stanza 1.1c, where the term “ which” is said to refer to omniscience.  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 9: 31 March–3 April, 2008 
 
24  “Taking that as the basis”: in the first chapter, the exalted knower of all aspects is indicated by 
presenting the ten topics; that manner of indicatio n is taken as the basis. The subject matter is 
divided into the eight occasions, which refers to t he eight chapters, by which the eight clear 
realizations are indicated. In the second chapter, by indicating the eleven topics that characterize t he 
knower of paths, the knower of paths is indicated; in the third chapter, by taking the topics 
characterizing the knower of bases, the knower of b ases is indicated. The eight chapters take the 
eight categories as their subject matter. By indica ting the topics characterizing the categories, the 
eight chapters are presented.  
 “The ten topics which closely characterize all the  clear realizations are taken earnestly by the 
Teacher:” here, the “ten topics” are not  those characterizing the exalted knower of all asp ects, 
because they do not characterize all the clear real izations; here, it refers to the ten perfections.  
 
Q: How do the ten perfections “closely characterize  all the clear realizations”? 
A: From the first to the tenth grounds, a bodhisatt va practices the ten perfections. This happens even  
before the first ground, but on the first ground, t here is the surpassing practice of the practice of 
generosity, on the second ground, there is the surpassing practice  of ethics, and so forth. Without 
practicing generosity before the first ground, it i s not possible to have the surpassing practice of 
generosity on the first ground. For example, on the  path of accumulation, when a bodhisattva 
practices generosity, all the ten perfections are c omplete, in that he practices them all together.  
 
 
Ornament of the Essence , pp. 48-49: 
 
 That not experienced through the levels of  the knowers arisen from hearing and so 
forth by those who have not familiarized with the s elflessness of all phenomena  free 
from all extremes— non-Buddhist  followers such as Simha, Vishnu, and Brahma, and the  
hearers and solitary realizers separated from attachment and so forth who are the 
others —is the distinction  attribute  of the subject matter. There is a reason for it no t being 
experienced by them, because the expresser —the Mother Sutras as well as the 
Ornament —and the subject matter expressed —the eight clear realizations— are made 
related by way of manner of a method and  accomplisher of that method. There is 
pervasion, because they [non-Buddhists, hearers,  and solitary realizers] do not perform any 
of the three—hearing, contemplation, and meditation —in regards to the very extensive 
scriptural baskets and the treatises that comment o n their thought. The Mahayana is 
superior, due to its greater object of observation.  It is also explained that the Acarya, in this 
passage, clarified the internal relationship. 
 
This passage is saying that non-Buddhist followers and the hearers and solitary realizers, who are 
separated from attachment and so forth, who are the  others, do not experience selflessness of 
phenomena. This is because the expresser—the mother  sutras and the Ornament for Clear 
Realization —and the subject matter, the eight clear realizatio ns, are not heard, contemplated, or 
meditated upon by them. As a result, they do not ex perience the subject matter. Therefore, it is said 
that the Mahayana has a greater object of observati on. The distinction of the subject matter is that 
these eight clear realizations are not experienced by the non-Buddhists and so forth.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 49: 
 
 Hence, the entity of the subject matter is as foll ows. The Great Commentary says that 
“With respect to that, by indicating the result, bo dhisattvas who seek enlightenment are 
made to fully understand all aspects, such as the g enerated mind, whereby the exalted 
knower of all aspects is expressed first.”  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 9: 31 March–3 April, 2008 
 
25  
“With respect to that, by indicating the result, bo dhisattvas who seek enlightenment are made to 
fully understand all aspects, such as the generated  mind, whereby the exalted knower of all aspects 
is expressed first.” This explains why the exalted knower of all aspects is explained first. The resul t 
is the exalted knower of all aspects; by indicating  this, the bodhisattvas will practice the special 
cause of the exalted knower of all aspects, the gen erated mind, and so forth, whereby they will 
come to fully understand all the aspects. From amon g the eight categories, the exalted knower of all 
aspects is explained first in order to generate ent husiasm in the trainees. After they generate 
enthusiasm for omniscience, they generate the mind seeking it. They attain the result by creating the 
special cause, the generated mind and so forth.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 49: 
 
“The path of the exalted knower of all aspects” is taken to indicate that the path that 
proceeds to an exalted knower of all aspects is pri ncipal. Know that the expression of 
worship and the purpose-and-relationship must be co rrelated with the two other 
summaries, which will be explained below. 
 
“The path of the exalted knower of all aspects” com es from stanza 1.2a of the root text. This 
indicates that the path that proceeds to the exalte d knower of all aspects is principal. What are the 
“two other summaries” that will be explained below?  We have already completed the expression of 
worship and the purpose-and-relationship. When we s ay they must be correlated with the two 
summaries, we need to relate this to “the path that  proceeds to an exalted knower of all aspects.” 
This path is indicated in the expression of worship , where it was said that in order for one to 
practice the path of a being of great capacity, one  would need to practice the paths common to the 
middling level and the small level. The statement o f purpose and relationship also indicates the path 
that proceeds to the exalted knower of all aspects.  In the expression of worship, the path that 
proceeds to the exalted knower of all aspects is in dicated as principal, and in the statement of 
purpose and relationship, it is also indicated as p rincipal. In this way, one should correlate the 
expression of worship and statement of purpose and relationship to the two summaries, which will 
follow. The way in which the path that proceeds to an exalted knower of all aspects is indicated in 
the expression of worship and in the statement of p urpose and relationship must be correlated with 
the other two summaries.  
 
Preview of the coming section 
 
Regarding the structure of the material coming up, there is a series of fifteen stanzas, which can be 
split into two sections: one of two stanzas, and th irteen. They are a brief indication of the corpus o f 
the treatise of the Ornament for Clear Realization . The first two stanzas are themselves a brief 
indication, and the next thirteen are an extensive explanation of those two stanzas. These fifteen 
stanzas taken together are still a brief indication  of the corpus of the treatise. We already went 
through the meaning of these when we discussed the eight categories and the seventy topics.  
 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 51: 
2B2B. Summarized topics {73}  
2B2B-1. Making a connection 
2B2B-2. Setting forth the statement 
2B2B-3. Summarized and explained 
2B2B-4. Reason for not unraveling them extensively 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 9: 31 March–3 April, 2008 
 
26 2B2B-1. Making a connection  
 
This outline comes from p. 29:  
2B2. Having revealed to persons of faith in the ext ensive, to explain  
2B2A. Meaning of the purpose of the treatise 
2B2B. Summarized topics 
2B2C. Meaning of the words  
 
Since the relationship was not explicitly indicated  by the root text, having asserted the 
elimination of the qualm, the relationship was ment ioned at the outset. 
 
“Elimination of the qualm” refers to the previous s ection, where we eliminated doubts about 
composing the text and so forth.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 51: 
 
COMMENTARY 
Thus, having indicated the relationship and so fort h—in order to make trainees realize 
easily, and also having seen it as easy to explain by not mixing up the completely classified 
meaning of the treatise—the presentation of the cor pus of the Perfection of Wisdom is 
taught, through indicating briefly and extensively by fifteen verses.  
 
Next Monday, it will be my turn to ask the students  some questions! 
 
 
No class Friday, 3 April 2008 
 
 
 
END 
 