Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/Transcript pdf/ORN_GTTnotes_11a.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:51:49.642490
================================================================================

Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
1 Masters Program: Ornament for Clear Realization 
Notes on commentary by  Geshe Tenzin Tenphel 
 
Monday afternoon, 14 April 2008 
 
Correction ( Ornament of the Essence , p. 56): 
 
Since It has been taught that  one traverses the ten grounds through practice by 
meditating on that which has been taken as  the object of mindfulness by means of 
hearing and contemplation. Therefore, since  the meaning that is to be determined by a 
Mahayana person by means of hearing and c ontemplation is indicated by all the eight 
chapters,  [and] Since  that very meaning that has been  determined by means of hearing 
and contemplation is practiced by means of meditation, know that the mode of practice 
is also indicated by all the eight chapters. 
 
Before we carry on with the text there is something I would like to  explain. When we talk about the 
Mother Sutras, that is, the Perfection of Wisdom Su tras, we are mainly talking about the extensive, 
medium, and brief Perfection of Wisdom Sutras. The Commentary: Clear Meaning  by Acarya 
Haribhadra is a commentary to these su tras, and Gyeltsab Je’s explanation, Ornament of the 
Essence , is a commentary to Haribhadra’s commentar y. When we talk about the subject matter of 
the Ornament for Clear Realization , we would say that it explai ns the hidden meaning of the 
Perfection of Wisdom Sutras; it clearly reveals the stages of the paths that are the hidden meaning 
of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras. We can say that the subject matter of the Ornament  is the eight 
clear realizations; we can also say that the subject matter is the eight categories. If we were to talk 
about this more extensively, then we  could say the subject matter of the Ornament  is the seventy 
topics, because if we extend the eight categories or  the eight clear realiza tions, we end up with the 
seventy topics. In this way, we can talk about th e subject matter or the obj ects to be explained in 
various ways. If you were to understand well the eight categories, the eight clear  realizations or, to 
put it another way, if you understand well the seventy topics, then you will have understood the Ornament well. 
 Ornament of the Essence , p. 58:  
2B2B-2A2A-3. Our own system (continued) 
 
In the context of the instructions for the achievings, even though nothing other than the 
isolates of the ten topics ha s been taught, you must receive instructions on all the paths 
of the three vehicles as well as  their results, without exception. 
 This is saying that even though only the isolates  of the ten topics have been taught, you must 
receive instructions on all the paths of the three ve hicles as well as their results, and then explain 
these instructions to others as well. Basically, only  the ten topics have been taught in this context, 
but besides these ten topics, one mu st receive instructions on all the paths of the three vehicles as 
well as their results. In that wa y, by having a lot of knowledge, one wi ll be able to ex plain them to 
others.  Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
2 Due to meditating upon the meaning of em ptiness on the occasion of the path of 
accumulation, the initial boundary where it tr ansforms into a wisdom arisen from 
meditation, the path of preparation, is indicated. 
 “It transforms” means “the path  of accumulation transforms.” On e meditates on emptiness on the 
path of accumulation and when th at transforms into a wisdom ar isen from meditation, then one 
attains the path of prepara tion, and that is indicated. 
 When the sentence above “Due to meditating….is indicated” is deba ted in the monasteries, on the 
basis of such a sentence, questions will be asked:  “What is the path of accumulation?” “What would 
you posit as the path of preparation in this sentence ?” So one would have to reply that the path of 
accumulation referred to here is the Mahayana pa th of accumulation, and th e path of preparation 
mentioned here is the Mahayana path of preparation. Are those answers accurate? The answer is 
No. To make the answer very precise, you would have to say that “the path of accumulation 
mentioned here refers to the path of accumulation of someone that is definite in the Mahayana 
lineage.” If you are able to give an answer like that, then this answer is consid ered accurate. If we 
do not add the qualification “the path of accumu lation of someone definite in the Mahayana 
lineage,” there is a fault.   Consider the case of a person who first enters th e Hinayana path, attains the state of a Hinayana 
foe-destroyer, and then enters th e Mahayana path. Let’s talk about such a person in the context of 
him/her having already realized emptiness; it is  possible to have the case of someone who has 
completed the Hinayana path and has realized emptiness. If this  person has realized emptiness, 
when he meditates on emptiness on the Mahayana pa th of accumulation, then we cannot say that the 
Mahayana path of preparation is attained when that path of accumulation initially transforms into a wisdom arisen from meditation, because such a person, prior to entering the Mahayana path of 
accumulation, has already attained the wisdom arisen from meditation observing emptiness. 
Therefore, to make the answer very precise, we must say that the path of accumulation indicated 
here refers to the path of accumulation of someone definite in the Mahayana lineage.  
 Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
The presence of other special purposes regard ing that will be e xplained. Since how one 
practices the stages of clear re alizations will be explained separately [elsewhere], here I 
will not elaborate more beyond just that. 
 In the context of the path of pr eparation, the presence of other spec ial purposes regarding that will 
be explained [later].  Translator: I asked Geshe-la the meaning of the sentence at the bottom of page 57: “Thus, in 
accordance with the stages of leading trainees, you must lead th em by way of lineage before leading 
them to great compassion.”  
A: This means that you need to check what kind of lineage they are, whether they are Hinayana 
lineage or Mahayana lineage, and then you have to awaken the lineage; you ha ve to check the signs 
before leading them to great compassion. Based on th e lineage that is awakened, you can lead them 
to the appropriate vehicle; eventually they will generate great compassion, and eventually 
bodhichitta.  Q: How can you indicate  the path of preparation by meditating on emptiness? (this is related to the 
sentence above: “Due to meditating upon the meaning of emptiness on the occasion of the path of 
accumulation, the initial boundary where it transforms  into a wisdom arisen from meditation, the 
path of preparati on, is indicated.”) 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
3 A: The Tibetan text says indicated  and it really means indicated in this context . What indication are 
we talking about? We have been ta lking about the ten topics that characterize the fi rst category, the 
exalted knower of all aspects. The third topic of the ten topics is the Mahayana  path of preparation. 
This is saying that among these ten topics , the path of prepar ation is indicated. 
 Q: By whom? By the treatise? A: It is indicated by this list of the ten topics. Th is path of preparation is  then indicated. Later on, 
there will be more discussion on this. 
 Ornament of the Essence , p. 58: 
2B2B-2A2B. Explanation of the individual entities  
2B2B-2A2B-1. The three exalted knowers 
2B2B-2A2B-2. The four applications 
2B2B-2A2B-3. The truth body 
2B2B-2A2B-1. The three exalted knowers 
The first of these: 
2B2B-2A2B-1A. Exalted knower of all aspects 
ROOT TEXT 
1.4c Exalted knower of all aspects, … 
EXPLANATION {83} 
The definition [of an exalted knower of all aspects ] is: a final exalted wisdom directly 
realizing the ten topics, generated mind and so forth.   That an exalted knower of al l aspects of this [context] is posited by means of merely 
knowing the two truths is not an assertion of the Acarya; that
 the corpus of the general 
Mahayana path must  dawns  as an object of awareness through demonstration of the 
objects of realization of that exalte d knower of all aspects that is one’s  are its  objects of 
attainment is the purpose .  
 The object characterized is: “ exalted knower of all aspects .” The basis for 
characterization is: in general, in terms of divisions, from be tween the two exalted 
wisdoms—(1) knowing all aspects of object s of knowledge, and (2) directly knowing 
the ten topics of principal cause and result —here it is the latter. The boundaries are: it 
exists only on the  buddha ground. 
 Why does the definition of an exalte d knower of all aspects specify that  it is “a final exalted wisdom 
directly realizing the ten topics, generated mind and so forth”? In ge neral, an exalted knower of all 
aspects realizes all obje cts of knowledge without exception; it realizes all modes and varieties, it 
realizes ultimate truth and conventional truth. So why in  this context do we have to specify that this 
exalted knower directly realizes the ten topics, ge nerated mind and so forth?  The reason is that the 
corpus of the general Mahayana pa th must dawn as an object of aw areness of this exalted knower of 
all aspects. “The corpus of the general Mahaya na path” refers to the process of the general 
Mahayana path. Among the eight clear realizations , the exalted knower of all aspects is explained 
first. The purpose is so that the trainees can generate enthusiasm for the result, and so that the 
trainees can cause the corpus/process of the gene ral Mahayana path to da wn as an object of 
awareness. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
4 2B2B-2A2B-1B. Knower of paths 
ROOT TEXT 
1.4c …knower of paths, 
 
EXPLANATION 
The definition [of a knower of paths ] is: a Mahayana pers on’s clear realization 
conjoined with a wisdom directly realizing emptiness in the continuum of the person 
who possesses it in his continuum.  
 This definition here is al right in general, but  if you were to scrutinize it, there is actually a fault, 
because it does not mention that it is a Mahayana arya person’s clear realization; the word arya is 
not there. What is the fault in this definition?  Student: Only a Mahayana arya can have a knower of  paths, a Mahayana pers on in general need not 
have a knower of paths. Geshe-la: Your answer is acceptable, alt hough it does not exactly describe the fault. 
 
Student: We have to specify “def inite in the Mahayana lineage.” 
Geshe-la: A knower of paths can be  found in the continuu m of all Mahayana ar yas, regardless of 
whether they are definite in the Mahayana lineag e or not. All Mahayana ar yas can have knowers of 
paths. To describe precisely what the fault is in  this definition, you have to  discuss about this in 
terms of the eight doors of pervasion. I have actually  explained this before. Th ere is this relationship 
of the eight doors of pervasion between  the definition and its definiendum: 
• if it is the definiti on, it is pervaded by being the definiendum; 
• if it is the definiendum, it is pervaded by being the definition; 
• if it is not the definition, it is pe rvaded by not being the definiendum; 
• if it is not the definiendum, it is pervaded by not being the definition; 
Similarly there are four, for presence or having: 
• if there is the definition, it is perv aded by there being the definiendum; 
• if there is the definiendum, it is pervaded by there being the definition; 
• if there is not the defin ition, it is pervaded by there not being the definiendum; 
• if there is not the definiendum, it is pe rvaded by there not being the definition; 
 
To describe the fault in terms of the eight door s of pervasion between the definiendum and its 
definition, let us examine this definition and definiendum: If it is a knower of paths,  is it pervaded by being a Mahayana person’s clear realization conjoined 
with a wisdom directly realizi ng emptiness in the continuum of the person who possesses it in his 
continuum ?  
Students: Yes.  If it is a Mahayana person’s clear realiza tion conjoined with a wisdom directly realizing emptiness 
in the continuum of the person who possesses it in his continuum , is it pervaded by being a knower 
of paths?  Students: No.   Geshe-la: Show! This means you have to posit an example of something that is a Mahayana 
person’s clear realization conjoined with a wisdom directly realizi ng emptiness in the continuum of 
the person who possesses it in his continuum , but is not a knower of paths. 
Student: a Hinayana person who has completed th e Hinayana path who ha s directly realized 
emptiness and then enters the Mahayana path.   
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
5 Geshe-la: On which path is this person? 
Student: He abides on the Mahayana pa th of accumulation or preparation. 
 Geshe-la: Are you saying that this is an example of a Mahayana person’s clear realization 
conjoined with a wisdom directly realizing emp tiness in the continuum of the person who possesses 
it in his continuum , but is not a knower of paths? You are positing the Ma hayana path of 
accumulation in the continuum of a person who has previously entered the Hinayana path and has 
realized emptiness. In  fact, if we were to posit  this illustration, this basi s of characteriz ation, then 
this is not pervaded by being a Mahayana person’s clear realization conjoined with a wisdom 
directly realizing emptiness in  the continuum of the person w ho possesses it in his continuum.  
 What would be an example of someone who satisfies the illustration, but is not a Mahayana 
person’s clear realization conjoined with a wisdom directly realizi ng emptiness in the continuum of 
the person who possesses it in his continuum.  Let’s say that you have a person who attains the 
Hinayana path of accumulation, and then, without attaining the Hinayana path of preparation, 
attains the Mahayana path of accumulation, such a person can have realized emptiness, but such a 
person would not have directly real ized emptiness. In other words, it is possible to  have a person 
who has entered the Hinayana path and realized em ptiness and then entered the Mahayana path of 
accumulation. Such a person may not have directly  realized emptiness. 
 Q: I do not understand what this example is for? Translator: We are trying to posit  an example of that which is a Mahayana person’s clear 
realization conjoined with a wisdom directly re alizing emptiness in the continuum of the person 
who possesses it in his continuum  but is not a knower of paths. 
 Q: But the example which Geshe-la is giving right now  is not about a direct realization; that is why 
I do not understand. Translator: Javier posited this example and Geshe- la says that if we were to mention the word 
“direct” realization, it would be fine.  
 If you were to give an example: The Mahayana path of accumulati on in the continuu m of a person 
who has previously entered the Hi nayana path and has directly 
realized emptiness. This would be a 
Mahayana person’s clear realization conjoined with a wisdom directly realizing emptiness in the 
continuum of the person who possesses it in his continuum , but is not a knower of paths. 
 Q: According to the Autonomist  school, are there Hinayana foe- destroyers who have directly 
realized the emptiness of true existence? A: There are Hinayana foe- destroyers who have direc tly realized the emptiness of true existence. In 
general, a Hinayana foe-destroyer does not need to have directly realized the emptiness of true 
existence, but it is possible to have such a foe destroyer.  Q: What is the reason for the example given—why is it not a knower of paths? 
A: The difference does not li e in whether or not this person has realized emptiness directly or not, 
this is not the criterion. The reason why it is no t a knower of paths is b ecause he does not have a 
Mahayana arya path. It is not an exalted knower of a Mahayana arya. 
 Q: Is it because he has not developed uncontrived bodhichitta? A: This person would necessarily have uncontr ived bodhichitta because he has attained the 
Mahayana path of accumulation.  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
6 If you look at the boundaries  of the knower of paths, it starts  from the Mahayana path of seeing 
through the buddha ground. The Mahayana path of accu mulation that has been posited is not an 
exalted knower of a Mahayana arya.  Q: So to be a Mahayana arya, it is no t enough to be a Mahayanist and an arya. 
Translator: Yes, to be a Mahayana  arya, it is not sufficient to be  both a Mahayanist and an arya. 
 
The consequences of wrongly defining a knower of paths 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 58: 
 
Someone’s assertion of “an exalted wisdom directly realizing the emptiness of true 
existence of the three paths” as the defin ition of a knower of paths is incorrect. A 
knower of paths knowing hearers’ paths would not directly realize the sixteen [aspects 
of the four noble truths], imperman ence and so {page 59} forth, whereby  
(i) it follows that it would be inappropriate fo r a clear realization (that is to be passed 
through, having been viewed by knowing and s eeing by a bodhisattva) to be generated 
at the time of the Mahayana path of seeing;  (ii) it follows that the first of the three know ers of paths for the sake of taking care of 
the hearer lineage-bearers w ould not be cultivated;{84}  
(iii) it follows that, if that very direct real ization of impermanence and so forth directly 
realizes freedom from elaborat ion, then the stains of the conception of the two truths as 
different entities would be exhausti vely abandoned on a learner’s path;  
(iv) it follows that meditative equipoise a nd subsequent attainme nt would be of one 
entity, and so forth. 
 Here we have someone who asserts that the defini tion of a knower of paths is “an exalted wisdom 
directly realizing the emptiness of  true existence of the three path s.” This is incorrect according to 
our system.  When we talk about the knower of paths, there are 3 types: 
1. a knower of paths knowing hearers’ paths, 
2. a knower of paths knowing solit ary realizers’ paths, and 
3. a knower of paths knowing bodhisattvas’ paths. 
 Here the consequence that follows from this wrong assertion is: “ A knower of paths knowing 
hearers’ paths would not direc tly realize the sixteen [aspects of the four noble truths], 
impermanence and so forth.” In fact, if we were to posit an example of a knower of paths knowing 
hearers’ paths, we would posit a knower of paths directly realizing the 16 as pects of the four noble 
truths, impermanence and so forth. If th is assertion that a knower of paths is an exalted wisdom 
directly realizing the emptiness of  true existence of the three paths  were to be correct, then a knower 
of paths knowing hearers’ paths would not directly  realize the 16 aspects of  the four noble truths, 
impermanence and so forth, whereby:  
(i) it follows that it would be inappropriate for a clear realization (that is to be passed through, 
having been viewed by k nowing and seeing by a bodhisattva) to be generated at the time of the 
Mahayana path of seeing;  
In fact, according to our system, th is direct realization of imperman ence and so forth is generated at 
the time of the Mahayana path of seeing.   
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
7 (ii) it follows that the first of th e three knowers of paths for the sa ke of taking care of the hearer 
lineage-bearers would not be cultivated;  (iii) it follows that, if that very direct realizati on of impermanence and so forth directly realizes 
freedom from elaboration, then the stains of the con ception of the two truths  as different entities 
would be exhaustively abandoned on a learner’s path;  
If that direct realizat ion of impermanence and so forth were  to directly realize freedom from 
elaboration, then there would be a single mind directly realizing the two truths. Here when it talks 
about “freedom from elaboration,” it  refers to the emptiness of true existence. It is saying that “if 
that very direct realization of im permanence and so forth also directly  realizes the emptiness of true 
existence, then there would be a single mind that directly realizes the two truths, whereby the stains of the conception of the two tr uths as different entities w ould be exhaustively abandoned on a 
learner’s path.”  Q: What is a learner’s path? Translator: A learner’s path is a path that occurs before the path of no-more learning (i.e., learners’ 
paths are the path of accumulation, path of prep aration, path of seeing, and path of meditation). 
 
(iv) it follows that med itative equipoise and subsequent attainme nt would be of on e entity, and so 
forth  
 
The procedure of flinging consequences here is that we first fling the consequence: “If your 
definition is correct, it would follow that a know er of paths knowing hearer’s path would not 
directly realize the 16 aspects of the four noble truth, imperm anence and so forth.” From this first 
consequence, other consequences follow.   Q: Why does the first of th e series of consequence – a knower of paths k nowing hearers’ paths 
would not directly realize the si xteen [aspects of the four noble truths], impermanence and so forth  
– follow from the definition of the knower of paths as “ an exalted wisdom directly realizing the 
emptiness of true existence of the three paths ”?  
A: What is the reason that it follows that a knower of paths knowing hearers’ paths would not 
directly realize the sixteen [aspects of the four noble truths], impermanence and so forth ? 
Student: Because if it directly realizes emptiness, it would not realize conventionalities.  Geshe-la: Hence, if a knower of path s necessarily directly re alizes the emptiness of  true existence, it 
would not directly realize imperm anence and so forth. Do you accept th is statement? It is important 
to make this precise by saying this : if a knower of paths necessarily directly re alizes the emptiness 
of true existence of the three paths, then a knower of paths knowing hearers’ paths would not 
directly realize the 16 asp ects of the four noble truths, impermanence and so forth. 
 This person is thinking that a knower of paths s hould be an exalted knower directly realizing the 
emptiness of true existence of the three paths since it is a knower of paths . If this were the case, 
then a knower of paths knowing hear ers’ paths would not di rectly realize the 16 aspects of the four 
noble truths, impermanence and so forth. 
 Q: If it is a knower of paths in the continuum of  a buddha arya, is it able to directly realize the 
emptiness of true existence of the three paths and al so directly realize the sixteen aspects of the four 
noble truths, impermanence and so forth? A: Of course. If we are talking about a knower of  paths in the continuum of a buddha arya, it is 
pervaded by realizing all phenom ena, all objects of knowledge, so  it would directly realize the 
emptiness of true existence of the three paths and would also directly reali ze the sixteen aspects of 
the four noble truths, impermanence and forth.  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
8 Has your doubt been answered? Have you understood the fault of positing this ( an exalted wisdom 
directly realizing the emptiness of  true existence of the three paths ) as the definiti on of a knower of 
paths? Is this a correct definition? It is not. Why?  What is the reason for saying that this is not the 
correct definition?  Student: This definition is faulty because it does not contain the words “ conjoined with.”  It says it is 
a direct realization of emptin ess rather than that it is conjoined  with this direct realization. 
Geshe-la: What would you posit as its de finition? Would you just add the words “ conjoined with”? 
Student: I would posit the above definition but add the word arya. 
 If we look at this assertion, it says th at the definition of a knower of paths is an exalted wisdom 
directly realizing the emptiness of  true existence of  the three paths. In response to this statement we 
would ask: If it is an exalted knower directly realizing the em ptiness of true existence of the three 
paths , is it pervaded by being a knower of paths? Likewi se, if it is a knower of paths, is it pervaded 
by being an exalted knower directly realizing the emptiness of true existence of the three paths . 
What would the fault be in sa ying that there is pervasion? 
Student: If it is a knower of paths, it is no t necessarily an exalted knower directly realizing the 
emptiness of true existence of the three paths . 
Geshe-la: Posit something that is a knower of paths but not an exalted knower dire ctly realizing the 
emptiness of true existe nce of the three paths.  
Student: A Mahayana arya’s  conventional bodhichitta. 
Geshe-la: That is correct. Does it follow that if it is a Mahayana arya’s conventional bodhichitta, it 
is pervaded by not being an exalted knower directly realizing the emptiness of true existence of the 
three paths ? Are you saying that this Mahayana ar ya’s conventional bod hichitta is not an exalted 
knower directly realizing the emptiness of true existence of the three paths ? 
Student: It should be a Mahayana learner
 arya’s conventional bodhichitta. 
Geshe-la: If you say that, then it is exactly right! Are there any other examples we can posit besides 
a Mahayana learner arya’s  conventional bodhichitta?  
Student 2: A Mahayana learner arya’s r ealization of the self lessness of persons. 
Geshe-la: That is correct. Student 3: A Mahayana arya’s subsequent attainment of the path of meditation.  
Geshe-la: You can just say “an exalted wisdom of s ubsequent attainment of the path of meditation” 
(it is not necessary to sa y “a Mahayana learner arya”) . That would be correct. 
 You have posited several examples of th at which is a knowe r of paths but not an exalted knower 
directly realizing the emptiness of true existence of the three paths . Now, what about the other way 
around: if it is an exalted wisdom di rectly realizing the emptiness of true existence of the three 
paths , is it pervaded by being a knower of paths? 
Students: Yes.  Student 4: Is it not that only a buddha knows the emptiness of true existence of the three paths? 
Geshe-la: No. Student: No, if it is an exalted knower directly realizing the em ptiness of true existence of the three 
paths , it is not pervaded by being a knower of paths; for exam ple, a Hinayana foe-destroyer’s 
exalted wisdom directly realizing emptiness. Geshe-la: This is correct!  You may think that you know what a knower of paths is—the defini tion is this and the boundaries 
are that—but if, when questions ar e directed at you, you do not how to  answer, this is a sign that 
you have not understood well what a knower of paths is. Thi nk about this material  carefully, in this 
way you will be able to understand we ll what a knower of paths is.  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
9 Therefore, when in this contex t we look at this incorrect definition posited by someone, there are 
essential points contained in th is assertion, and by examining this  assertion, we are able to 
understand better what a knower of paths is.   Q: We said that a knower of paths knows the three paths and then it is stated in the passage that (ii) 
it follows that the first of the three knowers of paths for the sake of taking care of the hearer 
lineage-bearers would not be cultivated . I had understood that a bodhisa ttva would not be interested 
in cultivating such a knower of paths knowing hearers’ paths.  
Geshe-la: In fact a bodhisattva cu ltivates a knower of paths knowing hearers’ path for the sake of 
taking care of hearer lineage bearers. Here the consequence is flung that if this definition were 
correct, the absurd consequence would follow that the first of the thre e knowers of paths for the 
sake of taking care of the hearer lin eage-bearers would not be cultivated . Basically this is a 
consequence that is flung to the person who posits this incorrect definition. We say that according 
to his wrong assertion, it would follow that a bodhisattva would not cultivate a knower of paths 
knowing hearers’ path, whereas a bodhi sattva in fact does cultivate it. 
 Q: I do not understand the first consequence: (i) it follows that it would be inappropriate for a clear 
realization (that is to be passed through, hav ing been viewed by knowing and seeing by a 
bodhisattva) to be generated at the time of the Mahayana path of seeing.  
A: What is this clear realization that is to be passed through, having been viewed by knowing and 
seeing by a bodhisattva ? We can posit: a knower of paths dir ectly realizing the sixteen aspects of 
the four noble truths, impermanence and so forth.  To make a connection: if we posit an exalted wis dom or a clear realization directly realizing the 
sixteen aspects of the fours noble truths, impermanen ce and so forth, this would be an example of a 
clear realization that is to be passed through, having been  viewed by knowi ng and seeing by a 
bodhisattva . The precise meaning of this phrase “ that is to be passed th rough, having been viewed 
by knowing and seeing by a bodhisattva”  will come in the 3rd chapter. To conclude this first point: 
according to our own system a bodhisattva does generate a clear realization  that is to be passed 
through, having been viewed by knowing and seeing, at the time of the Mahayana path of seeing.  
 In this passage here, we are discussing the cons equences that would follow from positing a wrong 
definition of a knower of paths. There are essentia l points in this passage , and you should not think 
that since this definition is not asserted by our sy stem, we can ignore it. Ra ther, there are essential 
points that need to be un derstood in this passage. 
 Ornament of the Essence : 
 
Furthermore, with respect to a knower of paths, it follows that [a Mahayana arya’s
] the 
great compassion that stops the extreme of peace is would  not be  included within a 
knower of paths. And if even the comp assion of non-observation in a bodhisattva 
[arya’s] mental continuum does not directly reali ze emptiness, then the assertion that a 
knower of paths is pervaded by it would only be incorrect. 
 If we do not add some annotations to this paragra ph, there would be some fa ults because “the great 
compassion that stops the extreme of peace” does not have to be a knower of paths. Here there is 
another passage positing consequences that again follows from the incorrect definition posited by this person: 
• if that definition were correct, it follows that a Mahayana arya’s  great compassion that 
stops the extreme of peace would not be included with in a knower of paths. The reason for 
this is that according to your wrong definition a knower of pa ths necessarily di rectly realizes 
the emptiness of true existence. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
10  
In the second sentence, it mentions  “the compassion of non-observation.” This refers to that great 
compassion that is conjoined with the wisdom  realizing emptiness. Such compassion of non-
observation does not directly  realize emptiness. That being the case, the assertion that a knower of 
paths is pervaded by being it (“it” re ferring to the direct realization of  emptiness) is only incorrect. 
 It is important to understand this  style of flinging consequences in that this kind of use of 
consequences will come again later. If you understan d it well right from the beginning, it will be 
easier to understand later passages.    
Tuesday 15 April, 2008 
 Correction
: Ornament of the Essence , p. 58:  
 
That an exalted knower of al l aspects of this [context] is posited by means of merely 
knowing the two truths is not an assertion of the Acarya; that  the corpus of the general 
Mahayana path must  dawns  as an object of awareness through demonstration of the 
objects of realization of that exalte d knower of all as pects that are its  is one’s  objects  of 
attainment is the purpose . 
 Translator: Regarding this passag e, I asked Geshe-la, What are th e objects of realization and the 
objects of attainment? The “objects of  realization” are the ten topics, and the “object of attainment” 
is the exalted knower of all aspects. Who is the “on e” referred to here? It is the intended trainees of 
the Ornament for Clear Realization . The purpose of this phrase is so  that the corpus of the general 
Mahayana path dawns as an object of awareness of the trainees.   Ornament of the Essence , p. 59:  
 
2B2B-2A2B-1B. Knower of paths (continued) 
 
 The object characterized is: “ knower of paths .” The bases for characterization are: all 
clear realizations of Mahayana  aryas that are conjoined with  a wisdom directly realizing 
emptiness, such as a knower of paths know ing hearers’ paths. The boundaries are: it 
exists from the Mahayana path  of seeing through the buddha ground. 
 There is no need to comment on this. However, I w ould like to review the series of consequences 
that we went through yesterday. Someone’s assertion is that the definition of a knower of paths is 
“an exalted wisdom directly realizing the emptiness of true existence of the three paths.” We also 
discussed whether a knower of paths is pervad ed by being this definition. Have you understood 
this? A knower of paths is not pervaded by being “an exalted wis dom directly realizing emptiness 
of true existence of the three pa ths.” Posit! (This means that you mu st posit examples of that which 
is a knower of paths but is not “an exalted wisdom directly realizi ng emptiness of true existence of 
the three paths.”)   Student 1: Bodhicitta in th e mind of a Mahayana arya. 
Student 2: The realization of subtle impermane nce in the continuum of a bodhisattva arya.  
 GTT: Good.   
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
11 The conclusion is that an exalted wisdom directly realizing emptiness of true existence of the three 
paths is not pervaded by being a knower of paths. Posi t (an example of exalted wisdom directly 
realizing emptiness of true ex istence of the three paths that  is not a knower of paths)! 
 Student 1: Meditative equipoi se directly realizing emptiness of tr ue existence of three paths in the 
continuum of a Hinayana arya.  GTT: Good. You’ve underst ood this. Other examples? 
 Student 2: Any mind in the continuum of an arya  buddha, because it is an exalted knower of all 
aspects.  GTT: No—an exalted knower of  all aspects is pervaded by being a knower of paths.  
 Student 3: Exalted wisdom in the continuum of  a bodhisattva realizing th e emptiness of true 
existence of all phenomena on the path of accumulation who has previously attained the arhat state.  
GTT: It is sufficient to just posit  the exalted wisdom directly realizing emptiness of true existence 
of all phenomena in the continuum of a bodhi sattva on the path of accumulation. You do not 
necessarily need to say “who has previously attain ed the arhat state.”  
 Student 4: But it is not possible to posit someone definite in Mahayana lin eage who has directly 
realized emptiness on the path of accumulation.  
GTT: That’s right. It is okay to say “exalted wisdom in conti nuum of a bodhisattva realizing the 
emptiness of true existence of all phenomena on the path of accumulation,” but you can add the 
phrase “who has previously attain ed the arhat state” to clarify. 
 Student: Is “exalted wisdom” mutually  inclusive with “cl ear realization”? 
GTT: Yes. They are synonymous.   Ornament of the Essence , p. 59: 
2B2B-2A2B-1C. Knower of bases 
ROOT TEXT 
1.4d  Then, knower of all, 
 
EXPLANATION  
The definition [of a knower of bases ] is: an exalted wisdom—conjoined with a wisdom 
directly realizing the selfle ssness of persons in the con tinuum of a person who possesses 
it in his continuum—that abides in a cl ass of hearers’ clear realizations.  
 
The object characterized is: “ then, knower of all .” The bases for characterization are: 
all that directly rea lize the sixteen [aspects of the f our noble truths], impermanence and 
so forth, and abide in that class. The qua lm—wondering if the exalted wisdom directly 
realizing emptiness of true existence fr ee of elaborations receives the convention 
“antidotal knower of bases”—is not present in  either of the Acarya’s great or small 
commentaries. The boundaries are: it exists in all arya persons.  
 There is someone who thinks that the “exalted wisdom directly realiz ing emptiness of true existence 
free of elaborations receives the convention,” or gets the name, “‘ antidotal knower of bases’,” but 
this “is not present in either of  the Acarya’s great or small comm entaries.” In this way, we have 
discussed the three exalted knowers. Now we  will discuss the four applications. 
 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
12 Ornament of the Essence , p. 59: 
2B2B-2A2B-2. The four applications {85}  
The first of these: 
2B2B-2A2B-2A. Application in complete aspects 
ROOT TEXT 
1.5a Clear complete realization of all aspects, 
 
EXPLANATION 
The definition [of an applic ation in complete aspects ] is: a bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined 
with a wisdom cultivating the aspects of the three exalted knowers.   The object characterized is: “ clear complete realization of all aspects .” Its divisions 
are: 173 bodhisattva’s yogas cu ltivating the aspect s of the three exalted knowers. The 
boundaries are: from the Mahayana path of  accumulation through th e end of continuum 
[of a sentient being]. 
 It mentions here that there ar e 173 bodhisattva’s yogas cultivating the aspects of the three exalted 
knowers. There are also 173 aspects of the three exalted knowers, which consist of:  
• 27 aspects of the knower of bases 
• 36 aspects of the knower of paths 
• 110 aspects of the exalted knower of all aspects.  
We can further subdivide the last group into three groups: 
• 37 aspects concordant with those of hearers and solitary realizers 
• 34 concordant with those of bodhisattvas 
• 39 uncommon aspects of an exalted knower of all aspects  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 60: 
2B2B-2A2B-2B. Peak application 
ROOT TEXT 
1.5b Gone to the peak, … 
 
EXPLANATION 
The definition [of a peak application ] is: a highly transf ormed bodhisattva’s yoga 
cultivating the aspects of the exalted know ers by means of bei ng conjoined with a 
wisdom arisen from meditation observing emptiness.   The object characterized is: “ gone to the peak.”  Its divisions are f our when condensed, 
and 173 when extensively [enumerated]. The bo undaries are: from the heat level of the 
Mahayana path of preparation through th e end of the continuum of the ten grounds. 
 The 173 mentioned here are the same as before. Th e divisions of the peak  application are four: 
1. Peak application of path of preparation  
2. Peak application of path of seeing  
3. Peak application of path of meditation  
4. Uninterrupted peak application  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 60: 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
13 2B2B-2A2B-2C. Serial application 
ROOT TEXT 
1.5b … serially, 
 
EXPLANATION 
The definition [of a serial application ] is: a bodhisattva’s yoga th at [is conjoined with 
the wisdom that]  cultivates in order to attain stable  the aspects of the three exalted 
knowers progressively in order to  attain stability in them. them . {86}  
 The object characterized is: “ serially.”  It has thirteen divi sions. The boundaries are: 
from the Mahayana path of accumulation through just prior to the end of the continuum 
[of a sentient being]. 
 This definition needs to be annotated as above in order to be correct.  
 The thirteen divisions of serial application are:  
1. perfection of generosity 
2. perfection of ethics 
3. perfection of patience 
4. perfection of joyous effort 
5. perfection of concentration 
6. perfection of wisdom 
7. recollection of the Buddha 
8. recollection of the Dharma 
9. recollection of the Sangha 
10. recollection of ethics 
11. recollection of giving 
12. recollection of the gods 
13. entitiness of non-things 
 It might seem there is some repetition in this list,  because at the beginning there is serial application 
of perfection of generosity, and th en there is serial application of  recollection of giving. They are 
not repetitions, however, because the first refers to the serial application while one is engaged in 
giving, while the serial applicati on of recollection of giving is an  application of recollecting the 
benefits of giving. This also applies to the serial application of the perfection of ethics, which is not 
the same as the serial application of the recollection of ethics. The first is serial application while 
guarding against misbehavior, while the second involves recollecting the benefits of guarding 
against misbehavior.   Ornament of the Essence , p. 60: 
2B2B-2A2B-2D. Instantaneous application 
ROOT TEXT 
1.5c Clear complete enlightenment in one instant, 
 
EXPLANATION 
The definition [of an instantaneous application ] is: a bodhisattva’s final yoga arisen 
through the force of a serial application. {86}   The object characterized is: “ clear complete enlightenment in one instant.”  It has four 
divisions. The boundaries are: only at the end of continuum [of a sentient being]. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
14  
The four divisions are:  
1. non-ripened instantaneous application  
2. ripened instantaneous application 
3. characterless instantaneous application 
4. non-dual instantaneous application 
 Then we have the truth body.   Ornament of the Essence , pp. 60-61:  
2B2B-2A2B-3. The truth body 
ROOT TEXT 
1.5d Truth body: … 
 
EXPLANATION 
The definition [of a truth body ] is: a final result attained by the strength of cultivating 
the aspects of the three exalted knowers.   The object characterized is: “ truth body.”  When divided, there ar e four exalted bodies. 
The boundaries are: only on the buddha ground. 
 The four exalted bodies are:  
1. nature body 
2. complete enjoyment body  
3. emanation body 
4. exalted wisdom truth body  
 Thus, the order is 
1. the three exalted knowers 
2. the four application 
3. the resultant truth body.  
 Or, when we look at them more extensively:  
1. exalted knower of all aspects 
2. knower of paths 
3. knower of bases 
4. application in complete aspects 
5. peak application 
6. serial application 
7. instantaneous application 
8. exalted wisdom truth body (which can also be stated as “resultant truth body”)  
 Ornament of the Essence , p. 61: 
 
Condensing the enumeration of these:  
ROOT TEXT 
1.5d … these are the eight. 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
15 • The objects to be cultivated are definite as three: the three exalted knowers. 
• Those which cultivate are definite as the four applications. 
• The result is definite as the resultant truth body.  
 
We can say that the “objects” or the “objects of  cultivation” are definite as the three exalted 
knowers, that “that which cultivates” or “that whic h cultivates the object-possessors ” are the four 
applications, and that the “result” is definite as  the truth body. The number of  these is definite, and 
the sequence is also definite. Are the three exalte d knowers definite in sequence? No, they are not, 
but the explanation of this will come later.   
Being definite in enumeration: 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 61: 
 
EXPLANATION 
“These are the eight.” With respect to that, the way in which the number of the three 
exalted knowers is definite should be know n at the outset by all who seek mere 
liberation and who seek omniscience. {87} Me ditating on the bases th at are objects to 
be determined by means of the sixteen asp ects of the four noble truths, impermanence 
and so forth, is definitely necessary in orde r to attain the result  of foe-destroyer of 
hearers and solitary realizers; one is able to  attain the result of foe-destroyer through 
merely that. Even a bodhisattva must firs t cultivate the sixteen  aspects prior to 
cultivating a knower of paths; he too must know  such bases in order to (i) take care of 
hearer lineage-bearers and (ii)  generate disillusionment fo r all of cyclic existence 
himself. Without that, this  will not arise. In order to attain the convent ion, “bodhisattva 
who knows well the path proceeding to omnisc ience,” and to accomplish the welfare of 
the entire world, he must know the paths of th e three vehicles. Without  that, he will not 
be able to do so.  
 This mentions two types of persons: those “w ho seek mere liberation” and those “who seek 
omniscience.” Then it mentions, “meditating on the bases that are objects to be determined by 
means of the sixteen aspects of the four noble truths, impermanence and so forth.” Both these types 
of persons need to train in the sixteen aspects of the four noble truths, impermanence and so forth. 
For hearers and solitary realizers, training in these sixteen aspects is sufficient to attain the state of 
foe-destroyer, or mere libera tion. Why do bodhisattvas need to cu ltivate the sixteen aspects? A 
bodhisattva first needs to cultivat e these in order to be able to  generate a knower of paths.  
 A bodhisattva “must first cultivate the sixteen asp ects prior to cul tivating a knower of paths;” he 
“must know such bases in order to (i) take care of hearer lineage-bearers and (ii) generate 
disillusionment for all of cyclic ex istence himself.” “Without that, this
 will not arise” means that the 
mind of definite emergence will not arise. A “b odhisattva who knows well th e path proceeding to 
omniscience” is a bodhisattva w ho knows the sixteen aspects well before generating the knower of 
paths. “To accomplish the welfare of the entire wo rld”: entire world refers to the three lineage-
bearers, i.e. “he must know the pa ths of the three vehicl es.” If a bodhisattva ha s trained first in the 
sixteen aspects of the four noble truths and then generates the knower of paths, then he/she is a 
“bodhisattva who knows well the path proceeding to omniscience.” A bodhisattva, in order to attain an exalted knower of all aspects, first needs to gene rate a knower of paths that  directly realizes that 
the three paths are empty of true ex istence. In order to generate th is, he needs to know the sixteen 
attributes. A bodhisattva who proceeds to omniscie nce in this way is skilled in the path to 
omniscience. A bodhisattva needs to know the sixteen  aspects of the four noble truths, and he also 
needs to practice all these aspects.  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
16  
Ornament of the Essence , p. 61: 
 
An exalted knower of all aspects is definitely  necessary in order to turn the complete 
wheels of Dharma for all three lineage-bearers.  Without that, he will not be able to do 
so.  
  This means that without an exalted knower of all aspects, he will not  be able to turn the complete 
wheels of Dharma for all three lineage-bearers.   Ornament of the Essence , p. 61: 
 
Hence, even from the point of view of acco mplishing the goals of the four aryas, the 
exalted knowers are definite in number as three, because the exalted knowers that are objects to be practiced by Maha yanists are definite ly three, and anything more than 
those is not needed.  
 The four aryas are: 
1. hearer aryas 
2. solitary realizer aryas 
3. bodhisattva aryas 
4. buddha aryas 
 The goal of hearer and solitary realizer aryas is to  attain mere liberation; to attain this, just the 
knower of bases is sufficient. The goal of bodhisa ttva aryas is to accomplish the goals of the three 
lineage-bearers, and the knower of paths is sufficient for this. The goal of buddha arya s is to turn 
the wheels of Dharma for the three lineage-bearers, and for that, the exalted knower of all aspects is 
sufficient. “Hence, even from the point of view of accomplishing the goals of the four aryas, the 
exalted knowers are definite in number as three.” Th e “objects to be practiced by Mahayanists” can 
be posited as the 173 aspects. He re it talks about “the exalted kno wers that are objects to be 
practiced by Mahayanists.” One practices the th ree exalted knowers by practicing the 173 aspects of 
the three exalted knowers.   Q: If a bodhisattva were to train in the aspects of the four noble truths before generating a knower 
of paths, then this bodhisattva could realize self lessness of persons before generating a knower of 
paths. Is such a bodhisattva an arya? Does he  have a knower of bases in his continuum?  
A: If you are just talking in general, it is possi ble for a bodhisattva to a ttain a knower of bases 
before attaining a knower of paths. A bodhisattva can  directly realize selfle ssness of persons before 
attaining a knower of paths. Su ch a bodhisattva is an arya and has a knower of bases in his 
continuum, but this is not a bodhisattva definite in the Mahayana  lineage. For someone definite in 
the Mahayana lineage, attainment of the Mahayana  path of seeing, attain ment of the knower of 
bases, and attainment of the know er of paths are simultaneous.  
 A bodhisattva who directly re alizes selflessness  prior to the pa th of seeing is not necessarily 
someone who has previously attained the state of Hinayana foe-destroyer. There can be a 
bodhisattva who has previously at tained the Hinayana path of seeing, without moving to the 
Hinayana path of meditation, who la ter enters a Mahayana path. It is  possible to have someone who 
attains the Hinayana path of accu mulation, the Hinayana path of pr eparation, or the Hinayana path 
of seeing who then enters the Mahayana path.   Those who have attained the Hinayana path of meditation are of two types: 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
17 1. those who abandon the objects of abandonment simultaneously . they will definitely proceed 
to the state of hinayana foe-destroyer,  and afterwards to a mahayana path.  
2. those who abandon the objects of abandonment serially . it is possible for them to enter the 
mahayana path from the hinayana path of med itation. however, they can also attain the state 
of foe-destroyer before en tering the mahayana path.  
As a basis for explaining these two types of persons, we will look at hearers on the Hinayana path of meditation. The objects to be abandoned by th e Hinayana path of me ditation are in three 
categories: 
1. desire realm  
2. form realm 
3. formless realm  
We explained before that the si xteen objects of abandonment of th e path of meditation can be sub-
divided into 414. We can talk about this in a c ondensed way: the object s to be abandoned with 
respect to the desire r ealm can be divided into great, middling, and small, and these can be further 
sub-divided into great, middling, and small. This al so applies to the objects of abandonment of the 
form realm and those of the fo rmless realm. We thus have: 
• great/great objects of abandonment 
• middling/great objects of abandonment 
• small/great objects of abandonment, and so forth.  
Someone who abandons simultaneously will abandon the great/great objects of abandonment of the 
three realms simultaneously: great/great of the de sire realm, form realm, and formless realm are 
abandoned simultaneously; the middling/great of the desire realm, form realm, and formless realm 
are abandoned simultaneously; and the small/great of  the desire realm, form realm, and formless 
realm are abandoned simultaneously.  A serial abandoner will first abandon the great/great object s of abandonment of the desire realm, 
then the middling/great, then the small/great, un til abandoning the small/small of the desire realm, 
and then begin to abandon the objects of the form  and formless realms, and so on, until he abandons 
the small/small objects of the form and formless r ealms. When someone who abandons serially is 
on the path of seeing, it is  possible to transfer to the Mahayana path before  attaining the path of 
meditation, but once they enter path  of meditation and begin to aba ndon the desire realm afflictions, 
they cannot transfer to the Mahayana before the desire realm afflictions have been abandoned. After 
abandoning the desire realm afflictions and be fore beginning to abandon the form realm and 
formless realm afflictions, however, they can transfer to the Mahayana path.  
 For a simultaneous person : on the Hinayana path of medita tion, there is no possibility of 
transferring to the Mahayana path while the objects of abandonment of path of med itation are being 
abandoned. They abandon the three types of obj ect of abandonment simu ltaneously. The person 
who abandons simultaneously would thus undergo nine uninterrupted pa ths, but the serial 
abandoner would undergo eightee n uninterrupted paths.  
  
Wednesday 16 April, 2008 (morning) 
 Ornament of the Essence , p. 61: 
 
 Acarya Arya [Vimuktisena] said, “[That] is explained to be the meaning of ‘a hearer’s 
path passed through, having been viewed by knowing and seeing by a bodhisattva, and 
is the cause of attaining the three vehicles together’
…” From that, it is obvious that it is 
as though there is neither a knower of bases nor a knower of paths in ordinary beings. 
 Who is the “Arya” mentioned above? This will be discussed later. 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
18 Q: Why does it say “as though”? This seems to imply that there is a knower of bases and knower of 
paths in ordinary beings. A: This is related to the previous quotation, in which the “three vehicles” are mentioned—the 
hearer, solitary realizer, and bodhisattva vehicles —each of which has its respective causes. There 
are various classes of realizations:  
• for hearers, the direct rea lization of the sixt een aspects of the four noble truths; 
• for solitary realizers, the di rect realization of forms as  not being external objects; 
• for bodhisattvas, the direct realization of  the emptiness of true existence.  
The causes of these are explained in the context of the Mahayana path of preparat ion. There, we 
will see an explanation of the causes of these realiz ations. On the occasions, or paths, of ordinary 
beings, i.e., on the path of accumu lation and the path of preparat ion, there are no knowers of bases 
and no knowers of paths. These are only present on ar ya paths. When we talk about a hearers’ class 
of realizations, we can just say “t he realization of selflessness,” or “the realization of the sixteen 
aspects of the four noble truths,” without specifying “direct.” This is the same for solitary realizers 
and bodhisattvas. But in terms of wh en they are complete, we have to say that they are completed 
when the corresponding direct  realization is obtained.  
 “The cause of attaining the thre e vehicles together” above means the cause of attaining the 
complete realization
 of the three vehicles together . For ordinary beings (those on the path of 
accumulation and path of preparation), there is realization, but th is realization is complete only upon 
attaining the first ground. For some one definite in the Mahayana li neage, the various  realizations—
the classes of realization of h earers, solitary realizers, and bodhisattvas—are complete only upon 
attaining the first ground. In this way, it is indicat ed that there is no knower of bases and no knower 
of paths in the continua of ordinary beings.   Ornament of the Essence , p. 61: 
 
 The number of the four applications is defi nite. In order to destroy all the afflictive 
and knowledge obscurations without exception, one must cultivate the complete aspects 
of the three exalted knowers. Since that is
 those are  subsumed under the two modes: (i) 
cultivation for the sake of attaining contro l over the familiarization and (ii) cultivation 
that is the culmination of the highest familia rization, there are the first two applications,  
{88} and  in order to actually attain the trut h body that is manifestly completely 
enlightened with respect to all phenomena in  one instant, when one takes to mind a 
single [aspect], such as impermanence, on the occasion of its application, without 
having to exert oneself in taking to mind th e others, all aspects of the three exalted 
knowers must dawn as objects of the mind; s ince one must act to sequentially 
familiarize with those through exertion previo usly in order for that to occur, the 
branches of the attainment of  stability are definite as the two later applications.  
 “That is subsumed” refers to th e cultivation of the aspects of the three exalted knowers. “(i) 
Cultivation for the sake of attaining control over th e familiarization” refers to cultivating the aspects 
for the sake of attaining control  over them, and “(ii) cultivation that is the culmination of the 
highest familiarization” refers to cultivating them for the sake of attaining stability . The “first two 
applications” are the app lication in complete aspects and peak  application. These first two are for 
the sake of attaining control, in that  
• an application in complete aspects is cult ivated in order to attain control, and  
• a peak application is an application in which control has been attained.  
The third and fourth applica tions are for the sake of a ttaining stability in that  
• a serial application is cultivated fo r the sake of attaining stability, and 
• an instantaneous application is an applica tion in which stability has been attained.  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
19  
“…[I]n order to actually attain the truth body that is  manifestly completely enlightened with respect 
to all phenomena in one instant, when one takes to mind a single [aspect], such as impermanence, 
on the occasion of its app lication, without having to exert ones elf in taking to mind the others, all 
aspects of the three exalted knowers must da wn as objects of the mind” refers to instantaneous 
application . One must familiarize with these aspects in order to obtain the result – the truth body 
that is manifestly completely enlightened with  respect to all phenomena in one instant.  
 
Ornament of the Essence : 
 
Thus the applications are defin ite as four. The final result of these is called the “truth 
body.” 
 The final result is the truth body.   Ornament of the Essence, p. 62: 
 
The sequence of the eight clear realizations is  definite. It is expl ained in the section on 
making a connection at the Truth Body [explanation] of the Great Commentary [on the 
Eight Thousand Stanza  Perfection of Wisdom Sutra] : 
 
“At that time when those who take to  mind the thorough abandonment of deceit 
and dissimulation, and so fo rth, through the stages that have been explained: (i) 
will subsequently cognize with an ex alted knower of all aspects that all 
phenomena are like illusions with respect to  this perfection of wisdom; (ii) will 
thoroughly analyze with a knower of the as pects of the paths;  (iii) will engage 
with a knower of all; (iv) will realize w ith a complete clear realization of all 
aspects; (v) will intend with a clear realization of peak ; (vi) will comprehend with 
a serial clear realization; (vii) will cl osely realize with an instantaneous clear 
realization; and (viii) will also cultivate with a manifestly completely enlightened 
truth body, at that time it wi ll not be difficult for th ese bodhisattvas to fully 
completely gain: (a) all excellent qualities of the nature of the truth body; (b) a 
buddha land with the characteristic of the complete enjoyment body; (c) the 
unsurpassable quality of a buddha, the self -entity of the emanation body; along 
with (d) the exalted activities”— is the meaning of the words. 
 Therefore, the three exalted knowers are in the order of explanation. 
 {89} Since what is explained here is an explanation of the stages of practice of a 
Mahayana person, at the beginning, he first meditates on the sixteen aspects, then 
generates a knower of paths, and after that, he will directly realize the ten topics [of an 
exalted knower of all aspects]. The first two a pplications are in the order of generation; 
the later two applications ar e also in the order of ge neration. The first and third 
applications are in the orde r of generation too. The three exalted knowers and the four 
applications are in the order of explanation.  
 In short: 
• The three exalted knowers are in the order of explanation , 
• the four applications are in the order of generation ,  
• the first two applications are in the order of generation ,  
• the latter two applications are in the order of generation ,  
• the first and the third applications are in the order of generation , 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
20 • the three exalted knowers and four a pplications are in the order of explanation . 
 This is related to stanzas 1.4cd and 1.5:  
1.4cd Exalted knower of all aspects, knower of paths, 
Then, knower of all, 
 
1.5 Clear complete realization of all aspects, 
Gone to the peak, serially, 
Clear complete enlightenment in one instant, Truth body: these are the eight. 
 If we look at these lines from the root text,   
1.4cd Exalted knower of all aspects, knower of paths, 
Then, knower of all, 
 we will see that while the three exalted knowers are explained in this particular order, this is not the 
order in which they are generated. The exalted knower  of all aspects is expl ained first in order for 
trainees to generate enthusiasm with regard to the result, due to which they generate the mind of aspiration and make effort to generate  the causes of this re sult. In order to attain a result, such as the 
exalted knower of all aspects, one must create its  cause. Without the cause, a knower of paths, there 
is no attainment of an exalted knower of all aspects. Because of this, the knower of paths is 
explained next. In order to generate this cause (a knower of paths), it is necessary to first cultivate 
the sixteen aspects of the four noble truths. Ther efore, the three exalted knowers are explained in 
this sequence – first an exalted knower of all aspect s, then a knower of paths, and then a knower of 
bases.   After the three exal ted knowers have been explained, th ere is an explanation of the four 
applications . 
• The application in complete aspects is cultivat ed for the sake of attaining control over the 
three exalted knowers through ga thering them together.  
• When control is attained, one attains a peak application.  
• Since one then needs to attain stability over th e aspects, one cultivates a serial application.  
• With this, one will attain stability in the as pects of the three exalted knowers. Once one has 
attained this, one attains an  instantaneous application.  
These four applications are set out in the order of their generation: an application in complete 
aspects and a peak application, a nd a serial application and an in stantaneous application. Why are 
the first and third also said to be in the order of generation? Which is generated first? The boundaries for an application in complete aspect s are from the Mahayana path of accumulation 
through the end of continuum of a sentient being, while the boundaries of a serial application are 
from the Mahayana path of accumulation through just  prior to the end of continuum of a sentient 
being. Since both begin from the Mahayana path of accumulation, it seems rather strange to say that they are set out in the or der of their generation. It is difficult to  say which of these two is generated 
first; however, in terms of their explanation , we can say that the applications in terms of attaining 
control are explained first, while those in terms of attaining stabil ity are explained later. One needs 
to engage in cultivation for the sake of gaining c ontrol first; after this, one engages in cultivation for 
the sake of attaining stability.   In short, the three exalted knowers are set out in  the order of their explanation, while the four 
applications are set out in the order of their generation. 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
21 The text then says: “The three exalted knowers a nd the four applications  are in the order of 
explanation.” This statement needs some explana tion. Before it was said that the three exalted 
knowers are in the order of explan ation, and the four applications are in the order of generation. If 
we look at the order of explanati on, we will see that the three exalte d knowers are explained prior to 
the four applications. However, this is not the or der of generation because it is not that the three 
exalted knowers are generated firs t, followed by the four applications. Without the generation of the 
applications, there is no generation of the exalted knowers. In terms of thei r generation, we would 
have to put the four applications first, followed by the three exalted knowers. In the context of the 
three exalted knowers, the aspects of the exalted knowers are ascert ained; in the context of the 
applications, those aspects that have been ascert ained are practiced. When one engages in the four 
applications, one needs to first understand what the aspects are. Theref ore, the three exalted 
knowers are explained before the four applications.  
 Ornament of the Essence , p. 62:  
 
The clear realizations are defi nite as eight, the objects to  be cultivated by the four 
applications are definite as the aspects of the three exalted knowers, the way of 
cultivating them is definite as the four applications, and the result is definite as the truth body.  
 In the phrase “the way of cultivating them,” the wo rd “them” refers to the aspects of the three 
exalted knowers. Here, we ha ve discussed the meaning of the citation from the Great Commentary  
and have completed the brief indica tion of the eight categories. What follows is a brief indication of 
the seventy topics.   In short, the brief indication of the corpus c overs fifteen stanzas. The first two stanzas are the 
“brief indication,” while the following thirteen are the “extensive explan ation.” Although they are 
so called, these thirteen stanzas  are actually a brief indicat ion of the seventy topics.  
 
(Material on the first exam ends here) 
 