Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/Transcript pdf/ORN_GTTnotes_11b.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:51:50.416448
================================================================================

Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
1  
Masters Program: Ornament for Clear Realization 
Notes on commentary by Geshe Tenzin Tenphel 
 
Wednesday 16 April, 2008 (morning) – continued 
 
Ornament of the Essence : 
2B2B-2B. Extensive explanation  
This outline comes from p. 51 (Tibetan p. 73):  
2B2B. Summarized topics  
2B2B-1. Making a connection 
2B2B-2. Setting forth the statement 
2B2B-3. Summarized and explained 
2B2B-4. Reason for not unraveling them extensively 
 
We are in the middle of the outline “Setting forth the statement.”  
 
2B2B-2B1. Explaining the corpus of the three exalted  knowers 
2B2B-2B2. Explaining the corpus of the four applicat ions  
2B2B-2B3. Explaining the corpus of the truth body 
2B2B-2B1. Explaining the corpus of the three exalted  knowers 
2B2B-2B1A. Explaining the corpus of an exalted knowe r of aspects 
2B2B-2B1B. Explaining the corpus of a knower of path s 
2B2B-2B1C. Explaining the corpus of a knower of base s 
2B2B-2B1A. Explaining the corpus of an exalted knowe r of aspects 
2B2B-2B1A-1. Nature of the ten topics 
2B2B-2B1A-2. How they characterize an exalted knowe r of aspects 
2B2B-2B1A-3. Ascertaining the sequence 
2B2B-2B1A-4. Joining the [brief] indication and the  [extensive] explanation 
2B2B-2B1A-1. Nature of the ten topics 
2B2B-2B1A-1A. Promise in attitude 
2B2B-2B1A-1B. Instructions showing the methods whic h achieve the aim of that 
2B2B-2B1A-1C. Achievings that accomplish the aim of  the promise 
2B2B-2B1A-1A. Promise in attitude 
ROOT TEXT 
1.6a Generated mind, …  
 
EXPLANATION 
The definition of a Mahayana generated mind  will be explained.  
 
The object characterized is: generated mind . It has twenty-two divisions. Its 
boundaries are: from the small level of the Mahayan a path of accumulation through the 
buddha ground. {90} 
 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
2 Questions and answers 
 
Q: When an aspect, i.e., one of the 173 aspects, is  directly realized, does one attain a wisdom arisen  
from meditation?  
A: If we take a concrete example, such as impermane nce, there are two types: coarse impermanence 
and subtle impermanence. In order to attain a direc t realization of coarse impermanence, one does 
not need to have a wisdom arisen from meditation. I n fact, one doesn’t even need to meditate! On 
the other hand, in order to attain a direct realiza tion of subtle impermanence, it is necessary to 
meditate. When one directly realizes subtle imperma nence, one attains a wisdom arisen from 
meditation.  
 
Q: Does the wisdom arisen from meditation arise on the path of preparation? 
A: In general, such a wisdom can occur even prior t o attaining a path. Special insight can be 
attained prior to entering the path of accumulation , since it can even be generated by non-Buddhists. 
It depends on the object of observation; for instan ce, a wisdom arisen from meditation observing 
selflessness arises on the path of preparation.  
 
 
1.  Mahayana generated mind 
 
We have already discussed the Mahayana generated mi nd, and later on we will discuss its twenty-
two divisions.  
 
 
2.  Mahayana instruction 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 63: 
2B2B-2B1A-1B. Instructions showing the methods whic h achieve the aim of that 
ROOT TEXT  
1.6a … instructions, 
 
EXPLANATION 
The definition [of a Mahayana  instruction ] is: an expresser that teaches an unerring 
method for attaining the object of seeking for the sake of the Mahayana generated mind.  
 
The object characterized is: Mahayana instructions . It has ten divisions. The 
boundaries are: it exists from even before one has entered the Mahayana path of 
accumulation through the buddha ground, but what is  mainly indicated here is a 
buddha’s speech. 
 
If we look at this definition in terms of a buddha’ s speech, it is correct to say “unerring,” but in 
general, there is a fault in saying “unerring.” Thi s is because in general Mahayana instructions do 
not have to be a buddha’s speech. This is because t here are many people who teach the Mahayana 
Dharma, some of whom make mistakes, in that they er r with regard to the method. In fact, because 
of this, Gyeltsab Je’s definition is posited as tha t of a “ ka-chig ,” or a “troublemaker,” in Jetsun 
Chogyi Gyeltsen’s General Meaning . In this text, the debate goes:  
 
“If someone were to say that the definition of Maha yana instructions is ‘pure Mahayana speech 
that teaches an unerring method for attaining the o bject of seeking of the Mahayana generated 
mind,’ this would be incorrect, because the subject : a Mind-Only treatise teaching that other-
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
3 powered and thoroughly established natures are mere ly truly existent; it follows that it is that 
definition, because it is that definiendum.”  
 
This means that while a Mind-Only treatise is not  “an expresser that teaches an unerring method” 
because it teaches a mistaken method, it is a Mahayana instruction. Gyeltsab Je’s definition is  thus 
refuted by Jetsun Chogyi Gyeltsen. In other words, because Gyeltsab Je’s definition includes the 
term “unerring,” Jetsun Chogyi Gyeltsen says that i t is faulty. When we talk about unerring method, 
it is shown, or taught, to someone. The trainees to  whom the method is taught should consider 
whether or not that method is correct; whether or n ot it is correct depends on the trainees. In 
Gyeltsab Je’s explanation, the word “unerring” is u sed in the context of the main intended trainees . 
Thus, in the context of the main intended trainees,  a Mind-Only treatise that teaches that other-
powered and thoroughly established natures are trul y existent is not mistaken. In other words, if the 
teaching that other-powered natures and thoroughly established natures are truly existent is taught 
to Mind-Only trainees, this is not a mistaken metho d; rather it is an unerring method. Hence, 
thinking of the main intended trainees, this defini tion is posited by Gyeltsab Je. However, from 
Jetsun Chogyi Gyeltsen’s point of view, since in ge neral other-powered and thoroughly established 
natures are not truly existent, teaching this would  be a mistaken method.  
 How do we reconcile these dissimilar presentations ? For those of the Mind-Only lineage, it is 
suitable to teach that other-powered and thoroughly  established natures are truly existent. In other 
words, while in general, it is correct to say that other-powered and thoroughly established natures 
are not  truly existent, it is not suitable to say this to Mind-Only trainees.  
 
Regarding our attitude with respect to divergent pr esentations in texts, we should not think that 
different viewpoints are necessarily contradictory.  Instead we should try to abide in the middle 
when reconciling different viewpoints. However, I a m referring specifically to treatises that have 
valid sources, not just any treatises. For instance , valid sources are Lama Tsongkhapa’s Golden 
Rosary and Gyeltsab Je’s Ornament of the Essence . For example, at Sera Me, they use the texts of 
Khedrup Denda and at Sera Je, they use Jetsun Chogy i Gyeltsen’s texts, and each one refutes the 
other’s viewpoint. We should use these texts to inc rease our intelligence by using them as a basis 
for eliminating doubts.  
 
Q: In the phrase “what is mainly indicated here is a buddha’s speech,” does “here” refer to this 
context, or to the whole text? 
A: “Here” refers to the Ornament for Clear Realization.   
 
 
3.  Mahayana branch  of definite discrimination 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 63: 
2B2B-2B1A-1C. Achievings that accomplish the aim of  the promise 
2B2B-2B1A-1C1. Identifying the initial achieving of  the wisdom arisen from meditation that realizes 
emptiness 
2B2B-2B1A-1C2. Presentation of the general achieving s 
2B2B-2B1A-1C1. Identifying the initial achieving of  the wisdom arisen from meditation that realizes em ptiness 
ROOT TEXT  
1.6b Four types of branches of definite discriminat ion, 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
4 EXPLANATION 
The definition of a Mahayana branch  of definite discrimination  is: a Mahayana clear 
realization generated subsequent to a partial conco rdance with liberation that is included 
within the level of utilizing belief.1  
 
When divided, there are four types .  
 
 
The divisions  are the heat, peak, forbearance, and supreme munda ne quality levels of the Mahayana 
path of preparation.  
 
The boundaries  are: it exists only on the Mahayana path of prepar ation.  
 
The “level of utilizing belief” refers to the level s of ordinary beings. Some words in the definition 
could be left out without fault: for instance, we c ould posit the definition as “that included within 
the Mahayana level of utilizing belief generated su bsequent to a partial concordance with 
liberation.”   
 
The next topic is the lineage abiding in the nature .  
 
 
Wednesday, 16 April 2008 (evening) 
 
 
4.  Lineage abiding in the nature of dharmadhatu that s erves as the support of the Mahayana 
achievings 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 64: 
2B2B-2B1A-1C2. Presentation of the general achieving s 
2B2B-2B1A-1C2A. Support of achievings 
2B2B-2B1A-1C2B. Supported achievings 
2B2B-2B1A-1C2A. Support of achievings 
ROOT TEXT 
1.6cd The nature of dharmadhatu 
That serves as the support of achievings, 
 
EXPLANATION {91}  
The definition of a lineage abiding in the nature o f dharmadhatu that serves as the 
support of the Mahayana achievings  is: a dharmadhatu [in the continuum of a 
bodhisattva ] that acts as the [actual ] supporting basis of Mahayana achievings.  
 
When divided by means of supporting phenomena, ther e are the thirteen mentioned in 
this context, and the Mahayana path of accumulation . The boundaries are: from the heat 
level of the Mahayana path of preparation for those  explicitly indicated here, and in 
                                                 
1 Generally, the generated minds are divided into fo ur levels. They are: (1) the level of engagement th rough belief, (2) 
the level of pure extraordinary thought, (3) the le vel of ripening, and (4) the level of the abandonme nt of obstructions. 
The level of engagement through belief covers the p ath of accumulation through the path of preparation ; the second, the 
level of pure extraordinary thought, covers the fir st through the seventh grounds; the third, the leve l of ripening, covers 
the three pure grounds; and the fourth, the level o f the abandonment of obstructions, the buddha groun d. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
5 general from the path of accumulation,  through the end of the continuum [of a sentient 
being].  
 
The definition of the definiendum—a lineage abiding  in the nature of dharmadhatu that serves as 
the support of the Mahayana achievings—needs to be annotated to read: “a dharmadhatu [in the 
continuum of a bodhisattva ] that acts as the [actual ] supporting basis of Mahayana achievings.” The 
Mahayana achievings can be posited as any path in t he continuum of a bodhisattva, and the 
dharmadhatu with respect to, or on, those Mahayana achievings is this lineage abiding in the nature 
that serves as the support of the Mahayana achievin gs.  
 
Divisions : “When divided by means of supporting phenomena, t here are the thirteen mentioned in 
this context, and the Mahayana path of accumulation .” If we consider the Mahayana path of 
preparation and above, there are thirteen divisions , and if we include the Mahayana path of 
accumulation, there are fourteen.  
 
Boundaries : 
• In this context,  from the heat level of the Mahayana path of prepar ation for those explicitly 
indicated here. 
• In general, from the path of accumulation through the end of th e continuum of a sentient 
being.  
 
Here, the phrase “by means of supporting phenomena”  is elaborated by Jetsun Chogyi Gyeltsen to 
read “by means of the achievings that are supporting phenomena.” The Mahayana path of 
accumulation is not included in the thirteen divisi ons. The thirteen are, for example, the four levels  
of the path of preparation, the path of seeing, ach ieving of the antidotes, and so forth, which will b e 
discussed later.  
 
 
Ornament of the Essence, p. 64:  
2B2B-2B1A-1C2B. Supported achievings 
2B2B-2B1A-1C2B-1. Objects of observation of the ach ievings 
2B2B-2B1A-1C2B-2. Objects of intent  
2B2B-2B1A-1C2B-3. Divisions of the achievings 
 
5.  An object of observation of the achievings 
 
2B2B-2B1A-1C2B-1. Objects of observation of the ach ievings 
ROOT TEXT 
1.7a Objects of observation, …  
 
EXPLANATION 
Its definition [of an object of observation of the achievings ] is: a basis for the 
elimination of superimpositions regarding the achie vings.  
 
The object characterized is: objects of observation . When divided, there are eleven.  
 
Divisions : there are eleven divisions: virtue, non-virtue, t he unspecified, and so forth.  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
6 Boundaries : it exists on all established bases. An establishe d base is an existent, or an object of 
knowledge. This means that an object of observation  can be posited on the basis of any existent.  
 
An established base is defined as “that established by a valid cognizer .”  
 
 
6.  Object of intent 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 64: 
2B2B-2B1A-1C2B-2. Objects of intent  
ROOT TEXT 
1.7a … intent, 
 
EXPLANATION 
The definition [of an object of intent ] is: a final result intended  for which one engages 
in the achievings.  
 
When divided, there are the three great ones. The b oundaries are: the buddha ground. 
 
Although here it just says “object of intent,” the full definiendum is an object of intent of Mahayana 
achievings , and the definition given here is of that definien dum. The three great ones are 
1.  great heroic mind,  
2.  great abandonment, and 
3.  great realization.  
 
 
Mahayana achieving 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 65: 
2B2B-2B1A-1C2B-32. Divisions of the achievings 
The definition of a Mahayana achieving  is: an activity that achieves the three great ones  
in dependence on a Mahayana generated mind. 
 
An achieving is that which achieves the three great  ones mentioned previously. There are four 
types:  
1.  Achieving of armor 
2.  Achieving of activities of engagement 
3.  Achieving of accumulation 
4.  Achieving of definite issuance  
 
 
7.  Achieving of armor 
 
Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
                                                 
2 Gnyis pa  emended to read gsum pa . 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
7 ROOT TEXT {92}  
1.7b Armor, …  
 
EXPLANATION 
The definition of an achieving of armor  is: a bodhisattva’s activity that practices 
inclusively the six perfections in their entirety w ithin each of the six perfections.  
 
When divided, there are six. The boundaries are: fr om the Mahayana path of 
accumulation through the end of the continuum [of a  sentient being]. 
 
This definition can be adjusted to read “a bodhisat tva’s yoga,” as it is written in the monastery 
textbooks, instead of “a bodhisattva’s activity .”  
 
Divisions : the six perfections. As mentioned in the definiti on, the six perfections are practiced 
within each of the six perfections. If we consider the sub-divisions, we arrive at thirty-six division s: 
the generosity of generosity, ethics of generosity,  patience of generosity, joyous effort of 
generosity, concentration of generosity, wisdom of generosity, and so forth.  
 
 
8.  Achieving of activities of engagement 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 65: 
 
ROOT TEXT  
1.7b … activities of engagement, 
 
EXPLANATION 
The definition of an achieving of activities of engagement  is: an activity [a 
bodhisattva’s yoga]  that practices by means of any topic of Mahayana c ause and result 
serving as a principal application.  
 
When divided, there are nine. The boundaries are: f rom the level of utilizing belief 
through the end of the continuum [of a sentient bei ng]. 
 
Here the definition of an achieving of activities o f engagement  needs to be annotated to read: an 
activity  a bodhisattva’s yoga  that practices by means of any topic of Mahayana c ause and result 
serving as a principal application.  
 
What does this achieving practice? It practices med itative stabilization. Of the nine divisions, the 
first is the achieving in engagement through concen trations and formless absorptions. Among these 
ten topics of the exalted knower of all aspects, so me are discussed in great detail later on, such as 
the Mahayana instructions, the achieving of engagem ent, and the achieving of accumulation (where 
the grounds and paths are discussed).  
 
Boundaries : it exists from the level of utilizing belief thro ugh the end of the continuum of a sentient 
being. The “level of utilizing belief” is the Mahay ana path of preparation. While it can also be said 
to include the path of accumulation, in this contex t it refers only to the path of preparation. This is 
because a wisdom arisen from meditation observing e mptiness is attained on the path of 
preparation. Is this always true? It is not, in tha t there are Hinayana practitioners who have realize d 
emptiness who have not attained the Mahayana path o f preparation. Therefore, the definition says 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
8 “an activity that practices by means of any topic of Mahayana cause and result serving as a 
principal application. ”  
 
 
9.  Achieving of accumulation 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 65: 
 
ROOT TEXT  
1.7c Accumulation, …  
 
EXPLANATION 
The definition of an achieving of accumulation  is: an activity that actually issues forth 
great enlightenment, its result.  
 
When divided, there are seventeen. The boundaries a re: from the great level of the 
supreme mundane quality of the path of preparation through the end of the  continuum 
[of a sentient being]. 
 
There is no pervasion that an achieving of accumula tion issues forth great enlightenment. The 
boundaries  are: it exists from the great level of the supreme  mundane quality of the path of 
preparation through the end of the continuum of a s entient being.  
 
Geshe-la: Is the achieving of accumulation that exi sts on the great supreme mundane quality level 
of the path of preparation an activity that actuall y issues forth great enlightenment, its result? 
Student: Not directly.  
 
If we were to look at the great level of the suprem e mundane quality of the path of preparation, 
there are many stages between it and the stage of e nlightenment, such as the path of seeing, the path 
of meditation, etc., so the achieving of accumulati on on the great level of the supreme mundane 
quality of the path of preparation does not actually issue forth great enlightenment.  
 
Can we leave the word “actually” out? What if the d efinition were “a bodhisattva’s yoga that issues 
forth great enlightenment as its result?” Would tha t be correct? Its boundaries are that it exists fro m 
the great level of the supreme mundane quality leve l of the path of preparation. Is there a 
bodhisattva’s yoga that exists before that that iss ues forth great enlightenment as its result? There 
are many. If we consider the path of preparation, t here are: the heat level, peak level, forbearance 
level, small level of the supreme mundane quality l evel, and middling level of the supreme 
mundane quality level—all of which issue forth grea t enlightenment.  
 Therefore, even if we were to drop the word “actua lly,” this would still not be a correct 
definition. What would a correct definition be? If we look at Seventy Topics,  the definition is “A 
bodhisattva’s yoga that surpasses the middling leve l of supreme mundane quality of the Mahayana 
path of preparation and below by way of being conjo ined with the two extensive accumulations and 
issues forth great enlightenment as its result.” Th is does not have the faults of the previous 
definitions because it “surpasses the middling leve l of supreme mundane quality of the Mahayana 
path of preparation and below…” and it “issues fort h great enlightenment as its result.” Does this 
mean that there is no extensive accumulation of mer it and wisdom prior to the great level of 
supreme mundane quality of the path of preparation?  There is an accumulation of merit and exalted 
wisdom before this point, but at that time there is  no path conjoined with the two extensive 
accumulations .  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
9 What is the criteria for being conjoined with the t wo extensive accumulations? In order to attain full  
enlightenment, according to the Ornament , one needs to accumulate merit for three countless  great 
eons. The first eon is on the path of accumulation and path of preparation, the second great eon is 
on the seven impure grounds, the third eon on the t hree pure grounds. The first eon is completed 
upon reaching the great level of the supreme mundan e quality of the path of preparation.  
 
 
10.  Achieving of definite issuance 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 65: 
 
ROOT TEXT  
1.7c … definite issuance: these together 
 
EXPLANATION 
The definition of an achieving of definite issuance  is: a yoga of the pure grounds that 
undoubtedly issues forth an exalted knower of all a spects.  
 
When divided, there are eight. The boundaries are: the three pure grounds. [The words] 
“these together ” have  the meaning of subsuming the ten in them. 
 
This definition, as it is, is sufficient.  
 
Q: It was said before that the four achievings and four applications are one entity (p. 57). While the  
first two applications and the first two achievings  do seem to correspond, the third and fourth do 
not, so how are they one entity? 
A: How can we interpret the statement, “the achievi ngs which are of the same entity as the 
applications are also divided into four”? We can us e the term “one entity” in different ways. The 
first and second of the four applications are mutua lly inclusive with the first and second of the four  
achievings, but this is not the case for the third and fourth. There are achievings that are the same 
entity as the applications, e.g., the application i n complete aspects has a common locus with the four  
achievings, peak application has a common locus wit h the four achievings, serial application has a 
common locus with the four achievings, and instanta neous application has a common locus with the 
four achievings. So there are achievings that are t he same entity as the applications, but if we 
consider the statement above, it is indeed somewhat  awkward.  
 
We have thus gone through the ten topics of an exal ted knower of all aspects.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 66: 
2B2B-2B1A-2. How they characterize an exalted knowe r of aspects 
Although this is slightly explained in the modes in  which the result is characterized by 
the cause, the Acarya’s assertion is as follows. {9 3} The Great Commentary says: 
 
It is very clear that the object-possessor is chara cterized by the object; also the 
purpose of that is the direct realization of these ten topics—the nature of that 
exalted knower of all aspects that is the object of  seeking. 
 
When that is explained, it is indicated that the wa y of realizing them is to generate the 
mind [aspiring] towards supreme enlightenment at fi rst, and then, through having 
experienced by way of the stages of the four achiev ings, to eventually manifest the three 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
10 great ones. Hence, by merely indicating the ten top ics that are to be directly realized 
[by] an exalted knower of all aspects, the corpus o f the general Mahayana path will 
dawn as an object of awareness, whereby it is for t he sake of knowing the nature of the 
result that is the object to be attained. 
 
If we look at the last phrase, the “result that is the object to be attained” is the exalted knower of  all 
aspects, and the “nature of the result” is the ten topics. “It is for the sake” refers to what is 
mentioned in the Great Commentary: “It is very clear that the object-possessor is char acterized by 
the object…” Therefore, “it is for the sake of know ing the nature of the result which is the object to  
be attained” means that the object-possessor being characterized by the obj ect  is for the sake of 
knowing the nature of the result which is the objec t to be attained. This is related to an earlier 
passage in Ornament of the Essence  which says: 
 
The object characterized is: “ exalted knower of all aspects .” The basis for 
characterization is: in general, in terms of divisi ons, from between the two exalted 
wisdoms – (1) knowing all aspects of objects of kno wledge, and (2) directly knowing 
the ten topics of principal cause and result – here  it is the latter. 
 
It is for the sake of knowing the nature of the res ult that is the object to be attained. Gyeltsab Je says 
“directly knowing the ten  topics of principal cause and result” whereas Jets un Chokyi Gyeltsen’s 
General Meaning  says “directly knowing the seventy  topics of principal cause and result,” but they 
mean the same.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 66: 
 
2B2B-2B1A-3. Ascertaining the sequence 
Through the force of purpose, the topics until the support of the achievings have been 
indicated, but in terms of the order of generation,  first one awakens the lineage, 
generates the mind [aspiring] towards supreme enlig htenment, hears instructions on the 
achievings, generates in the continuum the achievin g of the wisdom arisen from 
meditation that observes emptiness by practicing th e meaning of the instructions, 
observes the eleven objects of observation, and, fo r the sake of the three great objects of 
intent, practices the stages of practice by way of the stages of the four achievings, 
whereby one attains an exalted knower of all aspect s directly realizing the ten topics. 
 
In this section,  
• “Support of the achievings” refers to the lineage abiding in the nature , the fourth topic. 
“Through the force of purpose, the topics until the  support of the achievings have been 
indicated,” whereas in terms of the order of genera tion, one has to present the lineage first, 
since it is awakened at the beginning.  
• “Generates the mind [aspiring] towards supreme enli ghtenment” refers to the first topic, 
generated mind.  
• “Generates in the continuum the achieving of the wi sdom arisen from meditation that 
observes emptiness by practicing the meaning of the  instructions” refers to the path of 
preparation, the third topic.  
• “Observes the eleven objects of observation” refers  to the fifth topic: objects of observation 
of Mahayana achievings.  
• “For the sake of the three great objects of intent”  refers to the sixth topic, objects of intent.  
• “Practices the stages of practice by way of the sta ges of the four achievings” refers to the 
four achievings, the seventh through tenth topics.  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
11 Attaining the four achievings 
 
In the phrase, “practices the stages of practice by  way of the stages of the four achievings,” the 
stages are as follows: on the Mahayana path of accu mulation, there is the achieving of armor ; when 
one attains the path of preparation, one attains th e achieving of engagement . It can be said that on 
the path of preparation, both the achieving of armo r and the achieving of engagement exist. It is as 
if the achieving of armor improves and becomes the achieving of engagement, but it is not that it 
transforms into another entity. On attaining the su preme mundane quality of the path of preparation, 
there is the achieving of armor, the achieving of e ngagement, and the achieving of accumulation . 
On the pure grounds, there are all four achievings,  [including the achieving of definite issuance ].  
 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 66: 
2B2B-2B1A-4. Joining the [brief] indication and the  [extensive] explanation 
ROOT TEXT 
1.7d Are an exalted knower of all aspects of the Su bduers. 
 
EXPLANATION 
A clear realization of the Subduers , the persons who are the support,  is  an exalted 
knower of all aspects. 
 
This line in verse seven joins the brief and extens ive explanations. This is because in verse 1.4c, we  
see the words, “exalted knower of all aspects…”, wh ich occurs in the context of the brief indication, 
which is here joined with this verse.  
 
 
Thursday 17 April 2008 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 66: 
 
2B2B-2B1B. Explaining the corpus of a knower of path s 
2B2B-2B1B-1. Characterizing a knower of paths by th e eleven topics 
2B2B-2B1B-2. Joining the [brief] indication and the  [extensive] explanation 
2B2B-2B1B-1. Characterizing a knower of paths by th e eleven topics {94}  
2B2B-2B1B-1A. Branches of a knower of paths 
2B2B-2B1B-1B. Knower of paths bearing branches 
2B2B-2B1B-1A. Branches of a knower of paths 
ROOT TEXT 
1.8a Eclipsing and so forth, 
 
EXPLANATION 
The cause, entity, and result of a knower of paths are explained by: (i) the support for 
generating a knower of paths being free from the ob stacle; due to the natural light that is 
the tathagatas’ light eclipsing  the light that is a ripened [result] of the gods o f the desire 
and form realms, pride is dispelled; and, included within “ and so forth :” (ii) the 
cooperative condition, generated mind; (iii) lineag e, the cause; (iv) nature; and (v) 
function. 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
12 We are looking at branches of a knower of paths . In the explanation, there is no explicit definiti on, 
but it is mentioned by saying “The cause, entity, a nd result of a knower of paths.” Jedzun Chogyi 
Gyeltsen’s Seventy Topics says the definition is “A special excellent quality  conjoined with great 
compassion that is included in either the cause, en tity, or result of a knower of paths.”   
 
What are the divisions of this topic? There are fiv e divisions, as mentioned in this passage:  
1.  Branch of knower of paths that is separated from th e obstacle of pride 
2.  Awakening of the Mahayana lineage, the cause 
3.  Generation of a mind aspiring toward enlightenment,  the cooperative condition 
4.  Nature of knower of paths 
5.  Function, which refers to the result of a knower of  paths.  
 
Boundaries : it exists from having awakened the Mahayana linea ge through the buddha ground. 
 
It is said that the cause, entity, and result of kn ower of paths are included within these divisions.  
 
Q: What is the meaning of the passage on p. 66, whe re it says “…the object-possessor is 
characterized by that object; also the purpose of t hat is the direct realization of these ten topics…” ?  
A: In general, it is true to say that “The object-p ossessor is characterized by that object.” When we 
talk about the exalted knower of all aspects, there  are many ways to posit its definition. For 
example, on p. 58, it is defined in terms of either  knowing all aspects of object of knowledge, or in 
terms of directly realizing ten topics, etc.; in th e passage on p. 66, it is being described in this w ay 
with a particular purpose.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 67:  
 
2B2B-2B1B-1B. Knower of paths bearing branches 
The first of three: 
2B2B-2B1B-1B1. Knower of paths knowing learner hear ers’ paths  
ROOT TEXT 
1.8b Paths of learners, …  
 
EXPLANATION 
The definition of a knower of paths knowing learner  hearers’ paths  is: a direct 
realization of impermanence and so forth (qualified  by the three attributes 3) that is a 
clear realization of what is to be known in order t o take care of hearer lineage-bearers. 
 
The three attributes are:  
1.  generated mind 
2.  dedication 
3.  wisdom realizing emptiness.  
The knower of paths knowing learner hearers’ paths is a direct realization of impermanence, etc., 
which means that this direct realization of imperma nence is conjoined with the three attributes.  
 
Boundary : from the first ground through the buddha ground.  
 
 
                                                 
3  These three attributes are: the generated mind, d edication, and the wisdom realizing emptiness. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
13 Ornament of the Essence , p. 67:  
2B2B-2B1B-1B2. Knower of paths knowing rhinoceroses ’ paths, solitary realizers’ paths  
ROOT TEXT 
1.8b … and rhinoceroses 
 
EXPLANATION 
Other parts of the definition are similar [to that above]. It is “an exalted wisdom 
realizing that apprehendeds are devoid of being ext ernal objects,” and is “in order to 
take care of solitary realizer lineage-bearers.” 
 
[The definition of a knower of paths knowing rhinoc eroses’ paths, solitary realizers’ 
paths  is: an exalted wisdom (qualified by the three attr ibutes and realizing that 
apprehendeds are devoid of being external objects) that is a clear realization of what is 
to be known in order to take care of solitary reali zer lineage-bearers.] {95}  
 
The definition is the same as the previous one, wit h a slight modification: an exalted wisdom 
(qualified by the three attributes and realizing that apprehendeds are devoid of being ext ernal 
objects ) that is a clear realization of what is to be know n in order to take care of solitary realizer 
lineage-bearers.  
 
The boundaries  are the same as before: from the first ground thro ugh the buddha ground. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 67: 
 
2B2B-2B1B-1B3. Knower of bodhisattvas’ paths  
The first of two: 
2B2B-2B1B-1B3A. [Path of seeing] 
ROOT TEXT 
1.8cd Path of seeing—the great benefit  
Of excellent qualities of this and other [lives], 
 
EXPLANATION 
The definition of a Mahayana path of seeing—the great benefit of excellent quali ties 
of this and other [lives]  is: a clear realization of the truth that stops th e extremes of 
both cyclic existence and solitary peace.  
 
The boundaries  are only on the Mahayana path of seeing.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 68: 
 
2B2B-2B1B-1B3B. [Path of meditation] 
The first of two: 
2B2B-2B1B-1B3B-1. [Function of a Mahayana path of m editation] 
ROOT TEXT 
1.9a Function, …  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
14 EXPLANATION 
The definition of a function  of a Mahayana path of meditation  is: a benefit attained 
through the force of cultivating that. 
 
In the definition, “that” refers to the Mahayana pa th of meditation.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 68: 
 
2B2B-2B1B-1B3B-2. [Entity of a Mahayana path of med itation] 
2B2B-2B1B-1B3B-2A. Contaminated path of meditation 
2B2B-2B1B-1B3B-2B. Uncontaminated path of meditatio n 
2B2B-2B1B-1B3B-2A. Contaminated path of meditation 
 
The three divisions of the contaminated path of med itation are  
1.  path of meditation of belief 
2.  path of meditation of dedication 
3.  and path of meditation of rejoicing.  
 
The first of three: 
2B2B-2B1B-1B3B-2A1. [Path of meditation of belief] 
ROOT TEXT 
1.9ab … belief, 
praise, veneration, and laudation, 
 
EXPLANATION 
The definition of a path of meditation of belief  is: a subsequent clear realization 
convinced that the Mothers are the source of the th ree welfares.  
 
The boundaries are: from the first through the tent h ground. When divided, there are 
twenty-seven. {96}  
 
Here, “Mothers” refers to the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras. The “three welfares” are one’s own 
welfare,  others’, and both oneself and others’ wel fare.  
 
There are three divisions:  
1.  Path of meditation of belief of one’s own welfare 
2.  Path of meditation of belief of others’ welfare 
3.  Path of meditation of belief of both oneself and ot hers’ welfare. 
 
This involves being convinced that in dependence on  the three Mothers, the Perfection of Wisdom 
sutras, the three welfares will come about, so this  is a “subsequent clear realization convinced that 
the Mothers are the source of the three welfares.”  
 
Divisions : When divided, there are twenty-seven. This is eas y: there are three welfares; if we divide 
each of the three into great/middling/small, there are nine. If we sub-divide each of those into 
great/middling/small, we get twenty-seven.  
 
Questions and answers 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
15  
Q: In the expression of worship, the three mothers were praised. Is the praise mentioned here, in the 
context of the path of meditation of belief, relate d to that praise? 
A: You’re right in saying that this is a praise of the Mothers, but the context here is different. The  
explanation will come later. 
 
Q: This is in relation to the absurd consequences a rising from the wrong definition of the knower of 
paths ( Ornament of the Essence , pp. 58-59; Tib. p. 83). Is the selflessness that is one of the sixteen 
attributes of the four noble truths a conventional truth or an ultimate truth?  
A: According to the Autonomist school, this selfles sness is a conventional truth.  
 
Q: So when someone realizes the lack of a self-suff icient, substantially existent person, do they 
become an arya? 
A: When you directly realize lack of a self-suffici ent, substantially existent person, you attain an 
arya path. 
 
Q: But isn’t the definition of the path of seeing “ seeing the truth,” meaning that the realization of 
selflessness of persons sees an ultimate truth? So how could the selflessness of persons be a 
conventional truth?  
A: An arya doesn’t necessarily realize ultimate tru th. In the Autonomist school, ultimate truth, 
emptiness, dharmata, dharmadhatu, the final mode of  abidance, and thoroughly established 
phenomenon are all synonyms.  
 
Q: Isn’t selflessness of persons the final mode of abidance?  
A: No, it isn’t the final mode of abidance. The con ception of the self-sufficient, substantially 
existent person is a root of cyclic existence, but not a final root of cyclic existence; the final root of 
cyclic existence is the conception of true existenc e. In the Autonomist school, hearers and solitary 
realizers do not need to realize emptiness, but the re are those who realize emptiness.  
 
Q: So you can realize liberation with the realizati on of a conventional truth? 
A: You want to debate with me! I said that by direc tly realizing selflessness of persons, one will 
attain liberation. I also said that selflessness of  persons is a conventional truth, but I did not say  that 
by realizing a conventional truth, one will attain liberation. If that were the case, since selflessne ss 
of persons is a phenomenon, it would follow that by  realizing a phenomenon, one would attain 
liberation. 4 
 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 68: 
 
 Its benefits, the three— praise, veneration, and laudation —are either (i) a factor of 
mental delight due to the factor of bodhisattvas me ditating on the three levels of belief 
in buddhas and higher bodhisattvas, or (ii) a facto r of expressing actual excellent 
qualities. 
 
Here, there are three benefits: praise, veneration,  and laudation. These sound similar, but there is a  
slight difference. Praise is saying something is good or excellent; veneration has the sense of 
respect for the object; and laudation is expressing the excellent qualities of something.  In general, 
they are the same.  
                                                 
4 For further discussion of this issue, see Jang-gya  Röl-bay Dor-jay’s discussion of the two truths in Study of 
Svatantrika , pp. 228-230. There appear to be different positio ns on whether or not the Svatantrikas posit selfles sness of 
persons as a conventional or an ultimate truth. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
16  
Ornament of the Essence , p. 68: 
 
2B2B-2B1B-1B3B-2A2. [Path of meditation of dedicatio n] 
ROOT TEXT 
1.9c Dedication, …  
 
EXPLANATION 
The definition of a path of meditation of unsurpass able attention to dedication  is: a 
contaminated Mahayana subsequent clear realization that acts to transform one’s own 
and others’ roots of virtue into a branch of comple te enlightenment.  
 
When divided, there are twelve. The boundaries are as before: [from the first through 
the tenth ground].  
 
Q: What do contaminated and uncontaminated mean in this school?  
A: In this context, contaminated means conceptual a nd uncontaminated means non-conceptual. A 
contaminated path of meditation is a path of medita tion that is of conceptual entity; an 
uncontaminated path of meditation is a path of medi tation that is of a non-conceptual entity.  
 
Q: Does that mean that a non-conceptual, direct rea lization of impermanence is uncontaminated?  
A: Yes.  
 
Q: Three welfares are mentioned: what is the purpos e for mentioning the third, “one’s own and 
others’ welfare”?  
A: What is one’s own welfare? It is dharmakaya. It is sometimes difficult to differentiate between 
these: it is said that for a bodhisattva, one’s own  welfare is others’ welfare, and vice versa.  
 
Q: Why is the seventh topic, “Benefits of a mahayan a path of meditation of belief,” not mentioned 
separately here? 
A: [There is no separate outline for it, but] we se e it at the bottom of the previous outline, where i t 
says “Its benefits, the three—praise, veneration, a nd laudation…” (p. 68). 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 69: 
 
2B2B-2B1B-1B3B-2A3. [Path of meditation of rejoicing ] 
ROOT TEXT 
1.9cd Rejoicing, …  
Unsurpassable attentions,5 
 
EXPLANATION 
The definition of a path of meditation of unsurpassable attention  to rejoicing  is: a 
contaminated Mahayana subsequent clear realization that is very joyful regarding one’s 
own and others’ virtues.  
 
When divided, there are two. The boundaries are as before: [from the first through the 
tenth ground].  
                                                 
5 Bdag  emended to read dag  in accordance with the several editions of the roo t text. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
17  
The divisions  are:  
1.  Path of meditation of rejoicing that cultivates joy  regarding one’s own virtues 
2.  Path of meditation of rejoicing that cultivates joy  regarding others’ virtues 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 69: 
2B2B-2B1B-1B3B-2B. Uncontaminated path of meditatio n 
The first of two: 
2B2B-2B1B-1B3B-2B1. [Path of meditation of achieving ] 
ROOT TEXT 
1.10a Achieving, …  
 
EXPLANATION 
The definition of a path of meditation of achieving  is: an uncontaminated Mahayana 
subsequent clear realization that deposits an impri nt for the final realization.  
 
When divided, there are five.  
 
The divisions  are:  
1.  Entity 
2.  Result 
3.  Function 
4.  Temporal excellent qualities 
5.  Final excellent qualities.  
 
The full listing of these divisions needs to be qua lified by saying “ path of meditation of achieving 
distinguished by entity,” etc. The path of meditation of achieving a nd path of meditation of purity 
are mutually inclusive.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 69: 
 
2B2B-2B1B-1B3B-2B2 [Path of meditation of purity] { 97}  
ROOT TEXT 
1.10ab … this so-called “very pure,” 
Is the path of meditation. 
 
EXPLANATION 
The definition of a path of meditation called “very pure”  is: an uncontaminated 
Mahayana subsequent clear realization that deposits  an imprint for the final 
abandonment.  
 
When divided, there are nine. The boundaries for bo th [a path of meditation of 
achieving and a path of meditation called “very pur e”] are: from the first through the 
tenth ground. 
 
It says there are nine divisions, and that its boun daries are from the first through the tenth ground.  
There are nine levels of object of abandonment. Thi s is related to how we divide the objects of 
abandonment, into the great-great, great-medium, et c., which leads to nine divisions. If we then 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
18 further divide the great-great into coarse and subt le, we get ten divisions, which correspond to the 
ten grounds. When you look at these two levels (coa rse and subtle), they are the same type: they are 
both great-great objects of abandonment. If among t he ten uninterrupted paths, we consider the two 
that are direct antidotes to the coarse and subtle great-great objects of abandonment as one, we can 
say there are nine antidotes.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 69: 
 
2B2B-2B1B-2. Joining the [brief] indication and the  [extensive] explanation 
ROOT TEXT 
1.10cd A knower of paths  
Of skilled bodhisattvas is explained like that. 
 
EXPLANATION 
A knower of paths  that is a clear realization of  skilled bodhisattva  aryas is explained 
like that.  [The eleven topics] are taught to characterize a k nower of paths either from 
the point of view of object or from the point of vi ew of entity. Further, when one 
“knows well the paths  proceeding to omniscience,” knowing well the paths  of all three 
vehicles, one proceeds to their ranks; know that ev en though meditating on only  a 
trifling path will also become a cause of omniscien ce, it is a long path. 
 
How are the brief indication and extensive explanat ion joined? 1.4c (p. 58) says “knower of paths,” 
and 1.10cd (p. 69) says “a knower of paths of skill ed bodhisattvas is explained like that.”  
 
The phrase “one proceeds to their ranks” means proc eeding to the paths that proceed to 
omniscience. There are many types of paths that pro ceed to omniscience, but here they are of three 
types:  
1.  paths of hearers 
2.  paths of solitary realizers and  
3.  the Mahayana path.  
 
A “trifling path” is an ordinary path, i.e. a path of hearers and solitary realizers. Although by 
meditating on a trifling path, it will become a cau se of omniscience, it is a long path. Meditating on  
“only a trifling path” means meditating on a hearer  or solitary realizer path for only one’s sake; it 
does not mean simply meditating on such a path.  
 
Student 1: What are examples of “a knower of paths either from the point of view of object or from 
the point of view of entity”? 
Student 2: Some of the topics are objects, and some  are knowers of paths, which characterize the 
knower of paths from the point of view of entity.  
 
GTT: You said some are objects: for example?  
Student 2: Function of a Mahayana path of meditatio n, the fifth topic.  
 
That is a good example, or we could posit the sixth , eighth, or ninth topics, which are posited from 
the point of view of objects . They characterize the knower of paths from the po int of view of 
objects as well as from the point of view of entity . When we talk about the path of meditation of 
dedication, the entity is also explained, in that this is a contaminated path of meditation. Some of 
the paths of meditation are contaminated, some are uncontaminated. There are three contaminated 
paths of meditation (topics 6, 8, and 9) and two un contaminated paths of meditation (topics 10 and 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
19 11). How is the entity of the knower of paths expla ined through these topics? Through these topics, 
one understands that the knower of paths can be the  entity of the path of seeing, of the path of 
meditation, or of the path of no-more-learning.  
 
Q: For someone on the bodhisattva path, if they med itate to realize selflessness of persons as a basis  
for generating compassion, is there a fault? 
A: If one has not realized selflessness, then one h as to make effort to realize it. If one has realize d it, 
there is no need to make effort to do so. A bodhisa ttva, before realizing selflessness, would make 
effort to realize it and would meditate on it, but they would not mainly  meditate on selflessness of 
persons. Why does a bodhisattva need to make effort  to realize selflessness? Without realizing it, 
one cannot realize emptiness.  
 
 
Friday 18 April 2008 
 
Questions and answers 
 
Q: In relation to the absurd consequences presented  on p. 59 (related to the incorrect definition of 
the knower of paths), what are “the stains of the c onception of the two truths as different entities”?  
Are they the latencies of the conception of true ex istence? 
A: The stains are not exactly the latencies of the conceptions of the two truths. If the presentation of 
conventional truths is not feasible, then the prese ntation of ultimate truths will also be unfeasible,  
and vice versa. When we say the two truths are one entity, this does not mean that conventional 
truth is ultimate truth, and ultimate truth is conv entional truth. With the example of form, how does 
form exist? Does it depend on others for its existe nce, or does it exist in a self-sufficient way? If we 
examine its way of existing, it is empty of being e stablished by itself; it is posited by way of form 
dawning to the mind. It is not existent by being es tablished in a self-sufficient way. The “mode of 
abidance” is how something exists. The emptiness of  existing in a self-sufficient way without 
dawning to the mind is its mode of abidance, and th is is not a separate entity from form itself. It is  
not correct to say that the two truths are differen t entities. Later, we will look at the two truths i n 
great detail.  
 These stains come about through the force of latencies. For example, a conception that realiz es 
emptiness of true existence does not apprehend true existence, but there is the appearance of true 
existence. How does emptiness appear to this concep tion realizing the emptiness of true existence? 
It appears as mixed with a meaning-generality; true  existence also appears to this conception, but 
not in a clear manner. To a single mind, when conve ntional truth directly appears and ultimate 
truths are not able to directly appear, or when ult imate truth directly appears and conventional truth s 
are not able to directly appear, this is a sign of the presence of the stains of the conception of the  
two truths as different entities.  
Does a bodhisattva arya apprehend the two truths as  different entities? No, but he has not 
abandoned the stains of the conceptions of the two truths as different entities, whereby there is 
appearance of the two truths as different entities. When conve ntional truths directly appear to a 
bodhisattva arya and ultimate truths are not able t o directly appear, the reason is that the stains of  
the conceptions of the two truths as different enti ties have not been exhaustively abandoned.  
 
Q: Is a conception necessarily together with the ap pearance of true existence? 
A: Yes. A conception is pervaded by being a mind to gether with the appearance of true existence. It 
is pervaded by being a mistaken mind.  
 
Q: Can we say that dependent-arising is an isolate (ldog pa ) of emptiness? 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
20 A: Dependent-arising and emptiness are realized in different ways. Dependent-arising is realized 
before realizing emptiness; dependent-arising can b e used as a reason for realizing emptiness. 
Dependent-arising is not emptiness, but emptiness i s a dependent-arising. Is dependent-arising an 
isolate of emptiness? No. The isolate of emptiness is emptiness. If it is the isolate of emptiness, it  
must be emptiness. Emptiness is the isolate of empt iness, but the isolate of emptiness is not 
emptiness. Why do we say that emptiness is  the isolate of emptiness? The isolate of emptiness  is 
“that reversed from non-emptiness.” 6 The identification of isolates comes in the subjec t Collected 
Topics (Tib. bsdus grva ), which is studied before studying the great texts . When the monks begin 
the study of this, they study the subject of colors .  
 
Q: When you apprehend a pen, you can also conceive of its emptiness; although this is not a mind 
realizing the two truths simultaneously, it seems l ike such a mind is possible. Is this possible? 
GTT: Do you mean looking with the eyes? 
 
Q: The eye consciousness looks at the pen, a conven tional truth, and there is simultaneously a 
conceptual mental consciousness conceiving its empt iness.  
A: This is possible. In the Autonomist school, the object of negation, true existence, does not appear  
to an eye consciousness, but this eye consciousness  can subsequently induce a conception, which 
can apprehend the pen and simultaneously have the a ppearance of true existence. This conception 
apprehends the pen and simultaneously has the appea rance of true existence, but it does not realize 
the emptiness of the pen. In ordinary beings, it is  possible to have a conception that apprehends the 
two truths. A conception apprehending the emptiness  of true existence of a pen is a mind 
apprehending the two truths. It realizes a conventi onal truth, but the conventional truth referred to is 
not the pen; it is the meaning-generality of emptiness . This conception simultaneously 
apprehendeds the emptiness of the pen and the meani ng-generality of emptiness. The conception 
apprehending the emptiness of the pen does not apprehend the pen, because of the presence of 
obscurations that prevent the direct realization of  both the pen and its emptiness. In the Autonomist 
school, the subtle object of negation cannot appear to an eye consciousness, but the object of 
negation appears to the eye consciousness. In the latter cas e, the “object of negation” refers to the 
appearance of form being established as an external  object.  
 
Q: Are these stains of the conception of the two tr uths as different entities the innate obscurations to 
omniscience? 
A: The obscurations that prevent the two truths fro m being directly and simultaneously realized are 
innate knowledge obscurations.  
 
Q: On p. 58 (2B2B-2A2B-2A: Exalted knower of all as pects), it says “directly knowing the ten 
topics of principal cause and result.” What does “p rincipal cause and result” refer to? 
A: On p. 66 (Tib. p. 93), there is the passage, “As certaining the sequence,” which explains the 
cause/result relationship among these topics. It me ntions “in terms of the order of generation,” i.e. 
“first one awakens the lineage, generates the mind [aspiring] towards supreme enlightenment, hears 
instructions on the achievings, generates in the co ntinuum the achieving of the wisdom arisen from 
meditation that observes emptiness by practicing th e meaning of the instructions,” and so forth. The 
wisdom arisen from meditation refers to the path of  preparation; it “observes the eleven objects of 
observation,” which are the bases for elimination o f superimpositions; “for the sake of the three 
great objects of intent,” one practices the four ac hievings. Ten topics of principal cause and result 
refers to this.  
  
                                                 
6 Perdue’s Debate in Tibetan Buddhism: “Technically, an isolate of something is identified  as ‘that which is reversed 
from what is not one with it’” (p. 226). 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
21 Through the force of purpose, the topics until the support of the achievings have been 
indicated, but in terms of the order of generation,  first one awakens the lineage, 
generates the mind [aspiring] towards supreme enlig htenment, hears instructions on the 
achievings, generates in the continuum the achievin g of the wisdom arisen from 
meditation that observes emptiness by practicing th e meaning of the instructions, 
observes the eleven objects of observation, and, fo r the sake of the three great objects of 
intent, practices the stages of practice by way of the stages of the four achievings, 
whereby one attains an exalted knower of all aspect s directly realizing the ten topics. 
 
Q: Why are the ten topics presented in this order, and not in the order of generation?  
A: The first topic, exalted knower of all aspects, is explained first in order for trainees to generat e 
enthusiasm. When they have this, they will have a m ind that seeks omniscience. One understands 
that without bodhicitta, one cannot generate the ex alted knower of all aspects, and thus conventional 
bodhicitta is presented as the first of the ten top ics of the exalted knower of all aspects.  
 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 70: 
2B2B-2B1C. Explaining the corpus of a knower of base s 
2B2B-2B1C-1. Topics that characterize a knower of b ases 
2B2B-2B1C-2. Joining the [brief] indication and the  [extensive] explanation 
2B2B-2B1C-1. Topics that characterize a knower of b ases {98}  
2B2B-2B1C-1A. Reason for being distant from or near  to the resultant Mother 
2B2B-2B1C-1B. Proving that very reason 
2B2B-2B1C-1C. Divisions of the discordant and antid otal classes  
2B2B-2B1C-1D. Application of a knower of bases 
2B2B-2B1C-1A. Reason for being distant from or near  to the resultant Mother 
A path that does not abide in the extreme of cyclic  existence:  
 
ROOT TEXT 
1.11a Through knowing, not abiding in cyclic existe nce; 
 
EXPLANATION 
That which stops the extreme of cyclic existence through being conjoined with the 
method of great compassion and directly knowing  impermanence and so forth  is a 
knower of paths  not abiding in cyclic existence .  
 
“Through knowing, not abiding in cyclic existence” means that through directly knowing 
selflessness of persons, one does not abide in cycl ic existence. In order to obtain a precise definiti on 
of a knower of paths not abiding in cyclic existenc e, we can annotate this definition as follows:  
 
“A Mahayana arya’s clear realization abiding in the  class of realizations  that stops the extreme of 
cyclic existence through being conjoined with the m ethod of great compassion and directly 
knowing impermanence and so forth is a knower of pa ths not abiding in cyclic existence.” This is 
mutually inclusive with a knower of paths knowing h earers’ paths.  
 
Its divisions  are: 
1.  Mahayana path of seeing included within knowers of paths knowing hearers’ paths 
2.  Mahayana path of meditation included within knowers  of paths knowing hearers’ paths 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
22 3.  Mahayana path of no-more-learning included within k nowers of paths knowing hearers’ 
paths 
 
Its boundaries  are from the Mahayana path of seeing through the b uddha ground. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 70: 
 
Having eliminated the qualm wondering, “What are th e paths that stop them?,” when a 
bodhisattvas’ paths of seeing and meditation were i ndicated to stop the extremes of 
cyclic existence and solitary peace prior to these,  saying “a knower of bases not abiding 
in solitary peace through compassion” is a wrong ap plication of conventions, since (i) 
the meaning that is to be characterized and (ii) th e two meanings that act to 
characterize—are attributes of a knower of bases an d a knower of paths [respectively]. 
 
That to be characterized is the knower of bases and that which acts to characterize is the nine 
topics of a knower of bases. The knower of paths no t abiding in cyclic existence  is the first of the 
nine topics characterizing the knower of bases, but  we can see that it is also a knower of paths.  
 In the context of the third chapter, the knower of  bases is indicated, but the principal subject 
matter is the knowers of bases that are of the enti ty of the knower of paths. The “two meanings that 
act to characterize” are attributes of a knower of paths. These two points are the reason for saying 
“‘a knower of bases not abiding in solitary peace t hrough compassion’ is a wrong application of 
conventions.” What is wrong with this expression? I t should say “a knower of paths not abiding in 
solitary peace through compassion,” because the mea ning to be characterized is a knower of bases, 
but the two meanings that act to characterize are t he attributes of a knower of paths.  
 
If we look at the knower of paths not abiding in so litary peace through compassion, there are “two 
meanings”: (1) not abiding in solitary peace and (2 ) through compassion. In this context, we are 
looking at the knower of paths not abiding in cycli c existence through knowing, and in the next 
topic, the knower of paths not abiding in solitary peace through compassion.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 70: 
 
ROOT TEXT 
1.11b Through compassion, not abiding in solitary p eace; 
 
EXPLANATION 
The definition of a knower of paths not abiding in  solitary peace through compassion  
is: a Mahayana arya’s clear realization abiding in a class that stops the extreme of 
solitary peace relative to conventionalities. 
 
Both of these exist from the first ground and above . It is incorrect to link “through 
knowing” [in the root text 1.11a] only to a wisdom realizing emptiness, because its 
meaning is taught in the Great Commentary:  “Seeing the faults of cyclic existence with 
wisdom.” The faults of cyclic existence are seen wi th a knower of conventionalities; it 
cannot be seen with a rational knower observing the  ultimate. 
 
The boundaries  for both these topics are: from the Mahayana path of seeing through the buddha 
ground.  
 
There are three divisions :  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
23 1.  Mahayana path of seeing included within knower of p aths not abiding in solitary peace 
through compassion  
2.  Mahayana path of meditation included within knower of paths not abiding in solitary peace 
through compassion 
3.  Mahayana path of no-more-learning included within k nower of paths not abiding in solitary 
peace through compassion 
 
“Through knowing” should not be interpreted as the wisdom realizing emptiness, b ecause the 
wisdom realizing emptiness, being a rational knower  observing the ultimate, cannot see 
conventionalities; the faults of cyclic existence  are seen with a knower of conventionalities.  
 
Q: What is the definition of ultimate truth in this  system? 
A: The definition of an ultimate truth  in this system is “that which is to be realized in  a manner of 
vanished dualistic appearances by a direct valid co gnizer directly realizing it.” The definition of 
conventional truth  is: “that which is to be realized in a manner of b eing with dualistic appearances 
by a direct valid cognizer directly realizing it.” 
 
Q: What does “dualistic appearances” refer to? 
A: There are three types of dualistic appearances:  
1.  Appearance of true existence  
2.  Appearance of conventionalities 
3.  Appearance of object and object-possessors as diffe rent 
 
If any of these are present, then dualistic appeara nces are present.  
 
Q: Is that why for a hearer’s meditative equipoise that directly realizes selflessness of persons, 
selflessness of persons is not an ultimate truth? 
A: It is not that there is no appearance of true ex istence to a hearer’s meditative equipoise on 
selflessness of persons. To that meditative equipoi se, there are appearances of conventionalities, but  
no appearances of true existence. Therefore, selfle ssness of persons is a conventional truth, not an 
ultimate truth.  
 
Q: Why does the Autonomist school posit selflessnes s of persons as a conventional truth? Is it 
because selflessness of persons is not the final mo de of abidance of the person? 
A: It is because the selflessness of persons is not  the final mode of abidance of persons. The subtle 
selflessness of persons refers to the emptiness of a self-sufficient, substantially existent person. T his 
is not a final mode of abidance, although it is a mode of abidance.  
 
Student: Is it because there is the appearance of t rue existence of selflessness, so it does not satis fy 
the definition of ultimate truth? 
A: To a direct valid cognizer directly realizing se lflessness of persons, there is no appearance of 
true existence.  
 
Q: So is there an appearance of the emptiness of tr ue existence? 
A: There is an appearance other than the appearance  of true existence. There is no appearance other 
than the appearance of the emptiness of true existence. The emptiness of true existence does not 
appear; whatever appears is empty of true existence ; these are not other than the appearance of 
emptiness of true existence. Although an appearance  other than the appearance of emptiness of true 
existence does not appear, we do not say that there  is the appearance of true existence. The lack of a  
self-sufficient, substantially existent person is not an emptiness of true existence, because if we 
realize it, we do not realize emptiness. If the emp tiness of a self-sufficient, substantially existent  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 11: 14-21 April 2008 
 
24 person were emptiness, then the direct realization of the emptiness of a self-sufficient, substantiall y 
existent person would directly contradict the conce ption of true existence, but it doesn’t. So the 
conception of a person as self-sufficient, substant ially existent is very different from the conceptio n 
of true existence.  
 
Q: For non-buddhas, there is the appearance of true  existence when a conventionality appears to 
mental consciousness.  
A: No pervasion. For a learner’s meditative equipoi se that directly realizes selflessness of persons, 
the emptiness of a self-sufficient, substantially e xistent person appears very clearly. Nothing 
obscures the appearance of the selflessness of pers ons. If we consider a conception realizing 
emptiness, there is the appearance of  true existen ce, not just the appearance of the emptiness of true 
existence. Emptiness and its meaning-generality are  mixed. The appearance of this generality 
obscures the clear appearance of emptiness. Because  of the presence of this obscuration, there is the 
appearance of true existence. Maybe it is like that .  
 
The conception that apprehends a self-sufficient, s ubstantially existent person is not a conception of  
true existence; it is an afflictive obscuration, no t a knowledge obscuration. It obstructs the 
attainment of mere liberation, but not the attainme nt of omniscience.  
 
 
/wheel END /wheel 
 
 