Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/Transcript pdf/ORN_GTTnotes_12.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:51:40.507205
================================================================================

Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
1 Masters Program: Ornament for Clear Realization 
Commentary by Gesh e Tenzin Tenphel 
 
 
Monday afternoon, 5 May 2008 
 
Ornament of the Essence  p. 71: 
2B2B-2B1C-1B. Proving that very reason {99}  
ROOT TEXT 
1.11c Through lack of method, distant;  
 
EXPLANATION 
The definition of a knower of bases that is distant through lack of method  is: an 
exalted wisdom (directly realizing impermanen ce and so forth) that  is devoid of great 
compassion and bound by the conception of true existence.  
 Through lack of special method, being distant. “D istant” here means distant from the resultant 
Mother, i.e. omniscience.  
ROOT TEXT 
1.11d Through method, not distant;   
EXPLANATION 
The definition of a knower of bases that is not distant through method  is: an exalted 
wisdom (directly realizing impermanence and so forth) that is conjoined with great 
compassion and a wisdom realizing emptiness.  
 Due to being conjoined mainly with great compassi on, it is not distant from the resultant Mother. 
 
That very exalted wisdom directly
 realizing impermanence and so forth is characterized 
by means of divisions of being devoid of or  not devoid of special method and wisdom. 
Doubts regarding these two characterizing qualiti es are also eliminated  in the chapter on 
the knower of paths. 
 
What is characterized here? The knower of base s. What characterizes it? Its two divisions:  
• a knower of bases distant through lack of method and  
• a knower of bases that is not distant through method.  
Therefore, “divisions of being devoid of or not  devoid of special method and wisdom” refers to 
divisions of the knower of  bases that are conjoined with or not conjoined with special method and 
wisdom. Thus, a knower of bases th at is distant from the resultan t Mother and a knower of bases 
that is near the resultant Mother characterize a knower of bases.  
 The essential point to  be understood here is what causes a knower of bases to be distant from the 
resultant Mother. “These two char acterizing qualities” refer to a knower of bases distant from the 
resultant Mother and a knower of bases that is near the resultan t Mother; doubts regarding these are 
eliminated in the chapter on the knower of paths. Take note of this statement and check how these 
doubts are presented and eliminated in the second chapter.   Regarding the Ornament for Clear Realization,  it is said that the s econd chapter depends on 
reasoning, whereas the fourth chapter depends on understanding. This means that if one does not 
apply reasoning in the second chapte r one will not be able to unders tand it properly, and if one does 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
2 not apply understanding in the fourth chapter, one will not be able to understand it properly. The 
reason for this is that in the fourth chapter, ma ny different aspects are desc ribed, and if one does not 
apply understanding, one will become confused. It is said that one needs to apply reasoning in the 
second chapter; in fact it is necessary to apply reas oning in all eight chapters, but in chapter two it is 
especially necessary to appl y uncommon reasoning in order to understand it properly.  
 Q: Why is meant by “understanding”? A: It means to understand the meaning. Q: We need to apply understanding to every sentence. A: In particular, in the case of the fourth chapter, w ithout attaining a good understanding, one’s 
head will swell!   Ornament of the Essence , p. 71: 
2B2B-2B1C-1C. Divisions of the discordant and antidotal classes 
ROOT TEXT 
1.12a Discordant and an tidotal classes;  
 
EXPLANATION 
That very knower of bases is divide d into (i) a knower  of bases of the discordant class 
and (ii) a knower of bases of the antidotal class , by means of (i) being devoid of 
special method and wisdom and (ii)  being conjoined with them.  
 From this, we can deduce the defini tions of a knower of bases of the discordant class and a knower 
of bases of the antidotal class: 
• the definition of a knower of ba ses of the discordant class
 is: a knower of bases that is devoid of 
special method and wisdom, and 
• the definition of a knower of bases of the antidotal class  is: a knower of bases that is conjoined 
with special method and wisdom. 
 In the case of the discordant class , with what is it discordant? It re fers to being discordant with the 
Mahayana path. There are different  interpretations of this, whic h I leave you to think about. In 
short, discordant means discordant with  cherishing others. In the case of the antidotal class , to what 
is it an antidote? Antidote refers to  the antidote to self-cherishing.  
 In dependence on the knower of bases of the discordant clas s, one will attain liberation, but this 
liberation is one in which others ’ welfare is neglected. Hence, it is discordant with cherishing 
others. The knower of bases of the antidotal class serves as an anti dote to the knower of bases of the 
discordant class, which only bri ngs about one’s personal liberation. If one cultivates a knower of 
bases for only one’s own welfare, it becomes a knower  of bases of the discordant class. If, on the 
other hand, one cultivates a knower of bases for ot hers’ welfare, it become s a knower of bases of 
the antidotal class.  It is important to relate these discussions to the wo rds of the root text, which presents these subjects 
in a very concise way and makes them easy to reme mber. Also, in order to remember the divisions 
of the various subjects of disc ussion, which are then further subdivided and then even again 
subdivided, we need to keep track of  what is a division of what and be able to trac e it back to the 
original root division. If we do this, the text will  become very concise, otherwise the information 
may become very scattered.   Next we have a debate:  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
3 Ornament of the Essence,  p. 71: 
 
The assertion that the former is a conception of true existence should be discarded, since 
it does not know the presentation of reasoni ng and is not skilled in the stages of 
traversing the paths. The subject—a hearer s’ path of seeing—it follows that is a 
conception because it is a knower  that is a conception of true existence. {100} If you 
accept that, then, since it lacks clear appearance, your assertion that it acts as a direct 
antidote to the seeds of afflictive obscurations  will degenerate. Furt hermore, it follows 
that it is a wrong conception because it is the former. If you accept that, then, since it is 
mistaken with respect to its object of a dherence, there would not be the slightest 
difference between a conception of a self of  persons and what is  or is not to be 
practiced.  
 The first time “the former” is mentioned—“The asse rtion that the former is a conception of true 
existence should be discarded”—it refers to a knower of bases of the discordant  class. In the second 
case of “the former”—“Furthermore, it follows th at it is a wrong concep tion because it is the 
former”—it refers to the conception of true existence.  Someone says that a knower of bases of the discordant class is a conception of true existence. 
However, this is not correct. Such an assert ion should be discarded, as it does not know the 
presentation of reasoning and is not skilled in the stages of traversing the paths. The consequence is: 
the subject – a hearers’ path of seeing – it follows that is a conception because it is a knower that is 
a conception of true existence. In other words, it follows that a hearer’s path of seeing is a 
conception, which is not necessa rily the case. It can be con ceptual, but it can also be non-
conceptual. Our system flings this  consequence: if a knower of base s of the discordant class is a 
conception of true existence, then it follows that a hearer’s path of seeing is conceptual. The reason 
is: “because it is a knower that is a conception of true existence.” The essential point to be 
understood here is that a knower of bases of the discordant cla ss is NOT a conception of true 
existence.   Ornament of the Essence, p. 71: 
 
That very knower of bases conjoined with special method and wisdom is explained to 
be “a knower of bases of the antidotal class
,” but neither Arya [Vimuktisena] nor 
Haribhadra used that convention “antidotal knower of bases” for an exalted wisdom 
directly realizing emptiness. 
 This statement is related to th e assertion of the “tr ouble-maker” that a knower of bases of the 
discordant class is a conception of true existence, in which case it would be reasonable to assert that 
a knower of bases of the antidotal class is an exalted wisdom directly realizing emptiness.  
 Ornament of the Essence : 
2B2B-2B1C-1D. Application of a knower of bases 
 
Where does this division come from? It is the fo urth division of the outli ne on p. 70: 2B2B-2B1C-1 
– Topics that characterize a knower of bases.  
2B2B-2B1C-1D1. Divisions of an application of a knower of bases 
2B2B-2B1C-1D2. Mode of apprehension of an application of a knower of bases 
2B2B-2B1C-1D3. Result of an application of a knower of bases 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
4 The first outline talk s about the divisions of an application of a knower of bases, the second refers 
to the equality of the applications of a bodhisattva i ndicated here, and the third refers to the path of 
seeing (these are respectively the seventh, eighth, and ninth to pics of a knower of bases). 
 Ornament of the Essence , p. 72: 
2B2B-2B1C-1D1. Divisions of an application of a knower of bases 
ROOT TEXT 
1.12b Application; …  
 
EXPLANATION 
A bodhisattva’s yoga that cultivates an antidote to (i) erroneous adhe rence to the entity 
and attributes of the mode of subsistence of conventional bases, and (ii) erroneous 
adherence to the mode of subsistence of the ultimate is an application  of a knower of 
bases .  
 When divided, there are ten. Although it is corr elated with the path of preparation by 
means of the bases for characteriza tion, it exists thr ough the tenth ground. 
 Here we have the definition of an  application of a knower of bases
: a bodhisattva’s yoga that 
cultivates an antidote to (i) erroneous adherence to the entity and attributes of the mode of subsistence of conventional bases, a nd (ii) erroneous adherence to the
 mode of subsistence of the 
ultimate. Its boundaries  are: it exists from the Mahayana pa th of accumulation through the end of 
the continuum of a sentient being.  What is the meaning of the phrase in the defi nition, “erroneous adherenc e to the entity and 
attributes of the mode of subsistence of convent ional bases”? What is th e meaning  of “erroneous 
adherence to the mode of subsistence of the ultimate”? These two erroneous adherences are explained in relation respectively to a conventional or obscurational truth, and to an ultimate truth. 
What is “erroneous adherence to the entity  of the mode of subsisten ce of a conventional base” and 
what is “erroneous adherence to the attributes  of the mode of subsiste nce of a conventional base”? 
In the second part we should have some idea of  what an “erroneous adherence to mode of 
subsistence of the ultimate” is.  A vase, for example, is a conventional truth or  obscurational truth, or a conventional base. What 
is the mode of subsistence of  the conventional base  in relation to a va se? The vase is a 
conventionality. What is its entity? Its entity is its being a bulbous bellied and flat bottomed water-
container. What are its attri butes? We can posit its impermanence, its being a product, being 
produced, and so forth. A vase is no t established or does not exist in the way it appears. If we were 
to view a vase as being established in the way it appears, this would be  a superimposition with 
respect to the entity of the vase. Similarly, if we we re to view a vase as be ing established in the way 
it appears and hold it to be so, this would also be erroneous adherence to the mode of subsistence of 
the ultimate.   If the presentation of ultimate tr uths is not feasible, then the pr esentation of conventional truths 
will also not be feasible. Also if the presenta tion of conventional truths is not feasible, the 
presentation of the ultimate truths  will not be feasible. In this way the two truths are relative to each 
other. This is similar to the idea expressed in the Heart Sutra,  when it says “Form is emptiness. 
Emptiness is form.” Conventional truth and ultimate  truth are mutually dependent, in that without 
one, the other will not exist. There is no emptiness th at stands alone without be ing related to a basis. 
Therefore, emptiness is presente d in relation to its basis.  
 Student: if there is no emptiness without form , then there is no form without emptiness? 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
5 Geshe Tenzin Tenphel: That is correct—if there is no emptiness, there is no form. 
Student: Does the isolate of a vase  include the emptiness of a vase? 
Geshe Tenzin Tenphel: What are you thinking? Student: A vase is always together with its emptine ss, so they are not separa ble. Therefore, also the 
isolate of vase, which is not separate from vase, should include the emptiness of vase. 
Geshe Tenzin Tenphel: It seems alright to say that.  Ornament of the Essence , p. 72: 
2B2B-2B1C-1D2. Mode of apprehension of an application of a knower of bases 
ROOT TEXT 
1.12b … the equality of that; 
 
EXPLANATION 
Stopping adherence to the divisions of the bases, definitions, definienda, and object-
possessors as truly existent is the mode of apprehension of the equality of that  
application.  
 
When divided by way of is olates, there are four. 
 What is set out here is not a complete definition. The definition given in Seventy Topics  [for 
equality of the applications of a bodhisattva in dicated in the context of the knower of bases
] is: a 
bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined with the wisdom that  stops adherence to th e divisions of bases, 
definitions, definienda, objects, and object-possessors as truly existent. This is the eighth topic of a 
knower of bases and its complete definiendum is: th e equality of the applications of a bodhisattva 
indicated in the context of th e knower of bases. The words “s topping adherence to… as truly 
existent” should be understood to re fer to a wisdom realizing the emptiness of true existence. Thus, 
the topic here is: a bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined w ith the wisdom realizing the emptiness of true 
existence of definitions, definienda, objects, and object-possessors.   Q: Why is it called “ equality  of that application”? 
A: In this context, equality refers  to the equality of th e applications of a bodhisattva indicated here, 
in this context. Here we are talking about a knower of bases, and in particul ar the applications of a 
knower of bases. To be even more precise, we ar e talking about the applic ations of a knower of 
bases in the continuum of a bodhisattva. Here equa lity can be understood to be applied to bases, 
definitions, definienda, objects, and object-possessors, in that they are all realized as lacking true 
existence. In other words, the bases, definitio ns, definienda, objects, and object-possessors are equal  
in being empty of true existence. Therefore, “equality” is explained with regard to the various bases 
for characterization: bases, definitions, definienda, objects, and object-possessors.  
 In Gyaltsab Je’s explanation it says  “the mode of apprehension of th e equality of that application.” 
What do we posit as the mode of apprehension? We can posit emptiness of true existence itself. 
These words “the mode of apprehen sion of the equality of that a pplication” are aw kward and need 
to be annotated. The mode of apprehension must be posited as the emptiness of true existence. The 
wisdom realizing the emptiness of true existence is posited as the equality of that application. A bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined with that wisdom is th e equality of the application of a bodhisattva.  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
6 2B2B-2B1C-1D3. Result of an application of a knower of bases {101}  
ROOT TEXT 
1.12c Hearers and so forth, path of seeing: 
 
EXPLANATION 
The definition of an explicitly indicated path of seeing  is: a clear realiz ation of the truth 
that directly realizes freedom from elaboration.  
 The definition here is slightly incomplete. The comple te definition of an explicitly indicated path of 
seeing  should be annotated to read: a [Mahayana] clear realization of the truth that directly realizes 
freedom from elaboration [that is  explicitly indicated here]. “Explicitly indicated here” means 
indicated in the context of a knower of bases. 
 Q: Should the definition say “a Mahayana arya’s  clear realizati on of the truth”? 
A: That is not necessary, because the definition says “a clear rea lization of the truth,” which is 
necessarily of an arya. 
Q: There is no pervasion, because a hearer’s path of seeing is not a clear realization of the truth 
because a hearer has not realized ultimate truth.  A: A hearer’s path of seeing is a clear realization of the truth. To be  a clear realization of the truth, 
it does not have to be a clear rea lization of the ultimate truth.  
 This concludes the nine topics of a knower of bases. The first six are: 
1. A knower of paths not abiding in  cyclic existence through knowing 
2. A knower of paths not abiding in solitary peace through compassion 
3. A knower of bases distant from the resultant mother 
4. A knower of bases near to the resultant mother 
5. A knower of bases of the discordant class 
6. A knower of bases of the antidotal class 
 After this, there are an additional three: 
7. The divisions of the applications 
8. The mode of apprehension of the applications 
9. The result of the applications of a knower of bases 
 The sequence can appear to be strange, as the first si x exist in the continua of aryas, that is, on arya 
paths, whereas the seventh and eighth exist from the Mahayana path of accumulation and therefore 
do not necessarily exist on an arya path, and the ninth topi c is the Mahayana  path of seeing. 
Therefore, after explaining the six topics that exist only on arya path s, there are two topics that are 
related to the applications: the seventh is the application of a bodhisattva and the eighth is the 
equality of the application of a bodhisattva. Based on these applicatio ns one is able to attain their 
result—the path of seeing indicate d in this context. When one atta ins this path of seeing, some of 
the first six topics are attained. Not all of them ar e attained because those that are discordant are not 
attained.  Q: The exam says: “A sharp faculty bodhisattva r ealizes emptiness before attaining the Mahayana 
path of accumulation,” the answer to which is tr ue. How can one be a bodhisa ttva before entering 
the Mahayana path of accumulation?  A: It is true that a sh arp faculty bodhisattva reali zes emptiness before attaining the Mahayana path 
of accumulation; however, a sharp faculty bodhisattva is not a bodhisattva before attaining the 
Mahayana path of accumulation.  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
7 Tuesday, 6 May 2008 
 
Questions and answers 
 
Q: In the phrase, “exalte d knower of all aspects,” is “aspects” mutually inclusive with existents, 
established bases, etc.? If so, a person would be an  aspect, so what would they be an aspect of? 
A: In the expression, exalted knower of all aspects, “aspect” is mutu ally inclusive with existents. 
Since a person is an established ba se, it is an object-aspect of an  exalted knower of  all aspects. 
When we talk about the aspects of an ex alted knower of all aspects, there are object-aspects and 
knower-aspects . The object aspects of an exalted knower of  all aspects are all objects of knowledge. 
A knower-aspect of an exalted knower of all aspects is an exalted knower of all aspects.  
 Q: It is necessary to realize subtle impermanence and selflessness of persons  (the lack of a self-
sufficient, substantially existent person) before realizing the emptiness of true existence, so why 
does the lam rim not have meditations on subtle impermanen ce and selflessness of persons, but only 
on coarse impermanence and emptiness?  A: What is your answer? Do you th ink it is true that  you must realize subtle impermanence and 
selflessness of persons before realiz ing emptiness of true existence?  
Some students say yes, some say no. 
Geshe-la: if you say yes or no, you must say why. 
 Student 1: [Yes, because] the realization of subtle  impermanence is grosser than the realization of 
emptiness, so it must be realized first.  GTT: Is there pervasion? If th ere are two realizati ons, one coarser and one  subtler, is there 
pervasion that the coarser realiza tion has to be realized first? 
 Student 2: No [it’s not necessary to realize subtle impermanence and selflessness of persons before 
realizing emptiness of true exis tence], because a bodhisattva’s main observed object is the lack of 
true existence, so the realization of subtle impe rmanence arises simultaneously with the realization 
of emptiness of true existence.   GTT: A bodhisattva is not  always a bodhisattva. In the lam rim,  one starts as an ignorant person, 
then trains in the path of the small scope, then in  the path of the medium scope, then in the great 
scope. If such a person has trained well in the small scope, he will have realized coarse impermanence. Then one would enter the middle scope path, where one needs to observe the 
drawbacks of cyclic existence. One needs to trai n here in the four noble truths, which include the 
sixteen aspects—impermanence, etc. The four aspects of true suffe ring are impermanence, 
suffering, emptiness, and selflessness. Once one  has completed the realization of coarse 
impermanence, one has not yet completed the realiz ation of subtle imperman ence, which is one of 
the sixteen aspects. Someone who has realized coarse impermanence is not pervaded by having 
realized subtle impermanence. In order to re alize impermanence one n eeds to realize subtle 
impermanence. When one trains in the four aspects of  true suffering, one must contemplate:  
1. subtle impermanence 
2. the nature of suffering 
3. emptiness, meaning emptiness of a perm anent, unitary, independent self, and  
4. selflessness, referring to lack  of a self-sufficient, subs tantially existent person.   
One must additionally train in the mind of definite  emergence, or the att itude of renunciation. In 
order to train in that one must train in the mind th at seeks liberation. To generate this, one needs to 
realize the possibility of attaini ng liberation by way of realizing th e absence of a self-sufficient, 
substantially existent pers on. At that time, it is  not necessary to realize em ptiness. The realization of 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
8 emptiness comes later, in the path of the great scope. At that point, it is necessary to realize 
emptiness, although it is not necessary at the earlier stages.   In terms of the stages of trai ning the mind, we need to first r ealize coarse impermanence, then 
subtle impermanence, then the subtle selflessness of  persons, then the emptiness of true existence. 
In this case, it is necessary to r ealize subtle selflessness of persons before real izing the emptiness of 
true existence. Without realizing the subtle selflessness of persons, it is not possible to refute all 
levels of objects of negation required to re alize the emptiness of true existence.  
 If a person does not refute the object of negati on required to realize the subtle selflessness of 
persons, there is no way this person can refute th e object of negation required to realize emptiness 
of true existence. For instance, we can realize co arse impermanence by just looking with our eyes. 
If we realize subtle impermanence, this benefits the realizing of subtle selflessness of persons, and 
if we realize the subtle selflessness of persons, this will benefit the realization of emptiness of true existence. How does the realization of selflessness of persons benefit the r ealization of emptiness? 
The object of negation in the case of subtle selflessness of persons is coarser than in the case of the 
emptiness of true existence.   Q: Geshe-la previously said that for someone defi nite in Mahayana lineage,  direct realization of 
selflessness of persons a nd direct realization of emptiness o ccur simultaneously on the Mahayana 
path of seeing, when someone realizes both the know er of paths and the knower of bases. Now you 
are saying that to realize emptiness, we must first realize the selflessness of persons. Is this because 
in the first case, we are talking about direct realization, and in the sec ond case, there is not the 
qualification “ direct” ? 
A: Yes. One must realize the selflessness of persons  before realizing emptin ess of true existence, 
but for someone definite in Mahayana lineage, the direct realization of selfle ssness of persons and 
the direct realization of emptine ss occur simultaneously.  
 Let us imagine a hypothetical person  who has realized emptiness but has not realized selflessness of 
persons. What has happened to the conception of self in such a person? Is this  possible? It would be 
strange if someone were to  realize emptiness without  realizing selflessness of  persons. It would be 
similar if someone had realized emptin ess but had not realized impermanence. 
 Q: If someone uses the reasons that establish em ptiness and realizes emp tiness directly, does he 
subsequently realize selflessnes s of persons and impermanence? 
A: It would not be the case that the other realizations would occur in the second inst ant; in the very 
moment of directly realizing emptin ess, without deliberate effort, th e other realizations will occur, 
simultaneously.   Q: Do we need to have an inferential realizat ion of the three (imperma nence, selflessness, and 
emptiness) in order to have direct realiza tion? And are these realizations sequential? 
A: It is necessary to realize impermanence, se lflessness, and emptiness conceptually before 
realizing them directly. In order of generation, first there would be a c onceptual realization of 
impermanence, then of selflessness, then of emp tiness. Without realizing impermanence, there is no 
way all the objects of negation involved in realiz ing selflessness of pers ons can be refuted, and 
without realizing selflessness of persons, there is no way all objects  of negation that need to be 
refuted in order to realize emptiness of true existence can be refuted.  
 Q: In order to realize the emptiness of true existen ce, it is necessary to identify the subtle object of 
negation. This can be found on the basis of persons  or phenomena. What is  the difference between 
the absence of self-sufficient, substantial existence of a person and the emptiness of true existence of a person? 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
9 A: They are very different. Within the mode of apprehension of a conception of a self-sufficient, 
substantially existent person, the mode of apprehen sion of a conception of true existence of a person 
is complete; however, the concep tion of a self-suffici ent, substantially existent person is not a 
conception of true existence of the person. It is difficult to differentiate between them.  
 We have to understand the mode of existence of a self-sufficient, substantially existent person 
and the mode of existence of a truly existent pe rson. What is the measure of existence of a self-
sufficient, substantially existent person ? It is a person that is substantially existent, such that the 
person is inexpressible as being either one entity w ith or a different entity from the aggregates, or 
impermanent or permanent. There are four parts to this measure:  
1. The person is inexpressible as being one entity with the aggregates  
2. The person is inexpressible as being a different entity from the aggregates  
3. The person is inexpressible as being impermanent  
4. The person is inexpressible as being permanent  
 The measure of true existence  is establishment from the side of the object’s uncommon mode of 
subsistence without being posited through the force of  appearing to an awareness, as we discussed 
previously. There is appear ance of true existence to  a conception of self.  
 There is a big difference in terms of coarse ness or subtlety of th e two conceptions, the 
conception of a truly existent pers on and the conception of a self-su fficient, substantially existent 
person. Since there is the appearance of true existe nce to the conception of self, if you were to do 
the examination of selflessness or emptiness from th e point of view of the mode of appearance, it 
would be very difficult. One must first id entify how the self of persons would be if it were to exist . 
On that basis, we can examine fo r the self of persons or true ex istence. We need to examine the 
mode of apprehension of the self of persons. If we do not do  that, and instead try to analyze from 
the point of view of the mode of appearance , it would be difficult to di fferentiate between the self 
of persons and true existence.   Q: Do the four factors listed pr eviously refer only to self-suffi ciency, or also to substantial 
existence? A: The meaning of substantial existence
 is that in order for the object  to dawn to one’s mind, other 
objects do not need to dawn to the mind. If there is an ob ject that is able to  dawn to one’s mind 
without other objects dawning to one’s mi nd, then it is substa ntially existent.  
 For example, a person is an imputed existent . However, the basis of de signation, the aggregates, 
are substantially existent . This is because in order for them  to dawn to the mind, other phenomena 
do not need to dawn to the mind; they dawn without depending on other phenomena dawning to the 
mind. However, a person is an imputed existent, b ecause in order for a person to dawn to the mind, 
it depends on the bases of designation, the aggreg ates, dawning to the mind. First the aggregates 
dawn, then the person dawns. The aggregates are not the person; they  are other than the person. In 
order for the person to dawn, it depends on other phe nomena appearing; theref ore the aggregates are 
substantially existent while the person is imputedly existent.   The four inexpressibilities we mentioned previ ously explain self-sufficiency. You can see that 
when this criteria is posited, it does not contain th e word “reliance;” instead it says “inexpressible.”  
 Note that this explanation applies mainly to  the Autonomist system and below, with the 
exception of the Vaibhashika system. We need to  examine if it applies in the case of the 
Vaibhashika and Consequence schools.   Q: In the context of the knower of bases, why are th e first two of the nine topics knowers of paths? 
It is clearly not in th e order of generation.  
A: It is because for someone definite in Mahaya na lineage, the attainment of knower of bases and 
knower of paths are simultaneous. How would you pos it the definition of the first topic, the knower 
of paths not abiding in cyc lic existence through knowing? 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
10 Student: A Mahayana arya’s exalted knower abiding in  a class of realizations  that stops the extreme 
of cyclic existence relative  to a conventional base.  
 GTT: If we look at p. 70, it says:   
Having eliminated the qualm wondering, “What are the paths that stop them?,” when a 
bodhisattvas’ paths of seeing and meditation were indicated to stop the extremes of 
cyclic existence and solitary peace prior to these, saying “a knower of bases not abiding 
in solitary peace through compassion” is a wrong application of conventions, since (i) the meaning that is to be characterized and (ii) the two meanings that act to 
characterize—are attributes of a knower of bases and a know er of paths [respectively]. 
 Root text 1.11a says “Through knowing, not abiding in  cyclic existence,” wh ich means that through 
knowing the selflessness of persons, one does not abid e in cyclic exis tence. A knower that directly 
realizes the selflessness of persons is
 a knower of bases. Merely  through directly realizing 
selflessness of persons, one can atta in liberation from cyclic existen ce, but it is pos sible that one 
abides in the extreme of solitary peace. On top of this direct real ization of selflessness, if great 
compassion is conjoined with it, then it would be a knower of paths that doe s not abide in cyclic 
existence.  Q: Then why do we not call the fourth and sixth topics—the knower of bases that is near to the 
resultant mother and the knower of bases of the antidotal class—knowers of paths, because they are 
knowers of paths? A: For the fourth topic, the knower of bases that is  near to the resultant mother, there is no fault in 
replacing the words “knower of bases” with “knower of paths,” but there is an essential point in the 
terminology that is used. If we look at th e third topic, it is the knower of bases  that is distant from 
the resultant Mother. When this is  explained, we can have the doubt “What is a knower of bases that 
is near the resultant Mother like?” Als o, if we look at the fifth t opic, knower of bases of the 
discordant class, we can have the doubt, “What is the knower of bases of the antidotal  class like?” 
There are knowers of paths that abide in a Hinayana class of realizations.  
 Q: Could Geshe-la give an example of a meditation on the lack of true exis tence of a person? What 
is the conceptual analysis  that needs to be done? 
A: Like this [Geshe-la sits in  meditation posture and laughs]!  
 First you have to identify th e object of negation, then check how it dawns to the mind. Once this 
dawns as an object of the mind, you have  to check to see if it exists the way it appears, or dawns to 
your mind. Without doing this, it is not possible to  realize its absence, or emptiness. In our 
continuum, we have the conception of true existe nce; such a conception clearly apprehends true 
existence. However, we do not identify whether or  not such a truly existent person exists. Such a 
conception of true existence is a wrong consciousness . Although true existence appears very clearly 
and is apprehended by the conception of true existence, merely this does not benefit our 
identification of it. We need to generate a valid  cognizer that identifies the object of negation and 
then investigates whether or not it exists in the way it appears.  
 Q: What do we investigate, the aggregates? A: You can investigate th e aggregates, but it is best if you investigate th e person. In general, we 
need to realize emptiness with respect to all pheno mena, but if we start tr aining our mind with the 
person, this is easier for us.  Q: What is the difference between the person and the aggregates? 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
11 A: The five aggregates are posited as form, fe elings, discrimination, compositional factors, and 
consciousnesses. In the Autonomy school, there is a slightly different pr esentation, in that the 
illustration/basis of characterization of the person is the mental consciousness. That is the final basis of characterization of the person; you can say it’s an aggregate of consciousness. It’s a bit awkward 
in the Autonomy School, saying that the final basi s of characterization of the person is the mental 
consciousness. If you think of illustrations of a person, you could say a nun, a monk, an old man, an 
old woman, mother, father, girl, boy, etc., but if you try to  pinpoint what the pe rson is, it is difficult. 
In trying to identify this person, many different t ypes of tenets are posited. In the different tenet 
systems, there are different ways of positing in terms of the illustration of the person. Some posit 
the continuity of the five aggregates, some the me re composite of the aggregates, some the mental 
consciousness, and others the mere I. All the system s are the same in asserting a person, but when it 
comes to positing the basis of characterization  or illustration of the person, they have different 
ways of positing it.   Why is it said to be easier to realize the lack of  true existence of a person? When we look for the 
person within the aggregates, we are not able to find it.  For that reason it is ea sier to realize the lack 
of true existence of the person. A person is in fact found in depe ndence on the aggregates. This is 
beneficial when it comes to refuting the object of negation involved in realiz ing the lack of true 
existence of the person.    
Wednesday, 7 May 2008 (morning) 
 
Questions and answers 
 
Q: I was not completely satisfied with Geshe-la’s answer regarding the lam rim, i.e. its containing 
information on how to meditate on subtle impe rmanence and selflessness of persons. In the Lam 
Rim Chen Mo , Lama Tsong Khapa mentions the sixteen attr ibutes of the four noble truths, but does 
not explain how to meditate on all of th em. Where can we find these instructions? 
A: When the four noble truths are explained in the lam rim, the fi rst two truths are explained in 
relation to one’s entering cyclic existence, and the third and fourth truths ar e mentioned in regard to 
one’s exiting from cyclic existen ce. From this, we know that if one were to practice the first two 
truths, one would enter cyclic existence, while if  one were to practice the second two, one could get 
out of cyclic existence. If we look at the order of explanation, first, the truth of suffering is 
explained, then true origins, then true cessations, then true paths. This is not the order of cause and 
effect; if we look at sufferings and origins, we s hould have origins followed  by sufferings in terms 
of generation. Also, in terms of cause and effect , paths should be followed by cessations. The order 
in terms of explanation is thus reversed: suffe ring followed by origins, and cessations followed by 
paths. This explanation accords with the practice of trainees.  
 With regard to these four, it is said that sufferings are to be understood , origins are to be 
abandoned , cessations are to be actualized , and paths are to be cultivated . With regard to sufferings, 
what is to be known? In our continuum, we have  a mind that does not desire suffering. Although we 
have this desire, it is quite s uperficial. We don’t want to be hungr y, thirsty, hot, cold, and so forth, 
but if we examine this wish car efully, we will find that we do not have a good quality wish to be 
free from suffering. In order to generate a genuine wi sh to be free from suffering, we need to have a 
good understanding of the three types of suffering: suffering of suffering, suffering of change, and 
pervasive compounded suffering. If we understand thes e well, a genuine wish  to be free from 
suffering arises. Then, we would wonder, wh at are the origins of this suffering? 
 With regard to the first truth, there are f our aspects: impermanence, suffering, empty, and 
selfless. There is a lot to contemplate regarding these, for example that suffering is impermanent. 
By reflecting on the nature of suffering in deta il, we can understand that suffering is something 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
12 from which we can separate. The explicit words, “You need to meditate on subtle impermanence” 
are not in the lam rim, but the way to meditate is indicated.  
  I want to say something. In the monastery, we do many prayers, while here we do very few. I would 
like to request you in your room to recite the Heart Sutra , prayers to Tara, the mantra of Manjushri, 
and the Lama Tsong Khapa guru yoga with Migt sema mantras. We should also make good 
dedications. [Geshe-la gave furt her advice on dedicating our pr actice, accumulating merit, and 
purifying negativities.]  Q: Regarding a sentient being directly realizing em ptiness; can such a sentient being also realize 
conventional truth at the same time? A: When a sentient being is direct ly realizing emptiness, it is possi ble to realize a conventional truth 
at the same time, but this mind that dir ectly realizes emptin ess is pervaded by not realizing a 
conventional truth. The mind that di rectly realizes emptiness in th e continuum of a sentient being 
cannot realize a conventional truth; that very mind, at that time. But that person can at that time 
realize a conventional truth, with another mind. A mind realizing em ptiness in the continuum of a 
sentient being is not pervaded by not realizing conventional truths . However, if it is a mind directly 
realizing emptiness in the con tinuum of a sentient being, it is pervaded by  not realizing 
conventional truths. For example, for someone defin ite in the Mahayana lineage, the Mahayana path 
of preparation in such a person ’s continuum can realize emptines s and realize conventional truths. 
The realization of emptiness in the continuum of  this person realizes also conventional truth, 
because this realization conceptu ally realizes emptiness, i.e. by way of a meaning-generality, 
therefore it also realizes a conve ntional truth. This would be an in stance of simultaneous realization 
of both ultimate truth and conventional truth. Such  a person on the Mahayana path of preparation 
realizes both truths simultaneously, but when this  person proceeds to the path of seeing, s/he has a 
direct realization of emptiness; s/he does not rea lize conventional truth with such a mind because on 
the path of seeing, s/he realizes emptiness without a meaning-genera lity. On the path of preparation, 
the mind realizing emptiness also realizes the mean ing-generality of emptin ess. The two truths are 
thus realized simultaneously with a si ngle mind on the path of preparation.  
 Q: When someone definite in the Mahayana lineag e attains the path of seeing, there is direct 
realization of emptiness, and also simultaneously a direct realization of subtle impermanence and 
selflessness. It thus seem s that this person realizes the two tr uths simultaneously, which would seem 
to be the realization of a buddha. Could Geshe-la explain? 
A: When a person who is definite in the Mahayana lineage attains the path of  seeing, there is direct 
realization of emptiness, direct realization of selflessness, and di rect realization of impermanence, 
but these are not with one mind. In the continuum of a sentient being, a direct realization of 
emptiness does not directly real ize selflessness or impermanence.  Also, in the continuum of a 
sentient being, a direct realiz ation of selflessness does not di rectly realize emptiness or 
impermanence, and a direct real ization of impermanence does not directly realize emptiness or 
selflessness.  
 
Q: Then it would seem that there are three ment al consciousnesses realizing those three objects 
simultaneously. Is this correct? A: Yes. There are three mental c onsciousnesses existing at the same  time when this person directly 
realizes emptiness, but only the direct realizati on of emptiness is manife st, whereas the direct 
realization of selflessness and direct realizati on of impermanence are not manifest. The monastic 
textbooks have different presentati ons. Jedzun Chogyi Gyeltsen (of Sera Je monastery) says that 
when a bodhisattva has a manifest direct realization of emptiness,  conventional bodhici tta exists in 
his continuum but is not manifest . In contrast, Sera Me’s text books say that when the direct 
realization of emptiness is manifest in a bo dhisattva’s continuum, there is no conventional 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
13 bodhicitta; however, he is a bodhisattva, although he  does not have bodhicitta. They defend this by 
saying that conventional bodhicitta does not exist in  the continuum, but it has not degenerated. They 
say this bodhisattva possesses bodhicitta, but in th e continuum there is no bodhicitta; he possesses 
bodhicitta because it has not dege nerated. The three colleges of Sera Me, Drepung Loseling and 
Ganden Shartse share this assertion, while Se ra Je, Ganden Jangtse, and Drepung Gomang share 
different assertions.   Q: In the continuum of an ordi nary being, can many minds be mani fest simultaneously? What about 
an arya? A: Yes; many minds can be manifest at the same ti me, both for ordinary be ings and for aryas. The 
point is that when a sentient be ing has a manifest realization of  emptiness, this being is in 
meditative equipoise. When the mind is single-poi ntedly placed on emptiness, there are no other 
thoughts present.   Q: But we just have one mental continuum, which is a sequence of different instances of mind. Is it 
a continuum of one mind or of many different minds? In one moment of mind, how can we have 
many different manifest minds? A: We have six main minds, or primary consciousnesses: eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mental. 
These can all be manifest at one time.  Is your question how can there be many consciousnesses , or 
how can there be many mental consciousnesses at one time? In general, we  can have all six primary 
consciousnesses present at once, and we can also have many mental conscious nesses present at one 
time. If we consider the example of when we ar e eating, we can have all five sense consciousnesses 
manifest: with eyes, we look at co lor, with ears, we h ear sound, with the tongue , we taste, with the 
nose, we smell, and with the body, we touch. Thes e five sense consciousnesses can induce mental 
consciousnesses. Do these mental consciousnesses that are induced necessarily occur sequentially, 
or are they produced simultaneously?   Student: I have read in several Buddhist books that we do not ac tually have many consciousnesses 
manifest at the same time, but that this is an illusion, and that actually we  go very quickly between 
one consciousness and another. Is that correct? GTT: This topic is often explai ned in relation to a sutra citati on in which the Buddha says “The 
primary consciousnesses of sentient  beings are separate/individual co ntinuities.” This should not be 
interpreted to mean it is not possible to have more  than one primary consciousness manifest at once. 
We can verify that we have a primary eye cons ciousness manifest, but that does not mean we 
cannot hear or smell at the same time. The correct interpretation of this cita tion should be applied in 
relation to the mental consciousness. This is because a pe rson has a mental consciousness since 
beginningless time; when this pe rson dies, the single mental cons ciousness continues to the next 
life. At the time of death, the sense consciousn esses stop, but the ment al consciousness is not 
stopped; the continuity of the consciousness goes on. This is  the meaning of that citation; 
interpreting it to mean that we cannot have six consciousnesses manife st simultaneously is 
incorrect. Please investigate and check if this  accords with reality; then you can understand for 
yourself if this is the case.  
 Q: According to lam rim, we need to realize that all sentient beings have been our mothers, and in 
order to prove this, we have to establish th e beginninglessness of mi nd by understanding that the 
body and mind are different substantial entities. If that  is the case, then when the brain is damaged, 
why does the mind not function properly?  A: The mind and body are indeed different con tinuities. When we look at the mind, there are 
different levels: coarse and s ubtle. Coarse minds are closely related to the physical body. For 
example, if the brain is damaged, these coarse  minds do not function properly, because coarse 
minds are supported on the brain. They have a relationship of s upport and supported: the body is the 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
14 support and the coarse minds are the supported, so  when the support is damaged, the supported 
coarse minds are affected. However, subtle mi nds are not supported on th e physical body; there are 
cases where the brain does not function, but one is  still able to abide in meditative equipoise on 
emptiness.   Q: Is this assertion of the mental consciousness going from life to life a sserted by all the Buddhist 
schools? A: This assertion is accepted in all four tenet systems, with slight differences. For instance, the Vaibhashika system asserts that when one attain s nirvana without remainde r, the continuity of 
matter and cognition is severed.  Q: On the path of preparation, if one realizes emptiness inferentially, does it necessarily mean that 
this person realizes conventional tr uth with a sense consciousness? 
A:  My explanation was that the mind realizing em ptiness also realizes c onventional truth. We are 
talking about a single mind.   Q: Geshe-la said the six primar y consciousness can exist simultane ously, which is clear. But how 
can two mental consciousnesses be present simultaneously?   
A: I would say it is possi ble to have two mental primary consci ousnesses manifest at the same time. 
For example, we have the conception of true exis tence in our continuum and the conception of self. 
These are mental primary consciousnesses, a nd can be manifest at the same time.  
 Q: But in the lam rim, it says that when one is  angry, one must apply th e antidote, love, because 
love and anger cannot exist simultaneously.  A: This situation is different, because meditation on love is an antidote to anger; when one has love, 
it is not possible to be a ngry, and vice versa. But if we talk about the concep tion of true existence, 
when one is angry, there is also the conception of  true existence. When anger is manifest, it is 
possible to have the manifest c onception of true existence, and there can also be the manifest 
conception of self, as well as the manifest con ception of permanence, which will not damage the 
anger; in fact, they serve as a support for anger.  Q: We had a question about a person definite in  Mahayana lineage who can directly realize 
impermanence, selflessness, and emptiness simultane ously. But how can this be possible, if this 
person is in single-pointed med itative equipoise on emptiness? 
A: The conclusion we arrived at  was that when someone definite in Mahayana lineage initially 
attains the path of seeing, this pe rson attains direct realizations of emptiness, selflessness, and 
impermanence, but only the direct realization of emptiness is manifest. So how is this possible? An 
easy way to reply is to say that  upon newly attaining the path of  seeing, one attains a knower of 
bases. If this were not the case,  we would have an arya who doe s not have a knowe r of bases in 
his/her continuum, which is not possible; an arya  necessarily has a knower  of bases in his/her 
continuum.  
 Another reply is that when one newly attains the path of seeing, one a ttains an uninterrupted 
path, which only lasts one instant, because in the ne xt instant one goes to the liberated path. This 
also lasts only an instant, after which one aris es into subsequent atta inment. During subsequent 
attainment, the realizations of impermanence and se lflessness can manifest readily; there is no need 
for deliberate contemplation in orde r for these realizations to arise. During subsequent attainment, 
the direct realizations of impermanence and selflessn ess can manifest readily, but if we were to say 
that prior to subsequent attainment there are no direct realizations of  impermanence and of 
selflessness, then how would they  become manifest during subse quent attainment? How would an 
arya directly realize these duri ng subsequent attainment? So, havi ng directly realized emptiness, 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
15 there is no need to deliberately contemplate se lflessness and impermanence in order to directly 
realize them; there are no obscura tions to such realizations.  
 Q: Geshe-la says mental consci ousness can have many minds simultaneously manifest. How is this 
not contradictory to our ha ving one mental continuum? 
A: In fact, we have many cont inuities at one time, because we have many types of primary 
consciousnesses, so there are many types of conti nuities existing at the same time. When we talk 
about a person having one continu ity, it is in the context of pa ssing from one life to another, 
because mainly the mental consciousness passes fr om one life to the next. When one dies, it is 
mainly the mental consciousness that passes to the next life; however, it is not that the eye, ear, 
nose, etc., consciousnesses become non-existent—t hey abide in the entity of potential, and are 
therefore not said to be  primary consciousnesses. Upon taking rebirth and coming into contact with 
a physical body, these potentials ma nifest in the entity of primary consciousnesses. The only 
consciousness that continues without changing en tity is the mental primary consciousness.  
 Form does not act as the substantial cause of  the eye consciousness, sound does not act as the 
substantial cause of ear consciousness, and so forth. This is related to a citation that says, “How is 
that which is not a primary consciousness establis hed as not being a substantial cause of a primary 
consciousness?” From the words alone, you may th ink this means that which is not a primary 
consciousness is not a substantia l cause of a primary consciousness. In order to understand this 
citation properly, we need to add some annotations . What it means, however, is that forms, sounds, 
odors, etc.—which are not primary consciousnesses—do not act as the substantial cause of primary 
consciousness. If we misinterpret this, we could think that the ey e consciousness wh ich abides in 
the entity of potential when a person dies is not able to serve as the substantial cause of eye 
consciousness in the next life, but this is not correct; it can serve as the substantial cause of a 
primary consciousness. At the time of death, this eye consciousness comes to abide in the entity of a potential, so we would not say that it is a primary consciousness; we would say that it is a potential 
or a latency.   Q: Do sense consciousnesses also abide in the form of potential at the time of sleep? 
A: Yes. For example, the eye consciousness abides in the entity of potential at the time of sleep. 
When we are awake, the consciousnesses are very coarse. When we fall asleep and begin dreaming, the consciousness becomes more subtle. In deep sleep, it becomes even subtler than the dream  
consciousness. So we can posit thre e levels of coarseness or subtle ty of consciousness. If you were 
to observe a sleeping person, you can see differences  in the physical expressions, for example when 
they are in deep sleep and when they are dreaming.    
Wednesday, 7 May 2008 (evening) 
 Ornament of the Essence , p. 72: 
2B2B-2B1C-1D3. Result of an applicati on of a knower of bases {101} (continued) 
By way of those nine topics, that very  knower of bases bearing the aspects of 
impermanence and so forth is indicated th rough being characterized  by means of both 
explicit indication and implicit indication.  
 This passage talks about how the knower of bases “bearing the as pects of impermanence and so 
forth is indicated through being characterized by means of both e xplicit indication and implicit 
indication.” This talks a bout two means of indication: explicit an d implicit. This ninth topic is an 
explicitly indicated path of seeing, a path of seeing that is explicitly indicated in  the context of the 
knower of bases. Its defini tion is “a Mahayana clear realization of the truth that directly realizes 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
16 freedom from elaboration [explicit ly indicated here].” Here, “elabor ation” refers to elaboration 
regarding the sixteen attributes of th e four noble truths. This is what is explicitly indicated . What is 
implicitly indicated is the path of seeing that di rectly realizes the sixteen attributes of the four noble 
truths, impermanence and so forth.   So there are two indicated here, one explicitly a nd one implicitly. What is explicitly indicated is 
also the principal object i ndicated. The path of seei ng that directly realizes the sixteen attributes of 
the four noble truths, impermanence and so forth, is  implicitly indicated and is also a principal 
object indicated. What is im plicitly indicated but not
 a principal object indicat ed? A hearers’ path of 
seeing that directly realizes the si xteen aspects of the four noble trut hs. Hence, there are three cases: 
1. A Mahayana path of seeing that directly realizes the freedom fr om elaboration of the sixteen 
attributes of the four noble truths 
2. A path of seeing that directly realizes the sixteen attributes of the four noble truths 
3. A hearers’ path of seeing that directly realizes the sixteen attributes of the four noble truths  
 Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
A clear realization to be passed through, having been viewed by knowing and seeing, 
that is included within a bodhisattva’s pa th of seeing is implicitly indicated by the 
explicitly indicated  path of seeing. 
 The explicitly indicated path of seeing is the Mahayana path of s eeing that directly realizes the 
sixteen attributes as free from ela boration. What is implicitly indicate d by this is the path of seeing 
directly realizing the sixteen attr ibutes. This is the cl ear realization that is  to be passed through, 
having been viewed by knowing and seeing. T hus there are two pa ths of seeing:  
1. one that acts to pass through and  
2. one that is to be passed through.  
The path of seeing that directly realizes that the sixteen attributes ar e free from elaboration acts to 
pass through . The path of seeing directly real izing the sixteen attributes is the object  to be passed 
through . This is because this path of seeing is no t diligently cultivated by a bodhisattva on the path 
of seeing. Because this bodhisattva on the path of seeing does not di ligently cultivate such a path of 
seeing directly realizing the sixteen attributes, s/he does not abide on such a path of seeing, 
therefore it is an object to be passed through. We must say that such a bodhisattva does cultivate the 
clear realization of the truth that directly realizes the si xteen attributes, but does not diligently 
cultivate this cl ear realization.  
 Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
 From between the two—(1) a cl ear realization that is an object to be known and (2) a 
clear realization that is an object to be actualized—in the c ontinuum of a bodhisattva, 
the first, although existing on all three paths, is a clear realiz ation (that is merely viewed 
by knowing and seeing, and is an object to be passed through, havi ng been viewed by 
knowing and seeing), just as  it has been explained. 
 The latter need not be definitely cultivated in order to attain mere liberation. The paths 
that need to be definitely cultivated as antidotes to the knowle dge obscurations are 
special method and wisdom.  
 Here, “the first” refers to a clear realization that is  an object to be known, and the “latter” refers to a 
clear realization that is an object to be actualize d. “Special wisdom” refers to the realization of 
emptiness of true existence, while “special me thod” is either great co mpassion or bodhicitta.  
 Ornament of the Essence , 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
17  
Hence, when indicating a clear realizati on (that is merely vi ewed by knowing and 
seeing and is an object to be  passed through, having been vi ewed), it is necessary to 
indicate the path of seeing; it is inappropriate  to indicate the path of meditation which is 
of a similar type to it.  
 This means that if the bodhisattva were to diligen tly cultivate the path of seeing that directly 
realizes the sixteen attributes, impermanence and so  forth, on the path of seeing, then on the path of 
meditation which is of a similar ty pe to it, he should also deliberat ely or diligently  cultivate the 
attributes of the four noble trut hs, but this is not the case.  
 Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
If
 the principal learner’s path which is actualized  for the sake of the path that is to be 
actualized is indicated , the path of meditation must be indicated, and  the path of seeing 
must also be indicated as its cause.  
 We can take the “principal  learner’s path” in this context to mean the path of meditation. If this is 
indicated, then its cause, th e path of seeing, should also be indi cated, but this is not the case. This 
path of meditation refers to that which is diligently cultivated by a bodhisattva. The path of 
meditation in which the sixteen attrib utes are diligently cultivated is not
 indicated. If it were 
indicated, then the path of  seeing in which the sixteen attributes  are diligently cul tivated would also 
have to be indicated, as it is the ca use of such a path of meditation.  
 Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
Therefore, the path of seeing explicitly indicated he re is that which acts to pass through, 
and that indicated implicitly is the clear re alization that is the object to be passed 
through. 
 You should understand that there are three type s of clear realization of the truth: one that is 
explicitly indicated and two that are implicitly indicated.  
1. One that is explicitly indicated
: the clear realization of the truth that directly realizes that the 
sixteen attributes of the four noble truths are free from elaboration.  
2. One that is implicitly indicated  and is principally indicated : a clear realization of the truth 
that directly realizes the sixteen attributes of the four noble truths. 
3. One that is implicitly indicated, but not principally indicated : a hearers’ clea r realization of 
the truth directly realizi ng the sixteen attributes of  the four noble truths.  
 In this context there is a path of seeing that acts to pass through and a path of seeing that is passed 
through. The path of seeing that acts to  pass through
 is the Mahayana path of  seeing that directly 
realizes that the sixteen attributes  of the four noble truths are empt y of true existence. The path of 
seeing that is to  be passed through  is the path of seeing th at directly rea lizes the sixteen attributes of 
the four noble truths.   As to the mode of passing th rough, since a bodhisattva on the Mahayana path  of seeing does not 
diligently cultivate the sixteen aspect s of the four noble truths, then th e path of seeing that directly 
realizes the sixteen aspects is an object to be passed through. Due to what condition does a 
bodhisattva pass through this path of seeing dire ctly realizing the sixteen aspects? Because a 
bodhisattva diligently cultivates the path of seeing di rectly realizing that th e sixteen attributes are 
empty of true existence, he/she doe s not diligently cultivate the path of seeing that di rectly realizes 
the sixteen attributes.  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
18  
Ornament of the Essence , p. 73: 
2B2B-2B1C-2. Joining the [brief] indicati on and the [extensive] explanation {102}  
ROOT TEXT 
1.12d Such are asserted to be knowers of all. 
 
EXPLANATION 
Such clear realizations of hearers,  solitary realizers, and so forth who are th e support of 
the presentation are asserted to be knowers of all.  These are explained in this way 
simply through the force of the metrics of co mposition; since the path of seeing is the 
last characterizing topic, its meaning is expl ained to be “Path of seeing, of hearers and 
so forth:” [ compare this with verse 1.12c ]. It has also been applied in this manner in 
certain translations. 
 In the phrase “Such are asserted to be knowers of all,” “such” refers to the ninth topic, [the 
explicitly indicated path of seeing]. In 1.12c, it says “Hearers and so forth, path of seeing;” these are 
what are referred to by the term “such.” Here, ther e is an alternative pres entation of line 1.12c; 
some translations say “Path of seeing, of hearer s and so forth,” while some say “Hearers and so 
forth, path of seeing.” However, the meaning is the same; the difference is just in terms of the metrics of the composition.   Ornament of the Essence , pp. 73-74,  
 
2B2B-2B2. Explaining the corpus of the four applications 
 This comes from p. 62 (Tib. p. 89): 2B2B-2B. Extensive explanation. 
 
2B2B-2B2A. Cause and effect with respect to gaining control 
2B2B-2B2B. Cause and effect wi th respect to gaining stability 
2B2B-2B2A. Cause and effect with respect to gaining control 
The first of two: 
2B2B-2B2A-1. Application in complete aspects 
2B2B-2B2A-1A. The characterizing topics  
2B2B-2B2A-1B. Joining the [brief] indication and the [extensive] explanation 
2B2B-2B2A-1A. The characterizing topics  
2B2B-2B2A-1A1. General presentation in terms of the support who gathers roots of virtue 
2B2B-2B2A-1A2. Explicitly showing the stages of generation in the continuum in terms of the support who 
ripens roots of virtue 
2B2B-2B2A-1A1. General presentation in terms of the support who gathers roots of virtue 
2B2B-2B2A-1A1A. Divisions of the modes of apprehension of the yogas of the path perfection of wisdom 
being cultivated 
2B2B-2B2A-1A1B. Application of meditative equipoise 
2B2B-2B2A-1A1C. Excelle nt qualities and faults of the applications being cultivated 
2B2B-2B2A-1A1D. Characteristics that characterize the yogas of the path perfection of wisdom 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
19 2B2B-2B2A-1A1A. Divisions of the modes of apprehension of the yogas of the path perfection of wisdom being 
cultivated 
ROOT TEXT 
1.13a Aspects … 
 
EXPLANATION {103}  
When the instances of the modes of appreh ension of the aspects of the applications  are 
divided, there are 173.  
 There are two types of aspects: object-aspects and knower-aspects. Th e aspects referred to in 1.13a 
are mainly knower-aspects, and they principally re fer to knower-aspects of  the antidotal class. 
When we talk about the divisions, we say there ar e 173. What is divided? Here, when we talk about 
divisions, we are talkin g about divisions of the knower-aspects of the antidotal class,  the first topic 
of the fourth category, applic ation in complete aspects. 
 
Taking the aspects  indicated here as objects to be characterized and supplementing 
them with their characteri stics is a case of not havi ng understood the meaning of 
“[Those] called ‘aspects’  are the characteristic s” [4.1b]. For, they are explained in the 
commentary of Arya [Vimuktisena] to be the characteristics of the antidotes indicated; 
they are not explained to be the characteristics of the aspects. If that were to be the case, 
then the contextual meanings of all the th ree—bases, antidotes, and aspects—explained 
in the treatise would become lost. 
 Those who think that these aspects need to be  supplemented with characteristics have not 
understood  the meaning of the root text. It is explained in the co mmentary of Arya [Vimuktisena] 
that the meaning of the root text 4.1b is  referring to the characteristics of the antidotes ; the meaning 
is not the characteristics of the aspects . This is not the right explanation of this root text 4.1b. 
  When we talk about “the aspects of the appl ications,” applications are the yogas of the path 
perfection of wisdom. We can talk about the mode s of apprehension of thes e yogas; these modes of 
apprehension are the aspects of these applications. In this context, the aspects mainly refer to the knower-aspects. In the last sentence, “If that were to be the case, then  the contextual meanings of all 
the three—bases, antidotes, and aspects—explained in  the treatise would become lost,” perhaps, in 
the context of talking about base s, antidotes, and aspects, “aspect s” refer to object-aspects.  
 We are actually talking here about the first topi c of the fourth category, although the definition is 
not given. The definition of a knower-aspect of the an tidotal class explicitly indicated in this context
 
is an exalted knower that is able to overcome its di scordant class. The boundaries  are from the 
Mahayana path of accumulation through the buddha ground.   Ornament of the Essence , p. 73:  
2B2B-2B2A-1A1B. Application of meditative equipoise 
ROOT TEXT 
1.13a … along with applications; 
 
EXPLANATION 
The definition of a principal application  explicitly indicated here  is: a yoga that is a 
union of calm abiding and special  insight realizing that the object, object-possessor, and 
the three – bases, paths, and aspects – are empty of true existence and free from the 
elaborations. 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
20 This is the second topic of the fourth category:  a principal application explicitly indicated here . The 
boundaries  are from the heat level of the Mahayana path of preparation th rough the end of the 
continuum [of a sentient being].  
 
Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
Having taken what is explicitly indicated he re to be a yoga that is a union of calm 
abiding and special insight realizing emptiness, the assertion that it exists from the path 
of accumulation is one which is unskilled in the stages of the path, because such a path 
must definitely be attained on the he at level of the path of preparation. 
 We must think about this passage in terms of so meone who is definite in Mahayana lineage. In 
terms of such a person, a union of calm abiding and special insight realizi ng emptiness exists on, 
but not before, the path of preparation. This is w hy this passage says “the assertion that  it exists 
from the path of accumulation is one which is  unskilled in the stages of the path.”  
 Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
 By way of the two-fold division – into (1) objects to be cultivated, the aspects, and (2) 
that which acts to cultivate, the applica tions – having taken th e 173 aspects as the 
objects of observation, the bases for elim inating superimpositi ons regarding the 
applications, taking the cultivation of all of  them (by gathering them together in the 
emptiness of true existence) as the way of cultivating an application in complete aspects 
is very incorrect. 
 Why is this assertion “very inco rrect”? In general, a bodhisattva observes the 173 as pects and does 
take them as the bases for eliminating superimpositions regarding the applications, and he/she does  
cultivate these aspects and analyze whether or not th ey are empty of true exis tence. However, to say 
that such a mode of cultivation is  the way of cultivating an application in complete aspects is very 
incorrect. In the context of the f our applications, we can talk about  applications th at cultivate the 
aspects by gathering them together or  serially; however, here in this context, to say that the aspects 
are cultivated by gathering them to gether in the emptiness of true existence as the way of cultivating 
an application in complete aspects is not correc t. The reason follows in the next paragraph:  
 Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
 This is because an application in comple te aspects must cultivate all 173 aspects by 
way of a union of calm abiding and special insight, having caused them to dawn as modes of apprehension of its
 their  aspects. {104} Since these will be explained in the 
section on the meaning of the words, I will  not elaborate more beyond just this. The 
words “ along with ” [in 1.13a] indicate the persons w ho are the supports cultivating the 
applications and gathering roots of virtue. The division of applications into twenty is a 
division of the excellent qualities that are attained on that occasion; they are not 
divisions of the meditative equipoise alone. 
 Here it is saying that in the cont ext of an application in complete  aspects, the 173 aspects dawn as 
the modes of apprehension; they are not taken as the objects of observa tion. (“It” in “its aspects” 
refers to an application in complete aspects.)   Q: How is the mode of apprehension di fferent from the object of observation? 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
21 A: The object of the mode of a pprehension refers to the princi pal object. If we have an eye 
consciousness observing vase, vase is the object of the mode of appreh ension. If we have a 
conception apprehending vase, what  is the object of the mode of apprehension? It is vase. What 
about a realization of emptiness of  true existence? Its object of  the mode of apprehension is 
emptiness of true existence. If we have meditati ve equipoise realizing emptiness, the object of the 
mode of apprehension is emptiness.   The object of the mode of apprehension and the object of observation are very different. In 
general, object of observation and object of the mode  of apprehension are mutually inclusive, but 
when applied to a particular mind, they are differe nt [not necessarily the same]. For example, a 
realization of the emptiness of true existence of  a vase. The object of observation of this mind is 
vase; the object of the mode of apprehension is  the emptiness of the vase. Here, the object of 
observation and object of the mode of apprehensi on are different. Is there an example where the 
object of observation and th e object of the mode of apprehension are the same? 
 Student: An eye consciousness observing a vase. GTT: That’s right: the object of  observation is vase, an d the object of the mode of apprehension is 
also vase.   Q: If the object of the mode of apprehension is like that, what is  the mode of apprehension itself 
like? For example, in the sentence we just went  through: “This is because an application in 
complete aspects must cultivate all 173 aspect s by way of a union of calm abiding and special 
insight, having caused them to dawn as modes of apprehension  of their
 its aspects”? 
A: In this context, when it talks about the mode s of apprehension, it is really talking about the 
objects  of the mode of apprehension. To give an example of the mode of apprehension, we can 
consider anger. When anger apprehends its object , its mode of apprehension is unattractiveness; 
attachment’s mode of apprehension is attractiven ess. Two persons can have anger and attachment 
observing the same object; they ha ve different modes of apprehen sion: for the angry person, the 
mode of apprehension is unattract iveness, for the other person, it is  attractiveness. Although there is 
only one object of observation, due  to the attitude in the mind, the modes of apprehension are 
different. Both people look at th e same object, and one generates anger while the other generates 
attachment.   Q: What are the objects of the mode of apprehension of these two people? 
A: The object of the mode of apprehension for the angry person is unattractiven ess; the object of the 
mode of apprehension for the person with attachment is attractiveness.  
  
Thursday, 8 May 2008 
  Translator: Yesterday someone propos ed an analogy for the mode of directly realizing emptiness, 
selflessness, and impermanence for someone de finite in Mahayana lineage. That person 
simultaneously attains the direct realizations  of emptiness, selflessness of persons, and 
impermanence on the path of seeing. It is like someone who learns how to drive a truck, and 
automatically learns how to drive a car at the sa me time. Geshe-la said this is a good example. 
 When a bodhisattva attains the path of seeing, he moves from an uninterrupt ed path to a liberated 
path and then arises in subsequent attainment . There, without deliberate effort, the direct 
realizations of impermanence a nd selflessness are present.  
 Ornament of the Essence , p. 74: 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
22  This is because an application in comple te aspects must cultivate all 173 aspects by 
way of a union of calm abiding and special insight, having caused them to dawn as modes of apprehension of their aspects. {104} Since these will be explained in the 
section on the meaning of the words, I w ill not elaborate more beyond just this.  
 These 173 aspects dawn as modes of apprehension of their aspects. There will be an extensive 
explanation later, so Gyelts ab says “I will not elabor ate more beyond just this.” 
 
Ornament of the Essence,  
 
The words “ along with ” [in 1.13a] indicate the persons wh o are the supports cultivating 
the applications and gathering roots of virtue . The division of appli cations into 20 is a 
division of the excellent qualities that are attained on that occasion; they are not 
divisions of the meditative equipoise alone.  With respect to that, the so-called “applications” indicate a union of calm abiding and special insight, whereby a union of calm ab iding and special insi ght observing varieties 
exists even on the path of accumulation. Howe ver, those which observe modes are just 
as explained above [to be attained on the heat level of the path of preparation]. 
 This says that a union of calm abiding and special insight observing varieties exists even on the path 
of accumulation. In fact, a union of calm abiding and special insight observing varieties exists even 
prior to the path of accumulation. A union of calm abiding and special insight which observes 
modes is attained on the heat level of the path of  preparation; it does not exist before the path of 
preparation. This should be taken to refer to  someone definite in Mahayana lineage.  
 
(This Q-A came later but was pl aced here for convenience): 
Q: Here it says “The words ‘along with’ indica te the persons…” These words do not explicitly 
mention persons, so how do we come to such an inte rpretation? This also happens in other instances 
of the text, of something that is not actually mentioned in the root text?  
A: It is true that we do not see “persons” mentioned explicitl y, but the Tibetan says “along with” 
then has the plural particle ( rnams ) which indicates the presence of some object; this is thus 
interpreted as meaning the persons who are the supports cultiva ting the applications, etc.  
 Ornament of the Essence , p. 74: 
2B2B-2B2A-1A1C. Excelle nt qualities and faults of the applications being cultivated 
ROOT TEXT 
1.13b Excellent qualities and faults…  
 
EXPLANATION 
The definition of an excellent quality  of an application  is: a benefit atta ined through the 
force of cultivating that [application].   When divided, there are fourteen.  
 In the definition of an excellent quality of an app lication, “that” refers to the Mahayana application 
that is a method for attaining it. The boundaries  are from the Mahayana  path of accumulation 
through the buddha ground.  Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
23 The definition of a fault  of an application  is: that acting as a hi ndrance to the production 
or abidance of an application.   When divided, there are forty-six. 
 This definition seems fine. The boundaries are: it ex ists from not having entered a path through the 
seventh ground. There are forty-six divisions.  
 Ornament of the Essence , p. 75: 
2B2B-2B2A-1A1D. Characteristics that characterize the yogas of the path perfection of wisdom 
ROOT TEXT 
1.13b … along with characteristics; 
 
EXPLANATION 
The definition of a yoga of th e path perfection of wisdom  is: a bodhisattva’s activity of 
a union [of calm abiding and special insight] that serves as the method for attaining a 
resultant perfection of wisdom.  
 [A more accurate definition posite d by Geshe Tenphel: a bodhisattva’s yoga
 of a union of calm 
abiding and special insight that serves as the met hod for attaining a resultant perfection of wisdom.]  
 
When divided, there are ninety-one. Its bound aries are: from the Mahayana path of 
accumulation through the end of the continuum [of a sentient being].  
 In this definition, we can repla ce the words “a bodhisattva’s activ ity” with “a bodhisattva’s yoga” to 
make it more accurate. There are ninety-one divi sions, which are complicated. Before we had 173 
aspects, and these 91 are more complicated. Th ese can be grouped into four categories: 
1. knowledge characteristics 
2. distinguishing characteristics 
3. functional characteristics 
4. entity characteristics 
Within each of these categories, th ere are those related to an exalte d knower of all aspects, those 
related to a knower of paths, and those relate d to a knower of bases. How do we get the 91 
characteristics? There are 48 knowledge charact eristics, 16 distinguishing characteristics, 11 
functional characteristics, a nd 16 entity characteristics. 
 Ornament of the Essence , p. 75: 
2B2B-2B2A-1A2. Explicitly showing the stages of generation in the continuum in terms of the support who 
ripens roots of virtue 
2B2B-2B2A-1A2A. Occasion of generating an application 
2B2B-2B2A-1A2B. Occasion of ripening an application 
2B2B-2B2A-1A2C. Persons who are the support 
2B2B-2B2A-1A2D. A person’s stages of cultivation 
2B2B-2B2A-1A2A. Occasion of generating an application {105}  
ROOT TEXT 
1.13c Partial concordance with liberation …  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
24 EXPLANATION 
The definition of a Mahayana partial concordance with liberation  is: a clear 
realization of the doctrine in  the continuum of a bodhisattva  skilled in achieving an 
exalted knower of all asp ects in his continuum.  
 When divided, there are five. 
 The Mahayana partial concordance with liberation is the Mahayana path of accumulation. Generally 
we talk about the small, middling, and great Mahaya na paths of accumulation, but here it says there 
are five divisions. These are posit ed as the five qualities:  
1. Faith 
2. Joyous effort 
3. Mindfulness 
4. Meditative stabilization 
5. Wisdom 
These are transformed into the entity of the path of accumulation. Later, in the fourth chapter, the 
root text [4.33 – 4.34ab] mentions these five qualities, saying that  faith refers to faith observing 
buddhas and so forth, joyous effort refers to effort in generosity and so forth, mindfulness refers to 
mindfulness in the excellent attitude; the meani ngs of the last two, meditative stabilization and 
wisdom, are clear.   The boundaries are: it exists only on the Mahayana path of accumulation. 
 Ornament of the Essence , p. 75: 
2B2B-2B2A-1A2B. Occasion of ripening an application 
ROOT TEXT 
1.13c … and definite discrimination; 
 
EXPLANATION 
The definition of a Mahayana partial concordance with  definite discrimination  
indicated here  is: a bodhisattva’s clear realization of the meani ng that is qualified by the 
factor of method.   When divided, there are twelve. 
 This is the Mahayana path of preparation. It ha s four levels: heat, peak, forbearance, and supreme 
mundane quality. These are each divided into three, making twelve divisions.  
The boundaries are: it exists  only on the Mahayana path of preparation.  
 Ornament of the Essence ,  
2B2B-2B2A-1A2C. Persons who are the support 
ROOT TEXT 
1.13d The assembly of i rreversible learners; 
 
EXPLANATION 
The definition of a sangha included in the assembly of irreversible learners  is: a 
bodhisattva who has attained any of the signs , such as having turned away from the 
discrimination of forms and so forth.   
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
25 When divided, there are three. The boundaries  are: the heat level of the path of 
preparation and above. 
 Here, there is the example of “having turned away  from the discrimination of forms and so forth,” 
which refers to turning away from adhering to forms, etc., as truly existent. There are three 
divisions:  
1. sangha on the path of preparation who ha ve attained a sign of irreversibility 
2. sangha on the path of seeing who have attained a sign of irreversibility 
3. sangha on the path of meditation who have  attained a sign of irreversibility 
 What is the basis of these divi sions? In general, bodhisattvas are sharp-facultied, but we can also 
divide them into sharp-, middling- , and dull-facultied. Those of sharpe st faculty will attain a sign of 
irreversibility on the heat level of  the path of preparation, those of  middling faculty on the path of 
seeing, and those of dullest f aculty on the eighth ground.  
 Q: Gyeltsab says the boundaries are the heat level of  the path of prepar ation and above, which 
would include the buddha ground, while Seventy Topics says it is from the heat level of the path of 
preparation through the end of the continuum of  a sentient being. These are not the same.  
A: Although Gyeltsab says the boundaries are the heat  level of path of prep aration and above, this 
does not mean that a sangha included in the assemb ly of irreversible lear ners exists on the buddha 
ground. This is because the definiti on says it is “a bodhisattva.”  
 Ornament of the Essence , p. 76: 
2B2B-2B2A-1A2D. A person’s stages of cultivation 
The first of three: 
 
ROOT TEXT 
1.14a Equality of cyclic existence and peace;  
EXPLANATION 
The definition of an application of the equality of cyclic existence and peace  that 
deposits an imprint of the truth body  is: a bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom that has 
destroyed the opportunity for the generation of the manifest conception of true existence 
even on the occasions of subsequent attainment. 
 The boundaries are: it exists on the three pure grounds. On the eighth, ni nth, and tenth grounds, 
there is no manifest conception of true existence, even in subseque nt attainment. During subsequent 
attainment, whatever appears, appears as empty of true existence, like illusions. However, there are 
appearances of true existence. A lthough there is the ap pearance of true existence, phenomena still 
appear as empty of true existence, like illusions.   
(This Q-A came later but was moved here for convenience): 
Q: How is it that on the pure grounds there is the appearance of true existence, but th ere is also the 
appearance of the emptiness of true existence? How is this possible? 
A: Prior to the end of th e continuum of a sentient being, there is the conception of true existence, 
either in a strong or weak manner. Although b odhisattvas on the three pur e grounds do not have 
strong conceptions of true existence, they do have  the weaker ones, and these act as conditions for 
conceptions; thus there is the appearance of true existence.   Q: But how can the emptiness of true existence appear?  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
26 A: Do to strong familiarization with emptiness, to a bodhisattva on the pure grounds, even in 
subsequent attainment, the emptiness of true existence appears.  Q: So do both a negative and a positive phenom enon (the positive phenomenon being a dependent-
arising) appear?  A: In the case of a vase, the emptiness of true exis tence of a vase appears. When the vase appears, it 
appears as empty, like an illusion.  Q: So the two truths appear simultaneous ly to a bodhisattva on the pure grounds? 
A: Yes.  Q: So there is no need to attain buddhahood? A: You did not say the word “directly.” Simultaneous, direct appearance of the two truths only 
occurs on the buddha ground. The two truths can appear simultaneously, even on the path of 
preparation. Think about this carefully. We say that during subsequent attainment of the pure 
grounds, whatever appears appears as empty of true existence, like an illusion. Does this mean that 
the emptiness of true existence appears? We could debate this point extensiv ely. In the monasteries, 
there are two points of view on this.   Student: Maybe when you meditate on emptiness con ceptually, there is the appearance of emptiness 
of true existence, but there is also the appearan ce of true existence, because it is conceptual?  
GTT: Yes, that is correct.   
Ornament of the Essence,  
 
The second: {106}   
ROOT TEXT 
1.14b Unsurpassable pure land;  
EXPLANATION 
The definition of an application of an unsurpassable pure land  is: a bodhisattva’s 
exalted wisdom in which a root of virtue, such as a prayer to accomplish the special land where he will attain enlightenment, has become a powerful potency. 
 The boundaries are the three pure grounds.  
 Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
The third:  
ROOT TEXT 
1.14c Along with this, skillful means:  
EXPLANATION 
The definition of an application of skillful means  is: a bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom 
that spontaneously accomplishes exalted activ ities by means of having pacified coarse 
exertion. 
 The boundaries of this are: it ex ists on the three pure grounds.  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
27 In this way, we have completed the el even topics of the fourth category.  
 Ornament of the Essence ,  
2B2B-2B2A-1B. Joining the [brief] indication and the [extensive] explanation 
ROOT TEXT 
1.14d Clear complete realization of all aspects.  
 
EXPLANATION 
Know that these eleven topics are the t opics that characterize an application of clear 
complete realization of all aspects .  
 Someone, having applied the expression “a long with” of the three—beginning, middle 
and end—to all, divided “along  with” into fourteen. This  is a presentation whose 
confusion generates amazement. 
 The expression “along with” actually  occurs three times. On p. 74 (1.13a), it says “along with 
application,” on p. 75 (1.13b) it says “along with ch aracteristics,” and on p. 76 (1.14c), “along with 
this, skillful means.” This person who is confused applied “along with” to all the occasions and said 
there are fourteen, but there are not fourteen. Even if we apply the expression to all the topics, since 
there are eleven topics, we would get only eleven divisions. Maybe it’s like that. There are eleven 
characterizing topics, so at the most we should ge t only eleven divisions; this person, who divided 
“along with” into fourteen, has given “a presen tation whose confusion generates amazement.” 
 
Next we will talk about peak applic ation. The text says: “The first of the four is the peak application 
of the path of preparation.” The “four” mentioned here are:  
1. Peak application of the path of preparation 
2. Peak application of the path of seeing 
3. Peak application of the path of meditation 
4. Uninterrupted peak application  
 To get the eight topics of peak application, the peak  application of the path of preparation is divided 
into four:  
1. peak application of heat,  
2. peak application of peak,  
3. peak application of forbearance, and  
4. peak application of s upreme mundane quality,  
to which are added  
5. peak application of the path of seeing,  
6. peak application of the path of meditation, and  
7. uninterrupted peak application, 
as well as  
8. perverse achievings that are to be eliminated indicated here. 
 Ornament of the Essence , p. 77: 
2B2B-2B2A-2. Peak application 
[2B2B-2B2A-2A. The characterizing topics  
2B2B-2B2A-2B. Joining the [brief] indication and the [extensive] explanation 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
28 2B2B-2B2A-2A. The characterizing topics] 
The first of four, the peak applica tion of the path of preparation: 
 
ROOT TEXT 
1.15ab Signs of that; increases;  
Stability; always abiding mind; 
 
EXPLANATION 
1. A first partial concordance with  definite discrimination that has attained any of the 12 
signs of  attainment of peak application. 
2. A second partial concordance with definite  discrimination that has completed the 16 
increases,  such as that exceeding the worshipping of buddhas equal in number to the 
sentient beings in the billionfold world systems. 
3. A third partial concordance with defin ite discrimination that has attained stability  in 
(i) the wisdom that is a complete similit ude of the three exalted knowers and (ii) 
indivisibility from others’ welfare. 
4. A fourth partial concordance with defin ite discrimination that has attained an always 
abiding mind  of infinite meditative stabilizatio ns, due to having ripened the potency 
to generate the path of seeing. 
 These four are respectively the definitions of a peak application of heat and so forth, 
[that is, of peak, forbearance,  and supreme mundane quality ]. 
 There is no need to talk about the boundaries of these.   Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
The second and third:  
ROOT TEXT 
1.15cd With respect to th e individual paths of  
“Seeing” and “meditation,” 
 1.16ab Four types of antidotes 
To the four types of conceptions, 
 
EXPLANATION 
The definitions of a “peak application of the path of seeing ” and a peak application of 
the path “meditation ” are respectively: 
(i) a Mahayana clear realization of the truth that acts as an  antidote to the seeds of the 
conceptions that are objects to be abandoned by the path of seeing, and  
(ii) a Mahayana subsequent clear realization that acts as an antidote to the seeds of the 
conceptions that are objects to be abandoned by the path of meditation.  
 When divided, with respect to the  two individual paths , there are four types of 
antidotes to the four types of conceptions . 
 The “four types of conceptions
” are: 
1. conceptions regarding apprehe ndeds to be engaged in  
2. conceptions regarding apprehendeds  to be turned away from  
3. conceptions regarding apprehende rs of substantial existence 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
29 4. conceptions regarding apprehe nders of imputed existence 
 These conceptions are of two types: acquired and innate conceptions. The acquired conceptions are 
abandoned by the peak application of the path of seeing. The peak applicati on of the path of seeing 
is a direct antidote to the acquired conceptions, while  the peak application of the path of meditation 
acts as a direct antidote to  the innate conceptions.  
 Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
The fourth, the uninterrupted peak applic ation, as well as pe rverse achievings: 
 
ROOT TEXT 
1.16cd Uninterrupted meditative stabilization 
As well as perverse achievings: 
 
EXPLANATION {108}  
The definition of a peak application of  uninterrupted meditative stabilization  is: a 
yoga (in which the cultivation of the asp ects of the three exalted knowers through 
gathering them together has become excellent ) that directly genera tes an exalted knower 
of all aspects.  The definition of a perverse achieving that is  an object to be eliminated (indicated in 
this context of “ as well as perverse achievings ” that are objects to be eliminated)  is: 
either a seed of a conception or a manifest  conception apprehendi ng the two truths as 
not suitable to be subsumed as a single entity indicated here.  
 When divided, there are sixteen. 
 The boundaries for the peak applicati on of uninterrupted med itative stabilization are:  it exists at the 
end of the continuum of a sentient being, and for th e perverse achieving that is to be eliminated 
indicated here are: from not having entered a path through the seventh ground. 
 Student: In the definition of a perverse achie ving, what do the words “i ndicated here” refer to? 
Geshe Tenzin Tenphel: “Indicated here” means indi cated in the context of chapter five on peak 
application. It refers either to the seed of a c onception or a manifest conc eption indicated in chapter 
five. Or we can say that it refers to this  definiendum indicated in chapter five.  
 Ornament of the Essence ,  
2B2B-2B2A-2B. Joining the [brief] indication and the [extensive] explanation 
ROOT TEXT 
1.17a Clear realizations of peak… 
 
EXPLANATION  
“Clear realizations of peak .” 
 This concludes the fifth topic.  Ornament of the Essence ,  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
30 2B2B-2B2B. Cause and effect wi th respect to gaining stability 
2B2B-2B2B-1. Serial [application] 
[2B2B-2B2B-2. Instantaneous application] 
2B2B-2B2B-1. Serial [application] 
ROOT TEXT 
1.17ab … the serial:  
Three types, ten types, … 
 
EXPLANATION 
Joining the [brief] indication and the [extensive] explanation, “ the serial: ” is stated, and 
when divided, there are three types  and ten types , such as the serial [application] of the 
perfection of generosity.  
 All of you already know the definiti on of serial application and its thirteen divisions, right? The 
thirteen are easy: the first six are serial applica tions of the six perfections , then there are serial 
applications of the (7-9) recollections of the Thr ee Jewels, then (10) reco llection of ethics, (11) 
recollection of giving, (12) reco llection of the gods, and (13) r ecollection of entitiness of non-
things.   You already know the boundaries: it  exists from the Mahayana path of accumulation through just 
prior to the end of the con tinuum of a sentient being.  
 Ornament of the Essence , p. 79: 
2B2B-2B2B-2. Instantaneous application 
ROOT TEXT 
1.17bcd … Manifest complete enlightenment  
In a single instant, By way of characteristics: four types. 
 
EXPLANATION 
Joining the [brief] indication an d the [extensive] explanation, “ Manifest complete 
enlightenment  in a single instant,” is stated, and when divided, by way of the 
characteristics  of dissimilar isolate demarcations, there are four types  of different 
isolates with respect to a single entity. {109}  
 The four divisions of instan taneous application are:  
1. non-ripened instantaneous application 
2. ripened instantaneous application 
3. characterless instantaneous application 
4. non-dual instantaneous application 
 These four are one entity, but different isolates.  I already explained the meaning of “non-ripened” and “ripened,”  if you do not remember them, 
look at your notes! These ar e extensively explained in  the seventh chapter.  
 Ornament of the Essence , p. 79: 
 
 I do not think that the asse rtion that it exists  on the seventh ground and above is the 
intention of the Acarya. Since even the e nd of the continuum [o f a sentient being] 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
31 cannot be a partless instant of time, [it exists  for] the shortest instant in which an action 
is completed.  
 The assertion that instantaneous application exists on  the seventh ground a nd above is not the 
intention of the Acharya. The word  “instantaneous” refers to the shortest instant in which an action 
is completed. What is the meaning of the “shortest instant in which an action is completed”?   It is not necessary that the shorte st instant of time is without parts.  For example, we can talk about 
the time it takes to cut th rough a single sheet of paper with a ve ry sharp paper-cutt er as being the 
shortest instant of time. We say “shortest instant of time,” but when one’s realizations become deeper, we can speak of perceiving ever smaller moments of time, for instance a buddha perceives 
very small moments of time.   Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
 If we were to analyze the characteristics of the modes of cultivation of the last two 
applications, that it is so is obvious; at the time of serial cultivation, on the occasion of the tenth ground prior to the end of continuum  [of a sentient being], if one were to 
directly realize a quality such as impe rmanence—through the force of previous 
familiarization, without needing even great ex ertion—all the aspects of the three exalted 
knowers, without exception, would beco me objects of direct perception
1 in a single 
series without mix-up in sequence, by way of  being with a little  exertion. However, 
know that even in straightforward contexts , a little focused exertion is necessary. 
 In this passage, it says that at th e end of the continuum of a sentient  being, if we were to directly 
realize a single quality, without needing exertion, all the aspects of  the three exalted knowers would 
become objects of direct perception,  in a single series without mix- up in sequence. Before that, on 
the tenth ground, prior to the end of  the continuum of a sentient be ing, a little exertio n is necessary. 
But at the end of the continuum such exertion is not necessary.  Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
 I think that someone’s explanation that a serial application only progressively 
cultivates the thirteen topics  [characterizing a serial appl ication] has cast away the 
contextual meaning, because one needs to ga in control over familiarization of the 173 
aspects.  
 This person’s explanation says that a serial ap plication only progressively cultivates the thirteen 
topics. This is not correct, becaus e this person seems to be saying that a serial  application does not 
cultivate the topics through gathering them together . However, there is also cultivation through 
gathering the topics together. On  the Mahayana path of  accumulation, one has not attained control 
over the aspects, so one needs to cultivate the asp ects through gathering them together.  
 
Although one must cultivate the thirteen t opics without mixing up the sequence in its 
appropriate mode, know that most  of the thirteen are branches  that act to stabilize the 
serial activities subsequent to the cultiv ation of the 173 aspects during meditative 
equipoise. 
 
                                                
 
1 Gsum  emended to read sum in accordance with page 76 of the Dre pung Loseling Library Society’s 1996 edition of 
Ornament of the Essence . 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
32 This is saying that most of the thirteen are bran ches that act to stabili ze the serial activities during 
subsequent attainment . And the next paragraph explains this further: 
  
On the occasion of subsequent attainment, one recollects the Three Jewels, enhances 
the mind of giving, observes the inten tion of abandonment, and so forth. 
 Student: what is the meaning of  “without mixing up the sequence in its appropriate mode ”? 
Geshe Tenzin Tenphel: It probably refers to the partic ular/definite sequence of the 173 aspects, 
starting with the aspects of the four noble truths, which are asp ects of the knower of bases, all the 
way to the uncommon aspects of an exalted knower of all aspects.  
 
Friday, 8 May 2008 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 79: 
 
 On the occasion of cultivating an instanta neous application, as in the case of the 
analogy, “passing like a person’s watermill,” when an uncontaminated quality becomes manifest, without having to focus on the rest , they will manifest directly in a single 
series without mix-up in sequence. {110}   That is the time of the path of applicati on of the end of the continuum [of a sentient 
being]. As for the time of the uninterrupted  path, know that from the state of being 
placed in meditative equipoise on emptiness, one transfers to the first instant of an 
exalted knower of all aspects, by means of that clear realizati on immediately becoming 
the nature of powerful potency. At that time,  that very single entity of awareness places 
in meditative equipoise on emptiness in a manner of not rising as long as cyclic 
existence exists. At the time of that itself, one directly perceives all the varieties of phenomena as one would a myrobalan  fruit placed upon one’s palm. 
 This passage is a continuation of the explanation in the preceding paragra phs. To recall what was 
discussed in those paragraphs: on the occasion of the tenth ground, prior to the end of the 
continuum of a sentient being, if  one were to directly  realize a quality su ch as impermanence, 
through the force of previous fam iliarization, all the aspects of the three exalted knowers would 
become objects of direct perception in a single series without mix-up in  sequence, with just a little 
exertion. “Even in straightforward contexts, a little focused exerti on is necessary,” means that we 
directly focus on one aspect, and then we move to a nother aspect in a direct way. In that context, a 
little focused exertion is necessary. This is on the tenth ground, prior to the end of the continuum of 
a sentient being.   What happens at the end of the continuum is th at when one quality is manifest, without having 
to focus on the rest, they will manifest directly  in a single series, without mix-up in sequence, 
without exertion. At the end of the continuum, this is  the time of the uninte rrupted path; one is in 
meditative equipoise on emptiness. Within this state,  one transfers to the first instant of an exalted 
knower of all aspects, or omniscience. This occurs by means of that uninterrupted path at the end of 
the continuum of the sentient being becoming the nature of a powerful potency; in this way, one 
transfers to the first instant of omniscience. At that time, the awareness is placed in meditative 
equipoise on emptiness, or on “modes”/ultimate trut hs, in a manner of not rising as long as cyclic 
existence exists. At that time, one  perceives directly al l varieties of phenomena, or all conventional 
truths.   Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
33 Since the modes of the perfec tion of wisdom are difficult to realize at all times—and not 
simply on this occasion—they are only to be realized through having pleased the 
spiritual guide for a long time. 
 The modes of the perfection of wisd om are not easy to realize at any time, not just on this occasion. 
They are only realized “through having pleased the spiritual guide  for a long time.” Someone who 
has not pleased a spiritual guide or who has done  so only for a short time will have difficulty 
realizing the modes of the perfect ion of wisdom. Likewise, when we study these great texts, we 
need to spend much time, to rely on receiving teachings to understand the meanings, and to rely on Dharma companions, discussing and so forth, in order to understand well the meaning of the texts. One who is only willing to spe nd a short amount of time and does not receive many teachings, will 
have difficulty realizing the meaning of these text s. In the monasteries, there are some monks who 
are not so intelligent, but are very consistent in terms of attending te achings, studying, etc., and 
become very learned after some time. Others, w ho are quite clever, are less consistent in their 
studies and can be lazy, and do not  end up being very knowledgeable.  
 Q: What is the meaning of the analogy in th e phrase, “On the occasion of cultivating an 
instantaneous application, as in the case of  the analogy, “passing like a person’s watermill…”? 
A: This refers to a type of watermill that exists in Tibet or India, with buckets that collect water as it 
turns. Its movement causes the buckets to collect wa ter in a single series, one after the other. Just by 
one turning, the whole series of buckets fills up with water.  
 Ornament of the Essence , p. 80: 
2B2B-2B3. Explaining the corpus of the truth body 
ROOT TEXT 
1.18ab Nature along with complete enjoyment, 
Likewise the other, emanation, 
 
EXPLANATION 
(i) A  nature  body  that is a sphere possessing the two purities2, along with  (ii) a 
complete enjoyment body  distinguished by the fi ve certainties and, likewise , that other  
from the two—(iii) a supreme emanation  body , a final form body not distinguished by 
the five certainties—are the results that ar e objects to be obtained. Through that, know 
also their indivi dual definitions. 
 The definition of a nature body
 is: a final sphere posse ssing the two purities.  
The definition of a complete enjoyment body  is: a final form body possessi ng the five certainties.  
 The five certainties
 are:  
1. certainty of abode: it resides only in Akanishta (Not Low) 
2. certainty of body: it is adorne d with the clear and complete signs and exemplifications 
3. certainty of retinue: it is su rrounded only by bodhisattva aryas 
4. certainty of Dharma: it teaches only the Mahayana Dharma 
5. certainty of time: it remains as long as cyclic existence is not empty 
 The definition of an emanation body
 is a final form body distinguished by not possessing the five 
certainties. The definition of an exalted wisdom truth body will come later. In the root text 
                                                 
2  The two purities are the purity of inherent stains and the purity of adventitious stains. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
34 (1.18ab)—“Nature along with complete enjoymen t/ Likewise the other,  emanation”—only three 
exalted bodies are mentioned.   Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
ROOT TEXT  
1.18cd Truth body along with  the activities 
Are perfectly described as  being of four types. 
 
EXPLANATION 
Joining the [brief] indication a nd the [extensive] explanation, “Truth body” is stated. An 
assertion of the Acarya took them to be th e words joining the [brief] indication and the 
[extensive] explanation. {111} Ho wever, it is asserted that  there is no fault of not 
having engaged the meaning of the words of the treatise, even if this is taken to indicate  
the fourth  exalted body . Hence, the definition of a realization exalted wisdom truth body  
is: a knower that is final insi ght relative to the modes and varieties. The phenomena that 
are a truth body along with the activities a re perfectly described as being of four 
types . 
 These words from the root text have been e xplained by the Acharya as “joining the [brief] 
indication and the [extensive] explanation.” Then, “it is asserted that there is no fault of not having 
engaged the meaning of the words of the treat ise, even if this is taken to indicate
 the fourth exalted 
body.” This is saying that in this  root text (v. 1.18cd), the four th exalted body has been indicated, 
but there is no fault that these two lines have not  engaged the meaning of the words of the treatise. 
Here, the specific words of the root text just say “truth body,” but in th is context, it actually refers to 
the exalted wisdom truth body.  
 Here the outline reads “Explaining the corpus of the truth body ” but isn’t the eighth category 
normally stated as being the resultant truth body? The eighth category, prec isely stated, refers to the 
resultant truth body.  
 The text says, “there is no fault of not having enga ged the meaning of the words of the treatise, even 
if this is taken to indicate
 the fourth exalted body.” In 1.18c , it says “truth body along with 
activities.” These are the activities of the exalted wisdom trut h body, so in thos e lines, the truth 
body should be taken as the exalted wisdom truth body from among the four divisions of the 
resultant truth body .  
 Ornament of the Essence , p. 80: 
 
 Having refuted that the meaning of “in reli ance on an exalted wisdom and so forth as 
the very objects of buddhas and so forth” (in the context of the summarized topics of 
this [category] below) is that exalted wisd om emerges from within exalted wisdom and 
so forth, there is the explanation that it means that “(i) the twenty-one sets of 
uncontaminated exalted wisdom are posited as the exalted wisdom truth body, and (ii) the final body adorned with the signs and exem plifications is posited as the complete 
enjoyment body.” Both these explanations ar e cases of not having seen the Acarya’s 
commentaries in detail, because, in relation to this, the Great Commentary taught that it 
means that the wisdom truth body and the two form bodies have arisen from the 
accumulation of exalted wisdom, have arisen from the accumulation of merit, and have arisen from factors of both. 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
35 This paragraph discusses an incorrect  interpretation of a phrase that oc curs in the eighth chapter: “in 
reliance on an exalted wisdom and so forth as th e very objects of buddhas and so forth.” The word 
“below” refers to the eighth chapter. Someone re futed that the meaning of this phrase is that 
“exalted wisdom emerges from within exalted wis dom and so forth…,” and th en explained that it 
means: “(i) the twenty-one sets of uncontaminat ed exalted wisdom are posited as the exalted 
wisdom truth body, and (ii) the final body adorned with the signs and exem plifications is the 
complete enjoyment body.”  So someone explains  the exalted wisdom truth body and the complete 
enjoyment body in this way, and both these explanations  are incorrect. This person has not seen the 
Acharya’s commentaries in detail, because the Great Commentary  by the Acharya has a different 
explanation than these. Take note of this objection and check when we  come to the eighth chapter if 
you see these wrong assertions presented there.   The text says, “the wisdom truth body and the two form bodies have arisen from the accumulation of exalted wisdom, have arisen from the accumulation of merit, and have arisen from 
factors of both.” How do we unde rstand this? In general, we say the wisdom truth body arises from 
the accumulation of wisdom, and the form bodies aris e from the accumulation of merit. Here it says 
“have arisen from factors of bot h.” Although we say that the exal ted wisdom truth body arises from 
the accumulation of exalted wisdom, if a person were to accumulate exalted wisdom without 
accumulating merit, this person would not be able to attain the wisdom truth body. Also, if someone 
were to solely accumulate merit without accumulati ng exalted wisdom, they would not be able to 
attain the two form bodies.   The definition of accumulation of exalted wisdom
 is: that which mainly deposits an imprint for 
the exalted wisdom truth body. The definition of the accumulation of merit  is: that which mainly 
deposits an imprint for the form bodies. Notice the word “mainly” here. The accumulation of 
exalted wisdom is that which mainly  deposits an imprint for the ex alted wisdom truth body, but this 
does not eliminate the accumulation of exalted wisdom  also depositing imprints for the form bodies.  
Likewise you should understand the significance of the word “mainly” in the definition of the 
accumulation of merit. 
 
(This Q-A came later but was moved here for convenience): 
Q: In terms of the nature body, it is not mentioned th at it arises from the two accumulations of merit 
and wisdom—is it because it does not arise from those two collections? A: We would say that the nature body arises from  the accumulation of exalte d wisdom; it is through 
meditating on emptiness that one comes to attain it.  The extensive explanation will come later, but I 
can say something briefly.   The nature body is of two types:  
1. the nature body that is a factor of purity in being free from inherent stains 
2. the nature body that is a f actor of purity in being free from adventitious stains 
There is a discussion of two types of purities. The first division of the nature body—the nature body 
that is a factor of purity in be ing free from inherent stains—is actually the dharm ata of a buddha’s 
mind. The second division—the nature body that is a factor of purity in being free from adventitious 
stains—is the true cessations in the continuum of a buddha arya. We  can also posit the non-abiding 
nirvana.  
 We have adventitious stains: these obscure the mind as well as the nature of the mind. Because 
these stains obscure the mind, we are not able to know objects, and therefore we do not know the 
nature of the mind. As these stains decrease, we ar e better able to see the nature of the mind. When 
the stains are completely eliminated, the nature of the mind is no longer obscured; it becomes manifest and one comes to see the nature of the mind. When those stains ar e eliminated, even from 
within the state of meditative e quipoise on dharmata, one is able to perceive all phenomena.  
 When we talk about “purity in being free from inherent stains,” you s hould not think that the 
mind is stained by inherent existence; rather, we ar e talking about the stains that prevent one from 
seeing the nature of the mind. The st ains do not enter the nature of  the mind, but the nature of the 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
36 mind is obscured by stains. When these stains are e liminated and removed, the nature of the mind is 
said to be pure.  
 
Ornament of the Essence ,  
2B2B-3. Summarized and explained (this outline comes from page 51)  
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. By way of the first two stanzas, because of being summarized 
into the eight categories, it was indicated in brief. By way of thir teen stanzas, through 
being summarized into the topics of those, it was explained exte nsively. Thus, because 
of having been summarized and extensivel y explained, it has been well explained. 
 
EXPLANATION 
With respect to the fifteen stanzas present, the subject— by way of the first two stanzas  
[1.4 and 1.5]—the corpus was indicated in brief , because the corpus was summarized  
merely into the scope of the eight categories. {112} The subject— by way of thirteen 
remaining stanzas  [1.6–1.18]—the corpus was explained extensively,  because it was 
explained through being summarized merely into the scope of the seventy topics of 
those  eight [categories]. Thus, it has been well explained by way of the fifteen 
[stanzas], because of having been summarized and extensively explained  in the 
above manner . 
 The “first two stanzas” means the fi rst two of the fifteen stanzas.  
 Ornament of the Essence , p. 81: 
2B2B-4. Reason for not unraveling them extensively 
COMMENTARY  
Fearing it would become the fault of repetiti on, the stanzas of the summarized topics 
were not unraveled; by the very  composition of the treatise, a ll of the treatise that will 
be explained (such as “generated mind is for others’ welfare”) will explain it, whereby I 
thought to explain it by t horoughly explaining those. 
 
EXPLANATION 
The subject— the stanzas of the summarized topics were not unraveled  in detail 
prior to the extensive explanation of the bran ches which will be explained. The reason is 
because if they were unraveled in that manner, I fear it would become a commentary 
on the extensive explanation of th e branches and there would be the fault of repetition,  
whereby they were not unraveled. There w ould be repetition [if the stanzas of the 
summarized topics were unraveled], because,  by the very composition of  the treatise, 
all the words of the r oot text of the ex tensive explanation of the treatise which will be 
explained (such as “generated mind is for others’ welfare” [1.19a below]), will 
explain this corpus. There is pervasion, because, in  order to explain all of the words of 
the root text of the extensive explanation, I thought to explain this corpus by 
thoroughly  explaining those ; they will be explained. 
 In this outline, among the first fifteen stanzas, th e first two are a brief i ndication and discuss the 
eight categories. The remaining thirteen stanza s are an extensive explanation, and discuss the 
seventy topics. It is extensive relative to the brie f indication which is expressed in the two stanzas, 
but these are not as extensive as the extensive explan ation of the branches, which will come later. It 
says “if they were unraveled in that manner, I fear it would become a commentary on the extensive 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
37 explanation of the branches and there would be the fault of repetition,  whereby they were not 
unraveled.” This explains that there is a reason for not extensively explai ning now, because that will 
come later.   Ornament of the Essence , p. 81: 
 
OPINION: Since the consideration of the fau lt of repetition in the brief indication and 
the extensive explanation is unrelated, the re jection of the dispute of this context is 
incorrect. RESPONSE: This is a manifestation of  not having realized the meaning. 
OPINION: A commentary on the extensive expl anation of the branches will repeat the 
root text, because it will ex tensively explain the corpus. 
RESPONSE: Those who are able to complete ly comprehend the meaning in dependence 
on the mere words of the root text do not need  it; it is composed for the sake of those 
who are not able to do so. {113} 
 The meaning of this passage is that someone says th at rejecting the dispute of  the fault of repetition 
is incorrect in this context. The response is that  this person has not realized the meaning. Another 
opinion says “A commentary on the extensive explanation of the branches will repeat the root text, because it will extensively explain the corpus.” Our response is that those who are able to 
completely comprehend the meaning in dependence on the words of the root text do not need the commentary of the extensive explanation of the branches. That commentary is composed for those who are not able to comprehend the meaning in de pendence on the mere words of the root text.  
 Ornament of the Essence , p. 83: 
2B2C. Meaning of the words  
2B2C-1. Explaining the three exalted knowers extensively 
2B2C-2. Explaining the four applications extensively 
2B2C-3. Explaining the truth body extensively 
 
Now we have come to the actual part; everything before this was preliminary. 
2B2C-1. Explaining the three exalted knowers extensively 
2B2C-1A. Explaining the object of seeking, the exalted knower of all aspects 
2B2C-1B. Explaining the knower of paths which proceeds to the exalted knower of all aspects 
2B2C-1C. Explaining the branch that purifies the knower of paths, the knower of bases 
 
We will now look at the first of these three divisi ons, the exalted knower of all aspects. The others 
will be explained in the subsequent chapters. 
2B2C-1A. Explaining the object of seeking, the exalted knower of all aspects 
2B2C-1A1. Making a connection 
2B2C-1A2. Explaining the ten topics extensively 
2B2C-1A3. Summarizing the chapter 
2B2C-1A1. Making a connection 
COMMENTARY  
Having indicated all the summarized topics in  that manner – since bodhisattvas desire to 
attain enlightenment accordingly, as it is neces sary to attain the exalted knower of all 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
38 aspects because it is the result – it is assert ed that the exalted know er of all aspects is 
explained first by means of thoroughly expl aining the stanzas that summarize it. 
 
EXPLANATION 
Having indicated all the summarized topics in  that manner, it is asserted that the 
exalted knower of all aspects is explained first , stating “generated mind and so forth 
taught…” There is a reason for first explai ning an exalted knower of all aspects, as it is 
necessary  for trainees who desire to directly3 realize all the stages of clear realizations 
without exception to eventually attain the exalted knower of all aspects . It is 
necessary, because it is the  principal result  that is the object of seeking. That [an 
exalted knower of all aspects is the principal result that is th e object of seeking] follows, 
since  the intended trainees of the Ornament , bodhisattvas, desire to attain  
unsurpassable enlightenment in accordance with  the buddhas of the past and the 
present who have gone there. {114}  
OPINION: Although it is appropriate to expl ain that at the begi nning, why are merely 
[its topics] generated mind, instru ctions, and so forth explained? 
RESPONSE: It is appropriate to explain those, because it is asserted that, by means of 
thoroughly explaining the stanzas that summarize the exalted knower of all aspects, 
the object-possessor is extensivel y characterized by the objects. 
 Here, “in that manner” refers to a manner that is  not extensive. First, the exalted knower of all 
aspects is explained. What is the reason for explaining it first? It is for the sake of generating 
enthusiasm in the trainees for the result. Having generated enthusiasm, they will generate a mind of seeking the result. This exalted knower of all asp ects is thus the object of seeking by the intended 
trainees of the Ornament.  Not only is it the object of seeking of the intended trainees, it is the 
principal  object of seeking of the trainees.  
 In the first chapter, the topics of generated mi nd, instructions, and so forth are explained, but the 
exalted knower of all aspects is not explicitly stat ed in the root text. Having explained an exalted 
knower of all aspects first, the tr ainees generate enthusiasm for th e result; the exalted knower of all 
aspects is the principal result that  is the object of seeking, so it would make sense to explain the 
exalted knower of all aspects by me ntioning it, but it is not menti oned. Instead, the ten topics are 
explained. Why is this? There are two ways of explaining this: (1) an explanation by way of the 
result being characterized by the cause, and (2) an explanation by way of the object-possessor 
being characterized by its object . In Gyeltsab Je’s response, he says that “the object-possessor is 
extensively characterized by the objects.”   Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
The explanation (by way of applying to all be low what is similar to this [instance of] 
making a
 connection) is a presentation whose confusion generates amazement, whereby 
scholars should not make effort, because the need to explain that the characteristics of an ox are conglomerated objects such as a dorsal hump, folds
4 of flesh at the nape, 
drooping hide at the neck (dewlap), and so fo rth is inappropriate fo r trainees of this 
treatise for the time being. 
 
                                                 
3 Gsum  emended to read sum in accordance with page 79 of the Dre pung Loseling Library Society’s 1996 edition of 
Ornament of the Essence . 
4 ‘bungs  emended to read ‘phungs  in accordance with page 79 of the Drep ung Loseling Library So ciety’s 1996 edition 
of Ornament of the Essence . 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 12: 5-11 May, 2008 
 
39 This means that if you try to apply this type of explanation by way of applying it to “all below,” i.e. 
to all the following chapters, this is a confused  presentation. This is sa ying that those who are 
scholars can easily understand the characteristics of  an ox as being those e xplained here. Those who 
are skilled do not need to make effort to understand these characte ristics, but those who are not 
skilled or  knowledgeable would have to make effo rt to understand them. The need to explain these 
various characteristics of an ox is in appropriate for trainees of this tr eatise. This means that if it is 
necessary to explain these charact eristics to someone, this person is dull-facultied, and is not an 
appropriate trainee for the Ornament .  
 How is this analogy to be in terpreted? It has to be connect ed to the meaning. The meaning 
illustrated by this analogy is that in the first chap ter, the object-possessor is characterized by the 
objects. If we were to apply this  explanation to all the remaining chapters, this would be like the 
situation described in the analogy:  explaining the characteristics of  an ox, its dorsal hump, etc.  
 The point here is that in the first chapter,  the way the exalted knower of all aspects is 
characterized by th e ten topics is by means of the object-possesso r being characterized by its 
objects , but this mode of characterization does not apply, for instance, to the second chapter, 
because there, the eleven topi cs explain the knower of paths by means of cause, entity, and result. 
   
D END D 
 