Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/Transcript pdf/ORN_GTTnotes_16.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:51:43.262994
================================================================================

Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 1  
Masters Program: Ornament for Clear Realization 
Commentary by Geshe Tenzin Tenphel 
 
Monday afternoon, 2 June 2008 
 
Last week, we posited the definitions of an approac her to stream-enterer, approacher to once-
returner, approacher to non-returner, and approache r to foe-destroyer. We will now look at the 
definitions of the four abiders, which are from General Meaning .  
 The definition of an abider in the result of strea m-enterer  is: one of the four abiders in the result 
who abides in the result of the mode of a trainee-i n-virtue that abides in a class distinguished by 
having abandoned the three entwinements, the object s to be abandoned by the path of seeing.  
 From this, we can deduce the definitions of the ot her three abiders in the result [as follows]: 
 Definition of an abider in the result of once-retu rner : one of the four abiders in the result who 
abides in the result of the mode of a trainee-in-vi rtue that abides in a class distinguished by having  
abandoned most of the five partial concordances wit h the bottom. 
 Definition of an abider in the result of non-retur ner : one of the four abiders in the result who 
abides in the result of the mode of a trainee-in-vi rtue that abides in a class distinguished by having  
abandoned all of the five partial concordances with  the bottom, without exception. 
 Definition of an abider in the result of foe-destr oyer : one of the four abiders in the result who 
abides in the result of the mode of a trainee-in-vi rtue trainee in virtue that abides in a class 
distinguished by having abandoned the five partial concordances with the upper. 
 
2B2C-1A2B-1B2A-1B. Presentation of the persons (cont inued) 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 121: 
 
 With respect to the second, those who are simultan eous, the definition [of a 
simultaneous abider in the result of stream-enterer ] is: a person (abiding in the result 
distinguished by having abandoned the three entwine ment) who abandons 
simultaneously, by way of aspects, the afflictions that are the objects to be abandoned 
by the path of meditation of the three realms. The afflictions are abandoned in 
dependence on the preparation of the first concentr ation, Not Unable, (i) because one is 
able to abandon all the afflictions of the three re alms in dependence on this, and (ii) 
because the other levels are not appropriate as the  mind support for abandoning the 
objects to be abandoned by the path of meditation o f the desire realm. Further, they are 
abandoned by only a supramundane path, because a mu ndane path is unable to abandon 
the objects to be abandoned by the path of meditati on of the Peak of Existence. 
 
In the definition above, the phrase “… a person (abiding in the result distinguished by ha ving 
abandoned the three entwinements)…” can be replaced  with “an abider in the result of stream-
enterer.” Here, it says, “The afflictions are aband oned in dependence on the preparation of the first 
concentration, Not Unable.” Not Unable is the name of a superior type of preparation of the first 
concentration. Not Unable is “able” to abandon the afflictions of the three realms. What kind of 
preparation is this? When one trains in meditative stabilization, one first attains a mere calm 
abiding. Following this, one can attain a similitude of special insight, which is not the actual special  
insight. Following this, one will attain fully-qual ified special insight. Only after having attained t his 
will one attain the Not Unable preparation. This ty pe of preparation, however, is not attained by 
everyone.  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 2  Two reasons are given in the text [for the need to  use the preparation Not Unable]: (i) “because 
one is able to abandon all the afflictions of the t hree realms in dependence on this,” “this” meaning 
Not Unable, and (ii) “because the other levels are not appropriate as the mind support for 
abandoning the objects to be abandoned by the path of meditation of the desire realm.” In this case 
we are talking about a simultaneous abider, for whom the objects have been abandoned 
simultaneously. Without the preparation called Not Unable, simultaneous abandonment cannot 
occur because one must also abandon the afflictions  of the Peak of Existence, which are objects to 
be abandoned by the path of meditation; the other l evels are not appropriate. 
 “Further, they are abandoned by only a supramundan e path, because a mundane path is unable to 
abandon the objects to be abandoned by the path of meditation of the Peak of Existence” is saying 
that an actual concentration is unable to abandon t he afflictions of the Peak of Existence that are 
objects to be abandoned by the path of meditation. However, the preparation Not Unable is able to 
abandon the afflictions of the Peak of Existence th at are objects to be abandoned by the path of 
meditation. If one had attained an actual first con centration, one would already have abandoned the 
nine levels of desire realm afflictions. Therefore,  there would be no need to engage in simultaneous 
abandonment of the afflictions.  
 If this information is examined in great detail an d debated, it is difficult to respond. The debates 
do not appear yet, but when we come to the fifth ch apter, I will tell you what they are. Some time 
ago, a Swiss monk went to Sera to study Buddhist ph ilosophy. After a few months, he felt 
discouraged, saying, “when I answer ‘Yes,’ the answ er was proven to be ‘No,’ and when I answer 
‘No,’ the answer was proven to be ‘Yes.’ He became frustrated and left the monastery.  
 The text says, “other levels are not appropriate a s the mind support for abandoning the objects to 
be abandoned by the path of meditation of the desir e realm.” Why is the first concentration, for 
example, not appropriate as the mind support for ab andoning the afflictions of the desire realm to be 
abandoned by the path of meditation? It is because someone who has attained the first concentration 
has already abandoned the afflictions of the desire  realm that are to be abandoned by the path of 
meditation, and therefore it cannot serve as a supp ort. The actual concentrations can  be used as a 
support for a result such as non-returner. In this case, however, levels other than Not Unable are not  
appropriate as the mind support for abandoning the objects to be abandoned by the path of 
meditation of the desire realm.  
 We have posited the definition of an approacher to  stream-enterer, but have not yet seen the 
definitions for an approacher to stream-enterer who abandons serially and an approacher to stream-
enterer who abandons simultaneously .  
 The definition of an approacher to stream-enterer who abandons simultaneously  is: an 
approacher to stream-enterer who bears the lineage of abandoning simultaneously the nine small of 
the small afflictions of the three realms that are objects to be abandoned by the path of meditation.  
 The definition of an approacher to stream-enterer who abandons serially  is: an approacher to 
stream-enterer who bears the lineage of abandoning serially those nine [i.e. the nine small of the 
small afflictions of the three realms that are obje cts to be abandoned by the path of meditation].  
  
Ornament of the Essence , p. 121: 
 
 They are abandoned by way of simultaneously abando ning the great of the great 
objects to be abandoned by the path of meditation o f the three realms [until] 
simultaneously abandoning the small of the small. T he reason for such ability is that this 
[simultaneous abider] is of sharper faculty than th e others, whereby without having 
differentiated the aggregates—forms and so forth—of  the three realms as being of 
individual realms and levels, he familiarized with them by way of gathering them 
together, thinking, “All of these are impermanent, suffering,  and selfless.”  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 3 The reason for such persons being able to abandon t he afflictions simultaneously is because of their 
sharper faculties. They do not have to differentiat e among the various realms and levels. Such a 
person does not need to think: “the aggregates of t he desire realm are impermanent, suffering, and 
selfless,” then: “the aggregates of the form realm are impermanent, suffering, and selfless,” then: 
“the aggregates of the formless realm are impermane nt, suffering, and selfless.” He is able to gather 
them together and think: “all the aggregates of the  three realms are impermanent, suffering, and 
selfless.”  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 121: 
 
 It is inappropriate to posit simultaneity with res pect to the two middle results; at the 
time of abandoning the sixth affliction of the desi re realm, it is impossible to abandon 
the sixth object to be abandoned by the path of med itation of the Peak of Existence; at 
the time of abandoning the ninth affliction of the desire realm, it is impossible to 
abandon the ninth [object to be abandoned by the pa th of meditation] of the Peak of 
Existence. Hence it is posited only with respect to  the first and the last results. When 
divided, there are: 
(i) the mere abiders in the result of stream-entere r and  
(ii) special abiders in the result of stream-entere r.  
 
Here it is saying that it is inappropriate to posit  a simultaneous abider or approacher with respect t o 
the two middle results: once-returner and non-retur ner. The reason is that at the time of abandoning 
the sixth affliction of the desire realm, one canno t abandon the sixth object to be abandoned by the 
path of meditation of the Peak of Existence; simila rly, at the time of abandoning the ninth affliction  
of the desire realm, it is impossible to abandon th e ninth affliction of the Peak of Existence. Thus, a 
simultaneous approacher or abider is posited only f or the first and last results: the result of stream -
enterer and the result of foe-destroyer.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 122: 
 
 From between these two, the latter [special simult aneous abider in the result of stream-
enterer] is an approacher to the result of foe-dest royer. The boundaries [of a 
simultaneous abider in the result of stream-enterer ] are: from the sixteenth instant of 
clear realization of the truth through abiding on t he uninterrupted path that abandons the 
small of the small objects to be abandoned by the p ath of meditation. 
 
The special simultaneous abider in the result of st ream-enterer is an approacher to the result of foe-
destroyer. [Regarding the boundaries]: when one fir st attains the sixteenth instant of the clear 
realization of the truth, the path of seeing, one i s a mere abider in the result of stream-enterer . 
When one strives to attain the next result, one bec omes a special abider in the result of stream-
enterer .  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 122: 
 
 With respect to the second, the once-returners, th e definition of the first from between 
the two, approacher and abider, [i.e., the definiti on of an approacher to once-returner ] is: 
a person who strives for the sake of attaining the result of the mode of a trainee-in-virtue 
distinguished by having largely separated from atta chment. {174} When divided, there 
are two:  
(i) serial approacher to the result of once-returne r, and  
(ii) leaper approacher to the result of once-return er.  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 4 The boundaries are: from striving in the applicatio n that abandons the first object to be 
abandoned by the path of meditation of the desire r ealm after a serial approacher has 
attained the path of seeing, through abandoning the  sixth. A leaper approacher is like a 
stream-enterer; the difference is that he has aband oned either the sixth, seventh, or 
eighth object to be abandoned by the path of medita tion prior to the path of seeing. 
 
We already looked at the longer definition for an a pproacher to once-returner . We have two 
divisions:  
1.  serial approacher to the result of once-returner, a nd  
2.  leaper approacher to the result of once-returner.  
There are also two boundaries, one for serial appro acher to the result of once-returner, and one for 
leaper approacher to once-returner. The boundaries for a serial approacher to the result of once-
returner  are “from striving in the application that abandon s the first object,” i.e. the first affliction 
of the desire realm, “to be abandoned by the path o f meditation of the desire realm after a serial 
approacher has attained the path of seeing, through  abandoning the sixth,” meaning through before 
having abandoned the sixth .  
 The text says, “A leaper approacher is like a stre am-enterer; the difference is that he has 
abandoned either the sixth, seventh, or eighth obje ct to be abandoned by the path of meditation prior 
to the path of seeing.” This is saying that the bou ndaries of a leaper approacher to the result of 
once-returner  are similar to the boundaries of a stream-enterer;  in other words, from a single-
session path of preparation onwards as long as one has not attained the sixteenth instant of the path 
of seeing. Alternatively, we can say that the bound aries are from a single-session path of 
preparation onwards as long as one has not attained  the liberated path included within the result of 
once-returner .  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 122: 
 
 The definition of the second, an abider in the res ult of once-returner , is: a person who 
abides in the result of the mode of a trainee-in-vi rtue distinguished by having largely 
separated from attachment. When divided, differenti ated by the way of attaining the 
result, there are the two:  
(i) serialist and  
(ii) leaper.  
A one-obstruction special abider in the result of o nce-returner has abandoned the 
seventh or eighth affliction of the desire realm, h as not abandoned the ninth, and attains 
nirvana after having taken one rebirth. The boundar ies are: for a leaper, from the 
sixteenth instant of clear realization of the truth , and, for a serialist, from the liberated 
path (in which the sixth has been abandoned), throu gh the uninterrupted path that 
abandons the ninth object to be abandoned by the pa th of meditation of the desire realm. 
 
We have already looked at the longer definition of an abider in the result of once-returner, as 
posited by Jetsun Chogyi Gyeltsen. When an abider i n the result of once-returner is divided by way 
of attaining the result, there are two: serialist a nd leaper. This speaks of a “one-obstruction specia l 
abider in the result of once-returner.” This should  say “a one-life, one-obstruction special abider in 
the result of once-returner,” to be more precise. W hat do “one-life” and “one-obstruction” mean? 
“One-life” means obstructed by one life from attain ing the result of foe-destroyer. In order to attain  
the result of foe-destroyer, one is obstructed by o ne life. “One-obstruction” means that in order to 
attain the result of non-returner, one is obstructe d by one affliction. Such a person “has abandoned 
the seventh or eighth affliction of the desire real m, has not abandoned the ninth, and attains nirvana  
after having taken one rebirth.” If you read this c arefully, you see that this person has abandoned 
the seventh or eighth affliction of the desire realm. So there are  various possibilities. If they have 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 5 abandoned the eighth, but not the ninth, they are o bstructed by one  affliction. If they have 
abandoned the seventh, but not the eighth or ninth,  then they are obstructed by two afflictions. But 
there is no fault; if they have two obstructions, t hen they have one obstruction, they satisfy the 
requirement of having one obstruction, right? If yo u have two euros, you have one euro, right? 
 The boundaries are: for a leaper , from the sixteenth instant of clear realization o f the truth 
through the uninterrupted path that abandons the ni nth object to be abandoned by the path of 
meditation of the desire realm, and for a serialist , from the liberated path (in which the sixth has 
been abandoned), through the uninterrupted path tha t abandons the ninth object to be abandoned by 
the path of meditation of the desire realm. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 122: 
 
 With respect to the third, the non-returners, the definition of the first from between the 
two, approacher and abider, [i.e., the definition o f an approacher to non-returner ] is: a 
person who strives for the sake of attaining the re sult of the mode of a trainee-in-virtue 
distinguished by having abandoned the five partial concordances with the bottom. Its 
divisions are similar to those of a once-returner. The boundaries for an approacher to 
non-returner who has separated from attachment prev iously are similar to those of a 
leaper approacher to once-returner; the difference is that he has abandoned some of the 
afflictions—ranging from the ninth of the desire re alm through the ninth of 
Nothingness—prior to the path of seeing. As for a s erial approacher, [the boundaries 
are:] from striving to abandon the seventh afflicti on of the desire realm, through striving 
to abandon the ninth, after the path of seeing. 
 
The divisions of an approacher to non-returner are similar to the divisions of an approacher to once-
returner. There is a serialist and a leaper.  
 A serialist goes through the various results in a serial manner . There is a person who begins at 
the single-session path of preparation; this person  is a serial approacher to stream-enterer. When 
such a person attains the sixteenth instant of the path of seeing, this person becomes an abider in th e 
result of stream-enterer. This person then strives for the result of once-returner, and becomes an 
approacher to once-returner, eventually becoming an  abider in the result of once-returner. After this,  
he strives to attain the result of non-returner, be coming an approacher to non-returner. He attains 
the result of non-returner, becoming an abider in t he result of non-returner. After attaining the resu lt 
of non-returner, he strives for the result of foe-d estroyer, and is thus an approacher to foe-destroye r. 
When he has abandoned the afflictions of the Peak o f Existence, he becomes an abider in the result 
of foe-destroyer. This is the mode in which a seria list proceeds. 
 We have discussed the way in which a serialist pro ceeds. The way a leaper  once-returner  
proceeds is as follows. Before the path of seeing, such a person has abandoned the first six 
afflictions of the desire realm. This person enters  the single-session path of preparation. From this 
point until attaining the sixteenth instant of the path of seeing, i.e. the subsequent knowledge of tr ue 
paths, such a person is a leaper approacher to the result of once-returner. When attaining the 
sixteenth instant of the path of seeing, this perso n becomes a leaper abider in the result of once-
returner. When this person strives for the result o f non-returner, he is an approacher to the result o f 
non-returner. This person attains the result of non -returner, becoming an abider in the result of non-
returner. He then strives for the state of foe-dest royer, becoming an approacher to foe-destroyer, 
and then attains the result of foe-destroyer, becom ing an abider in foe-destroyer.  
 The mode for a serialist non-returner is similar to above, i.e. for a serialist once-returner . But 
what about a leaper non-returner ? This expression, “leaper,” is the same as “one wh o has 
previously separated from attachment.” Such a perso n has abandoned the nine afflictions of the 
desire realm prior to the path of seeing. One then enters the single-session path of preparation. From  
this point until before the sixteenth instant of th e path of seeing, one is a leaper approacher to the 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 6 result of non-returner . Upon attaining the sixteenth instant, this person  becomes an abider in the 
result of non-returner . Then this person strives for the result of foe-de stroyer, becoming an 
approacher to foe-destroyer . When he attains the result of foe-destroyer, he b ecomes an abider in 
the result of foe-destroyer .  
 The way a serialist stream-enterer proceeds is the  same as for the serial once-returner and serial 
non-returner described above. Such a person goes th rough the results serially.  
 The way a simultaneous stream-enterer proceeds is that, prior to the path of seeing, he h as not 
abandoned even one desire realm affliction. This pe rson enters the single-session path of 
preparation and proceeds until attaining the sixtee nth instant. Before attaining the sixteenth instant  
of the path of seeing, this person is an approacher  to stream-enterer who abandons simultaneously. 
Upon attaining the sixteenth instant, he becomes a simultaneous abider in the result of stream-
enterer. After the sixteenth instant, this person s trives to abandon the great-great afflictions of th e 
three realms simultaneously, the middle-great affli ctions of the three realms simultaneously, and so 
forth, until abandoning the small-small afflictions  of the three realms simultaneously. After the 
sixteenth instant of the path of seeing until befor e having abandoned the small-small afflictions of 
the three realms, such a person is a special simultaneous abider in the result of stream -enterer , and 
a simultaneous approacher to foe-destroyer . When such a person has abandoned the small-small 
afflictions of the three realms, he is a simultaneous abider in the result of foe-destroyer .  
 When we talk about abandoning the great-great affl ictions of the three realms and so forth, this 
refers to the nine great-great afflictions of the t hree realms: the great-great afflictions of the des ire 
realm, the great-great afflictions of the first con centration, the great-great afflictions of the seco nd 
concentration, and so on, up through the great-grea t afflictions of the Peak of Existence.  In this wa y 
we have nine great-great afflictions. After that th ere are nine medium-great afflictions, and so forth , 
corresponding to these levels (desire realm, four f ormless realms and four formless absorptions).  
 We have explained the way of attaining the result serially and by way of leaping. We have also 
looked at how the objects are abandoned serially an d simultaneously.  
 
 
Tuesday, June 3, 2008 
 
[Geshe-la began by talking about persevering in pra ctice and so forth.]  
2B2C-1A2B-1B2A-1B. Presentation of the persons (cont inued) 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 122:  
 
The boundaries for an approacher to non-returner wh o has separated from attachment 
previously are similar to those of a leaper approac her to once-returner; the difference is 
that he has abandoned some of the afflictions—rangi ng from the ninth of the desire 
realm through the ninth of Nothingness—prior to the  path of seeing. As for a serial 
approacher, [the boundaries are:] from striving to abandon the seventh affliction of the 
desire realm, through striving to abandon the ninth , after the path of seeing. 
 
Here, it talks about the boundaries of an approache r to non-returner who has separated from 
attachment previously. These are similar to those o f a leaper approacher to once-returner, meaning 
the boundaries are the same as before: from a singl e-session path of preparation onwards as long as 
one has not attained the sixteenth instant of the p ath of seeing. There is a difference between an 
approacher to non-returner who has separated from a ttachment previously and a leaper approacher 
to once-returner: the non-returner who has separate d from attachment previously has abandoned 
some of the afflictions, i.e. those from the ninth of the desire realm through the ninth of 
Nothingness—prior to the path of seeing. A serial a pproacher to non-returner first attains the result 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 7 of stream-enterer, then the result of once-returner , then goes on to attain the result of non-returner . 
The boundaries for such a person are from striving to abandon the seventh affliction of the desire 
realm, through striving to abandon the ninth, after  the path of seeing. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 123: 
 
 The definition of the second, an abider in the res ult of non-returner  is: a person who 
abides in the result of the mode of a trainee-in-vi rtue distinguished by having 
abandoned the five partial concordances with the bo ttom. {175}  
 
This is the brief definition; we have already gone through Jetsun Chogyi Gyeltsen’s longer 
definition.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p.123: 
 
The five partial concordances with the bottom are: (1-3) the three entwinements, (4) 
aspiration for the desire realm, and (5) harmful in tent. When divided, differentiated by 
the manner of attaining the result, there are the t wo:  
(i) serialist non-returner and  
(ii) non-returner who has separated from attachment  previously. 
When differentiated by the manner of relying upon a rya qualities, there are the two:  
(i) non-returner who transforms in a life in the de sire realm, and  
(ii) [non-returner] who does not transform in a lif e in the desire realm.  
The first attains the state of non-returner by rely ing upon an arya path in continuous 
rebirths in the desire realm. Pacifying in that pre sent life means actualizing nirvana in 
the life where one attains the path of seeing. The second attains the state of non-returner 
in that life where he attains the path of seeing. 
 
Of the two types of abider in the result of non-ret urner when differentiated by the manner of 
attaining the result, the first, a serialist non-returner , attains the result of stream-enterer, then once-
returner. When such a person has abandoned the nint h affliction of the desire realm, he attains the 
state of non-returner, and becomes an abider in the  result of non-returner.  
 As for the second type, the non-returner who has separated from attachment prev iously, before 
the path of seeing, this person has abandoned some of the afflictions, as mentioned in the previous 
paragraph (in the boundaries): those ranging from the ninth of the desire realm through the ninth of 
Nothingness . Before the path of seeing, this person has defini tely abandoned the ninth affliction of 
the desire realm, and could have abandoned more, e. g. he could have abandoned the ninth level of 
afflictions of the first concentration, the ninth o f the second concentration, and so on, through the 
ninth level of Nothingness, so there are many possi bilities. When this person attains the path of 
seeing and attains the sixteenth instant, he attain s the state of abider in the result of non-returner . 
Before attaining the state of non-returner, this pe rson is an approacher to non-returner, specifically  
an approacher to non-returner who has separated fro m attachment previously. Such a person must 
have abandoned the ninth level of affliction of the  desire realm as a minimum requirement.  
 When differentiated by the manner of relying upon arya qualities, there are the two: (i) non-
returner who transforms in a life in the desire rea lm and (ii) non-returner who does not transform in 
a life in the desire realm. The first of these, the  non-returner who transforms in a life in the desire  
realm, in dependence on an arya path, takes two rebirths i n the desire realm, then attains the state of 
non-returner, and then, on the same support that he  used to attain the state of non-returner, he attai ns 
the state of foe-destroyer, the state of nirvana. I n this passage, it seems that there is some repetit ion, 
but it is not clear where these extra words come fr om.  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 8  The non-returner who does not transform in a life in th e desire realm refers to someone who, 
having attained an arya path, does not need to take  more rebirths [in the desire realm]. In that life,  
he attains the state of non-returner. In the life o f attaining the path of seeing, such a person attai ns 
the state of non-returner.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 123: 
 
With respect to that, there are:  
(i) one who proceeds to the form realm,  
(ii) one who proceeds to the formless realm,  
(iii) one who pacifies in that present life, and  
(iv) one who actualizes a body. 
The definition of the first [an abider in the resul t of non-returner who proceeds to the 
form realm ] is: a person who attains the state of non-returne r in that life where he attains 
the path of seeing and takes rebirth in the form re alm. With respect to its divisions, (1) 
the first of five—one who attains nirvana in the in termediate state—has abandoned the 
entwinement of rebirth in the form realm and, due t o not having abandoned the 
entwinement of establishment, actualizes nirvana on  the support of an intermediate 
existence of the form realm. (2) The second—one who  attains nirvana upon rebirth—
due to not having abandoned both entwinements, havi ng actualized the path when just 
having established the birth existence of the form realm, attains nirvana. (3) The third—
one who attains nirvana by being with compositional  action—having actualized the path 
with great exertion in order to be like the others,  attains nirvana. (4) The fourth—one 
who attains nirvana by being without compositional action—having actualized the path 
without great exertion through the force of familia rization, attains nirvana. 
 (5) With respect to the fifth—one who transfers to  the upper—its definition is: an 
abider in the result (distinguished by having aband oned the five partial concordances 
with the bottom) who bears the lineage of attaining  nirvana on the support of either 
Akanishta or the Peak of Existence, having passed t hrough rebirth in the form realm. Its 
divisions are:  
(i) a lineage-bearer who proceeds finally to Akanis hta and  
(ii) a lineage-bearer who proceeds finally to the P eak of Existence. {176}  
With respect to the first [an abider in the result of non-returner who is a lineage-bearer 
who proceeds finally to Akanishta], there are three :  
(i) lineage-bearers who are leapers,  
(ii) [lineage-bearers] who are half-leapers, and  
(iii) [lineage-bearers] who die and transfer to all  other abodes, excluding Great 
Brahma. 
 
The non-returners are the most complicated, with ma ny divisions, but perhaps we will not go 
through all of them now. There are five divisions o f an abider in the result of non-returner who  
proceeds to the form realm : 
1.  one who attains nirvana in the intermediate state 
2.  one who attains nirvana upon rebirth 
3.  one who attains nirvana by being with compositional  action 
4.  one who attains nirvana by being without compositio nal action 
5.  one who transfers to the upper 
 
1.  The non-returner who attains nirvana in the interme diate state  has abandoned the 
entwinement of rebirth in the form realm, i.e. he h as abandoned the karma for a birth existence in 
the form realm. “Due to not having abandoned the en twinement of establishment…” means that 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 9 this person has not abandoned the karma of establis hment, and as a result s/he attains nirvana on 
the support of an intermediate existence of the for m realm. 
2.  One who attains nirvana upon rebirth  has not abandoned both entwinements: he has 
abandoned neither the entwinement of rebirth in the  form realm, nor the entwinement of 
establishment. Such a person, “having actualized th e path when just having established the birth 
existence of the form realm, attains nirvana.” This  person is reborn in the form realm and attains 
nirvana there. “One who attains nirvana upon rebirt h” means that after taking rebirth, one attains 
nirvana.  
3.  One who attains nirvana by being with compositional  action  means that this person 
actualizes the path with great exertion and attains  nirvana.  
4.  One who attains nirvana by being without compositio nal action : because of familiarization, 
this person does not need to exert himself greatly.  Without great exertion, this person actualizes 
the path and attains nirvana.  
5.  One who transfers to the upper : we can take the example of someone in the desire realm, 
who transfers to the upper, i.e. the form realm. Th ere are many possibilities for the fifth division, 
for example in the text it mentions someone who pro ceeds finally to Akanishta, or to the Peak of 
Existence. One can start from the first concentrati on, then go to the second concentration, then up 
to the Peak of Existence, and so forth. Some, befor e going to the Peak of Existence, can go to 
other realms. There are lineage-bearers who are lea pers, half-leapers, and so forth. Note that the 
word “leaper” here is not the same as the leaper wh o separates from attachment previously. The 
Tibetan word is different.  
 The divisions of one who transfers to the upper ar e:  
1.  a lineage-bearer who proceeds finally to Akanishta and  
2.  a lineage-bearer who proceeds finally to the Peak o f Existence.  
 
A lineage-bearer who proceeds finally to Akanishta  is divided into:  
1.  Lineage-bearers who are leapers : Such a person starts from a certain realm and goe s to 
Akanishta. 
2.  Lineage-bearers who are half-leapers : People who, from wherever they are, go to another  
realm and then finally go to Akanishta.  
3.  Lineage-bearers who die and transfer to all other a bodes, excluding Great Brahma : Great 
Brahma is the third of the seventeen levels of the form realm [see Chart 13]. This person goes to 
all the levels of the form realm, except for Great Brahma.  
 
When we divide the form realm into seventeen, there  are three divisions of the first concentration, 
three in the second concentration, three in the thi rd concentration, and eight in the fourth 
concentration. Among these eight, three are abodes of ordinary beings, and five are pure places, i.e. 
abodes of aryas.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 124:  
 
The second [an abider in the result of non-returner  who is a lineage-bearer who 
proceeds finally to the Peak of Existence] is not r eborn in the pure places, due to not 
having meditated on the causal alternating concentr ations. Persons who meditate on 
alternating concentrations are of two types: non-re turners and foe-destroyers. With 
respect to the latter [foe-destroyers], those of du ll faculty meditate [on alternating 
meditations] in order to distance themselves from t he obscurations relishing the taste of 
meditative stabilization, while those of sharp facu lty meditate in order to abide in the 
happiness of that present life. The first [non-retu rners] meditate also in order to be 
reborn in the pure places. 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 10  Those who meditate on alternating concentrations ca n be reborn in the pure places, while those who 
do not do this meditation cannot be reborn in the p ure places. This abider in the result of non-
returner is a lineage-bearer who proceeds finally t o the Peak of Existence; s/he does not meditate on 
the alternating concentrations, and as a result, is  not reborn in the pure places. This person proceed s 
finally to the Peak of Existence, where he or she a ttains nirvana. There are two cases: those who 
meditate on alternating concentrations and those wh o do not meditate on alternating concentrations. 
Those who meditate on alternating concentrations ar e born in the pure places of aryas. The highest 
of these, the fifth, is Akanishta. This person is r eborn there and attains nirvana there. Those who do  
not practice these alternating concentrations canno t be reborn in the five pure places. They proceed 
to the formless realm, the highest level of the for mless realm, the Peak of Existence, and attain 
nirvana there.  
 In general, there are two types of persons who med itate on alternating concentrations: non-
returners and foe-destroyers. We have discussed non -returners, now we will look at foe destroyers.  
Foe-destroyers can be of dull faculty or of sharp f aculty. The text says that those “of dull faculty 
meditate [on alternating meditations] in order to d istance themselves from the obscurations relishing 
the taste of meditative stabilization, while those of sharp faculty meditate in order to abide in the 
happiness of that present life.” 
 Regarding the “obscurations relishing the taste of  meditative stabilization:” when a person 
attains the foe-destroyer state, one attains a spec ial meditative stabilization. A foe-destroyer of du ll-
faculty can have the conceptualization, “Maybe my m editative stabilization will degenerate.” In 
order to distance themselves from this type of conc eptualization, they train in the alternating 
meditations. If a foe-destroyer has such conceptual izations, he or she will not be able to experience 
the bliss of meditative stabilization. If these obs curations become stronger, they will prevent the 
foe-destroyer from experiencing the bliss of medita tive stabilization. In fact, this would not happen 
to a foe-destroyer.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p, 124: 
 
 On what minds are they supported? They are initial ly meditated on by being supported 
on a mind of the fourth concentration, since it is the best serviceable mind; 
subsequently, they are also supported on other mind s. Further, one enters absorption 
upon an uncontaminated fourth concentration by way of a single application, then a 
contaminated one, then an uncontaminated one—the sm all, alternating three 
[concentrations]. Through that mode, alternating si x, nine, twelve, and fifteen 
[concentrations] are the middling, great, very grea t, and tremendously great. That very 
karma that projects [a rebirth] into the fourth con centration that was accumulated at the 
time of an ordinary being previously, due to one ha ving meditated on the pure fourth 
concentration, transforms into the cause for being reborn in a pure place. Hence there is 
no fault that it would follow that, despite having seen the truth, one newly accumulates  
karma that projects one into cyclic existence. 
 
Here, the question is: On what minds are they, i.e.  the alternating concentrations, supported? 
Initially these alternating concentrations are supp orted on the fourth concentration, since it is the 
best serviceable mind; subsequently, they are also supported on other minds, such as the first, 
second, or third concentrations. The word “alternat ing” means alternating between uncontaminated 
and contaminated concentrations. There are various degrees. The “small” involves alternating three: 
starting with an uncontaminated fourth concentratio n, then a contaminated concentration, then an 
uncontaminated concentration. The “middling” involv es six concentrations, or two sets of three: 
uncontaminated, contaminated, uncontaminated, then again, uncontaminated, contaminated, and 
uncontaminated. The “great” is nine concentrations:  three sets of uncontaminated, contaminated, 
and uncontaminated; the “very great” is twelve, and  the “tremendously great” is fifteen.  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 11   The text says “That very karma that projects [a re birth] into the fourth concentration that was 
accumulated at the time of an ordinary being previo usly, due to one having meditated on the pure 
fourth concentration, transforms into the cause for  being reborn in a pure place.” This is not the 
case of an arya newly accumulating karma that proje cts him into samsara. Before this person 
attained the arya state, s/he accumulated karma to be reborn in the fourth concentration. Due to 
training in the alternating concentrations, this ka rma transforms into the cause to be born in a pure 
place. In that way, this arya can be reborn in a pu re place. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 124: 
 
 The definition of the second [an abider in the res ult of non-returner who proceeds to 
the formless realm ] is: a person who attains non-returner in that lif e where he attains the 
path of seeing and bears the lineage of actualizing  nirvana on a support of the formless 
realm without taking rebirth in the form realm. Whe n divided, there are four, excluding 
one who attains nirvana in the intermediate state. {177}  
 
This refers to an abider in the result of non-retur ner who proceeds to the formless realm,  the second 
of the four previous divisions (middle of page 123) :  
1.  one who proceeds to the form realm,  
2.  one who proceeds to the formless realm,  
3.  one who pacifies in that present life, and  
4.  one who actualizes a body. 
 
Before, we went through the five divisions of the f irst [one who proceeds to the form realm]:  
1.  one who attains nirvana in the intermediate state 
2.  one who attains nirvana upon rebirth 
3.  one who attains nirvana by being with compositional  action 
4.  one who attains nirvana by being without compositio nal action 
5.  one who transfers to the upper 
 
In this passage, when it says that there are four ( divisions of abider in the result of non-returner w ho 
proceeds to the formless realm ), we exclude the first of these five divisions. Th us there are: 
1.  one who attains nirvana upon rebirth 
2.  one who attains nirvana by being with compositional  action 
3.  one who attains nirvana by being without compositio nal action 
4.  one who transfers to the upper 
Why is the first division excluded? It is because t here is no intermediate existence of the formless 
realm.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 124: 
 
 The third, a non-returner who pacifies in that pre sent life, actualizes nirvana in that 
very life of attaining the path of seeing.  
 
“A non-returner who pacifies in that present life” refers to a non-returner who pacifies, or attains 
nirvana. “Present life” literally means “seen pheno mena/phenomena that are seen,” and refers to the 
path of seeing. A non-returner who pacifies in that  present life is one who attains nirvana in that li fe 
of attaining the path of seeing. This third one is one who, in the life of attaining the path of seein g, 
attains the state of foe-destroyer.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 124: 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 12   
The fourth, a non-returner who actualizes a body, i s an arya learner who possesses the 
eight liberations. The boundaries, for a serialist,  are from the liberated path in which the 
ninth affliction of the desire realm has been aband oned, through abiding on the 
uninterrupted path that abandons the ninth [afflict ion] of the Peak of Existence, and for 
a leaper, from the sixteenth instant of the clear r ealization of the truth. 
 
The eight liberations  will be discussed in the fourth chapter. Just to l ist them now, they are:  
1.  The liberation of that having form looking at a for m 
2.  The liberation of that not having form looking at a  form 
3.  The liberation of the beautiful which eliminates ob stacles 
4-7. The four formless realm absorptions 
8.  The liberation of cessation 
More details on these will come in the fourth chapt er.  
 
The boundaries for a serialist non-returner are fro m the liberated path in which the ninth affliction 
of the desire realm has been abandoned, through abi ding on the uninterrupted path that abandons 
the ninth affliction of the Peak of Existence. For a leaper non-returner, they are from the sixteenth 
instant of the clear realization of the truth (the later boundaries are not mentioned but they are the  
same as the previous one: through abiding on the uninterrupted path that aban dons the ninth 
affliction of the Peak of Existence) . These are boundaries for abiders in the result of  non-returner: 
the serialist and the leaper.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 124: 
 
 Regarding the fourth, a foe-destroyer, the definit ion of an approacher [to foe-
destroyer ] is: an arya person who strives for the sake of at taining the result of the mode 
of a trainee-in-virtue that is distinguished by hav ing abandoned the five partial 
concordances with the upper. When divided, there ar e two:  
(i) serial and  
(ii) simultaneous approachers to foe-destroyer.  
If he is a non-returner, then [the boundaries] are:  from striving in the application that 
abandons the remaining objects to be abandoned by t he path of meditation, through the 
uninterrupted path which abandons the ninth afflict ion of the Peak of Existence. If he is 
a stream-enterer, then the boundaries are posited t o be similar to those for a special 
simultaneous stream-enterer. 
 
This definition of an approacher to foe-destroyer i s brief, and we already went through the more 
extensive definition by Jetsun-pa. There is a seria list and a simultaneous approacher to foe 
destroyer.  “Serialist” can have two possible conno tations: one who is serial by way of result , or one 
who is serial by way of objects of abandonment . In this context, we are applying the second 
connotation: serial by way of objects of abandonmen t, meaning we are looking at someone who 
abandons serially. Whether we are talking about som eone who is serial by way of result or serial by 
way of object of abandonment, after attaining the s tate of non-returner, such a person will go on to 
attain the state of a foe-destroyer.  
 
Questions and answers  (answers will be discussed in the following session )  
 
Q: What is the difference between the five eyes and  the six clairvoyances? Are they all 
consciousness? Are they all mental consciousness? 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 13  Q: What is the relationship between the five partia l concordances with the bottom and the nine 
levels of desire realm afflictions? Are the nine le vels of desire realm afflictions subsumed under the  
fourth of the five partial concordances with the bo ttom—the aspiration for the desire realm?  
A: We would say that these nine levels of desire re alm afflictions are aspiration for the desire 
realm, which is the fourth of the five partial conc ordances with the bottom. They are differentiated 
by way of their strength: some are stronger, some a re weaker. When we talk about the strength of 
these afflictions, the strong ones are those that m anifest strongly.  
 
Q: About the leapers who have previously separated from attachment and who have abandoned 
some or all of the desire realm afflictions—are the se innate or acquired afflictions?  
A: They are all innate.  
 
Q: Why is something that includes both impermanent and permanent parts classed as permanent? 
For example, the Buddha?  
A: We say that such an object is permanent, from be tween the two—permanent and functioning 
thing. From between the existent and the non-existe nt, it is an existent. If there is something with 
both permanent and impermanent instances, can you p osit such an object that is impermanent?  
Q: I would say that if an aspect of it changes, all  of it changes, so it is impermanent.  
Translator: Are you permanent? There is no part of you that is permanent. 
Q: Yes, there is my emptiness. 
Translator: It is not part of your aggregates, of y ou. Think about it. 
A: For example, emptiness is permanent. The emptine ss of Lobsang is permanent. So where is 
Lobsang? If you break a vase, then the vase is brok en, but there is the continuity of the vase. When 
this vase is broken, the vase goes out of existence ; the emptiness of the vase goes out of existence. 
It is not that the emptiness of the vase disappears . When one creates a vase, one does not create the 
emptiness of the vase. Due to the vase being establ ished, its emptiness is merely established. It is 
not that the emptiness has been created. This empti ness is the nature of the vase, so it is not 
something created.  
 
Q: About the eyes and clairvoyances, I don’t see th e difference between the first eye (eye of flesh) 
and the fifth clairvoyance (divine eye): they seem to have the same function and their definitions are  
similar.  
A: Think about it, and answer the question tomorrow .  
 
 
Wednesday June 4, 2008 (morning)  
 
[Geshe-la began by speaking about the need for happ iness in our studies and the importance of not 
giving up when getting frustrated.] 
 
We are discussing the foe-destroyer. Other than the  foe-destroyer, there are three results: stream-
enterer, once-returner, and non-returner. At this p oint, I would like to summarize what we have 
done so far. Let us look at the stream-enterer . There are two types:  
1.  stream-enterers who abandon simultaneously  
2.  stream-enterers who abandon serially. 
Stream-enterers who abandon serially by way of the result and who abandon serially by way of the 
objects of abandonment are the same. The stream-enterer who abandons serially  starts from the 
single-session path of preparation, and from then u ntil the fifteenth instant of the path of seeing is  
an approacher to stream-enterer . Upon attaining the sixteenth instant of the path of seeing, this 
person becomes an abider in the result of stream-enterer . Then this person strives to abandon the 
first six afflictions of the desire realm. From the  point of striving to abandon the first six afflict ions 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 14  of the desire realm, this person is an approacher to once-returner . Upon abandoning the sixth 
affliction of the desire realm, this person becomes  an abider in the result of once-returner . After 
that, this person strives to abandon the ninth affl iction of the desire realm, and is an approacher to 
non-returner . Upon abandoning the ninth affliction of the desir e realm, this person becomes an 
abider in the result of non-returner . After that, s/he strives to abandon the other aff lictions: those of 
the first concentration, the second concentration, etc. Such a person is an approacher to foe-
destroyer . When this person has abandoned the ninth afflicti on of the Peak of Existence, s/he 
becomes an abider in the result of foe-destroyer . In this way, the result of abider in the result o f foe-
destroyer is attained.  
 To explain this in some more detail: after attaini ng the sixteenth instant of the path of seeing, 
such a person strives to abandon the six affliction s of the desire realm. Such a person is an 
approacher to once-returner ; at the same time, s/he is a special abider in the result of stream-
enterer . Upon abandoning the sixth affliction, s/he become s an abider in once-returner . Then s/he 
strives to abandon the seventh, eighth, and ninth a fflictions, and becomes a special abider in the 
result of once-returner  and an approacher to non-returner . Upon abandoning the ninth affliction of 
the desire realm, s/he becomes an abider in the result of non-returner . After that, s/he strives to 
abandon the afflictions of the upper realms, and be comes a special abider in the result of non-
returner and an approacher to the result of foe-destroyer . In this way, when all the afflictions of the 
upper realms have been abandoned, this person becom es an abider in the result of foe-destroyer . It 
is helpful to understand this procedure of a serial ist, because from this we can understand how a 
serialist stream-enterer proceeds, how a serialist once-returner proceeds, how a serialist non-
returner proceeds, and how a serialist foe-destroye r attains the result. The procedure is exactly the 
same.  
 This is the general procedure for a serialist. If we look at it in detail, there are many cases to 
consider, and many divisions, such as dull and shar p faculty trainees, the various divisions of 
maximum-seven-timers and so forth. There are many t hings to contemplate. Let us consider the 
case of a stream-enterer. Prior to attaining the pa th of seeing, we can have someone who has not 
abandoned even one of the desire realm afflictions,  or someone who has abandoned one, two, three, 
or four of the afflictions. This is for those who a re serial by way of result. A stream-enterer, befor e 
the path of seeing, may have abandoned not even one , or one through four afflictions of the desire 
realm.  
 In the case of a [serialist] once-returner, such a  person, before the path of seeing, may abandon 
from zero up to five of the desire realm affliction s.  
 In the case of a [serialist] non-returner, prior t o the path of seeing, such a person may have 
abandoned up to eight of the desire realm afflictio ns; they may have abandoned not even one, or 
they may have abandoned one, two, three, etc. up to  eight. In the case of those who have previously 
separated from attachment, there are many cases to consider.  
 
Q: How is it possible for a serialist once-returner  not to have abandoned even one affliction of the 
desire realm before the path of seeing?  
A: This person who has not abandoned even one of th e desire realm afflictions before the path of 
seeing is a serialist once-returner. I am not  saying that someone on the single-session path of 
preparation, up to not having abandoned the sixth d esire realm affliction—i.e. through having 
abandoned the fifth desire realm affliction—is an a pproacher to once-returner. This is not what I am 
saying; there is some misunderstanding there. If yo u do not understand this carefully, if such a 
question comes up on the exam, you will get “0!”   
 I have given various examples. I said that there i s a case of a non-returner who, prior to attaining 
the path of seeing, has abandoned up to eight desir e realm afflictions. We said this is a case of a 
serialist, but serialists are two types: (1) serial ists by way of the mode of attaining the result, an d (2) 
serialists by way of the mode of abandoning the obj ects of abandonment. This description of a non-
returner who, prior to attaining the path of seeing , has abandoned up to eight desire realm 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 15  afflictions, is a case of a serialist by way of objects of abandonment ; this person is not a serialist by 
way of result. The two types of serialists are the same for stream-enterers, but not for once-returner s 
and non-returners.  This shows that, although there  is a general procedure, if we look at the details,  
we are able to differentiate many different possibi lities. 
 Let us consider a non-returner who is a serialist by way of result . This is actually the same as a 
once-returner who is a serialist by way of result, in that prior to the path of seeing, they have 
abandoned up to five desire realm afflictions. Prio r to the path of seeing, they can have abandoned 
not even one desire realm affliction, up to having abandoned five desire realm afflictions. Why have 
they abandoned up to five, but not six? If someone has abandoned six afflictions of the desire realm 
prior to the path of seeing, this person would not be a serialist by way of result, but would be a 
leaper. If someone has abandoned six afflictions of  the desire realm prior to the path of seeing, upon  
attaining the sixteenth instant of the path of seei ng, such a person becomes a leaper abider in the 
result of once-returner.  
 Let us take the example of a simultaneous stream-enterer . This person, prior to the path of 
seeing, has not abandoned even one desire realm aff liction. From the single-session path of 
preparation through the fifteenth instant of the pa th of seeing, such a person is an approacher to 
stream-enterer. Upon attaining the sixteenth instan t of the path of seeing, this person becomes an 
abider in the result of stream-enterer. After the s ixteenth instant, this person strives to abandon th e 
great-great afflictions of the three realms, and be comes a special abider in the result of stream-
enterer and a simultaneous approacher to foe-destroyer . From the time of striving to abandon the 
great-great afflictions through before abandoning t he small-small afflictions of the three realms, thi s 
person is a simultaneous approacher to foe-destroye r. When this person has abandoned the small-
small afflictions of the three realms (desire realm , 1 st  concentration, and so forth up to the Peak of 
Existence), this person attains the result of simul taneous abider in the result of foe-destroyer. Such  a 
person is of the sharpest faculty.  
 Let us discuss the case of leapers . A leaper once-returner , prior to attaining the path of seeing, 
has abandoned six, seven, or eight desire realm aff lictions – the minimum number is six, but it 
could be seven or eight.  When attaining the sixtee nth instant of the path of seeing, this person 
becomes an abider in the result of once-returner .  In this case, there are three possibilities: tho se 
who have abandoned six, seven, or eight desire real m afflictions prior to the path of seeing. 
Someone who has abandoned six, upon attaining the p ath of seeing, is an abider in the result of 
once-returner . After this, when he strives to abandon the sevent h desire realm affliction, he 
becomes a special abider in the result of once-returner  and an approacher to non-returner . 
Someone who has abandoned seven desire realm afflic tions prior to the path of seeing becomes an 
abider in the result of once-returner  at the sixteenth instant. When striving to abandon  the eighth, 
s/he becomes a special abider in the result of once-returner  and an approacher to non-returner . A 
person who has abandoned eight desire realm afflict ions prior to the path of seeing becomes an 
abider in the result of once-returner  at the sixteenth instant. When s/he strives to aba ndon the ninth 
desire realm affliction, s/he is a special abider in the result of once-returner  and an approacher to 
non-returner .  
 When such a person, any of the three possibilities , has abandoned the ninth affliction of the 
desire realm, s/he becomes an abider in the result of non-returner . Then this person strives to 
abandon the afflictions of the upper realms, becomi ng a special abider in the result of non-returner  
and an approacher to the result of foe-destroyer . When all the afflictions of the three realms have  
been abandoned, s/he becomes an abider in the result of foe-destroyer . This is a leaper abider in the 
result of foe-destroyer .  
 The most complicated case is that of a leaper non-returner . This is because there are many 
divisions. A leaper non-returner is a person who ha s abandoned at least nine afflictions of the desire  
realm, or even more, prior to the path of seeing. T here is the case, for example, of someone who has 
abandoned the nine afflictions of Nothingness (the third level of the formless realm). In the case of 
the leaper non-returners, prior to the path of seei ng there are afflictions to be abandoned, ranging 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 16  from the nine afflictions of the desire realm up to  the nine afflictions of Nothingness. It is not  
possible to have abandoned the afflictions of the P eak of Existence prior to the path of seeing; the 
reason is that there is no higher realm than the Pe ak of Existence. In cultivating the mundane path 
that has the aspects of coarseness and peace, one v iews the upper level as being peaceful. Since 
there is no realm higher than the Peak of Existence , one cannot view the upper realm as peaceful [in 
relation to it], and it is not possible to abandon the afflictions of the Peak of Existence prior to t he 
path of seeing. The afflictions of the Peak of Exis tence can only be abandoned by a supramundane 
path. When we talk about abandoning afflictions pri or to the path of seeing, it is by way of a 
mundane path, that has the aspects of coarseness an d peace: one views the lower realm as coarse, 
and the upper as peaceful. This mode cannot apply i n the case of the Peak of Existence, since there 
is no realm above it that can be viewed as being pe aceful. 
 The result of foe-destroyer does not need elaborat ion, since all the modes we have gone through 
end up with the result of foe-destroyer.  
 
Here we have the discussion of the eight approacher s and abiders. When this is discussed 
extensively, there are twenty sangha. In this prese ntation, after attaining the path of seeing, one ha s 
a maximum of fourteen lifetimes until attaining nir vana. One may attain nirvana in the same life in 
which one attained the path of seeing; otherwise, o ne may attain nirvana in the intermediate state, or  
upon taking rebirth. A maximum of fourteen lifetime s is needed to attain nirvana after attaining the 
path of seeing. If we consider the number of lifeti mes a person who abandons simultaneously needs 
to attain nirvana, there are various possibilities.  Such a person can attain nirvana in that life, in the 
intermediate state, or in the next life. Such a per son would not take fourteen lifetimes to attain 
nirvana. Remember our discussion of the “maximum se ven-timers?” These are people who can take 
up to seven pairs of rebirths. Among these maximum seven-timers, some are definite maximum 
seven-timers and some are indefinite. Both types ha ve accumulated the karma, prior to the path of 
seeing, to be reborn fourteen times. Those who are of dull faculty are definite to take fourteen 
rebirths; those who are indefinite are of sharper f aculty and engage in confession and restraint. They  
may take less rebirths before attaining nirvana. I am discussing this because in Gyeltsab Je, we do 
not find such details.  
 
2B2C-1A2B-1B2A-1B. Presentation of the persons (cont inued) 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 124: 
 
If he is a non-returner, then [the boundaries] are:  from striving in the application that 
abandons the remaining objects to be abandoned by t he path of meditation, through the 
uninterrupted path which abandons the ninth afflict ion of the Peak of Existence.  
 
This is in relation to the boundaries of an approac her to foe-destroyer. For the first part of the 
boundaries, it talks about the remaining objects to  be abandoned by the path of meditation, without 
specifying what they are, whereas “through the unin terrupted path which abandons the ninth 
affliction of the Peak of Existence” specifies the objects of abandonment. This is because there are 
many types of non-returners. We can understand that  there are various ways to be an approacher to 
foe-destroyer.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 124-125: 
 
If he is a stream-enterer, then the boundaries are posited to be similar to those for a 
special simultaneous stream-enterer. 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 17  This is the case of a simultaneous stream-enterer. “The boundaries are posited to be similar to those 
for a special simultaneous stream-enterer,” meaning  that the boundaries are from the sixteenth 
instant of the path of seeing, when one strives to abandon the great-great afflictions of the three 
realms, through abiding on the uninterrupted path t hat abandons the small-small objects to be 
abandoned by the path of meditation. This end bound ary is the uninterrupted path that abandons the 
small-small afflictions of the three realms. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 125: 
 
 In regard to the second, the definition [of an abi der in the result of foe-destroyer ] is: a 
person who abides in the result of the mode of a tr ainee-in-virtue that is distinguished 
by having abandoned the five partial concordances w ith the upper. The five partial 
concordances with the upper are: (1-2) attachment o f the form and formless realms, (3) 
excitement, (4) pride, and (5) [afflicted ] ignorance. Its divisions, when it is divided by 
way of the mode of abandoning the objects of abando nment, are the two: 
(i) serial foe-destroyers, and  
(ii) simultaneous foe-destroyers.  
And when divided by means of faculty, there are the  six: 
(1) those who bear the property of degeneration, 
(2) those who bear the property of suicide, 
(3) those who bear the property of subsequent prote ction, 
(4) those who bear the property of unmoving from th at state, 
(5) those who bear the property of worthy of thorou gh realization, and 
(6) those who bear the property of unwavering. 
The boundaries are: from the knowing of exhaustion [of contaminations ] and [their] 
lack of production [again] .  
 
We have already gone through the extensive explanat ion of this. The fifth of the five partial 
concordances with the upper (ignorance) needs to be  annotated as being “ afflicted  ignorance.” The 
first five divisions [by means of faculty] are thos e of dull faculty , and the sixth is sharp-facultied . 
 
1.  Those who bear the property of degeneration  refers to those who will degenerate from 
abiding in happiness in that present life. Although  this happens, this person does not lose the state 
of foe-destroyer.  
2.  Those who bear the property of suicide : This does not mean this person kills himself. Aft er 
attaining the state of foe-destroyer, this person t hinks “If I do not pass away, I will degenerate 
from abiding happily in this present life,” and thu s decides to attain nirvana without remainder and 
passes away.  
3.  Those who bear the property of subsequent protectio n : These are foe-destroyers who think 
“If I do not protect my mind, I will degenerate fro m abiding happily in the present life,” and thus 
protect their minds.  
4.  Those who bear the property of unmoving from that s tate : These are foe-destroyers who 
abide in meditative equipoise. They see, “If I aris e from meditative equipoise, I will degenerate 
from abiding happily in the present life,” and deci de not to arise from meditative equipoise.  
5.  Those who bear the property of worthy of thorough r ealization : These are foe-destroyers 
who have fear that they will degenerate from abidin g happily in that life. The term “thorough 
realization” ( rtogs pa ) refers to a kind of conceptualization that is a f ear that they will degenerate 
from abiding happily in that life. A foe-destroyer with such fear is one who has this property of 
“worthy of thorough realization.” 
6.  Those who bear the property of unwavering : This sixth type of foe-destroyer, in contrast, 
does not have fear.  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 18   
The boundaries are “from the knowing of exhaustion [of contaminations ] and [their] lack of 
production [again] ,” meaning from knowing that the contaminations wil l not be produced again. In 
other words, because the afflictions, the contamina tions, have been exhaustively abandoned, they 
will not be produced again. The end boundary is “no t having entered a Mahayana path.”  
 
Questions and answers 
 
Q: I have understood that there can be persons who are serialists by way of object of abandonment, 
but leapers from the point of view of result. Is th at correct? And if so, what is an example? 
A: We would say that if it is a leaper, it is perva ded by being someone who is serial by way of 
object of abandonment. This person is pervaded by not  being a serialist by way of result. This 
leaper is a leaper by way of result, is necessarily  a serialist by way of object of abandonment, and i s 
necessarily not a serialist by way of result. If we look at the exp ression “simultaneous person,” 
simultaneous refers to the fact that the objects of  abandonment of the path of meditation are 
abandoned simultaneously. The afflictions of the th ree realms to be abandoned by the path of 
meditation are abandoned simultaneously. [Such a si multaneous person is someone who is not  serial 
by way of object of abandonment.] 
 
Q: If we talk about a leaper non-returner, this per son has abandoned the nine afflictions of the desir e 
realm before the path of seeing, and becomes an abi der in the result of non-returner at the sixteenth 
instant of the path of seeing. Will this person be reborn again in cyclic existence, since they have 
not abandoned the seeds of the afflictions?  
A: When such a person attains the sixteenth instant  of the path of seeing, we would say that he has 
abandoned the seeds of the desire realm afflictions . Although the path of seeing they pass through 
does not explicitly abandon the seeds of the desire  realm afflictions, this abandonment is included in  
the result that they attain when they become an abi der in the result of non-returner at the sixteenth 
instant. The fact of their being an abider in the r esult of non-returner means they will never return to 
the desire realm.  
Q: So it is only the acquired afflictions? 
A: No.  On the sixteenth instant, even the innate  afflictions of the desire realm have been 
abandoned. After attaining the sixteenth instant of  the path of seeing, this person does not need to 
strive in the antidotes to abandon the seeds of the  desire realm afflictions. The abandonment in 
which the objects of abandonment of the path of see ing have been abandoned includes the 
abandonment in which the desire realm afflictions h ave been abandoned.  There are many debates 
about this, so think about it.  This is not an easy  question. 
 
 
 
Wednesday June 4, 2008 (afternoon) 
 
Look at the next outline, on page 125: Meanings that are objects to be characterized . We have 
looked at the examples, the Hinayana sangha. The me anings that are characterized by these 
examples are the Mahayana sangha. At the start of t his session, we will we try to enumerate the 
twenty sangha. In fact, we have already gone throug h the twenty sangha, but we did not specify, 
“This is the first,” “This is the second,” and so o n.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 125: 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 19  2B2C-1A2B-1B2A-2. Meanings that are objects to be c haracterized 
The bases of the divisions are simply irreversible learner bodhisattva aryas. {178} The 
way of dividing them into twenty is as follows: “Th ose who transfer to the upper,  five, 
from proceeding to Akanishta through proceeding fin ally to the Peak of Existence,” 
which are explicitly indicated by the texts of the Acharya Arya [Vimuktisena], are 
counted as one of the twenty. Thus, by adding the f our—the eighth, the two mere 
abiders in the two middle results and the approache r to foe-destroyer—to the sixteen 
explicitly mentioned by the text, twenty are explai ned. 
 
In the text of the Acharya Arya (referring to Vimuk tisena), sixteen are explicitly mentioned and 
four are implicitly indicated. The text talks about  how they are divided into twenty. Let us count the  
“five who transfer to the upper”: 
1.  Leapers 
2.  Half-leapers 
3.  Those who die and transfer to all abodes 
4.  Those who proceed finally to Akanishta 
5.  Those who proceed finally to the Peak of Existence  
These five are counted as one of the twenty. Then t here are sixteen explicitly mentioned by the text, 
plus four, which are: 
 1. “The eighth”: this refers to the approacher to stream-enterer  
“Two mere abiders in the middle results”: these are   
 2. The mere abider in the result of once-returner and  
3. The mere abider in the result of non-returner 
4.  “The approacher to foe-destroyer”  
 
We will go through the root text first, to have a c learer understanding of what these passages are 
talking about. If we look at the root text (page 12 6), the twenty are explicitly mentioned there:  
 
1.24 Dull and sharp faculties; 
The faithful and the attainers-by-seeing; from clas s to class; 
One obstacle; intermediate state 1 and upon rebirth, 
Acting and not acting; progressing to Akanishta, 
 
1.25 Three leapers; progressing finally to the Peak  of Existence, 
Destroying attachment of the form realm,  
Pacifying in that present life, actualizing with a body;  
And the rhinoceros are the twenty. 
 
[The twenty are enumerated as follows:] 
 
“Dull and sharp faculties” refers to  
1.  the dull-facultied approachers to stream-enterer  
2.  the sharp facultied approachers to stream-enterer;  
3.  “The faithful” and  
4.  “the attainers-by-seeing” 
5.  “from class to class” refers to going from human to  human and 
6.  going from desire-realm god class to desire-realm g od class 
7.  “One obstacle” refers to the one-life, one obstruct ion once-returner  
                                                 
1 Par emended to read bar, in accordance with page 21 of the Drepung Loseling Library Society’s 1996 edition of the 
root text and commentary. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 20  8.  “intermediate state” refers to the non-returner who  passes beyond during the intermediate 
existence 
9.  “upon rebirth” refers to those who pass beyond, or attain nirvana, after taking rebirth 
 “Acting and not acting” refers to  
10.  those who attain nirvana by being with compositiona l action 
11.  those who attain nirvana by being without compositi onal action 
12.  “progressing to Akanishta” refers to those who prog ress finally to Akanishta 
“Three leapers” refers to  
13.  leapers 
14.  half-leapers, and  
15.  those who die and transfer to all abodes 
16.  “progressing finally to the Peak of Existence” – th is is clear 
17.  “Destroying attachment of the form realm” refers to  non-returners who proceed to the 
formless realm  
18.  “Pacifying in that present life” refers to non-retu rners who pacify in that present life 
19.  “actualizing with a body” refers to non-returners w ho actualizes with a body 
20.  “And the rhinoceros” refers to the rhinoceros-like.  
 
In the earlier passage, “these five are counted as one” refers to numbers 12 to 16 in the above list. 
The passage, “‘Those who transfer to the upper, fiv e, from proceeding to Akanishta through 
proceeding finally to the Peak of Existence,’ which  are explicitly indicated by the texts of the 
Acharya Arya [Vimuktisena], are counted as one of t he twenty,” means that those five are counted 
as one (leaving sixteen), to which we add four—“the  eighth, the two mere abiders in the two middle 
results, and the approacher to foe-destroyer”—to ad d up to twenty.  
 More complication is coming up.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 125. 
 
 According to Acharya [Haribhadra]: 
• there are five related to stream-enterers: the four  explicitly mentioned, supplemented by 
the mere abider in the result of stream-enterer;  
• there are three related to once-returners: the two explicitly mentioned, supplemented by the 
mere abider in the result of once-returner;  
• there are five related to non-returners: the explic itly mentioned approacher and four who 
attain nirvana;  
• although those who proceed to Akanishta were explic itly mentioned, having taken them as 
the bases of division, there are three who transfer  to the upper who are differentiated from 
them…  
 
Here we have seventeen explicitly mentioned, supple mented by three to make twenty. First, there 
are “five related to stream-enterers : the four explicitly mentioned, supplemented by th e mere abider 
in the result of stream-enterer.” These five are: 
1.  an approacher to stream-enterer who is a follower o f faith 
2.  an approacher to stream-enterer who is a follower o f Dharma  
3.  abider in the result of a follower of faith  
4.  abider in the result of a follower of Dharma  
5.  mere abider in result of stream-enterer 
In the passage, “there are three related to once-re turners : the two explicitly mentioned, 
supplemented by the mere abider in the result of on ce-returner,” the “two explicitly mentioned” are: 
6.  serialist approacher to once-returner 
7.  leaper approacher to once-returner  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 21  These are supplemented by 
8.  mere abider in the result of once-returner  
In the passage, “there are five related to non-retu rners : the explicitly mentioned approacher and four 
who attain nirvana,” the explicitly mentioned appro acher is 
9.  the approacher to non-returner 
The four who attain nirvana are: 
10.  one who attains nirvana in the intermediate state 
11.  one who attains nirvana upon rebirth  
12.  one who attains nirvana by being with compositional  action 
13.  one who attains nirvana by being without compositio nal action 
In the passage, “although those who proceed to Akan ishta were explicitly mentioned, having taken 
them as the bases of division, there are three who transfer to the upper who are differentiated from 
them,” those who proceed finally to Akanishta are t he basis of division. The three who transfer to 
the upper  are: 
14.  leapers 
15.  half-leapers 
16.  those who die and transfer to all abodes  
 
The commentary then speaks of two versions of the t ext—a new one and an old one: 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 125: 
 
…although a certain translator said that “there are  two: one who destroys attachment of 
the form realm and proceeds to the Peak of Existenc e, and one who pacifies in that 
present life and actualizes with a body,” in the ca se of this new translation, even though 
one who proceeds finally to the Peak of Existence  Akanishta  and one who destroys 
attachment of the form realm were explicitly mentio ned, without counting them as 
divisions, they are subsumed into one meaning and t aken as a basis of division. 
 
17.  One who proceeds finally to the Peak of Existence a nd one who destroys attachment of the 
form are counted as one . According to the new translation, these two are n ot counted 
separately; they are counted as one.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 126: 
 
By differentiating one who pacifies in that present  life and one who actualizes with a 
body into two, and supplementing it with an approac her to foe-destroyer, the text makes 
it up to twenty by way of the seventeen explicitly mentioned, supplemented by three. 
Without counting mere believers-by-faith and attain ers-by-seeing in the enumeration, 
[the text] explicitly indicates those bearing the n ame of approachers to both middle 
results. 
 
So the previous seventeen are supplemented by three : 
18.  one who pacifies in that present life  
19.  one who actualizes with a body 
20.  approacher to foe-destroyer 
 
Next we have some trouble-makers, people with incor rect assertions. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 126: 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 22   It seems that, some arrogant one, holding to the l atter system (from between the two: 
the assertion that these are fully qualified stream -enterers and so forth, and the assertion 
that they are be  imputed), flung what is only a counterfeit repudia tion, and laughed at 
the slightly wounded tradition of another without s ensing his own head splitting; I shall 
explain this slightly on the occasion of the meanin g of the words. {179} 
 
We need to be careful. Although sometimes we have h uge faults, we laugh at others for their small 
faults. This is what is said here. This arrogant pe rson has a big fault: his own head is splitting, bu t 
he sees a small wound in someone else and laughs at  that person. Sometimes we can make some 
mistakes, and without sensing that, we look at othe rs’ mistakes and make a big deal of them.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 126: 
 
 A previous scholar said the following regarding th e Acarya: If he had explained the 
modes of the Mahayana, then it would be incorrect t o apply them to one who is serial in 
the stages of abandoning the afflictions; if [he ha d explained] just the modes of hearers, 
then the presentation of proceeding to the Peak of Existence would be incorrect; the 
stages of abandonment of the afflictions would be i ncorrect as reasons for making 
divisions of the Mahayana sangha; and the names “st ream-enterers” and so forth would 
be incorrect in meaning, because it is impossible f or a bodhisattva of sharp faculty who 
is skilled in means to previously abandon only the afflictions of the desire realm, since 
he simultaneously abandons the small of the small o bjects of abandonment of the three 
realms. It would have been better if he had not beh aved like someone shooting an arrow 
without having seen what the target was. There is p lenty to be said about these; since 
those (with neither discernment nor diligent exerti on) who desire to engage in the stages 
of clear realization are asserted to have been care d for, I will not elaborate more. 
 
This previous scholar had various assertions, which  are not correct. The last part of the passage 
says, “since those (with neither discernment nor di ligent exertion) who desire to engage in the 
stages of clear realization are asserted to have be en cared for, I will not elaborate more,” meaning 
there are people who do not understand the context of the explanation and make incorrect 
assertions; they are like a person who shoots an ar row without seeing the target. If we point out the 
faults of these people, then those “with neither di scernment nor diligent exertion” would become 
discouraged, so Gyeltsab Je does not say more. Thes e various assertions mentioned here are not in 
accordance with our system’s assertions. This passa ge is not particularly essential. If you 
understand it, that’s good; if not, it is not essen tial.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 126: 
2B2C-1A2B-1B2B. Meaning of the branches (This outline comes from p. 119)  
2B2C-1A2B-1B2B-1. Making a connection 
2B2C-1A2B-1B2B-2. Root text 
2B2C-1A2B-1B2B-3. Commentary 
2B2C-1A2B-1B2B-1. Making a connection 
COMMENTARY 
In the context of the Sangha Jewel, in order to rea lize easily, two interceding stanzas:  
 
EXPLANATION 
In the context of the Sangha Jewel, in order to rea lize easily  the divisions taught 
frequently in the sutras, two interceding stanzas : {180}  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 23   
This passage says that the Sangha Jewel is taught f requently, and its divisions can be seen in the 
sutras frequently. In order for us to realize easil y those divisions, two stanzas are taught here.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , pp. 126-7: 
2B2C-1A2B-1B2B-2. Root text 
ROOT TEXT 
1.24 Dull and sharp faculties; 
The faithful and the attainers-by-seeing; from clas s to class; 
One obstacle; intermediate state 2 and upon rebirth, 
Acting and not acting; progressing to Akanishta, 
 
1.25 Three leapers; progressing finally to the Peak  of Existence, 
Destroying attachment of the form realm,  
Pacifying in that present life, actualizing with a body;  
And the rhinoceros are the twenty. 
 
EXPLANATION 
Twenty-five occur in the Eighth Chapter of the Sutra 3: the twenty explicitly mentioned 
by the text, the eighth, the first three abiders in  the results, and the approacher to foe-
destroyer. Further, in terms of the eighth it is sa id [in sutra], “Bhagavan, where did the 
bodhisattva abiding by way of the practice of the p erfection of wisdom die and transfer 
from, and beco me reborn here? After dying and transferring from h ere, where will he be 
reborn?” Similarly, [passages] regarding the two fo llowers [of faith and dharma] also 
appear in individual sutras. Fearing wordiness, I h ave not written them down. 
 
Here, “the Sutra” refers to the Twenty-Five Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sutra , and the “Eighth 
Chapter” is a commentary by Haribhadra to this sutr a. This passage mentions “two followers”—
these are followers of faith and followers of dharm a. There are many sutras, so Gyeltsab Je says that 
fearing wordiness he has not written them down. 
  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 127: 
 
 The subject—the person abiding on the uninterrupte d path of dharma forbearance on 
the Mahayana path of seeing—{181} is divided into t wo types, because there are those 
of dull and sharp faculties ; similarly, there is one bearing the name “stream- enterer” 
who is supported implicitly. [Indicated] by “ the faithful and the attainers-by-seeing, ” 
there are two bearing the name “approacher” by way of the two middle [results]. 
Indicated by “ from  class to class, ” there are two bearing the name “special abider in  the 
result of stream-enterer” and one bearing the name “mere abider in the result of once-
returner” implicitly indicated. Indicated by the na me “special” is “ one obstacle .” And 
indicated by the name “non-returner” are four beari ng the names “attaining nirvana in 
the intermediate state, upon rebirth, 4 with compositional  action, and with no 
compositional  action .” In regard to those who bear the name “ progressing to 
                                                 
2 Par emended to read bar, in accordance with page 21 of the Drepung Loseling Library Society’s 1996 edition of the 
root text and commentary. 
3 This sutra is identified as the Twenty-Five Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom Su tra  on page 282 of the Ganden 
Jangtse Library edition of Jetsun Chokyi Gyeltsen’s  Ocean of Sport , Volume 1. 
4 Gnas emended to read nas. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 24  Akanishta ,” there are three leapers . Taking as the basis of division “ destroying 
attachment of the form realm”  that is imputed as “ progressing finally to the Peak of 
Existence ,” there are the two— pacifying in that present life and actualizing with  a 
body —and that bearing the name “ rhinoceros  solitary realizer.” Thus there are twenty . 
 
We need to understand that these are different ways  of counting the twenty. However, it seems like 
one is missing here—there are actually nineteen lis ted here.  
1.  those of dull faculties  
2.  those of sharp faculties 
3.  one bearing the name “stream-enterer” who is suppor ted implicitly 
4-5.[Indicated] by “the faithful and the attainers- by-seeing,” there are two bearing the name 
“approacher” by way of the two middle [results] 
6-7. Indicated by “from class to class,” there are two bearing the name “special abider in the 
result of stream-enterer” 
8.  one bearing the name “mere abider in the result of once-returner” implicitly indicated 
9.  Indicated by the name “special” is “one obstacle.” 
indicated by the name “non-returner” are four beari ng the names  
10.  “attaining nirvana in the intermediate state,  
11.  upon rebirth,  
12.  with compositional action,  and  
13.  with no compositional action.” 
In regard to those who bear the name “progressing t o Akanishta,” there are  
14-16.  three leapers. 
Taking as the basis of division “destroying attachm ent of the form realm” that is imputed as 
“progressing finally to the Peak of Existence,” the re are the two— 
17.  pacifying in that present life and  
18.  actualizing with a body 
19.  and that bearing the name “rhinoceros solitary real izer.” 
20.  The missing number is the approacher to foe-destroy er. This will be discussed later (p. 131).  
 
This is Gyeltsab Je’s explanation based on the root  text, and next we will look at Haribhadra’s  
commentary on the root text. There are different wa ys of counting the twenty sangha. In the 
commentary, it mentions some that are implicitly in dicated, such as  “one bearing the name ‘stream-
enterer’ who is supported implicitly” and “one bear ing the name ‘mere abider in the result of once-
returner’ implicitly indicated,” which means it is not explicitly indicated in the root text. After th is 
explanation, we have the commentary followed by the  explanation. From this point onwards until 
page 131, the twenty are enumerated and explained.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 127: 
2B2C-1A2B-1B2B-3. Commentary 
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. (1-2) In dependence on th e sixteen instants of the path of seeing 
included within the knower of paths that will be ex plained, by way of particularities of 
followers of faith and dharma, there are two types of approachers to the first result. 
 
EXPLANATION 
The subject—a bodhisattva who abides in dependence on the uninterrupted path of 
dharma forbearance, the entity of the eight forbear ances of the path of seeing  which is 
are  differentiated into the sixteen instants included within the knower of paths that 
will be explained  in the second chapter—is of two types, bearing the  name 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 25  “approachers to the first result, ” because bearers of that name , by way of 
particularities of followers of faith and dharma, a re of  two types.  
 
This passage says that there are two types of bodhi sattvas, who bear the names of followers of faith 
and followers of dharma. The path of seeing is divi ded into sixteen instants—the eight forbearances  
and the eight knowledges. From the Mahayana point o f view, the uninterrupted path of the path of 
seeing is differentiated into the eight forbearance s by way of isolates. In fact, the eight forbearanc es 
are one entity. Likewise, the liberated path of the  path of seeing is differentiated into the eight 
knowledges by way of isolates; in fact, the eight k nowledges are one entity.  
 
Questions and answers 
 
Q: From yesterday: What is the difference between t he five eyes and the six clairvoyances? Are 
they all consciousnesses? Are they all mental consc iousness? 
Student: The five eyes and six clairvoyances are al l mental consciousnesses, because when one 
trains in meditative stabilization, the mind change s… 
Student 2: From the general definition of an eye, i t seems they are all consciousnesses.  
 
[There was further discussion between students on w hether the eyes and clairvoyances are mental or 
physical.]  
 
GTT: On p. 114, it speaks about “an eye of flesh… seeing subtle and coarse forms” and on p. 115 it 
says “the clairvoyance of divine ear…which hears .” What do you think about this? 
Student: In the explanation of the fifth clairvoyan ce, the clairvoyance of divine eye, it says “it is a 
mental consciousness,” but speaks of it “seeing.”  
GTT: Yes. Well, the time is finished [laughter]. 
 
Thursday June 5, 2008 
 
[Geshe-la first gave advice about meditation.]  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 128: 
2B2C-1A2B-1B2B-3. Commentary (continued) 
 Some ignoramus asserted that in this context, thes e [two] are the approacher—abiding 
on the first fifteen instants—and the abider in the  result—abiding on the sixteenth. This 
is an assertion of the Vaibhashikas and so forth; { 182} the assertion that a bodhisattva’s 
path of seeing is generated only in sixteen sequent ial instants is simply a case of talking 
nonsense, while not having realized even slightly t he assertions of Arya [Vimuktisena] 
and Haribhadra regarding the mode of generating the  path of seeing, because (i) acting 
to directly newly realize the dharmata of suffering s first and then subsequently acting to 
directly newly realize the dharmata of origins tran sgresses the path of reasoning, and (ii) 
the Acharya also specifically refutes it below. 
 Yet another ignoramus, while asserting to have dem onstrated damage to these 
bodhisattva sangha being stream-enterers and so for th, proved that bodhisattvas (who 
abide on the sixteenth instant) abide in the result  of the mode of a trainee-in-virtue that 
is distinguished by having abandoned the objects to  be abandoned by the path of seeing; 
he is disparaging himself, because he flings repudi ation at the opponent, having himself 
asserted meanings of stream-enterer and so forth th at are concordant with those of the 
opponent. 
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 26  In the first of these assertions, some ignorant per son says that the approacher abides on the first 
fifteen instants, and an abider on the sixteenth in stant. These are the two we are talking about here.  
“This is an assertion of the Vaibhashikas and so fo rth;” in our system, we do say that these two are 
the approacher abiding on the first fifteen instant s and the abider in the result on the sixteenth 
instant. “The assertion that a bodhisattva’s path o f seeing is generated only in sixteen sequential 
instants is simply a case of talking nonsense,” so according to our system, these sixteen instants are  
not generated sequentially: the eight uninterrupted pat hs are generated in one instant, and the eight 
liberated paths in one instant. Our system says tha t the assertion that a bodhisattva’s path of seeing  
is generated sequentially, in sixteen instants, is not correct. This person has not “realized even 
slightly the assertions of Arya [Vimuktisena] and H aribhadra regarding the mode of generating the 
path of seeing.” If one says that the direct new re alization of the dharmata of true sufferings occurs  
first, followed by the direct new realization of th e dharmata of origins, this “transgresses the path of 
reasoning, and the Acharya also specifically refute s it below.”  
 The next person asserts that these bodhisattva san gha are not stream-enterers and so forth, and 
while saying that, says that “bodhisattvas (who abi de on the sixteenth instant) abide in the result of  
the mode of a trainee-in-virtue that is distinguish ed by having abandoned the objects to be 
abandoned by the path of seeing.” These two asserti ons are contradictory; such a person is 
disparaging himself. He first refutes that these bo dhisattva sangha are stream-enterers and so forth, 
and then proves that these bodhisattvas on the sixt eenth instant “abide in the result of the mode of a  
trainee-in-virtue that is distinguished by having a bandoned the objects to be abandoned by the path 
of seeing.” On one hand, he asserts meanings that a re accepted by the opponent, yet “he flings 
repudiation at the opponent.”  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 128: 
 
COMMENTARY 
(3) After that are the stream-enterers. (4-5) After  that, by way of birth from class to 
class of gods and humans, there are another two typ es. (6) After that, those of dull and 
sharp faculties, the faithful, and the attainers-by -seeing are only one approacher to the 
second result. (7) After that are the once-returner s. (8) After that they are “another one 
obstacle.” 
 
EXPLANATION 
(3) After that are  the  persons abiding on the liberated path of the Mahaya na path of 
seeing, the nature of the eight knowledges,  the enterers into the stream,  the path that 
acts to attain the nirvana in which the afflictive obscurations have been abandoned, 
since they are bodhisattvas who have exhaustively a bandoned the three entwinements 
that are the objects to be abandoned by the path of  seeing. Although afflicted doubt and 
the view holding bad ethics and modes of conduct as  supreme are exhausted, the view 
of the transitory collection is not exhausted. Sinc e even the innate view of the transitory 
collection is explained to be an entwinement, it sh ould not be taken that “the three 
entwinements are exhausted.” {183} (4-5) After that, there are another two types, by 
way of birth from class to class of desire realm gods and humans.  
 (6) After that, those bodhisattvas on the path of meditation who strive f or the sake of 
attaining the liberated path in which the sixth aff liction (that is an object to be 
abandoned by the path of meditation) has been aband oned—of dull and sharp 
faculties, the faithful and attainers-by-seeing—are  only enumerated as one  of the 
twenty. This, further, is the one bearing the name “ approacher to the second result.”  
(7) After that , those abiding on the liberated path in which that  [sixth affliction that is 
the object to be abandoned by the path of meditatio n] has been abandoned,  are the 
once-returners  to the desire realm . (8) After that they , bearing the name “once-
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 27  returner”—since one remaining object to be abandone d by the path of meditation is left 
in order to attain the liberated path in which the afflictive obscurations have been 
abandoned— are “another one obstacle.” 
 
In the earlier passage, we have two of the twenty s angha:  
1.  “followers of faith,” and  
2.  “followers of Dharma.”  
In this passage, there are six more.  
3.   “After that are the persons abiding on the liberat ed path of the Mahayana path of seeing, the 
nature of the eight knowledges, the enterers into t he stream…” This is a bodhisattva bearing the 
name “stream-enterer.” Here, it talks about the thr ee entwinements: “since they are bodhisattvas 
who have exhaustively abandoned the three entwineme nts that are the objects to be abandoned by 
the path of seeing.” When we listed the three entwi nements previously, we said that the view of 
the transitory collection mentioned there was the acquired view of the transitory collection. The 
three entwinements are objects of abandonment of th e path of seeing, and the view of the 
transitory collection included within them is the a cquired view of the transitory collection.  
After that, there are another two types:  
4.  “by way of birth from class to class of desire real m gods”  
5.  “by way of birth from class to class of humans” 
 
6.  “After that, those bodhisattvas on the path of medi tation who strive for the sake of attaining 
the liberated path in which the sixth affliction (t hat is an object to be abandoned by the path of 
meditation) has been abandoned—of dull and sharp fa culties, the faithful and attainers-by-
seeing—are only enumerated as one of the twenty.”  
7.  “After that, those abiding on the liberated path in  which that [sixth affliction that is the 
object to be abandoned by the path of meditation] h as been abandoned, are the once-returners to 
the desire realm.” 
8.  “…bearing the name ‘once-returner’—since one remain ing object to be abandoned by the 
path of meditation is left in order to attain the l iberated path in which the afflictive obscurations 
have been abandoned—are ‘another one obstacle.’”   
 These six, added to the two from the previous sect ion, bring us to eight of the twenty sangha.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 129: 
 
COMMENTARY 
(9) After that, as before, the faithful and attaine rs-by-seeing are approachers to the third 
result. 
 
EXPLANATION 
(9) After that, as before, bodhisattvas on the path of meditation  who strive for the sake 
of attaining the liberated path in which the ninth affliction (that is an object to be 
abandoned by the path of meditation) of the desire realm has been abandoned,  the 
faithful and the attainers-by-seeing are enumerated as one  of the twenty. They are  
one bearing the name “ approachers to the third result. ” 
 
9.  We are talking about bodhisattvas who bear the name  “approachers to non-returner.” There 
are two types: the faithful and the attainers-by-se eing. These are counted as one.  
 
The first nine include:  
• those bearing the name “approacher to stream-entere r” [# 1-2]; 
• those bearing the name “abider in the result of str eam-enterer” [# 3-4-5]; 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 28  • those bearing the name “approacher to once-returner ” [#6]; 
• those bearing the name “abider in the result of onc e-returner” [#7-8];  
• those bearing the name “approacher to non-returner”  [#9].  
Now we will look at those bearing the name “abider in the result of non-returner.”  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 129: 
 
COMMENTARY 
(10-13) After that, there are four types of non-ret urners called: completely attaining 
nirvana in the intermediate state, upon rebirth, wi th manifest compositional action, and 
without manifest compositional action. 
 
EXPLANATION 
(10-13) After that, there are  four types with respect to the presentation called  “non-
returners,”  because there are four types called: attaining nirvana in the intermediate 
state,  in that they attain a liberated path in which any of the afflictive obscurations have 
been abandoned upon the support of the intermediate  existence of the form realm 
{184} ; attaining nirvana upon rebirth in the form realm ; completely attaining 
nirvana , in that they attain a liberated path in which any o f the afflictive obscurations 
have been abandoned with manifest compositional action, and without man ifest 
compositional action  of endeavor . 
 
In this passage, there are four bearing the name “n on-returner.” These four are: 
10.  Those who attain nirvana in the intermediate state  
11.  Those who attain nirvana upon rebirth  
12.  Those who attain nirvana with manifest compositiona l action  
13.  Those who attain nirvana without manifest compositi onal action  
 
There are four here and, added to the nine above, w e have thirteen. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 129: 
 
 Someone propounds that, on these occasions of (i) having abandoned the entwinement 
of birth but not having abandoned the entwinement o f establishment, and (ii) not having 
abandoned the entwinement of birth, even though the  causes of being born into the 
intermediate existence and the birth existence of t he form realm are retained, 
“bodhisattva aryas do not take rebirth through the force of karma and afflictions.” Know 
that this is simply contradiction. 
 
In the first opinion, “on these occasions of (i) ha ving abandoned the entwinement of birth but not 
having abandoned the entwinement of establishment, and (ii) not having abandoned the 
entwinement of birth, even though the causes of bei ng born into the intermediate existence and the 
birth existence of the form realm are retained, ‘bo dhisattva aryas do not take rebirth through the 
force of karma and afflictions.’” In our previous d iscussion, we said that if someone has abandoned 
the entwinement of birth but not the entwinement of  establishment, this person will attain nirvana 
during the intermediate state. If someone has not a bandoned either of these, this person will take 
rebirth and then attain nirvana after rebirth. We s ay that bodhisattva aryas do not take rebirth due t o 
karma and afflictions.  
 It says, “Know that this is simply contradiction.”  What is the contradiction? The contradiction is 
that this person first says there is taking of rebi rth through karma, and later says that bodhisattva 
aryas do not take rebirth through karma and afflict ions. He says that if someone has abandoned the 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 29  entwinement of birth but has not abandoned the entw inement of establishment, he will take rebirth 
through the karma of entwinement of establishment a nd attain nirvana in the intermediate state. If 
he has not abandoned either, then this person will take rebirth and attain nirvana after being reborn.  
This person is saying that there is taking of rebir th due to karma, yet he asserts that bodhisattva 
aryas do not take rebirth due to karma and afflicti ons; this is a contradiction.  
 Do bodhisattva aryas take rebirth? Yes, they do, b ut they do so through the force of compassion 
and prayers, not through the force of karma and afflictions. Therefo re, such bodhisattvas do not take 
rebirth into the intermediate existence due to the karma of the entwinement of establishment, and do 
not take rebirth through the karma of entwinement o f birth. Due to the karma of the entwinement of 
establishment, one would be born into the intermedi ate existence; due to the karma of entwinement 
of birth one would be reborn into a new birth. Arya  bodhisattvas have neither of these 
entwinements. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 129: 
 
 Yet another person, having taken a bodhisattva (ab iding on the liberated path in which 
the ninth affliction of the desire realm has been a bandoned) as an imputed non-returner, 
asserts that his abiding in the result of the mode of a trainee-in-virtue that is 
distinguished by having abandoned the five partial concordances with the bottom, is our 
system. This is an assertion that incurs all three circles 5 for the sake of disparaging 
himself. Also, does “having abandoned the ninth aff liction of the desire realm” refer to 
having abandoned merely the manifest afflictions or  the seeds? In the first case, 
presenting those on the path of seeing (who have at tained an actual concentration prior 
to the Mahayana path of seeing) as sangha bearing t he name “non-returner” indicated 
here would not contain contradiction. If it were to  refer to the seeds, then that would 
become an assertion outside of this system, since t he Acharya asserted that a 
bodhisattva arya who has not traversed the Hinayana  path exhaustively abandons the 
seeds of the ninth object to be abandoned by the pa th of meditation that are both 
[afflictive and knowledge] obscurations with the un interrupted path of the end of a 
sentient being’s continuum. 
 
“Yet another person, having taken a bodhisattva (ab iding on the liberated path in which the ninth 
affliction of the desire realm has been abandoned) as an imputed non-returner, asserts that his 
abiding in the result of the mode of a trainee-in-v irtue that is distinguished by having abandoned the  
five partial concordances with the bottom, is our s ystem.” In fact, this is not our system. This perso n 
says that this bodhisattva is not  an actual non-returner, he is an imputed non-retur ner, and yet he 
says this person abides in the result of the mode o f a trainee in virtue that is distinguished by havi ng 
abandoned the five partial concordances with the bo ttom. This is a contradiction. This person 
“incurs all three circles,” thus disparaging himsel f. The “three circles” are related to debate. They 
are: (1) the sign, (2) the predicate, and (3) the p ervasion. 
 Next we consider, “does ‘having abandoned the nint h affliction of the desire realm’ refer to 
having abandoned merely the manifest afflictions or  the seeds?” In the first case (having abandoned 
the manifest afflictions), then “presenting those o n the path of seeing (who have attained an actual 
concentration prior to the Mahayana path of seeing)  as sangha bearing the name ‘non-returner’ 
indicated here would not contain contradiction.” If  it refers to an abandonment of the seeds, then 
that would become an assertion outside of this syst em, “since the Acharya asserted that a 
bodhisattva arya who has not traversed the Hinayana  path exhaustively abandons the seeds of the 
                                                 
5 This refers to a situation in debate where one can  deny neither the reason nor the pervasion, and yet  cannot accept the 
thesis. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 30  ninth object to be abandoned by the path of meditat ion that are both [afflictive and knowledge] 
obscurations with the uninterrupted path of the end  of a sentient being’s continuum.”  
 In the case of having abandoned the manifest affli ctions, this is acceptable, because in our 
system a bodhisattva is pervaded by having attained  an actual concentration before the Mahayana 
path of seeing. Such a bodhisattva who has attained  an actual concentration before the Mahayana 
path of seeing has  abandoned the manifest afflictions, so if we call them sangha bearing the name 
“non-returner,” that is acceptable. But if this ass ertion refers to the seeds, then it contradicts the  
assertions of the Acarya, because Acarya Haribhadra  asserts that the seeds are abandoned only at 
the end of a sentient being’s continuum (for those definite in the Mahayana lineage). It would 
therefore not be correct to say that the abandonmen t referred to here refers to the seeds.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 130: 
 
COMMENTARY 
(14-16) After that, they proceed finally to Akanish ta, three other types who transfer 
higher: by leaping, half-leaping, and death-transfe rence in all abodes. {185}  
 
EXPLANATION 
(14-16) After that, those very bodhisattva aryas, actualizing a liberat ed path in which 
any of the afflictive obscurations has been abandon ed upon the support of Akanishta, 
proceed finally to Akanishta; there are three types other than the five held in the 
previous enumeration, because there are three who transfer higher:  
(1) by leaping —having taken rebirth in Brahma Type at first, disc arding the others 
and taking rebirth in Akanishta from there;   
(2) half-leaping —from Brahma Type, having taken rebirth in any of t he three below 
the  lower  pure places, taking rebirth in Akanishta from ther e;  and  
(3) death-transference in all abodes —from Brahma Type, having progressively 
passed through [the various levels] until Akanishta , attaining a liberated path in which 
any of the afflictive obscurations have been abando ned upon the support of Akanishta.  
 
Here there are another three types of sangha:  
14.   “By leaping—having taken rebirth in Brahma Type at  first, discarding the others and taking 
rebirth in Akanishta from there.” This person takes  rebirth in Brahma Type, the first of the 
seventeen levels of the form realm, and then goes t o Akanishta, the highest level of the form 
realm. 
15.  “Half-leaping—from Brahma Type, having taken rebirt h in any of the three below the pure 
places, taking rebirth in Akanishta from there.” Th is person starts from Brahma Type, then goes to 
any of the three abodes of ordinary beings in the f ourth concentration. Remember that in the fourth 
concentration, there are three abodes of ordinary b eings below the five pure places. Then this 
person goes to Akanishta. 
16.  “Death-transference in all abodes—from Brahma Type,  having progressively passed through 
[the various levels] until Akanishta, attaining a l iberated path in which any of the afflictive 
obscurations have been abandoned upon the support o f Akanishta.” Starting from Brahma Type, 
this person progresses through all the levels, unti l finally reaching Akanishta.  
 At the beginning of this passage, it mentions “thr ee types other  than the five held in the previous 
enumeration.” “These five” are probably  
1.  One who proceeds finally to Akanishta 
2.  One who proceeds finally to the Peak of Existence  
3.  Those who are leapers  
4.  Those who are half-leapers 
5.  Those who die and transfer to all abodes 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 31    
 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 130: 
 
 Some ignoramus, strongly adhering to merely what i s overt in the sutras, asserted that 
if a bodhisattva arya who has attained the fourth c oncentration were to take rebirth in 
Brahma Type, he would degenerate from the three hig her concentrations. This is 
extremely inappropriate, (i) because it is impossib le for a bodhisattva arya to degenerate 
from a concentration, and (ii) because, since it ha s been explained that “the branches are 
thoroughly exhausted,” even though he has attained the fourth concentration, due to 
having thoroughly exhausted the potency to take reb irth through the force of the karma 
of pure concentration, it will be impossible for hi m to be born in cyclic existence 
through the force of that.  
 Therefore, even those who take rebirth in the form  realm do so through the force of 
compassion and prayers. Concurring the conventions with those of the hearer sangha 
that are overt in the sutras is: (i) for the sake o f causing some who are not definite in the 
hearer lineage to enter the Mahayana; (ii) for the sake of stopping someone’s 
deprecation that “The Mahayana sutra sets are not t aught by the Buddha, since they do 
not have a presentation of the approachers and abid ers;” {186} and (iii) for the sake of 
leading hearers who have arisen from the sphere of peace to the Mahayana, saying 
“With merely that nirvana, you have not fully compl eted what is to be attained; you 
must act to attain non-abiding nirvana.”  
 
This ignorant person strongly adheres to what is ov ert in the sutras. In the sutras, we find 
explanations, such as if someone has a first concen tration and is born in the desire realm, their 
concentration will degenerate, or if someone with a  third concentration is born in the first 
concentration, their first and second concentration s will degenerate. Based on such explanations in 
the sutras, this person says that “if a bodhisattva  arya who has attained the fourth concentration 
were to take rebirth in Brahma Type,” one of the le vels of the first concentration, “he would 
degenerate from the three higher concentrations.” A ccording to our system, this is not right because 
it is impossible for a bodhisattva arya to degenera te from a concentration. The explanation in the 
sutras is not relevant to the bodhisattva aryas, be cause in the sutras it explains that when someone 
who has attained the first concentration degenerate s the first concentration when he takes rebirth in 
the desire realm, this refers to someone who takes rebirth through karma and afflictions. In order to 
take rebirth in the desire realm, desire realm affl ictions need to be manifest and therefore one’s fir st 
concentration will degenerate.   
 This explanation comes in the case of ordinary bei ngs who attain a concentration by way of a 
mundane path having the aspect of coarseness and pe ace. When someone attains a concentration by 
such a mundane path, the manifest afflictions are a bandoned, but the seeds are not abandoned. 
When this person takes birth in the desire realm, d esire realm afflictions are manifest and the first 
concentration degenerates. Likewise, someone who, h aving attained the third concentration and is 
reborn in the first concentration, degenerates the first and second concentrations, is a case of 
someone taking rebirth through karma and affliction s; it is not applicable to arya bodhisattvas, who 
take rebirth through compassion and prayers, not th rough the force of karma and afflictions.  
 Next there is an explanation of why there is concu rrence in the conventions with those of the 
hearer sangha that are overt in the sutras. There a re three reasons:  
1.  for the sake of causing some who are not definite i n the hearer lineage to enter the 
Mahayana; 
2.  for the sake of stopping someone’s deprecation that  “The Mahayana sutra sets are not taught 
by the Buddha, since they do not have a presentatio n of the approachers and abiders;” 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 32  3.  for the sake of leading hearers who have arisen fro m the sphere of peace to the Mahayana. 
This refers to hearer foe-destroyers. For the sake of leading them to the Mahayana, there is 
this concurrence of conventions.  
 
Questions and answers 
 
Q: You say that arya bodhisattvas do not take rebir th due to karma and afflictions, but do so through 
compassion and prayers. How is this possible, if th ey do not abandon the afflictions until the end of 
the continuum?  
Student: Maybe because the projecting karma at the time of death is not nourished by karma and 
afflictions, but by compassion and prayers, and a b odhisattva takes rebirth in that way.  
GTT: What is the reason that he doesn’t take rebirt h under the force of karma and afflictions? 
Student: There must be something that is stronger t han the afflictions, so the compassion and 
prayers are stronger. Compassion and prayers are th e actualizing cause of the projecting karma and 
are stronger than the afflictions. 
GTT: A bodhisattva arya does have karma and afflict ions, but he does not take rebirth through their 
power. This is because he does not take rebirth thr ough the karma being nourished by the craving 
for existence. Because of the absence of this cravi ng, a bodhisattva arya does not take rebirth 
through the force of karma and afflictions. If one took rebirth through the force of karma and 
afflictions, then one would not have control over t heir rebirth. A bodhisattva arya has attained 
freedom, or control, over his or her rebirth. A bod hisattva arya does not fall sick, become old, or 
die.  
 
 
Friday June 6, 2008 
 
[Geshe-la began with a discussion about how sufferi ng comes from inside, how happiness comes 
from inner peace, and the need for analytical medit ation.] 
 
So far, we have covered sixteen of the twenty sangh a.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 131: 
2B2C-1A2B-1B2B-3. Commentary (continued)  
 
COMMENTARY 
(17, 18) After that, those proceeding finally to th e Peak of Existence, separating from 
attachment of the form realm are of two other types : those pacifying in that present life 
and those actualizing with a body. (19) After that are the approachers to the result of 
foe-destroyer. (20) After that are the solitary rea lizers. These are the twenty. 
 
EXPLANATION 
(17, 18) After that, those  sixth-grounder bodhisattvas possessing afflictions  of the Peak 
of Existence, those very bodhisattvas imputed with the name “ proceeding finally to the 
Peak of Existence ,” due to not seeking rebirth in the formless realm , imputed to the one 
attribute of separating from attachment of the form realm  due to having abandoned 
any of the afflictions of the form realm,  are of two types, other than the eight held in 
the enumeration of the twenty. 
 This is because there are two : those  pacifying in that present life  who have 
exhausted connecting to rebirth through the force o f karma and afflictions, and those 
actualizing with a body  of meditative stabilization of the eight liberatio ns . (19) After 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 33  that are the ten-grounders who strive for the sake of attain ing a liberated path in which 
the afflictive obscurations have been exhaustively abandoned, called “ the approachers 
to the result of foe-destroyer, ” enumerated as one.  (20) After that are the 
bodhisattvas who bear the name  “solitary realizers. ” These are the twenty  in 
enumeration . 
 
We counted sixteen [of the twenty] in the previous session, and here we have the last four. The 
explanation begins by talking about sixth-grounder bodhisattvas possessing afflictions of the Peak 
of Existence, who are imputed with the name “procee ding finally to the Peak of Existence.” 
Although they have this name, they do not seek rebi rth in the formless realm. They are imputed this 
way because of their attribute of separating from a ttachment of the form realm due to having 
abandoned any of the afflictions of the form realm.  There are two types: 
17.  “those pacifying in that present life”  
18.  “those actualizing with a body” 
The seventeenth and eighteenth are bodhisattvas who  proceed finally to the Peak of Existence. 
Following these are:  
19.  the tenth-grounder bodhisattvas, who are called “ap proachers to the result of foe-destroyer,” 
Then there are: 
20.  the bodhisattvas who bear the name “solitary realiz ers.” 
In this way we have the last four. 
 
At the end of the first paragraph, it mentions “the  eight held in the enumeration of the twenty.” 
These are probably the five we counted yesterday, p lus three: 
1.  Those proceeding to Akanishta 
2.  Those proceeding finally to the Peak of Existence 
 3-5. Three kinds of leapers 
6.  Those pacifying in that present life 
7.  Those actualizing with a body 
8.  Those destroying attachment of the form realm  
 
  
THE MAHAYANA PATH OF PREPARATION 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 131: 
2B2C-1A2B-2. Explaining the start of generating the wisdom arisen from meditation observing emptiness 
through meditating on the meaning of the instructio ns 
2B2C-1A2B-2A. General meaning 
2B2C-1A2B-2B. Meaning of the branches {187}  
2B2C-1A2B-2A. General meaning 
2B2C-1A2B-2A1. Support 
2B2C-1A2B-2A2. Entity 
2B2C-1A2B-2A3. Analysis of the awareness and knower  
2B2C-1A2B-2A1. Support 
The body supports of men and women of three [human]  continents as well as gods of 
the desire realm are the support of body [for gener ating a path of preparation]. Although 
not the support for actually generating the supreme  mundane quality level, apparently 
some beings of the form realm also generate the hea t and peak levels.  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 34  When we discuss the support for generating the Maha yana path of preparation, we can talk about 
the body support and the mind support . For those who are definite in the Mahayana lineag e, the 
body support is men and women of three human contin ents as well as the six types of gods of the 
desire realm. The mind support, which is not mentio ned here, is the absorption of an actual 
concentration.  
 From among the four human continents, we do not in clude Unpleasant Sound, the northern 
continent; thus the three continents referred to he re are the eastern, southern, and western 
continents. Why do we say that the humans of the no rthern continent cannot generate the Mahayana 
path of preparation? It is because they have very s trong karmic obscurations. Beings of the lower 
realms are not able to generate this path of prepar ation because of the fruitional, or maturational,  
obscurations. We say these beings have these fruiti onal obscurations because they experience the 
fruitional result of much suffering.  
 Do beings of the upper realms have the support of the Mahayana path of preparation? The texts 
says there are some beings of the form realm who ge nerate the heat and peak levels, but they are not 
the support for generating the supreme mundane qual ity level. Why do beings of the form realm not 
generate this path of preparation? It is because th ere is a predominance of the bliss of absorption. 
Due to this, they have very weak disillusionment fo r cyclic existence. Some beings of the form 
realm may generate the heat and peak levels of the path of preparation, but they cannot actually 
generate the supreme mundane quality level of the p ath of preparation, because the support for 
newly generating the Mahayana path of seeing has to  be a desire realm support. After newly 
generating the path of seeing, a bodhisattva can ar ise in subsequent attainment; at that time, the 
support can be other than that of the desire realm,  so such a bodhisattva may be reborn in the form 
realm, for example in Akanishta, and receive teachi ngs there from a complete enjoyment body.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 132: 
2B2C-1A2B-2A2. Entity 
2B2C-1A2B-2A2A. Definition 
2B2C-1A2B-2A2B. Divisions 
2B2C-1A2B-2A2C. Mode of generation 
2B2C-1A2B-2A2D. Meaning of the individual divisions  
2B2C-1A2B-2A2A. Definition 
[The definition of a path of preparation  is:] a Mahayana mundane path (subsequent to 
the completion of a partial concordance of liberati on) that is a similitude of the clear 
realization of truth. It is not limited to solely b eing a wisdom arisen from meditation, 
because there are many cases of wisdoms arisen from  hearing or contemplation. 
 
Here we have the definition of a Mahayana path of p reparation: a Mahayana mundane path 
(subsequent to the completion of a partial concorda nce of liberation) that is a similitude of the clea r 
realization of truth. Is this Mahayana path of prep aration necessarily a wisdom arisen from 
meditation? No, because there are many cases of wis dom arisen from hearing and from 
contemplation [on the path of preparation]; however , the wisdom arisen from meditation is 
principal .  
 Let us discuss the meanings of a wisdom arisen fro m hearing, a wisdom arisen from 
contemplation, and a wisdom arisen from meditation.   
• A wisdom arisen from hearing  is a wisdom arisen mainly from hearing the meaning of the 
scriptures.  
• A wisdom arisen from contemplation  is a wisdom arisen mainly from the contemplation of the 
meaning of the scriptures. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 35  • A wisdom arisen from meditation  is a wisdom arisen mainly in dependence on meditati ng on a 
meditative stabilization of the first concentration  and above. Note that this description does not 
contain the words “meaning of the scriptures.”  
The word “mainly” appears in all three descriptions . What is its significance? If we consider the 
wisdom arisen from meditation on emptiness, such a wisdom is a wisdom arisen from hearing the 
meaning of the scriptures, but it is not a wisdom a risen mainly from hearing the meaning of the 
scriptures. This wisdom does not arise mainly from hearing the meaning of the scriptures; it aris es 
mainly from meditating on meditative stabilization.   
 Let us consider someone who is definite in the Mah ayana lineage. On the Mahayana path of 
accumulation, there is calm abiding observing empti ness. This calm abiding observing emptiness is 
solely calm abiding observing emptiness. At this po int, is there wisdom arisen from meditation 
realizing emptiness? No. But if you ask, “Is there a wisdom arisen from meditation?” the answer is 
Yes. Such a calm abiding observing emptiness on the  path of accumulation is a wisdom arisen from 
meditation, but it is not a wisdom arisen from medi tation that observes emptiness. A wisdom arisen 
from meditation that observes emptiness is necessar ily a special insight observing emptiness. When 
such a bodhisattva on the path of accumulation who is definite in the Mahayana lineage attains the 
path of preparation, s/he simultaneously attains th e heat level of the path of preparation and the 
wisdom arisen from meditation observing emptiness.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 132: 
2B2C-1A2B-2A2B. Divisions 
The divisions of occasions are the three: small, mi ddle, and great. The divisions of 
entity are the four: heat, [peak, forbearance and s upreme mundane quality].  
 
In terms of the divisions of occasions, there are s mall, medium, and great. There are different 
interpretations regarding this. One way is to say t hat these are divisions in terms of faculty . The path 
of preparation in the continuum of someone of sharp -faculty is great, in the continuum of someone 
of middling faculty is middle, and in the continuum  of someone of dull faculty is small. Another 
interpretation, in terms of when it is generated , is that the small path of preparation is the one that is 
initially generated (at the beginning of the path o f preparation), the middle path of preparation is t he 
one generated in the middle, and the great path of preparation is the one generated at the end.  
 In terms of divisions by way of entity , there are four: 
1.  Heat 
2.  Peak  
3.  Forbearance 
4.  Supreme mundane quality 
Each of these can be sub-divided into small, middli ng, and great, giving a total of twelve divisions. 
If we look more closely, the heat level is divided into small, middle, and great. These sub-divisions 
are in terms of time, rather than faculty. When one  initially attains the heat level, one has the smal l 
heat level, following which one generates the middl e heat level, and then the great heat level. In the  
Mahayana presentation, there are three sub-division s of each of the four levels of the path of 
preparation, small, middle, and great. In the Hinay ana presentation, the heat, peak, and forbearance 
levels are each divided into three – small, middle,  and great – but the supreme mundane quality is 
not divided into three; it is said that the supreme  mundane quality level lasts the shortest instant i n 
which an action is completed.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 132: 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 36  2B2C-1A2B-2A2C. Mode of generation  
On the occasion of the path of accumulation, althou gh a fully qualified application in 
complete aspects that completely practices all the types of aspects of the three exalted 
knowers without exception exists, and a wisdom aris en from meditation that observes 
impermanence and suffering, as well as a wisdom ari sen from meditation that has 
meditated on unattractiveness and so forth exist, t here is no wisdom arisen from 
meditation that observes emptiness because, when th at [wisdom arisen from meditation 
that observes emptiness] is initially generated, on e transfers to the path of preparation. 
 
In this passage, it says that for someone who is de finite in Mahayana lineage, on the path of 
accumulation, although there are wisdoms arisen fro m meditation that observe impermanence, 
suffering, unattractiveness, and so forth, there is  no wisdom arisen from meditation that observes 
emptiness. Once the wisdom arisen from meditation o bserving emptiness is generated, one attains 
the path of preparation. This explanation should be  understood by relating to the fact that for a 
bodhisattva, the main object of abandonment is the conception of true existence. This manifest 
conception of true existence needs to be suppressed  prior to the path of seeing. On the four levels of  
the path of preparation, one suppresses the four ty pes of manifest conceptions of true existence. In 
that way, upon attaining the path of seeing, one ab andons the acquired conception of true existence. 
This section on the path of preparation is actually  quite difficult.  
 We talk about four types of conceptions that are s uppressed on the four levels of the path of 
preparation:  
• On the heat level of the path of preparation, the c onceptions regarding apprehendeds of the 
thoroughly afflicted class are suppressed. 
• On the peak level of the path of preparation, the c onceptions regarding apprehendeds of the 
completely pure class are suppressed. 
• On the forbearance level of the path of preparation , the conceptions regarding apprehenders of 
substantial existence  are suppressed. 
•  On the supreme mundane quality level of the path o f preparation, the conceptions regarding 
apprehenders of imputed existence are suppressed. 
There are nine for each of these four types of conc eptions. They will come very extensively.  
 
Questions and answers 
 
Q: (Regarding Ornament of the Essence , p. 123) The abiders in the result of non-returner  who 
proceed to a form realm are divided into five, the first of which is those who attain nirvana in the 
intermediate state . Such a person has abandoned the entwinement of re birth in the form realm, but 
has not abandoned the entwinement of establishment.  What is the entwinement of establishment?  
A: This entwinement of establishment is a kind of f actor such that if it is present/complete, then one  
would connect to a future rebirth, but if this fact or is not complete, one would not connect to a 
future rebirth. In the case of such a person who at tains nirvana in the intermediate state, he or she 
has the karma to be reborn in the form realm, but t his karma is not complete. Therefore this person 
attains nirvana in the intermediate state. Although  this person has karma to be reborn in the form 
realm, it is not complete. It is hard to say what b eing “complete” means. 
 
Q: How are the seeds of innate attachment to the de sire realm abandoned in the case of a serial non-
returner who has familiarized with calm abiding, or  one who will abandon these seeds by way of a 
mundane path? 
A: A mundane path cannot abandon the seeds of innat e afflictions. A person who has abandoned 
nine afflictions of the desire realm prior to the p ath of seeing does not need to make deliberate effo rt 
to abandon them when one has attained the sixteenth  instant of the path of seeing. If one needed to 
make deliberate effort to abandon these seeds, this  means that this person makes effort twice to 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 16: 2-6 June, 2008 
 
 37  abandon them. Likewise, when we talk about a serial ist by way of result, this person can abandon 
the nine innate afflictions of the desire realm [af ter the path of seeing] by way of a mundane path 
(this is someone with familiarity with calm abiding ). This separation that is obtained in dependence 
on a mundane path transforms into the entity of an uncontaminated tru e cessation . This separation 
by way of a mundane path becomes included in the se paration by way of a supramundane path. The 
first separation becomes included in the second sep aration, so they become combined into one. You 
must understand that this person, having attained t he path of seeing, already has a supramundane 
path in his continuum, and has a true cessation. Wh en this separation from the desire realm 
afflictions takes place in dependence on a mundane path, this separation becomes included within 
the true cessations, so they are not two separate s eparations, they are just one. Of course there are 
two things, but they become one entity.  
 
 
/wheel END /wheel 