Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/Transcript pdf/ORN_GTTnotes_14.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:51:48.584624
================================================================================

Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 1  
Masters Program: Ornament for Clear Realization 
Commentary by Geshe Tenzin Tenphel 
 
 
Monday afternoon, 19 May 2008 
 
Ornament of the Essence , page 99: 
2B2C-1A2B. Explaining the instructions which reveal the methods for accomplishing the aim of the promis e 
Here we are looking specifically at Mahayana instru ctions. The definition of a Mahayana  
instruction  as found in Jetsun Chokyi Gyeltsen’s Seventy Topics  is: Mahayana speech that teaches a 
method for attaining the object of striving of the Mahayana generated mind. The boundaries are: it 
exists from not having entered a path through the b uddha ground.  
 Basically, Mahayana instructions are instructions given so that: 
1. Mahayana excellent qualities that have not yet b een attained will be generated, and  
2. Mahayana excellent qualities that have been atta ined will increase.  
 
2B2C-1A2B-1. Actual 
2B2C-1A2B-2. Explaining the beginning of generating the wisdom arisen from meditation observing 
emptiness through meditating on the meaning of the instructions 
2B2C-1A2B-1. Actual 
2B2C-1A2B-1A. Making a connection 
2B2C-1A2B-1B. Explaining the meaning 
2B2C-1A2B-1A. Making a connection {139} 
COMMENTARY 
Having expressed the divisions incidentally, instru cting in order that the bodhisattvas 
who have generated the initial mind of enlightenmen t and so forth in that manner, who 
seek in exact accordance at the time, generate the mind of enlightenment and 
accomplish the qualities propelled by it; and in or der to strongly increase the excellent 
qualities attained for the purpose of completely sa feguarding them: the instructions.  
 
EXPLANATION 
Since the divisions of the generated mind are a subsidiary topic of the  common topic, 
having expressed them incidental to the definition and the object of observation 
taught, after that : the instructions.  The subject—the receivers [of instructions], the 
bodhisattvas who have generated the three, the initial mind of enlightenment and so 
forth in that manner —instructing  Mahayana instructions [to them] by a supreme 
emanation body is purposeful, because it is  in order to generate the mind of 
enlightenment not attained before  and to accomplish the qualities propelled by it, 
such as calm-abiding and special-insight included w ithin perfect application , and in 
order to strongly increase the excellent qualities  previously  attained for the purpose 
of completely safeguarding them  without degeneration. 
 
“The divisions of the generated mind are a subsidia ry topic of the common topic” refers to the 
twenty-two divisions of the generated mind that wer e discussed previously. “The definition and 
object of observation” are those of the conventiona l generated mind. Having expressed them, the 
instructions are presented. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 2  In the phrase “The bodhisattvas who have generated  the three,” the “three” refers to the small, 
middling, and great Mahayana path of accumulation. There are two reasons for instructing the 
Mahayana instructions to these bodhisattvas (as exp lained above): 
1. “in order to generate the mind of enlightenment not attained before and to accomplish the 
qualities propelled by it, such as calm-abiding and  special-insight included within perfect 
application,” and  
2. “in order to strongly increase the excellent qua lities previously attained for the purpose of 
completely safeguarding them without degeneration.”  
 
The boundaries of Mahayana instructions are that th ey exist from not having entered a path through 
the buddha ground. So how do you interpret these Ma hayana instructions? Are they 
texts/textbooks? What does it mean that Mahayana in structions exist from not having entered a path 
through the buddha ground? Where do they exist? In this world? On this table? In Sukhavati or in 
other buddha fields? You should not think that they  are physical texts. In fact Mahayana 
instructions are speech that is expressed, speech t hat exists in the continua of beings. These 
instructions should be understood to be speech.  
 When we look at the expression “Mahayana instructi ons,” are we talking about instructions that 
exist in the continua of Mahayana persons? What is the meaning of “Mahayana”? It is not correct to 
think that Mahayana instructions are speech given b y a Mahayana person, because if that were the 
case how are we to understand the instructions of a  supreme emanation body? A supreme 
emanation body gives Mahayana instructions, Hinayan a instructions, as well as instructions 
common to the vehicles. For example, the Heart Sutra  is the instructions of Buddha, it is also 
Mahayana instructions. Many people recite the Heart Sutra  but is everyone who does so necessarily 
a Mahayanist? This is not necessary. If it were nec essary that everyone who recites the Heart Sutra  
be a Mahayanist, then Mahayana instructions would n ot exist from not having entered a path. 
  “Mahayana instructions,” “Hinayana instructions,”  and so forth are expressions from the point 
of view of the main intended trainees. Instructions  that are given to main intended trainees who are 
Mahayanists are Mahayana instructions. Similarly, y ou should understand Hinayana instructions 
and instructions that are common to the vehicles. T hus:  
• If the main intended trainees are only Mahayanists,  then the instructions given to them are 
Mahayana instructions; 
• If the main intended trainees are only Hinayanists,  then the instructions given to them are 
Hinayana instructions; 
• If the main intended trainees are both Mahayanists and Hinayanists, then the instructions 
given to them are instructions common to the vehicl es.  
 
So how should we understand the boundaries “from no t having entered a path through the buddha 
ground”? Is it from down here to up there? Is it li ke a multi-storied building, with not having 
entered a ground being the first storey, followed b y the path of accumulation, path of preparation, 
and so forth up through the buddha ground, which is  the uppermost storey? It is not like that. “From 
not having entered a path” means that the instructi ons exist in the continuum of someone who has 
not entered a path. They also exist in the continuu m of a person on the path of accumulation, in the 
continuum of a person on the path of preparation, a nd so on all the way up to a person on the 
buddha ground. All these people can abide together in one room, eat together, talk together, and so 
forth. 
 For example, we say that His Holiness the Dalai La ma is Avalokiteshvara, a buddha, but when 
he gives teachings there are people present who hav e not entered a path up to those who are foe 
destroyers and those who are bodhisattvas. Therefor e, understand that the boundaries are not 
physical boundaries but refer to the minds of perso ns. Someone starts from not having entered a 
path, then enters the small path of accumulation, t hen the middling path of accumulation, then the 
great path of accumulation, and so forth, and as hi s realizations increase this person moves on to the  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 3 path of preparation, then to the path of seeing, an d so forth. The boundaries are not physical 
boundaries. For example, when people take refuge in  the Buddha they tend to look upwards, but 
this has to do with the disposition of the person. It is not that buddhas abide above us; they are all  
around us. While we are here on the top storey of t his building, perhaps there is a buddha working 
in the jewelry factory below us on the ground floor !  
 
These are the boundaries of Mahayana instructions, but what about the boundaries of listening to  
Mahayana instructions? Probably we can posit the sa me: from not having entered a path through the 
buddha ground. For example, when Buddha Shakyamuni gave teachings, in his retinue there were 
various disciples including the eight great bodhisa ttvas, Avalokiteshvara, Manjushri, Maitreya, 
Vajrapani, and so forth. 
 
Ornament of the Essence, p. 99: 
 
 [The explanation above] is in terms of those who h ave obtained the meditative 
stabilization of the stream of Dharma from the grea t level of the path of accumulation, 
who are pervaded by being able to directly hear ins tructions from a supreme emanation 
body because, in general, if even those who have no t entered a path can directly hear 
Mahayana instructions from [a supreme emanation bod y], what need is there to mention 
about [those who can directly hear Mahayana instruc tions from a supreme emanation 
body] existing from the small level of the path of accumulation? The special receivers 
[of instructions] are bodhisattvas who seek in exact accordance at the time  of hearing 
the instructions. 
 
On the great level of the path of accumulation, bod hisattvas attain the “meditative stabilization of 
the stream of Dharma.” Such bodhisattvas are pervad ed by being able to directly hear instructions 
from a supreme emanation body. In general, even tho se who have not entered a path can directly 
hear Mahayana instructions from a supreme emanation  body. As I explained before, someone who 
has attained the great level of the path of accumul ation who is sitting here in this gompa can hear 
teachings directly from a supreme emanation body te aching in Bodhgaya, India. This person does 
not have to be near such a supreme emanation body i n order to receive his instructions. In other 
words, someone who has attained the great level of the path of accumulation does not need to be 
physically close to a supreme emanation body in ord er to hear his instructions. A person on the 
great level of the path of accumulation hears instr uctions as though s/he is beside a supreme 
emanation body.  
 
 The cause of hearing instructions, the meditative s tabilization of the stream of 
Dharma, is a meditative stabilization that is a uni on of calm-abiding and special-insight 
that has generated a special ability to directly he ar instructions from a supreme 
emanation body, due to having purified most of the coarse obscurations to directly 
seeing the buddhas and hearing the Dharma from them  by those on lower paths. {140} 
Its causes are having collected the accumulations f or many eons, pure view and ethics, 
possessing reasoning, much hearing and having aband oned most of the four 
shortcomings of lineage.  
 
The causes of this ability that are mentioned here are not easy to attain. The first is “having 
collected the accumulations for many eons.” It is n ot easy to directly perceive a buddha due to our 
obscurations, and even if we could directly perceiv e a buddha we may not do so perfectly or 
correctly. It is important to confess our negativit ies, in order to remove the obscurations that preve nt 
us from directly perceiving buddhas, and we need to  collect the accumulations for a long time.  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 4  Let alone directly perceiving the buddhas as they really are, we cannot directly perceive ordinary 
beings as they really are! Sometimes we tend to hav e a negative view of someone, due to 
superimpositions of how bad the person is. In fact,  they may not be as bad as we impute them to be. 
If we think negatively of a person, when we merely see him we become unhappy, and as soon as he 
begins to speak we become unhappy. But is this pers on really as bad as he appears to us? If it was 
the case that the person is really so bad, then eve ryone should see the person in the way you do. 
Everyone should dislike him, be unhappy in his pres ence, when hearing him speak. But instead 
there are people who like him, who find him attract ive, who find him concordant with their mind. 
  We all have such projections that do not accord w ith reality. Therefore, let alone directly 
perceiving buddhas as they really are, we cannot ev en directly perceive ordinary persons as they 
are. This is really our own fault; our conceptualiz ations, superimpositions, and projections, due to 
our non-virtuous mind. If we tend to see things in a negative way, then we need to work on 
transforming our own mind. If we do not do this, ou r mind will become worse and worse. If we see 
someone in a very negative way, who is harmed? Is t hat person harmed? Does he become worse 
due to our seeing him negatively? It is our own min d that becomes negative in this process, so if we 
don’t work on it, it will become worse such that we  become unable to get along with anyone, and 
anything can make us unhappy. Therefore, it does no t harm the person we see negatively, rather we 
are the one who receives the loss: our negative out look on other people harms ourselves. In the end, 
we will become angry even at people who want to mak e us happy, take us for a picnic and so forth. 
  We have to look at our own mind. There are two th ings that can happen: when someone does 
good things, we think how good that person is and t hen we always want to talk to that person. Then 
we suffer when we cannot talk to him. If the people  who we want to talk to, do not talk to us, we 
become unhappy. The other way is thinking negativel y about someone, and if that person, who we 
do not want to talk to us, talks to us, we become u nhappy. We should try to go in the Madhyamika, 
the middle way. Otherwise, if we go in these two wa ys, our mind becomes weaker and weaker, and 
we ourselves are harmed. Even without anyone trying  to cause problems for us, we become 
unhappy.  
 If we think negatively of someone we should think why: “Why am I thinking that this person is 
negative? Is he negative or not?” If we are smart, we should think about this and work to reduce this 
mind. We must judge our own mind. For some people t his might be difficult at the beginning but 
we should try and try, until it becomes normal and we do it without problem. When other people 
say something bad, we get offended thinking “Why is  he saying this?” We actually harm ourselves 
a lot. For example, one person says one word to us,  we think about this over and over, asking 
ourselves why that person said that. We think about  it for hours and hours, even days, and then we 
don’t want to see that person again. Now check. Who  did more harm to you? That person just said 
one word and it was finished. Instead we thought ab out that person for hours. If we love ourselves 
and want peace for ourselves, we should think, and stop doing like this. How can we stop this? We 
can say something to that person, and tell him not to do that, but perhaps he becomes worse. We can 
kill him, then we can kill another one and another one, but we cannot kill everyone. Everyone wants 
liberation, they talk about freedom. However, we al so say similar things to others. Therefore, stop it  
right from the beginning; do not think too much abo ut what others say. We think too much even 
when one person says one word to us, thinking about  how much suffering he has created for us, but 
why do we not think about how much suffering we cre ate for ourselves? Whether we suffer or not 
depends on ourselves. It is our choice. If a word h arms us, it means that we are not perfect, it means  
our mind is not strong enough. We need to understan d this and make ourselves stronger. This does 
not mean that we need to become very strong physica lly, we do not need to go to the gym and lift 
weights! If our mind is not strong, it will harm ou r body, it will shorten our lifespan. If our body i s 
strong but our mind is not strong, in the end our b ody will not be strong. But if the mind is strong, 
even if the body is not, no one can harm us. Even i f they kill us, we will be reborn again! Perhaps as  
a beautiful person, because we practiced patience!  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 5 The next cause is that of “pure view and ethics.”  Pure view is something that we need to be careful 
about, because if we are not careful there is the d anger that we come to hold wrong views. We 
should be careful not to deny something that we hav e not seen or do not understand. Rather we 
should be like a scientist and investigate it. If w e do not know something or have not seen 
something, we should just say that we don’t know. I f, on the other hand, we don’t understand 
something but try to explain it as if we did  understand, there is the danger of making mistakes . Of 
course if we understand something, we can take a po sition saying “yes, it is like this” or “no, it is 
not like that.” But if we do not know or see someth ing, it is better to admit that we don’t know. If 
we do not do this, there is the danger of coming to  hold wrong views. 
 “View” here can refer to correct view, or we can a lso look at it in terms of ordinary view. We 
should not be very stubborn, holding on to certain positions. If we do this, then when we discuss 
things with others, the discussion will not go smoo thly. This will prevent us from seeing the correct 
view. 
 The next part is “pure ethics.” We know what this is. We also understand what it means to 
“possess reasoning,” and to have “much hearing,” bu t what does it mean to have “abandoned most 
of the four shortcomings of lineage”? Have I not ex plained this before? They were mentioned in the 
context of awakening the lineage. They are the four  hindrances to awakening the lineage:  
1.  strong familiarity with the afflictions,  
2.  being held by negative companions,  
3.  being deprived of the necessities that are conditio ns for practicing the Dharma, and 
4.  not having freedom to practice the Dharma due to be ing under the control of others.  
We need to be careful about the first as we all hav e afflictions, such as anger. If we have strong 
anger, although it may not harm our knowledge of th e texts, it will prevent us from generating 
realizations. There are people who are very knowled geable, but are very angry. This makes it 
difficult to generate realizations. 
 When one is held by negative companions, one comes  under the power of negative people and 
does not have power over oneself. There was a maste r called Gungtang Tenpe Dronme who 
composed a short text in which he explained certain  points very nicely. He said that negative 
companions are not necessarily those with fangs and  horns. If they were, this would be wonderful 
because it would be easy to identify them and there by not come under their power. We could run 
away from them! He said that negative companions ar e those who smile at us, who are friendly to 
us, but who create obstacles to our practice of the  Dharma and our study as we waste our time in 
talking to them. After spending time talking to the m, there is no more time to study.  
 Among negative companions there are two types. One  type has a bad motivation and actually 
wants to waste our time and create obstacles to our study  and practice. However, there is another 
type who has a neutral motivation, but if we are no t careful they can become obstacles to our study 
and practice. It is important that we do not come u nder their power. This does not mean that we 
should ignore them. If our minds are not strong, if  we do not have control over them, it is important 
to try to keep a distant from negative companions. As ordinary people we do have to socialize, 
sometimes when we meet people we need to talk with them, this is understandable. If we go to the 
extreme of avoiding talking to others there is the danger of getting lung , wind disease. Therefore, as 
ordinary beings it is important to keep to the midd le way. “Too much is too bad.” Sitting in our 
room too much is bad; talking too much with others and going out too much is bad. We should 
study, and then go out and relax and talk to our fr iends. But we need to be careful as it can become 
a habit, then we are unable to remain studying. It becomes an obstacle, and the time we spend 
talking becomes longer and longer and the time we s pend studying becomes shorter and shorter. 
Our cushion does not even have time to warm up! I a m talking about ordinary people. For higher 
beings, it does not matter even if they sleep all d ay. There is one Nyingma lama who spends most of 
his time sleeping, only getting sometimes up to gre et visitors. On the other hand, Lama Zopa 
Rinpoche never sleeps, he accepts people all the ti me. He once stayed here for one month. One day 
he suggested we do Hayagriva Tsog the next day at 1 0.00 AM. So I prepared the tormas and the 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 6 next day went to tell Rinpoche that everything was ready. He said he would come, and I waited; 
then it was 11, then 12, then lunch, then he went b ack to talk to people, and it was 17.00 when we 
started. Then we broke for dinner, then he talked a gain to some people, then we started again at 
20.00 and finished at 22.00, then he went to the go mpa to give teachings. 
 One day we went around the stupas, he was going ve ry fast, for three and a half hours, the next 
day I had pain in my legs. Then next day I told Lam a Zopa that I would not come with him. He 
asked me why and I told him because I had pain in m y legs. When he does something, he does it 
strong and long. He asked Joan to make a lot of off erings here in the gompa. To do like this is very 
difficult; I need to sleep. It is very good that he  comes here sometimes. This time he is coming for 
one week. People who know him come to the teachings  with blankets. When he gives teachings 
there are those whose heads are nodding. But he kee ps on teaching, without looking at those who 
are sleeping.  
 We need to keep balance so as to not get lung . Here we need to go on, not for months, but for si x 
years. Read and study, then rest, drink a coffee or  tea, go outside a bit and then return. We cannot 
sleep all day, nor can we go without sleeping. We n eed to be balanced, then things will go very 
well.  
 
The third hindrance is being deprived of necessitie s that are conditions for the practice of Dharma. 
Such necessities can be understood in terms of phys ical necessities for our livelihood, and mental 
necessities, meaning our attitude. If we are depriv ed of physical necessities we will be miserable, 
but it is worse to be deprived of mental necessitie s, the right attitude and right motivation. 
 If you consider Milarepa, he was very poor in term s of physical necessities such as clothing, but 
he was not deprived of the mental necessities for t he practice of Dharma. This is an example of a 
holy being, but in terms of ordinary people, it was  seen in the monasteries in Tibet that those who 
were wealthy did not necessarily study better. In f act, there were poor monks who studied the texts 
very well. Why does this happen? It could be becaus e the monks who are diligent and study well, 
do not spend time gathering possessions, and due to  this they are poor. On the other hand, there are 
others who do not spend time in studying but in gat hering possessions, and so they become wealthy. 
This is also seen in India in the monasteries. Ther e are poor monks who are good in their studies, 
and monks with sponsors who are wealthy but do not necessarily study.  
 When talking about this third point of being depri ved of necessities for practicing Dharma, this 
mainly refers to mental necessities. Physical necessities are important, bu t without a pure mind, 
they go to waste. There are poor monks in the monas teries who do not go to restaurants, only when 
their friends treat them, but spend their time in s tudying. In the monasteries in the past, monks had 
to pay for their meals. However, they did not have to pay rent as their house-teacher is responsible 
to provide accommodation. The teachers undergo a lo t of hardship to provide accommodation and 
clothing to their students. These house-teachers ar e very kind. Of course, here you have to pay for 
accommodation, food, and even the teachings. Althou gh money is important, do not become 
obsessed with it as it can become a hindrance. Some times people here do not have enough money to 
pay the Institute and so have to work in exchange f or accommodation and food. This work should 
be seen in a positive way as a training of the mind , a training in excellent qualities.  
 (Geshe-la talks about the situation in the monaster ies, regarding who does what work, and  the 
order of seating: according to the class one is in,  rather than the vows one holds….)  
 The point here is that it is important to not beco me discouraged when we encounter difficulties. 
The studies we do here are very important, they are  instructions that will benefit us when it comes 
to transforming our mind. The best method for trans forming the mind is to practice the Dharma. 
Here we are able to study the Great Texts, whereby we will have everything that we need to be able 
to practice, and in that way we can make our practi ce of the Dharma very rich. By studying the 
Great Texts we will become very knowledgeable; we w ill know what to practice and how, but 
whether or not we actually put it into practice is up to us.  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 7  I will tell you a small story, an Indian story. Th ere was a man who was afraid of a spirit. He 
could see the spirit and was afraid of it. This man  was very bad, he had done many mistakes. 
However, this man said that the spirit was bad and went to the temple to pray to the gods Krishna 
and Shiva to get rid of it. Driving home, he saw th e spirit in the rear-view mirror, sitting behind 
him, in the form of a woman. He said to the spirit:  “Now you are finished; I prayed to the gods to 
finish you off.”   The spirit said: “I also went to the temple to pra y, and the gods are looking out for 
who is good and who is bad, and they destroy those who are bad, so they will destroy you.” What is 
the advice given by the spirit? The main point is t hat we have to take care of our karma, we have to 
consider carefully our actions and their results. I f we are mistaken with our actions, then even if we  
go for refuge to the Three Jewels they will not be able to help us. They protect those who guard 
their actions. If we do not guard our karma, how ca n they help us? The buddhas help us by blessing 
us; these blessings come to us through their teachi ngs. If we listen to the teachings and do what they  
say, we receive their blessings. If we do not, how can these blessings come to us? They cannot. The 
Buddha said that if we cannot help we should not ha rm. Some people say: “No one is helping me, 
no one is taking care of me.” This is a big problem ; it is not good to think like this. We should try to 
help others, then help will come to us. If we wait for others to help us, we become nervous and no 
one wants to help us, no one will come near us. I h eard that some people think like this.   
 
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 
 
Student: If someone who has gained control over ema nations is in meditative equipoise and sends 
out emanation bodies, can one simultaneously be in meditative equipoise and do deeds even on the 
pure grounds? 
A: When one attains buddhahood one simultaneously a ttains the four exalted bodies of a buddha 
(the nature body, exalted wisdom truth body, enjoym ent body, and emanation body). At that time, 
the entity of the enjoyment body is attained in Aka nishta and simultaneously the emanation body is 
attained in the desire realm. Before attaining enli ghtenment, there is an emanation in the desire 
realm, and when one attains buddhahood, that emanat ion in the desire realm becomes the emanation 
body.  
 The being who is at the end of the continuum of a sentient being is said to be in meditative 
equipoise. The reason for saying this is the explan ation that one transfers to another ground from 
within meditative equipoise. This is the general ru le. Therefore, at the end of the continuum of a 
sentient being one is in meditative equipoise and f rom there transfers to the buddha ground. It is not  
the case that one is in subsequent attainment when about to transfer to a higher ground. For that 
reason we say that the being at the end of the cont inuum of a sentient being is in meditative 
equipoise.  
 This point is difficult. The twentieth generated m ind is posited on the preparation of the buddha 
ground. This refers to the end of the continuum of a sentient being. The description of this mind 
(page 97) talks about sound being proclaimed, but h ow does one explain that sound is proclaimed at 
the end of the continuum of a sentient being, while  one is in meditative equipoise? Of course, there 
is not much time to teach. These points are difficu lt to understand, so think about and meditate on 
them. 
 
Student: Regarding the gaining of confidence in med itative stabilization on the fifth ground (page 
96, the ninth generated mind), since the person att ains calm abiding long before that, why does it 
take until the fifth ground to attain confidence in  one’s meditative stabilization? 
A: A bodhisattva gains calm abiding before the fift h ground but he does not gain confidence  in 
meditative stabilization simply due to having attai ned calm abiding. On the sixth ground the 
bodhisattva gains a special wisdom such that he is able to enter the absorption of cessation and arise  
from it in a short moment of time. Such special wis dom is a special insight, which is contingent 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 8 upon a very special meditative stabilization. Thus,  we say that on the fifth ground the bodhisattva 
attains confidence in meditative stabilization.  
 
Student: Since the purpose of the instructions is t o generate excellent qualities not yet generated an d 
to increase excellent qualities already generated, why are the boundaries of instructions through the 
buddha ground, given that buddhas do not have to ge nerate qualities not yet generated and do not 
have to increase excellent qualities already genera ted? 
A: Indeed on the buddha ground there is no need for  instructions to generate excellent qualities not 
yet generated and to increase excellent qualities a lready generated, but on the buddha ground one 
gives instructions to others. This is similar to th e explanation in which it is said that on the buddh a 
ground there is the aspiration seeking enlightenmen t. A buddha has already attained enlightenment 
but a buddha still has the aspiration seeking enlig htenment. How? A buddha seeks to place others in 
enlightenment. 
 
 
Tuesday, May 20, 2008 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 100: 
 
2B2C-1A2B-1B. Explaining the meaning 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1. General divisions 
2B2C-1A2B-1B2. Explaining the Sangha Jewel in particu lar 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1. General divisions 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1A. Root text 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B. Commentary 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1C. Summary 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1A. Root text 
ROOT TEXT  
1.22 The achievings, the truths, 
The Three Jewels, Buddha and so forth,  
Non-adherence, tirelessness, 
Thoroughly upholding the path, 
 
1.23 The five eyes, the six excellent qualities of 
Clairvoyances, and the path of seeing and  
That called “meditation:” instructions are to be 
Known as the nature of ten. 
 
EXPLANATION 
The subject—Mahayana instructions —are to be known as the nature of ten , because 
they range from the entity of the achievings themse lves through the instructions on the 
path of meditation.  
 
We are looking at the topic of Mahayana instruction s, which is divided into ten divisions. If you 
understand these, you understand the instructions. The 10 divisions are stated in the root text 
(1.22—1.23): 
 
1.  The first is “achievings,” which refers to the enti ty of the achievings themselves.  
2.  “Truths” refers to the four noble truths.  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 9 3.  “The Three Jewels, Buddha and so forth,” refers to the support of achievings.  
4-6. “Non-adherence, tirelessness, Thoroughly uphol ding the path,” refers to the three types of 
joyous effort.  
7. “the five eyes,” 
8. “the six excellent qualities of clairvoyances,” 
9. “the path of seeing” 
10. “that called ‘meditation’”— this refers to the path of meditation.  
“In this way, “instructions are to be / Known as th e nature of ten.” 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 100: 
 
{141} From between the two—the supports of the achi evings and the supported—the 
former is instructions on the Three Jewels, Buddha and so forth , while regarding the 
latter, the bases for the attributes and the attrib utes. 
 
Instructions can be subsumed into two: 
1)  the supports of the achievings—the instructions in the Three Jewels, Buddha and so forth; 
2)  the supported—these are in turn divided into two: t he bases for the attributes and the 
attributes. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 100: 
 
 With respect to the first [the bases for the attri butes], the instructions on the aspects 
and the objects of observation are instructions on the achievings  and the truths . With 
respect to the attributes, there are instructions o n eliminating discordant classes and 
instructions on achieving excellent qualities. With  respect to eliminating the manifest 
[discordant classes], the instructions on the cause s of stabilizing, increasing and not 
degenerating the achievings are the instructions on  non-adherence, tirelessness,  and 
thoroughly upholding the Mahayana path .  
 
“The first” refers to the bases for the attributes.  The instructions on the aspects are the instructio ns 
on the entity of the achievings. The instructions o n the objects of observation are instructions on th e 
four noble truths.  
 “With respect to the attributes,” there are two ty pes of instructions: 
1) “Instructions on eliminating the discordant clas ses,” of which there are three types:  
 (i) “the instructions on the causes of stabilizing ,” which are “instructions on non-adherence;” 
 (ii) “the instructions on the causes of achieving”  are “instructions on tirelessness;” 
 (iii) “the instructions on not degenerating the ac hievings” are “instructions on thoroughly 
              upholding the Mahayana path.” 
2) “instructions on achieving excellent qualities.”  With respect to this: 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 100: 
 
With respect to achieving [excellent qualities], th e instructions on the causes of 
engaging independently and quickly completing the r esult are the instructions on the 
five eyes  and the six excellent qualities of clairvoyances . To eliminate the seeds that 
are objects of abandonment, there are instructions on the path of seeing  and path of  
meditation . 
 
Instructions on the causes of engaging independentl y are instructions on the five eyes, and 
instructions on quickly completing the result are i nstructions on the six excellent qualities of 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 10  clairvoyances. Above it talks about “eliminating th e manifest [discordant classes],” while further 
on, it says, “To eliminate the seeds that are objects of abandonment, there are instruct ions on the 
path of seeing and path of meditation.” When it tal ks about “eliminating the manifest [discordant 
classes],” there are instructions on the three type s of joyous effort (non-adherence, tirelessness, an d 
thoroughly upholding the path), which are the antid otes to the three types of laziness:  
1.  adherence to negative activities; 
2.  laziness of indolence: e.g. thinking “I’m not going  to do this,” “I’m not able to do that,” etc. 
3.  laziness of denigrating oneself: despising oneself.  Although you may know how to practice 
the path, you do not pay attention, you just leave it. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , pp. 100-101: 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B. Commentary 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-1. Instructions on the supported ach ievings 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-2. Instructions on the supports of t he achievings 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-3. Instructions on the attributes of  the achievings 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-1. Instructions on the supported ach ievings 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-1A. Instructions on the entity of th e achievings themselves 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-1B. Instructions on the objects of o bservation of those [achievings] 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-1A. Instructions on the entity of th e achievings themselves 
COMMENTARY 
So the root text is said. Regarding achieving the c lassifications of the mind of 
enlightenment which were explained, instructing on achieving training: "Through not 
passing beyond the obscurational 1 and ultimate truths, uncommon with the hearers and  
so forth, one should engage in a manner of not obse rving." 
 
EXPLANATION {142}  
Instructing on achieving.  Achieving what? Instructing on achieving the 
classifications of the mind of enlightenment , the attitude, and the applications 
propelled by that, generosity and so forth, which were explained  previously. 
 How are they achieved?  Because of instructing by way of  training : "Having 
established by valid cognition the achiever, the pe rson who is the support, the objects to 
be practiced, the results, and so forth just as the y have been explained, one should 
engage  (i) through the practice not passing beyond the stages of the path based upon 
obscurational truth  and,  by realizing all of those to be empty of true exis tence,  the 
practice [not passing beyond] the stages of the pat h based upon ultimate truth, and, (ii) 
for the sake of all sentient beings’ accomplishing nirvana and [for the sake of]  the truth 
body uncommon with the hearers and so forth with respect to the Mothers , in a 
manner of not observing  the four qualities of practice with respect to the  Mothers ."  
 
There are two types of paths: those based on obscur ational truth, and those based on ultimate truth. 
What are the “four qualities of practice” mentioned  here? They are listed in the text: 
1.  the practice not passing beyond the stages of the p ath based upon obscurational truth 
2.  the practice not passing beyond the stages of the p ath based upon ultimate truth 
3.  the practice with respect to the Mothers for the sa ke of all sentient beings accomplishing 
nirvana  
4.  the practice with respect to the Mothers for the sa ke of accomplishing the truth body  
 
                                                 
1 Kun rdzob 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 11  Ornament of the Essence , p. 101: 
 
If the meaning of not passing beyond the mode of re alizing the obscurational to be false 
and illusory is to be explained, you should know it  to be as before. 
 
This is saying that if we were to explain the meani ng of “not passing beyond the mode of realizing 
the obscurational to be false and illusory,” you sh ould know it from the explanation above. This is 
referring to the phrase above (lines 5-7 in the par agraph) where it says, “by realizing all of those t o 
be empty of true existence,  the practice [not passing beyond] the stages of the  path based upon 
ultimate truth.” “All of those” refers to the vario us objects mentioned at the beginning of this 
paragraph: the achiever, the support, the objects t o be practiced, the results, and so forth. By 
realizing all of these objects to be empty of true existence, then you would be able to know the 
meaning of “not passing beyond the mode of realizin g the obscurational truths (or the conventional 
truths) to be false and illusory.” 
 
Q: In the phrase, “for the sake of all sentient bei ngs’ accomplishing nirvana and [for the sake of]  the 
truth body…,” should we apply “all sentient beings”  to the second part of the sentence?  
A: Either way. You can say “for the sake of all sen tient beings’ accomplishing nirvana and for the 
sake of all sentient beings’ accomplishing the trut h body,” or you can just say “for the sake of all 
sentient beings’ accomplishing nirvana and for the sake of the truth body.” Eventually all sentient 
beings will be lead to achieve the truth body, but temporarily a sentient being may be led to 
temporal goals such as personal liberation.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 101: 
 
 “Shariputra, at the time when a bodhisattva mahasa ttva practices the Perfection of 
Wisdom, while the bodhisattva himself exists, the b odhisattva does not perfectly 
subsequently see…” indicates the instructions on th e entity of the achievings 
themselves, because it is instructions to achieve n ot passing beyond the stages of the 
path based upon the two truths with respect to the generated mind and the phenomena 
indicated on that occasion. {143} 
 “Shariputra, if in 2 this Jambudvipa, Bhikshu Shariputra…” indicates th e instructions 
on the uncommonness of the entity of the achievings  themselves, because it is 
instructions to not take to mind Hinayana for the w elfare of oneself alone. 
 
In these paragraphs, we find two sutra quotations, one indicating the instructions on the entity of th e 
achievings. The first indicates instructions to ach ieve “not passing beyond the stages of the path 
based upon the two truths.” The second citation ind icates the uncommonness of the entity of the 
achievings themselves; it is instruction to not tak e to mind Hinayana for the sake of individual 
liberation. In this passage we find discussions on the paths based on obscurational truths and the 
paths based on ultimate truths. Next, we will talk about the two truths.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 102: 
 
With respect to the two truths here, there are: 
 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-1A1. Definitions 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-1A2. Meaning of the names 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-1A3. Divisions of the bases for char acterization 
                                                 
2 ‘di  emended to read ‘dir  in accordance with page 166 of the Ganden Jangtse Library edition of Jetsun Chokyi 
Gyeltsen’s Ocean of Sport , Volume 1. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 12  2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-1A4. Investigating one and different  
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-1A1. Definitions 
The definition of an ultimate truth  is: an object to be realized by way of vanished 
dualistic appearance (by a direct valid cognizer ex plicitly realizing it) that is not to be 
realized in the aspect of an affirmative phenomenon . 
 The definition of an obscurational truth  is: that which abides in the class of objects to 
be realized by way of being together with dualistic  appearance by a valid cognizer 
explicitly realizing it. 
 
Next, we have the outline “Meaning of the names,” r eferring to the etymologies of the expressions 
“ultimate truth” and “obscurational truth.” The wor d “ultimate” literally means “excellent 
meaning,” and refers to an excellent object of the object-possessor, an arya’s meditative equipoise 
on emptiness. In the perspective of an arya’s medit ative equipoise on emptiness, emptiness is true; 
in general, such an object, emptiness, is also true . In contrast, when we look at obscurational truth 
(another translation for which is “conventional tru th”), let us take the example of a vase: a vase is 
true in the perspective of a conception of true exi stence, but it is not true in general, it is false in 
general. Therefore the vase is called an “obscurati onal truth.”  
 To say this again: When we look at the expression “ultimate truth,” emptiness of true existence is 
ultimate, or literally “excellent-meaning.” It is a lso a truth in the perspective of an arya’s meditat ive 
equipoise; therefore we call emptiness “ultimate tr uth.” In the case of a conventional or 
obscurational truth, a vase is false, and is thus o bscurational. It is true in the perspective of the 
ignorance that is a conception of true existence, a nd is therefore called an obscurational truth.  
 When we use these words “true” and “false,” what d o they mean? Something that is true is 
something in which the mode of abidance and the mode of appearance are concordant, they agree. 
If an object is such that the mode of abidance and the mode of appearance are discordant, then it is 
false.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 102: 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-1A2. Meaning of the names 
Due to abiding in the perspective of an unmistaken,  excellent object-possessor, an 
arya’s meditative equipoise, it is called “ultimate  truth” [literally, excellent-meaning 
truth].  
 Due to being true in the perspective of an erroneo us object-possessor, an awareness 
that is a mind 3 of conventionalities, but false with respect to me asure of abidance, it is 
called “obscurational truth.” Further, it abides in  the perspective of this obscurational 
awareness that obscures the explicit seeing of such ness, such as a sense consciousness. 
Hence, the terms “an obscurational awareness” and “ a truth in its perspective” are 
explained. 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-1A3. Divisions of the bases for char acterization 
Besides mere dissimilar ways of expressing an ultim ate truth, divisions that are made by 
way of entity do not exist. Regarding the ultimate,  enumerative ultimates are inferential 
rational knowers, while non-enumerative ultimates a re the aryas’ meditative equipoise 
which sees the ultimate. {144}  
 
This is saying that for emptiness or ultimate truth , divisions are made by different ways of 
expression, but all these different emptinesses are  one entity. For instance, we talk about emptiness 
                                                 
3 Bsam pa  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 13  of the inner, of the outer, of the inner and outer,  and so forth. These are different ways of expressi ng 
ultimate truth, but all these various emptiness are  really one entity.  
 If we discuss “ultimate object-possessors,” there are:  
1.  Enumerative ultimates: this refers to inferential r ational knowers. 
2.  Non-enumerative ultimates: this refers to aryas’ me ditative equipoise which sees the 
ultimate. 
“Enumerative ultimates” are not actual ultimate object-possessors, while “non-enumerative 
ultimates” are actual ultimate object-possessors. The arya’s meditative e quipoise that sees the 
ultimate is the real, actual ultimate object-posses sor. The inferential rational knower is the 
enumerative ultimate; although it is not the actual  ultimate object-possessor, it is enumerated  as an 
ultimate object-possessor. Non-enumerative ultimate s refer to the actual ultimate object-possessors 
that directly realize emptiness—they are called “no n-enumerative ultimates” because they are the 
actual ones, and are not stated just to enumerate t he divisions—while the enumerative ultimates are 
inferential valid cognizers that do not directly re alize emptiness.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 102: 
 
Know that when obscurational truth is divided, also  there are two: real and unreal 
reverses . 
 
There are very extensive definitions of real and un real obscurational, or conventional, truth in 
Jetsun Chokyi Gyeltsen’s General Meaning.  These are very technical, so I will abbreviate the m for 
you: 
 
• Real conventional truth or conventionalities : “(i) That which is either a real conventional tru th 
or an unreal conventional truth (ii) that cannot be  realized to not be established in the way it 
appears to a mind that takes it as its appearing ob ject by a person who has not realized 
emptiness.”  
A briefer version of this might be: “That which is either a real conventional truth or an unreal  
conventional truth that cannot be realized to not b e established in the way it appears by a 
 person who has not realized emptiness.”  
• Unreal conventional truth : “(i) That which is either a real conventional tru th or an unreal 
conventional truth (ii) which can be realized to no t be established in the way it appears by a 
person who has not realized emptiness, or whose exi stence (conventionally) is damaged by a 
valid cognizer.” We can leave out the word “convent ionally.”  
 
When we talk about these divisions of conventional truth, they are not divisions by way of entity; 
rather, they are terminological divisions . Examples of real conventionalities are a vase, a pillar, and 
so forth. Examples of unreal conventionalities are reflections, flowers in the sky, and stars in t he 
water. What is renowned in the world to be false is  an unreal conventionality. The reason we say 
that real and unreal conventional truths are termin ological divisions is because if it is an unreal 
conventional truth, it does not necessarily have to  be a conventional truth. For example, we can 
posit non-existents: a star in the water, a flower in the sky, etc. The examples of reflections, 
mirages, echoes and so forth are renowned in the wo rld as false. They are conventional truths, but 
they are false. They are renowned in the world to n ot exist in the way they appear. Gyeltsab Je 
merely mentions that there are two types of convent ional truths, but he does not explain them at all, 
so try to read up on them from other sources.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 102: 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 14  2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-1A4. Investigating one and different  
If the two truths were to be one, there would be th e four faults taught in Sutra 
Unraveling the Thought (Samdhinirmocanasutra ), but even if they were to be different 
entities, there would be the four faults taught in that. Hence they are one entity but 
different isolates. 4 
 
If the two truths were to be one, there would be th e four faults taught in the Sutra Unraveling the 
Thought . If you say they are different entities, there wou ld also be four faults. These two sets of 
four faults can be explained in relation to a vase and its emptiness. If a vase and its emptiness of 
true existence were to be one , there would be four faults: 
1.  The subject—the emptiness of true existence of a va se— it follows that it is a phenomenon 
of direct perception by an ordinary being, because it is one with the vase.  
2.  The subject—the emptiness of true existence of a va se—it follows that there is the generation 
of afflictions that observe it, because it is one w ith the vase. 
3.  The subject—the emptiness of true existence of a va se— it follows that yogis do not need to 
meditate on it besides looking at the vase, because  it is one with the vase. 
4.  The subject—the emptiness of true existence of a va se—it follows that it has color, shape, 
and so forth, because it is one with the vase. 
 
For two things to be “one,” they need to be the sam e in name and meaning. If two objects have the 
same name and meaning, they are said to be one. If those conditions are not satisfied, we cannot say 
that the two objects are one. If you consider a vas e and the emptiness of a vase, the names, or terms,  
are not the same, and also the meanings are not the  same. “One meaning” or “one entity,” can be 
said only in relation to another object. If we talk  about “one entity,” we have to ask: “one entity 
with what ?” If we say “one entity with something,” then the object being discussed is pervaded by 
not being one; it has to be diverse.  
 These Tibetan expressions are very terse; you cann ot get the complete phrase from the explicit 
words. If we look at them in a more technical way, the definition of “one”  is: a phenomenon that is 
not diverse. The opposite of “one” is “different.” The definition of “the different [from something]”  
is: a phenomenon that is diverse [from something].  
 
Questions and answers 
 
Q: The emptiness of form is not separable from form , therefore the isolate of form must include 
emptiness of form. Here the text says that the two truths are “one entity but different isolates.” Is 
this different? 
A: What does it mean to say that the emptiness of a  vase and the vase are one entity but different 
isolates? Different isolates means, for example, th at they have different terms; it does not mean that  
emptiness of vase and vase and are separable.  
 
Q: With regard to the three types of bodhicitta (ki ng-like, together-like or boatman-like, and 
herdsman-like), it seems that anyone who attains en lightenment must attain it in the mode of the 
king-like bodhicitta.    
A: These three modes of bodhicitta are posited in d ependence on three types of motivation. In king-
like bodhicitta, one thinks: “I will attain enlight enment and then I will guide all other sentient 
beings to enlightenment.” In the boatman-like bodhi citta, one thinks “All sentient beings and I will 
attain enlightenment together.” In the herdsman-lik e, one thinks “I will lead all other sentient being s 
                                                 
4 The Tibetan word " ldog pa " translated here as "isolate" literally means "rev erse" and indicates a double reverse or 
double negation. For more information on this topic , see Daniel E. Perdue's Debate in Tibetan Buddhism  (Snow Lion 
Publications, 1992). 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 15  to enlightenment before me, and then I will attain it.” So there are three modes of generating 
bodhicitta.  
 Let’s say there are three persons who generate the se three types of bodhicitta. In fact, the person 
who generates the herdsman-like bodhicitta will att ain enlightenment first, because his mental 
strength is very powerful, and due to that, his obs curations are very quickly purified. This person is  
followed by the person who generates together-like bodhicitta, and finally by the one with king-like 
bodhicitta—this person will attain enlightenment la ter than the other two.  There is a huge difference 
in terms of the order of attaining enlightenment du e to the power of the mind. Due to the power of 
the mind, one is able to accumulate merit and purif y negativities in dependence on others very 
quickly.  
 If one attains enlightenment, one necessarily atta ins it before other sentient beings, but this does 
not mean that one necessarily generated king-like b odhicitta; one could have generated one of the 
other types of bodhicitta.  
 
Wednesday 21 May 2008 (morning) 
 
We will continue our discussion of the two truths. There are four faults if the two truths are 
different entities . If vase and the emptiness of true existence of va se were to be different entities, 
there would be the following faults: 
1.  The subject—vase—it follows that the valid cognizer  comprehending its emptiness of true 
existence would not eliminate superimpositions that  apprehend the vase as truly existent, 
because the vase is different in entity from the em ptiness of true existence of vase.  
2.  The subject—the emptiness of true existence of the vase—it follows that it would not be the 
dharmata of the vase, because it would be different  in entity from the vase. 
3.  The subject—vase—it follows that it would not be th e basis upon which the true existence 
of vase is negated, because it is different in enti ty from the emptiness of true existence of the 
vase. 
4.  It follows that there would be two valid cognizers in the continuum of a buddha arya: (i) a 
valid cognizer comprehending the emptiness of true existence of the vase; and (ii) a valid 
cognizer comprehending the emptiness of true existe nce of the vase to be different in entity 
from the vase, because the vase is different in ent ity from the emptiness of true existence of 
the vase. 
 
We have gone through the faults if the vase and dha rmata of vase were one, and the faults if vase 
and dharmata of vase were different entities.  
 To summarize the essential points in these argumen ts: If we say that vase and its dharmata are 
one , then when we comprehend vase, we would comprehend  the dharmata of vase; there would not 
be a separate dharmata that needs to be comprehende d, separately, but this is not the case. It is 
possible to have one mind comprehending vase and an other mind comprehending the dharmata of 
vase—two separate minds. An ordinary being is able to directly realize a vase, but an ordinary 
being is not able to directly realize the dharmata of the vase; therefore, a vase and the emptiness of  
true existence of the vase cannot be one.  
 The second essential point regarding the faults if  the vase and the emptiness of the vase were 
different entities: when we investigate the entity of the vase, we will  find that its final entity is its 
emptiness of true existence, so vase and emptiness of vase are not separate entities. Thus the 
emptiness of the vase is one entity with the vase, and the vase is one entity with the emptiness of th e 
vase; otherwise, when we investigate the entity of the vase, we would not be able to find its final 
entity which is its emptiness of true existence. Th erefore, they are one entity but different isolates .  
 What do we mean by “one entity”? In general, one e ntity means to be of one nature. When we 
talk about functional things or impermanent phenome na being one entity with each other, it means 
they are one substance .  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 16   
Ornament of the Essence , p. 102: 
 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-1A4. Investigating one and different  (continued) 
 
 Just understand the other explanations in the comm entaries of the Acarya and the Arya 
in relation to this point.  
 
This is saying to understand the essential points r egarding the two sets of four faults in relation to  
this point. 
 
Ornament of the Essence ,  
 
With respect to an eighth-grounder, if the meaning of “by stopping nirvana,” which 
bears their thought, is to be slightly explained: i n relation to the generated mind, “with 
respect to a knower of all, passing through, having  viewed through seeing” was 
explained, and “due to desiring to pass beyond the levels of a youth” was taught.  
 Therefore, from among the two—(1) passing through,  having seen, and (2) passing 
beyond, having abided—the first is passing through the hearers’ and solitary realizers’ 
grounds by a bodhisattva on the occasion of the pat h of seeing, having viewed them by 
knowing and seeing. The second refers to an irrever sible eighth-grounder; the meaning 
of passing beyond that is: in the manner of examini ng a possibility on the eighth 
ground, if one is not roused by the buddhas, due to  immediately severing the continuity 
of migrating beings’ welfare, one will enter absorp tion in the uncontaminated sphere; 
but, due to being roused by the buddhas, even thoug h one enters absorption 
continuously on the eighth ground, one passes beyon d actualizing it. 
 
This talks about the situation with an eighth-groun der.  
• The term “by stopping nirvana” is related to our pr evious discussion of actualizing the 
perfect end, in which bodhisattvas are advised not to enter the perfect end before having 
completed the three conditions.  
• “Knower of all” here refers to a knower of bases. T his knower of bases is passed through, 
having been viewed through seeing.  
• In the expression “due to desiring to pass beyond t he levels of a youth”, “the levels of a 
youth” refers to the levels of an ordinary being. 
 
From among the two:  
(1) passing through, having seen—this actually rela tes to a bodhisattva on the path of seeing 
(2) passing beyond, having abided—this relates to a  bodhisattva on the eighth ground.  
What is the meaning of “passing beyond”?  
If a bodhisattva on the eighth ground is not roused  by the buddhas, he will enter the absorption in 
the uncontaminated sphere, but due to being roused by the buddhas, he will pass beyond actualizing 
this absorption. On the eighth ground, there is thi s possibility that if one is not roused by the 
buddhas, one will enter this absorption of cessatio n. However, due to being roused by the buddhas, 
even if they enter this absorption, they will not a ctualize the absorption of cessation.  
 Here, we are merely examining a possibility; in fa ct, bodhisattvas on the 8 th  ground would not 
enter this absorption continuously. The point here is that bodhisattvas on the 8 th  ground would not 
enter the absorption of cessation continuously, in fact they pass beyond actualizing it.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 103: 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 17   
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-1B. Instructions on the objects of o bservation of those [achievings] 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-1B1. General meaning 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-1B2. Meaning of the branches 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-1B1. General meaning 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-1B1A. Definite number of the four tr uths 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-1B1B. Definite sequence 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-1B1C. Bases for characterization  
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-1B1D. Valid cognizers which ascertain  those 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-1B1A. Definite number of the four tr uths {145} 
The principal objects to be determined by those see king liberation are definite as the 
two classes which are included within samsara and n irvana. With respect to samsara, 
they are also definite as two: (1) the cause that b inds, true origins, and (2) the result that 
is bondage, true sufferings. With respect to the co mpletely pure, they are also definite as 
two: (1) the cause that is the method liberating fr om samsara, true paths, and (2) the 
entity of the result that is liberation, true cessa tions. Hence, the causes and results of 
entering into and turning away from samsara are def inite as four. 
 
This explanation is sufficient for your understandi ng.  
 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-1B1B. Definite sequence 
In terms of the order in reality, true origins and paths are objects to be indicated first, 
and sufferings and cessations are objects to be ind icated later. Here they are to be 
indicated according to another sequence correspondi ng to the order of the object-
possessor clear realizations, in this manner, that is—true sufferings, origins, cessations 
and paths. You must at the outset generate an aware ness that wishes to be separated 
from the general and particular drawbacks of samsar a by means of having contemplated 
them well because, without being preceded by that, it will be impossible to generate the 
desire to abandon their causes. 
  Once the wish to be separated from sufferings has  been generated, you investigate the 
origins, asking: “Am I able or not able to separate  from these? Do these have causes or 
not? Further, are the causes permanent or impermane nt?” For, you see that you cannot 
abandon the entity of suffering itself, like pullin g out a thorn [embedded in one’s flesh]. 
If you were to investigate in this manner, then by comprehending that the two—karma 
and afflictions—are its causes, you will generate t he mind wishing to abandon them. 
Thus the origins are indicated second. Once you see  that you are able to abandon the 
origins, then you will see that you can put a stop to suffering. Then, since you will see 
that you can actualize the cessations in which suff ering has been stopped, the cessations 
are indicated third. {146} Since you will see that actualizing those is contingent on 
having relied on and familiarized with the paths, t he true paths are indicated fourth.  
 
In this passage, there are two sets of sequence exp lained.  
1.  In terms of the order in reality: 
a.  With respect to the stages of entering into samsara , we have true origins first, and 
then true sufferings.  
b.  With respect to turning away from samsara, first th ere are true paths, and then true 
cessations.  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 18  2.  In this context, the four truths are indicated acco rding to the order of clear realizations, or 
the order in which a practitioner would generate th e clear realizations in terms of practice of 
the path. This sequence is: true sufferings, follow ed by true origins, then true cessations, & 
then true paths. At the beginning, one needs to gen erate an awareness that wishes to be free 
from suffering. Without generating this, there is n o way one will go on to abandon the 
causes of suffering, or to actualize cessation thro ugh cultivating the paths. Right at the start, 
one needs to understand sufferings. By understandin g sufferings, one will go on to 
investigate the origins of sufferings, asking “Do t he sufferings have causes? What are they 
like? and so forth. Through investigating in this m anner, one will generate the mind wishing 
to abandon the origins or causes of sufferings, kar ma and afflictions. Thus, origins of 
sufferings are indicated next. Once one realizes th at one is able to abandon the origins of 
sufferings, one realizes that one can actualize the  cessation in which sufferings has been 
stopped, therefore cessations are indicated next. I n order to actualize cessations, one needs 
to rely on and familiarize oneself with the path, t herefore true paths are indicated last.  
 
Here, we are mainly discussing the second order, th e order of clear realizations. In terms of the 
order of clear realizations, on the 2nd step, we ha ve origins—one investigates, “Am I able to 
separate from the causes of suffering?”, “Am I able  to abandon these causes?” At this point, one 
sees that one is able to separate from the causes o f suffering. Some of you may have this doubt: 
since one sees that one is able to separate from th e causes of sufferings, therefore true cessations 
should be presented together with true origins on t he 2nd step, after true sufferings have been 
presented. However it is not like that. In fact, on  the 2 nd  step, one sees that one is able to separate 
from the causes of suffering, so following from tha t, i.e. on the third step, one will realize that on e is 
able to actualize cessation. This realization shoul d come after the understanding that one is able to 
separate from the causes of suffering. From there, one sees that the actualization of cessation is 
contingent upon the paths; therefore, true paths ar e indicated on the fourth step.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p.103: 
 
QUALM: Since first seeing that one is able to stop suffering is pervaded by seeing that 
one is able to actualize the cessation of suffering s, cessations should be indicated next. 
Further, having seen that one is able to abandon or igins, one must see that one is able to 
stop sufferings, whereby origins should be indicate d before sufferings. Since seeing that 
one is able to abandon origins is contingent upon r ealizing selflessness, that itself 
should be indicated at the beginning. Hence the seq uence of the Four Truths explained 
is not definite. 
 
RESPONSE: I shall explain. In general, for any acti vity, embarking upon it is 
contingent upon seeing its benefits, and turning aw ay from it upon seeing its drawbacks. 
Hence, by having contemplated the general and parti cular drawbacks of samsara, having 
seen that samsara is like a fire pit, one will gene rate at first a mere awareness that 
desires to separate from it; one does not understan d that one is able to separate from it. 
Then, secondly, one sees with valid cognition that one is able to abandon origins. Once 
that is seen, one will see that one is able to actu alize cessations, whereby it is 
appropriate for origins to be indicated second, and  cessations third. That paths are to be 
indicated last is just as [explained] above. Theref ore when a path of seeing observing 
the Four Truths is generated in a yogi’s continuum,  it is also generated in agreement 
with that sequence.  
 
Here, we have a wrong explanation regarding the seq uence of the Four Truths. This person says that 
right from the start, one sees that one is able to stop sufferings. According to our own system, this is 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 19  not correct because right from the start, through k nowing sufferings, one will generate a wish to be 
separated from sufferings. Due to this, one generat es a mind investigating whether the causes of 
sufferings can be separated from. Once one sees tha t one is able to separate from the causes of 
sufferings, one realizes that one is able to actual ize cessation. When one realizes this, one will 
understand that one must rely on the paths.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 104: 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-1B1C. Bases for characterization  
Present feelings of pain in the kidneys and the lik e are suffering of suffering. Feelings 
relishing tastes due to excessive craving for pleas ant food are suffering of change. That 
which is a contaminated aggregate that is an imprin t deposited by karma and afflictions 
is all-compounded suffering. All of these are true sufferings. {147} All contaminated 
karma and afflictions are true origins. A separatio n in which sufferings have been 
stopped is a true cessation. A wisdom directly real izing selflessness is a true path. 
 
There is not much to say about this passage. In the  Lam Rim texts, sufferings are explained in great 
detail, so read those passages in the Lam Rim well.  Likewise, there is also an extensive explanation 
of karma and afflictions in Lam Rim, so read those well. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 104: 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-1B1D. Valid cognizers which ascertain  those 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-1B1D-1. Identifying the sixteen wron g conceptions 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-1B1D-2. Identifying the sixteen aspe cts of the truths contradicting those 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-1B1D-1. Identifying the sixteen wron g conceptions 
1.  The wrong engagements with respect to sufferings ar e the four apprehensions of cleanliness, 
happiness, permanence and self.  
2.  The wrong engagements with respect to origins are t he two—the apprehension of sufferings as 
causeless, and the apprehension of the discordant a s causes. With respect to the latter, there are: 
the apprehension of [suffering] as being produced b y only a single cause; the apprehension of 
[suffering] as being produced due to others, such a s Ishvara, first having an idea; and the 
apprehension of the nature as permanent, but its st ates changeable.  
3.  The wrong engagements with respect to cessations ar e: the apprehension of liberation as utterly 
not existent, the apprehension of some contaminated  attribute as liberation, the apprehension of 
some attribute of suffering as sublime liberation, and the apprehension of the exhaustion of 
suffering as existing, but reversible.  
4.  The wrong engagements with respect to paths are: th e apprehension of the path to liberation as 
utterly not existent, the apprehension of the famil iarization of selflessness as being unsuitable to 
be a path, the apprehension of merely some attribut e of concentration as the path to liberation, 
and the apprehension of a path (that acts as a bear er of the quality of overcoming suffering) as 
not existent. 
 
The wrong engagements with respect to sufferings  are: 
1.  Apprehending the unclean as clean 
2.  Apprehending suffering as happiness 
3.  Apprehending the impermanent as permanent 
4.  Apprehending the selfless as self 
 
The wrong engagements with respect to true origins  are: 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 20  1.  Apprehension of sufferings as causeless 
2.  Apprehension of sufferings as produced by only a si ngle cause 
3.  Apprehension of sufferings as produced by others, s uch as Ishvara, first having an idea 
Sometimes, when we encounter someone we dislike, we  may generate a wish to harm this 
person. First we have an idea, then we harm the per son. Is this similar to the third 
apprehension here? To give another example, if we w ant to build a house, we need a plan. 
First we have an idea, then we build the house. Her e, it is saying that Ishvara first has an 
idea, and without doing anything about it, the resu lt just happens. This does not accord with 
reality. (Ishvara is a god, a deva in the desire re alm). 
4.  Apprehension of the nature as permanent, but its st ates as changeable. This is not correct. 
 
The wrong engagements with respect to true cessatio ns  are: 
1.  Apprehension of liberation as utterly not existent.  
There are people who think that an actual concentra tion (which is a contaminated attribute) 
is a state of liberation. When they are about to di e, they see with clairvoyance that they will 
be reborn in the hell realms, and generate the wron g view thinking that liberation does not 
exist. So, first this person has an apprehension of  some contaminated attribute as liberation 
(refer to next wrong engagement #2 below), then he generates the wrong view thinking that 
liberation does not exist. 
2.  Apprehension of some contaminated attribute as libe ration. 
3.  Apprehension of some attribute of suffering as subl ime liberation. 
There are people who mistake the suffering of chang e as sublime liberation. It is possible for 
someone in the desire realm to generate clairvoyanc e, and to see a rebirth in the form realm 
as lasting for a very long time. Since this clairvo yance is not unlimited, this person does not 
see an end to such a rebirth, and thinks that a for m realm rebirth is everlasting, while this is 
not the case.  
4.  the apprehension of the exhaustion of suffering as existing, but reversible. 
This is also incorrect. Suffering can be exhausted in a temporal way; if it is exhausted in this 
way, it is reversible i.e. it can come back. But if  it is exhausted in an everlasting manner, 
then it is irreversible i.e. it would never come ba ck. 
 
The wrong engagements with respect to true paths  are: 
1.  Apprehension of the path to liberation as utterly n ot existent 
2.  Apprehension of the familiarization of selflessness  as being unsuitable to be a path 
3.  Apprehension of merely some attribute of concentrat ion as the path to liberation 
Here, we are talking about “merely some attribute o f concentration as the path to liberation”. 
This specifically refers to an attribute of a conce ntration that is a mundane concentration , 
not one that is an entity of a path . A mundane concentration cannot be the path to lib eration; 
if one apprehends it as a path to liberation, then this is wrong. This apprehension is related 
to the third apprehension under true cessations, th e apprehension of some attribute of 
suffering as sublime liberation. One apprehends som e attribute of suffering as sublime 
liberation (i.e. third wrong conception under true cessation), and thinks this attribute of 
concentration is the path to liberation (i.e. third  wrong conception under true paths). 
4.  Apprehension of a path (that acts as a bearer of th e quality of overcoming suffering) as not 
existent 
Here, someone thinks that a path that overcomes suf fering does not exist.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 105: 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-1B1D-2. Identifying the sixteen aspe cts of the truths contradicting those 
The subject—the suffering of suffering—is: 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 21  (1) impermanent, because it is produced intermitten tly;  
(2) suffering, because it is under the influence of  karma and afflictions; 
(3) empty, because it is devoid of a supervisory se lf that is a different entity, and  
(4) selfless, because it is not established as an e ntity of independent self. {148}  
 
The aspects of origins are as follows. The subject— contaminated karma and craving—
are: 
(1) the aspect of cause, because they are the root of suffering, its result; 
(2) origin, because they produce all those aspects again and again; and 
(3) strong production, because they produce them fo rcefully. 
The subject—craving of [cyclic] existence—is:  
(4) the aspect of condition, because it is the coop erative condition of suffering, its result. 
 
The aspects of cessations are as follows. The subje ct—the separation that is an utter 
exhaustion of suffering through the force of antido tes—is: 
(1) the aspect of cessation, because it is a separa tion in which suffering has been 
abandoned;  
(2) the aspect of pacification, because it is a sep aration in which afflictions have been 
abandoned; 
(3) the aspect of sublimity, because it is a libera tion that is benefit and happiness; and  
(4) the aspect of definite emergence, because it is  a liberation that bears the quality of 
irreversibility. 
 
The aspects of paths are as follows. The subject—th e wisdom directly realizing 
selflessness—is: 
(1) aspect of path, because it is a path that proce eds to liberation; 
(2) aspect of suitability, because it acts as the d irect antidote to afflictions; 
(3) aspect of achievement, because it is an exalted  wisdom directly realizing the final 
mode of abidance of the mind; and  
(4) aspect of deliverance, because it is an antidot e that acts as a bearer of the quality of 
suffering being irreversible [non-returnable, i.e. sufferings will never return ]. 
 
With respect to the subject of the aspects of paths : the subject is the wisdom directly realizing 
selflessness. Is this an exalted wisdom directly re alizing the final mode of abidance of the mind? 
No, it is not. (This is related to the third aspect  of path, which reads “aspect of achievement, 
because it is an exalted wisdom directly realizing the final mode of abidance of the mind.”) If we 
leave out the word “final” (i.e. if we say “it is a n exalted wisdom directly realizing the mode of 
abidance  of the mind…”), then the statement would be accura te; otherwise, there is a fault. Why? 
In general, when we talk about selflessness, it can  refer to selflessness of persons or selflessness o f 
phenomena. The selflessness of phenomena refers to emptiness of true existence. Here, when we 
talk about selflessness, we are talking about selfl essness of persons, because the realization of 
emptiness of true existence is not necessary for th e attainment of mere liberation from samsara. 
When we talk about “the realization of selflessness ” in this context, it must be an aspect common to 
all the three vehicles . So, this wisdom directly realizing selflessness i s a wisdom directly realizing 
selflessness of person. The realization of the empt iness of true existence is not necessary.  
 
If we compare the fourth aspect of true cessations with the fourth aspect of true paths: the fourth 
aspect of true cessations has to do with one defini tely emerging, because of liberation being 
irreversible, while the fourth aspect of true paths  is the aspect of deliverance i.e. one is definitel y 
delivered because the wisdom directly realizing sel flessness is an antidote that acts as a bearer of 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 22  the quality of suffering being non-returnable. So, this last aspect, the aspect of deliverance means 
that one is definitely delivered to liberation.  
 
 
Questions and answers 
 
Q: The first and fourth wrong conceptions with rega rd to true paths seem very similar. Is there a 
difference?  
A: Indeed they are similar, however when it comes t o how they are explained there are some 
differences. If you were to look at the aspects of true cessations: there are the aspect of cessation,  
pacification, sublimity and definite emergence, the y are quite similar too. 
 
 
 
Wednesday 21 May 2008 (evening)  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 105: 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-1B2. Meaning of the branches 
The first of four: 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-1B2A. Instructions regarding true su fferings 
COMMENTARY 
Regarding suffering, “The emptiness of forms and so  forth that are results and the 
Perfection of Wisdom are one nature in the entity o f thusness.” 
 
EXPLANATION 
The subject—“Shariputra, with regard to this, when a bodhisattva mahasattva strives 
with respect to the emptiness of forms, he strives… ” {149}—are instructions for the 
sake of stopping adherence to objects of knowledge as truly existent regarding 
suffering, because they are instructions that make known that “The emptiness of 
contaminated forms and so forth that are results, and the Perfec tion of Wisdom 
directly realizing that  are one nature in the entity of thusness , the emptiness of true 
existence.”  
 
In this section, there are four types of instructio ns: those regarding true sufferings, true origins, true 
cessations, and true paths. These instructions are given to the persons who practice the four noble 
truths. First, one needs to know or understand suff erings. On that basis, one will be able to generate  
a mind that wishes to separate from suffering. Then  one investigates the causes of suffering, 
checking, “Am I able to separate from the causes of  sufferings? Do these sufferings have causes or 
not? Are the causes permanent or impermanent, and s o forth.”  Based on this analysis, one sees that 
one can  separate from suffering.  
 The instructions regarding the four truths involve  instructions for those who practice the four 
truths by way of instructing them not to adhere to the truths—sufferings, origins, and so forth— as 
truly existent. There are instructions as follows:  
• true sufferings are to be known but they are not to  be known—this means that sufferings are to 
be known, but they should not be known in a manner of adhering to them as truly existent; so 
they are to be known in a manner of not adhering to  them as truly existent; 
• true origins are to be abandoned but are not to be abandoned—i.e. true origins are to be 
abandoned, but they are not to be abandoned by way of adhering to them as truly existent; they 
are to be abandoned not adhering them as truly exis tent; 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 23  • true cessations are to be actualized but are not to  be actualized—i.e. true cessations are to be 
actualized, but they are not to be actualized in a manner of adhering to them as truly existent; 
they are to be actualized not adhering them as trul y existent; 
• true paths are to be cultivated but are not to be c ultivated—true paths are to be cultivated, but 
they are not to be cultivated through adhering to t hem as truly existing; they are to be cultivated 
by not adhering to them as truly existent.  
That is the basic meaning of this section, although  it may seem there are many words in this section. 
If you can contemplate this very extensively, it wo uld be best. 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 106: 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-1B2B. Instructions regarding true or igins 
COMMENTARY 
Regarding origins, as emptiness and forms and so fo rth that are causes are just not 
different, “Forms and so forth are not bearers of t he qualities of origination, cessation, 
the thoroughly afflicted or the completely pure.” 
 
EXPLANATION 
“Do not perfectly subsequently see forms as bearing  the quality of production or bearing 
the quality of cessation…” are instructions regarding origins,  because they instruct that 
“Forms and so forth  included within contaminated causes  do  not newly exist truly as 
bearers of the qualities of origination, cessation,  the thoroughly afflicted or the 
completely pure.” They do not exist truly as those, as emptiness and forms and so 
forth that are causes are just not different  ultimately. This is for the sake of refuting 
true existence with respect to origins, the objects  of abandonment. {150}  
 
The text says, “Do not perfectly subsequently see f orms as bearing the quality of production or 
bearing the quality of cessation…” In fact, forms do bear the quality of production and the quality 
of cessation. In this quotation, one is told to “no t perfectly subsequently see forms as bearing the 
quality of production or bearing the quality of ces sation…” this means that, although forms do  bear 
the qualities of production and cessation, one shou ld not perfectly subsequently see forms as 
bearing the quality of production ultimately , or as bearing the quality of cessation ultimately . 
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 106: 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-1B2C. Instructions regarding true ce ssations 
COMMENTARY 
Regarding cessations, “emptiness is free from produ ction and cessation, the thoroughly 
afflicted and the completely pure, decrease and inc rease and so forth; from form does 
not exist, production of ignorance does not exist, cessation of ignorance does not exist, 
buddha does not exist, until enlightenment does not  exist.”  
 
EXPLANATION 
“Shariputra, emptiness is not produced, not ceased,  not thoroughly afflicted, and not 
completely pure,” are instructions regarding cessations,  because they instruct that 
“emptiness , the freedom from adventitious stains, is  free from truly existent 
characteristics of compounded phenomena, production and cessation, the thoroughly 
afflicted and the completely pure  objects of abandonment and antidotes , occasions of 
decrease and increase , causes and results,  and so forth ; with respect to it, truly 
existent characterizing attributes are never establ ished anywhere. ” It follows that true 
existence is never established anywhere because, from a generality of the thoroughly 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 24  afflicted,  form  does not exist ; a particularity,  production of ignorance, does not exist ; 
a generality of the  completely pure, cessation of ignorance, does not exist ; a 
particularity, the realization,  buddha , does not exist ; until the abandonment,  
enlightenment , does not exist  ultimately. This is for the sake of refuting true existence 
with respect to cessations, the objects to be actua lized. 
 
This talks about “the realization, buddha,” which i s actually the ultimate  or final realization , and 
“enlightenment,” which is the final abandonment . This passage is for the sake of refuting true 
existence with respect to cessations. When it says “It follows that true existence is never establishe d 
anywhere because, from a generality of the thoroughly afflicted,  form  does not exist ,” this means 
that form does not exist truly , and also that sounds, odors, tastes, and objects of touch do not exist 
truly . “A particularity, production of ignorance, does n ot exist” truly ; “a generality of the 
completely pure, cessation of ignorance, does not e xist” truly ; “a particularity, the realization, 
buddha, does not exist” truly , “until the abandonment, enlightenment, does not e xist ultimately .” So 
here, in this section, when it says “does not exist ,” you need to understand that it means “does not 
exist truly,” or alternatively you can say “does not exist ultimately .”  
 Here, thoroughly afflicted phenomena are mentioned . Not only are they not truly existent, but 
also completely pure phenomena are not truly existe nt. Here when we talk about “cessation, you 
need to understand that cessation is a phenomenon o f the completely pure class.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 107, 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-1B2D. Instructions regarding true pa ths 
COMMENTARY 
Regarding paths, “The perfection of generosity and so forth, oneself or inner emptiness 
and so forth, outer emptiness and so forth, the ear lier limit and the later limit—mutually 
possessing all and established as just not being no t possessed.” Indicating [all the above 
four statements] instructs about the truths. {151} 
 
EXPLANATION 
“Shariputra, when a great bodhisattva practices the  Perfection of Wisdom, he does not 
perfectly subsequently see himself ‘striving’ or ‘n ot striving’ in generosity…” are 
instructions regarding path,  because they instruct that “The perfection of generosity 
and so forth,  the bodhisattva himself , the object of cultivation and that which cultivat es 
are not truly existent, whereby they are not posses sed; the negation is not truly existent, 
whereby it is not that they are not possessed. Real ize that.”  
 “Regarding emptiness, one does not practice by way  of emptiness; it is a yoga path 5 by 
way of emptiness…” are instructions regarding  suitability and achievement , because 
they instruct that “(i) The meditative stabilizatio ns that takes  the three— inner 
emptiness and so forth— as objects, and (ii) the three—the emptiness of outer objects 
and so forth —do not exist truly as objects and object-possessor s. That negation itself 
also does not exist truly.” 
 “With respect to forms, one does not and will not practice the earlier limit…” are 
instructions regarding  deliverance , because they instruct that “mutually possessing  the 
earlier limit , samsara  and the later limit,  nirvana (where one definitely emerges from 
and  where one definitely emerges to) is not truly exist ent , and since that very lack of 
true existence is also not truly existent, they are  established as just not being not 
possessed.  These are instructions for the sake of stopping ad herence to paths, the 
objects to be relied upon, as truly existent. {152}  
                                                 
5 la ma emended to read lam in accordance with page 101 of the Drepung Loseling  Library Society’s 1996 edition of 
Ornament of the Essence . 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 25   
In this section regarding true paths, we actually f ind the four aspects of true paths. These are: 
1.  Aspect of path 
2.  Aspect of suitability 
3.  Aspect of achievement  
4.  Aspect of deliverance 
Here, in the first paragraph, there are instruction s regarding path ; in the second paragraph, 
instructions regarding suitability and achievement ; and in the third paragraph, instructions regardin g 
deliverance . This morning, we said that the wisdom directly re alizing selflessness is aspect of path 
because it is a path that proceeds to liberation. W hen we talk about this path that proceeds to 
liberation, we can relate it to the cultivation of generosity, for example. In this first paragraph, i t 
talks about the bodhisattva, the object of cultivat ion, and that which cultivates as not being truly 
existent. One should cultivate the path by not adhe ring to it as truly existent.  
 In the second paragraph, it discusses suitability and achievement. Suitability has to do with the 
fact that true paths “act as the direct antidote to  afflictions,” as mentioned earlier. One cultivates  
paths without adhering to them as truly existent. R egarding achievement:  a true path is “an exalted 
wisdom directly realizing the mode of abidance of t he mind.”  When one cultivates such an exalted 
wisdom, one does not adhere to it as truly existent . 
 In the third paragraph, we have instructions regar ding deliverance . This regards true paths being 
an “antidote that acts as a bearer of the quality o f suffering being non-returnable.” When it talks 
here about deliverance, it’s talking about delivera nce to liberation. It mentions the earlier limit an d 
the later limit. The “earlier limit” refers to sams ara, where one definitely emerges from, and the 
“later limit” refers to nirvana, where one definite ly emerges to. While definitely emerging from 
samsara or to nirvana, one does not adhere to them as truly existent. To actualize cessations, one 
needs to rely on true paths.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 107: 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-2. Instructions on the supports of t he achievings 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-2A. General meaning 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-2B. Meaning of the branches 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-2A. General meaning 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-2A1. Identifying the uncommon Three Jewels  
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-2A2. General presentation of refuge 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-2A3. Difference between conventional  and ultimate refuge 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-2A4. How to go for refuge 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-2A1. Identifying the uncommon Three Jewels  
[Maitreya’s] Mahayana Treatise on the Sublime Continuum  
(Mahayanottaratantrasastra ) [1.5] says: 
 
Uncompounded, spontaneous,  
Not realized by others’ conditions,  
Possessing knowledge, mercy and ability 
Is the very Buddha possessing the two welfares.  
 
This quote from Maitreya’s Uttaratantra  contains the eight qualities of the Buddha Jewel. The 
definition of a Buddha Jewel  is “a final object of refuge that possesses the ei ght excellent qualities, 
uncompounded and so forth.” These eight excellent q ualities are: 
1.  The excellent quality of being uncompounded, due to being free from production and 
disintegration. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 26  2.  The excellent quality of being spontaneous , meaning having completely pacified exertion.  
3.  The excellent quality of not being able to be realized exactly as it is by expressive sounds 
and conceptualizations in the way it appears to the  mind that takes it as its appearing object.  
4.  The excellent quality of knowledge , referring to knowing modes and varieties.  
5.  The excellent quality of mercy. 
6.  The excellent quality of ability. 
7.  The excellent quality of one’s own welfare.   
8.  The excellent quality of others’ welfare.  
 
The seventh and eighth qualities subsume all the pr evious six. The first three are subsumed in the 
excellent quality of one’s own welfare, the next th ree are subsumed in the excellent quality of 
others’ welfare.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 108: 
 
Just as it has been said, that is the Buddha Jewel bearing the nature of the three exalted 
bodies, the fulfillment of the two welfares. Furthe r [1.10]: 
 
That which is inconceivable, without the two, witho ut conception, 
Pure, clear, and of the antidotal class, 
That which is and that by which there is separation  from attachment; 
That bearer of the characteristics of the two truth s is the Dharma. 
 
Just as it has been said, that is the Dharma Jewel bearing the characteristics of the two 
truths of the completely pure [class]. Also [1.14]:  
 
The definition of a Dharma Jewel  is: a truth of the completely pure class in an ary a’s continuum that 
possesses any of the eight excellent qualities, “in conceivable” and so forth. Notice that in the 
definition of the Buddha Jewel, it talks about poss essing the eight excellent qualities, while in the 
case of the definition of the Dharma Jewel, it says  “possesses any of the eight excellent qualities.” 
The eight excellent qualities of the Dharma Jewel a re: 
1.  The excellent quality of being inconceivable , or not being able to be conceived exactly as it 
is by the mind of the logicians with respect to the  four possibilities. The word “logician” 
refers to a propounder of reasoning who is a follow er of conceptualizations/ conceptualizing 
superimpositions.  
2.  The excellent quality of being with neither karma nor afflictions.  
3.  The excellent quality of being without conceptualization that is improper attention. 
4.  The excellent quality of purity , meaning being pure due to the entity of the path not being 
mixed with obscurations. 
5.  The excellent quality of being clear , meaning knowing modes and varieties.  
6.  “Of the antidotal class” refers to the excellent qu ality of acting as an antidote to the 
discordant classes.  
7.  The excellent quality of true cessation, which is free from attachment. 
8.  The excellent quality of true paths , which act to separate from attachment.  
 
Gyeltsab Je says “Just as it has been said, that is  the Dharma Jewel bearing the characteristics of th e 
two truths of the completely pure [class].” The sev enth and eighth qualities subsume the first six, 
with true cessations subsuming the first three and true paths subsuming the fourth through sixth 
qualities. In the definition of the Dharma Jewel, w e say it possesses any of the eight qualities. For 
example, someone who newly attains the path of seei ng does not have a true cessation.  
 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 27  Ornament of the Essence , p. 108: 
 
Because of pure inner exalted wisdoms  
Seeing modes and varieties, 
The assembly of intelligent irreversible  ones 
Just possess unsurpassable excellent qualities.  
 
Just as it has been said, that is the Sangha Jewel who are irreversible aryas possessing 
the excellent qualities of knowledge and liberation . I will not elaborate more beyond 
this. 
 
The definition of a Sangha Jewel  is an arya person who possesses any of the eight e xcellent 
qualities of knowledge and liberation.  
 
The eight excellent qualities are:  
1.  Excellent quality of knowing modes.  
2.  Excellent quality of knowing varieties.  
3.  Excellent quality of inner knowledge.  
The next three are excellent qualities of purity in  being free of any of the three respective 
obscurations :  
4.  Obscurations of attachment—this refers to afflictiv e obscurations. 
5.  Obscurations of obstructions—this refers to knowled ge obscurations. 
6.  Inferior obscurations —obstructions that hinder the generation of the mind  of enlightenment 
due to being captivated by the bliss of an inferior  peace. 
7.  Excellent quality of knowledge.  
8.  Excellent quality of liberation.  
In the seventh and eighth qualities, the excellent quality of knowledge corresponds to the word 
“intelligent,” and the excellent quality of liberation  corresponds to the word “irreversible” in the 
quotation from Uttaratantra . The first three qualities are subsumed under the seventh quality, and 
the next three under the eighth quality. It would b e very good for you to contemplate these points 
with regard to the Three Jewels.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 108: 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-2A2. General presentation of refuge 
Furthermore, it is just as it has been taught in th at [Maitreya’s Mahayana Treatise on 
the Sublime Continuum (Mahayanottaratantrasastra ), 1.19]: 
 
Due to the teacher, the teaching and the disciples,  {153}  
In terms of the three vehicles and  
Those who believe in the three takings, 
The three refuges are presented. 
 
Here, in general, the purpose of presenting the thr ee refuges in the scriptures is 
indicated. In terms of: (i) the buddha that is an o bject to be attained in the continuum of 
Mahayana lineage-bearers who have entered a path, w hich should be known as a 
resultant refuge, and the buddha that has already b een accomplished, which should be 
known as a causal refuge; (ii) the causal refuges o f the other two lineage-bearers; and 
(iii) those who believe in taking the buddhas to be  supreme, such as making offerings to 
them and honoring them, even though they have not e ntered the path—the Buddha 
Jewel is presented as a refuge. 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 28   In terms of: (i) the resultant refuge of those who  seek in their continua nirvana without 
relying on others’ sounds, at the time of the last existence of solitary realizer lineage-
bearers who have entered a path and (ii) those who believe in taking the excellent 
Dharma to be supreme, even though they have not ent ered the path—the Dharma Jewel 
is presented as a refuge. 
 In terms of: (i) the resultant refuge of those who  seek nirvana that is attained through 
following others’ sounds at the time of the last ex istence of hearer lineage-bearers who 
have entered a path, and (ii) those who believe in the taking the Sangha to be supreme, 
even though they have not entered the path—the Sang ha Jewel is presented as a refuge. 
 Even though one may not seek them as objects to be  attained in one’s continuum, 
understand that even the Dharma and Sangha Jewel fo r whom they have become 
refuges are causal refuges upon which one relies. I n dependence on the presentation of 
the three Mahayana uncommon refuges above, the thre e causal refuges and the two 
resultant refuges of the other two lineage-bearers will also become understood. 
However, this indicates the purpose of the general presentation of the three refuges in 
the scriptures. 
  
To explain the essential points in this outline: he re, we have the general presentation of refuge. In 
general, all three lineage-bearers are the same in going for refuge to the Three Jewels. In particular , 
the Buddha Jewel is posited as the main object of r efuge for Mahayana lineage-bearers, the Dharma 
Jewel is posited as the main object of refuge for s olitary realizer lineage-bearers, and the Sangha 
Jewel is posited as the main object of refuge for h earer lineage-bearers. Why do we posit the 
Buddha Jewel as the main object of refuge for Mahay ana lineage-bearers, and so forth? In this 
stanza from Uttaratantra , we see the words “In terms of the three vehicles and / Those who believe 
in the three takings.” Before entering a path, ther e are three lineage-bearers of different beliefs; after 
they have entered the path they have three differen t takings (which will be explained); and at the 
end they attain different results .  
 In general, the three lineage-bearers take refuge in the Three Jewels. For Mahayana lineage-
bearers, the main object of refuge is the Buddha Je wel. Of course, before entering a path, Mahayana 
lineage-bearers believe in taking the buddhas as su preme, make offerings to them, honor them, and 
so forth. After entering the path, they have a mind  that wants to seek the state of a buddha, and 
when they eventually attain the result, they attain  buddhahood. So in this way, the Buddha Jewel is 
posited to be the main object of refuge of Mahayana  lineage-bearers. 
 As for solitary realizer lineage-bearers, before e ntering the path, they have strong belief in 
Dharma, so they take the excellent Dharma to be sup reme. After entering the path, they do not rely 
much on the arya sangha as companions and in partic ular, in their last existence, they do not rely on 
others’ speech, and they actualize the result, nirv ana.  
 Hearer lineage-bearers, before entering the path, have belief in the Sangha Jewel, taking it as 
supreme, and after entering the path, they rely on others. In their last life, through relying on othe rs’ 
sounds, they attain the result of nirvana.  
 In this way, the Buddha Jewel is posited as the ma in object of refuge for Mahayana lineage-
bearers, the Dharma Jewel is posited as the main ob ject of refuge for solitary realizer lineage-
bearers, and the Sangha Jewel is posited as the mai n object of refuge for hearer lineage-bearers. 
 This outline mentions resultant refuge and causal refuge; we will discuss those tomorrow. 
 
Questions and answers 
 
Q: Regarding yesterday’s teachings on the two truth s. Is it possible for all conventional truths to 
cease to exist? When all sentient beings have attai ned enlightenment, it would seem that at that 
point conventional truths would cease to exist.  
A: The two truths still exist on the buddha ground.   
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 29  Student: For what purpose?  
A: There is no need for a purpose for the two truth s to exist. The two truths are a description of 
reality; there is no particular reason for their ex istence. They are not a description of practice, wh ere 
there is some kind of purpose. For example, the fou r truths are explained from the point of view of 
practice, but the two truths are explained in gener al as a description of how things are in reality.  It is 
important to understand the presentation of the two  truths well; without understanding them well, 
erroneous minds will arise, and afflictions will ar ise. If one does not know the two truths well, one 
will not know the four noble truths well, and witho ut knowing the four noble truths well, one will 
not be able to go for refuge to the Three Jewels pr operly, because one will not understand the 
objects of refuge well.  
 
Q: When all sentient beings become buddhas, would p henomena just become mental in nature? 
A: When all sentient beings become buddhas, we can always have a picnic! It is very difficult to say 
when this will be…. There is a lot of discussion ab out this in the textbooks. Lama Tzong Khapa’s 
textbook says at the end: of course if we point out  everyone, one by one, for everyone there is the 
end, but it is difficult to point out the end of sa msara.   
 
Q: By understanding the sixteen aspects of the four  noble truths, we can understand that liberation 
is possible. How can we understand that buddhahood is possible?  
A: If we understand that the conception of true exi stence can be abandoned, we realize the 
possibility of attaining buddhahood. These last wor ds I have mentioned are very auspicious.  
 
Thursday May 22, 2008 
 
Yesterday we discussed the three types of obscurations : obscurations of attachment, obscurations of 
obstructions, and inferior obscurations. The inferi or obscurations are described in Jetsunpa’s 
General Meaning . It gives the example of an obscuration which inte rferes with the generation of the 
Mahayana mind of enlightenment due to being captiva ted by the bliss of an inferior peace. An 
example could be a mind that seeks one’s own indivi dual liberation. Yesterday we spoke of these 
obscurations as obscurations of meditative absorpti on, but this word “of” can be interpreted to mean 
either “to” or “which are.” It seems that the medit ative absorption itself is the obscuration. On p. 
102, it says “…if one is not roused by the buddhas… ” This means that if one were to enter this 
absorption, it would act as a hindrance to the bodh isattvas’ attaining enlightenment, but this is not 
the case and is merely examining a possibility. How ever, it would thus seem that calm abiding is a 
type of obscuration!  
 
In yesterday’s discussion of the general presentati on of refuge, it discusses resultant and causal 
refuge. Resultant refuge refers to the refuge that is to be attained. An exa mple is the Buddha that is 
an object to be attained in one’s continuum. An exa mple of causal refuge is the Buddha in others’ 
continua that has already been accomplished. The re sultant refuge is an object to be attained in the 
future in one’s own continuum, and a causal refuge is a cause for attaining that future result, which 
serves either directly or indirectly as a cause for  the attainment of the Buddha to be attained in one ’s 
continuum in the future.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 109: 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-2A3. Difference between conventional  and ultimate refuge {154}  
That [Maitreya’s Mahayana Treatise on the Sublime Continuum  
(Mahayanottaratantrasastra ), 1.20] says: 
 
Because it will be abandoned, because it bears the quality of being fallible, 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 30  Because of absence and because it is together with fear, 
The two types of Dharma and the assembly of aryas 
Are not supreme, everlasting refuges. 
 
Regarding that, the meanings of ultimate and conven tional refuge are as follows. The 
refuge, as in the case of those definite in the hea rer lineage, that—(i) in the perspective 
of its attitude, seeks merely the pacification of t he suffering of cyclic existence, and 
holds that it is not necessary to proceed beyond th at, and (ii) in actuality, does not 
complete the traversing of the path—is the meaning of a conventional refuge. That 
which—(i) in the perspective of attitude, holds to completing the traversing [of the 
path], and (ii) in actuality completes it—is the me aning of an ultimate refuge; there is no 
person who wishes to know the proof of the scriptur al Dharma and the like as not being 
the final truth body, whereby it is only inappropri ate. Hence, even what is a Mahayana 
scriptural Dharma is not a final refuge; it is mere ly an object to be relied upon as a 
method for clearly realizing the meaning. Once the final clear realization of the meaning 
has been attained, since it is not necessary as a m ethod for attaining that which is not yet 
attained, 6 it  is only an object to be abandoned  like a boat. Further, the general 
conclusion here is a branch of establishing the per vasion; it is not the principal meaning. 
 A wisdom directly realizing selflessness in the co ntinuum of a bodhisattva arya (i) has 
not exhausted all stains, even though it appears as  though it has separated from all stains 
in the perspective of seeing, and (ii) has not exha usted all stains in entity, even though 
the pollution of stains has not entered its entity,  whereby it  bears the quality of being 
fallible , a falsity, the combination of appearing to be tha t and being empty of that. 
Hence, it is indicated to not be an ultimate refuge . Having said that, know that the 
assertion—that this indicates that a compounded phe nomenon is pervaded by not being 
an ultimate refuge—is a vile wrong conception that denies that a buddha’s true paths 
and two types of form bodies are ultimate refuges; it should be cast faraway. {155} 
  Also, with respect to the modes of the hearers’ v ehicle, a hearer’s nirvana without 
remainder is not an ultimate refuge, because it is strongly distinguished by a mere 
absence  of all  sufferings and origins . It projects inexhaustible fear of the knowledge 
obscurations.  
 
Here, we are looking at the difference between conv entional and ultimate refuge. We will look at 
the definitions from General Meaning . 
• The definition of conventional refuge  is: (i) There is no ultimate refuge that is either  it or a 
division of it, and (ii) a refuge that has not comp leted the traversing of the path in actuality. 
Conventional refuge is mutually inclusive with temporal refuge . 
• The definition of ultimate refuge  is: A refuge that has completed the traversing of the path in 
actuality.  
Ultimate refuge is mutually inclusive with final refuge .  
 
There are Three Jewels: Buddha Jewel, Dharma Jewel,  and Sangha Jewel. Among these, we can 
differentiate between temporal and final refuges. W hen the Buddha Jewel is divided, it can be 
divided into ultimate and conventional Buddha Jewel . The conventional Buddha Jewel refers to the 
form bodies, i.e. the emanation body and the enjoym ent body. The ultimate Buddha Jewel refers to 
the nature body and the exalted wisdom truth body.  
                                                 
6 Ma thob pa’i emended to read ma thob pa thob pa’i in accordance with page 104 of the Drepung Loseling  Library 
Society’s 1996 edition of Ornament of the Essence . 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 31   The Dharma Jewel has terminological divisions , that is, they are not divisions by way of entity . 
The conventional Dharma Jewel is, for example, the scriptural wheel of Dharma, such as the 
teachings. The ultimate Dharma Jewel is true cessat ions and true paths.  
 When the Sangha Jewel is divided terminologically,  there are the conventional and ultimate 
Sangha Jewels. The conventional Sangha Jewel is the  arya sangha. The ultimate Sangha Jewel is 
true cessations and true paths. True cessations and  true paths are ultimate Sangha Jewels, but are not  
Sangha Jewels. The reason true cessations and true paths are ultimate Sangha Jewels is because 
whether or not someone is Sangha Jewel depends on w hether or not this person has true paths or 
true cessations.  
 
We have posited the conventional and ultimate refug e, the conventional and ultimate Buddha Jewel, 
the conventional and ultimate Dharma Jewel, and the  conventional and ultimate Sangha Jewel. You 
may wonder, is the Buddha a conventional or ultimat e refuge? A conventional refuge has to be a 
temporal  refuge and an ultimate refuge has to be a final refuge. A Buddha Jewel is pervaded by 
being a final refuge. The Buddha Jewel is divided i nto the conventional and ultimate Buddha Jewel. 
Is the conventional Buddha Jewel a conventional ref uge? It is not. The conventional Buddha Jewel 
is not a conventional refuge, but it is a conventio nal Buddha Jewel. A conventional Buddha Jewel is 
necessarily not  a conventional refuge. Whatever is a conventional refuge is definitely a temporal 
refuge, while whatever is an ultimate refuge is a f inal refuge.  
 How many ultimate refuges are there? How many conv entional refuges are there? The Buddha 
Jewel is pervaded by being an ultimate refuge, but there is no pervasion that a Dharma Jewel or a 
Sangha Jewel is not a final refuge. There are those  that are final refuges and those that are not. Wit h 
regard to the Dharma Jewel, we can posit some that are final refuges. For example, the exalted 
knower of all aspects on the buddha ground and the true cessations on the buddha ground are both 
final refuges and Dharma Jewels. If we leave out th e cases on the buddha ground, all instances of 
the Dharma Jewel are temporal refuges. Other than t hose cases on the buddha ground, all true 
cessations and true paths in the continua of aryas are temporal refuges. They are Dharma Jewels and 
temporal refuges. It is similar with the Sangha Jew el. A buddha arya is a Sangha Jewel and is a final 
refuge. All aryas who have not attained the state o f Buddha Jewel are Sangha Jewels and temporal 
refuges.  
 
In the citation from Maitreya’s Mahayana Treatise on the Sublime Continuum  above, the first line 
says, “Because it will be abandoned...” Regarding t his, General Meaning says, “The subject—the 
twelve branches of scriptures included within the c ontinua of trainees—are not final refuges 
because they are to be abandoned, like a boat at th e time of having completed the clear realization 
of the meaning of the scriptures.”  
 Regarding the line “because it bears the quality o f being fallible…,” General Meaning says “The 
subject—the true path directly realizing emptiness in the continuum of an [arya] learner—is not a 
final refuge because it bears the quality of being fallible, a falsity that has not separated from all  
stains even though it appears as though it has sepa rated from all stains in the perspective of seeing. ” 
The next syllogism, which is related to the same li ne, says, “The subject—a true path in the 
continuum of a learner—is not a final refuge becaus e it is an impermanent phenomenon that must 
transform from a state that is together with stains  into a state that is free from stains.”  
 In regard to the next line, “because of absence…,”  General Meaning says, “The subject—
nirvana without remainder—is not a final refuge bec ause it is strongly distinguished by a mere 
absence of sufferings and origins.” 
 In regard to the line “because it is together with  fear…,” General Meaning says, “The subject—
tenth-grounders and hearer and solitary realizer fo e-destroyers—are not final refuges because they 
are together with the fear of [or “that is”] the kn owledge obscurations.” When we say “fear of the 
knowledge obscurations,” it refers to fear that is  the knowledge obscurations.  
 Uttaratantra says:  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 32   
Because it will be abandoned, because it bears the quality of being fallible, 
Because of absence and because it is together with fear, 
The two types of Dharma and the assembly of aryas 
Are not supreme, everlasting refuges.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 110: 
 
Some ignoramus, having discarded the timely occasion  to state a proof for that not 
being an ultimate refuge in our system, formulated a consequence and explained that the 
sign and the predicate are assertions of those of h earer schools. Another explained that it 
means non-existence at the final time, stated a non -affirming negative as the reason, and 
so forth. Their making presentations despite not ha ving realized the meaning will cause 
the Buddha’s teachings to become stained. Thus, it will be marvelous to ignore them.  
 The mode of the hearers is also the mode of the ve hicle asserted in our system; it is not 
the mode of assertion of the lower tenets. The anal ogy of a butter-lamp that has died out 
means that when a hearer has entered the sphere of peace, even appearances in which 
dissimilar meanings are slightly observed have vani shed; it does not mean that the 
continuity of matter and cognition has been severed , as is asserted by some Buddhist 
schools. Even the signs of compositional factors of  a hearer foe-destroyer is  together 
with the fear  of [i.e. “that is” ] the knowledge obscurations, as if the knife of a butcher 
has been raised. 
 Therefore, [Maitreya’s Mahayana Treatise on the Sublime Continuum  
(Mahayanottaratantrasastra ), 1.21] says: 
 
Ultimately, the refuge of migrating beings  
Is solely the Buddha, 
Because the Muni bears the truth body; 
Because [He] is also the culmination of the assembl y. 
 
Just as it has been said, only the Buddha who bears  the nature of the three exalted 
bodies is an ultimate refuge.  
 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-2A4. How to go for refuge {156}  
Having understood well the excellent qualities of t he Three Jewels and the stages to be 
trained in of one who has gone for refuge in them t hat have been taught in [Asanga's] 
Compendium of Ascertainments (Viniscaya-samgrahani ) and so forth, you yourself 
should contemplate well upon the shortcomings of sa msara in general and the 
shortcomings of the bad migrations in particular, i n dependence on the two causes—(1) 
recollecting the fear, and (2) knowing that the Thr ee Jewels have the ability to protect 
from the fear. Then tame your mind [by] going for r efuge such that you entrust yourself 
in the Three Jewels from the bottom of your heart, after which train properly in the 
trainings of refuge. 
  
This passage explains how to go for refuge to the T hree Jewels. It is not long, but contains all the 
essential points for going for refuge. First we nee d to identify what the Three Jewels are, then bring  
to mind their excellent qualities. Then one needs t o practice properly the trainings related to the 
Three Jewels.  
 There are two causes for taking refuge : (1) reflecting on the faults of samsara, particul arly the 
lower migrations, by way of which we generate fear,  the first cause of refuge. (2) The second cause 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 33  is knowing that the Three Jewels have the ability t o protect us from fear. On the basis of these two, 
we go for refuge to the Three Jewels. Besides going  for refuge to the Three Jewels, we need to train 
in the various types of advice. There are common tr ainings and individual trainings. Among the 
individual trainings, there are prescriptive and pr oscriptive trainings, i.e., respectively, those tha t 
indicate what we should do and what we should not do.  
 The proscriptive trainings  with regard to the Three Jewels are as follows. A proscriptive training 
with regard to the Buddha Jewel is the training not  to go for refuge in worldly gods, nagas, evil 
spirits, and so forth. With respect to the Dharma J ewel, a proscriptive training is not to harm 
sentient beings. This means being non-violent. Havi ng gone for refuge in the Sangha Jewel, one 
should not keep company with Tirthikas (the “Forder s”). These are people who hold wrong views. 
The reason for this is that, having gone for refuge  to the Sangha Jewel, there is the danger of 
adopting their views and becoming like them. Howeve r, this does not mean that we should hate 
them.  
 The prescriptive trainings  are as follows: having gone for refuge to the Budd ha Jewel, we should 
not discriminate among Buddha images on the basis o f the material they are made from. For 
instance, we may have a Buddha statue made of gold or silver, which we place very high, while we 
place statues made of clay lower down. A statue mad e of precious materials will not bring greater 
blessings! This also applies to images such as phot ographs.  
 The prescriptive training with respect to the Dhar ma Jewel is that, having gone for refuge to the 
Dharma Jewel, we generate the awareness of even a s ingle syllable or letter as being the Dharma 
Jewel. The Dharma Jewel has the ability to dispel t he darkness of our ignorance, so it is important 
to regard Dharma texts as being the actual Dharma J ewel. We also should not leave our malas, pens, 
and so forth on Dharma texts, or put Dharma texts o n the ground or on cushions. If we do not 
respect Dharma texts, we accumulate the negative ka rma to be obscured in the future. The actual 
Dharma Jewel is the realizations, and of course the y cannot be left on the ground! Since it is 
difficult to maintain this training strictly, it is  important to recite a specific mantra to make amen ds 
(see below). With a good motivation, we should try to make amends for whatever mistakes we 
make.  
 With regard to the Sangha Jewel, having gone for r efuge to the Sangha Jewel we should treat 
even small pieces of red- or yellow-colored cloth w ith respect. This is difficult to do. When we 
think of the Sangha Jewel, there are also lay peopl e who are Sangha Jewel, but when we posit the 
examples of Sangha Jewel, we look to ordained peopl e, so it is important to treat robes of ordained 
people with respect. We need to be careful not to c riticize monks or nuns, as it transgresses our 
training in going for refuge to the Sangha Jewel.  
 
  
Friday May 23, 2008 
 
Going for refuge  
  
Yesterday we went through the section on how to go for refuge (p. 110). There are various points 
we need to understand. First, we need to identify t he Three Jewels, and on that basis, we need to 
understand their excellent qualities. In order to g o for refuge properly, we need to generate the two 
causes of going for refuge: (1) the fear of suffering , which is generated through contemplating the 
drawbacks of samsara and the bad migrations in part icular. Without generating this sense of dread, 
the mind wishing to separate from suffering will no t arise. (2) Then one understands that the Three 
Jewels have the ability to protect us from this fea r, so one has belief or confidence in the Three 
Jewels . With these two causes present, one will have a go od practice of going for refuge.  
 Having gone for refuge, one needs to engage in the  methods of training properly in the trainings 
of refuge, which can be divided into prescriptive and proscriptive trainings. We can also talk about 
common trainings, referring to stable faith, for ex ample in the Buddha, such that one will not give 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 34  up one’s refuge even at the cost of one’s life. One  also shows respect to the Three Jewels, makes 
offerings and prostrations to them, and so forth. I n this way good quality refuge will occur.  
 Pure refuge is contingent on the presence of the t wo causes of refuge, so as much as we are able 
to generate these, that much we are able to go for refuge well. We need to investigate whether or 
not we have these two causes. We probably have fear  of suffering, but whether we have it in an 
excellent form is questionable. We are afraid of su ffering, but probably not very  afraid. If we 
examine the attitude we have towards suffering, it is probably limited to fear of being sick, not 
having good health, not having a good job, and so f orth. As long as we do not have such superficial 
problems, we feel fine. If this is the case, then t he first cause of refuge is not complete in our 
continuum.  
 We may be healthy now, have a good job, etc., but will this always be the case? In fact, it is 
uncertain. We may be happy and comfortable now, but  we cannot be certain that it will be like this 
in the next life. Death will occur, and if it occur s suddenly, can we be sure what will happen in the 
next instant? It may be the case that due to the ri pening of negative karma, we will find ourselves in  
a very different situation from our present one. I am talking about ordinary people; of course there 
are some people who have attained control over thei r rebirth, but for ordinary people, we are not 
able to control rebirth, we do not have freedom reg arding our future life. We may die suddenly and 
find ourselves in a very pathetic situation. 
  Although the explanation in the text is not very extensive, you can do your own contemplation 
of refuge in an extensive way. We are under the inf luence of afflictions. We do find happiness in 
samsara, such as in the upper realms, but such happ iness is uncertain, it is not everlasting. Due to 
being under the influence of afflictions, such happ iness is unstable. We should contemplate this 
topic in detail. The main point here is that if we want to generate a stable cause of refuge regarding  
the fear of suffering, we need to think that as lon g as we are under the power of afflictions, there i s 
no way to experience any trustworthy, stable happin ess. On the basis of generating well the two 
causes for refuge, one takes refuge well in the Thr ee Jewels, but one should not stop at that. One 
must go on to train in the trainings of refuge. Tak ing refuge does not just refer to merely verbally 
reciting the refuge formula; it must occur in our o wn mind.  
 With regard to the trainings, there are the indivi dual trainings and the common trainings. The 
individual trainings are the prescriptive and the p roscriptive trainings. The common trainings are 
those that apply to all Three Jewels in common, suc h as respecting them, making offerings to them, 
prostrating to them, and so forth. When we show res pect, and make offerings and prostrations to the 
Three Jewels, who is benefited? Do they benefit? No , in fact it is we who benefit from this; it is not  
that if we do not make offerings, the Three Jewels do not have anything to eat, drink, etc.! 
 [Geshe-la spoke more about making offerings, etc.]  
 
Making water-bowl offerings 
 
It is said that one can determine the quality of a person’s practice by the way this person arranges 
offerings. For example, sometimes the bowls not arr anged in a straight line, but are crooked; 
sometimes there is a lot of water in one bowl, only  a little water in another. So it is said that if t he 
offerings are laid down properly, this is a sign th at the person’s practice is going well.  
 I would like to explain the way to make water bowl  offerings. It is not crucial how many bowls 
you offer; you can offer one, two, three and so for th—the number is not important. If you offer the 
traditional seven bowls of water, you should know t hat they represent the traditional offerings:  
1.  water for drinking 
2.  water for washing the feet 
3.  flowers 
4.  incense 
5.  light 
6.  perfume 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 35  7.  food  
On top of these seven you can offer music by placin g a bell, for example, on the altar, or you can 
ring a bell after you have set up the offerings, re citing the offering cloud dharani  three times while 
you ring the bell. If we make offerings with small bowls, we can hold them [in a stack] in one hand 
and [pour water into the first bowl, then] pour mos t of the water from the first bowl into the second 
one, leaving just a little in the first one, then p lace that bowl on the altar. In this way you place the 
bowls in a straight row, starting from the left and  going to the right, and make sure that you do not 
place empty bowls on the altar. Adjacent bowls shou ld not touch, and should not be placed far 
apart. The distance between them should be the widt h of a grain of wheat. These various 
observances contain essential points: for instance,  having empty bowls on the altar is said to be a 
cause of being deprived of necessities for liveliho od; it is also said that Gandharva (smell-eater) 
cities become formed in them. If the bowls touch ea ch other, this is said to be a cause of dull 
wisdom, whereas if they are too far apart, this is a cause of being very distant from one’s spiritual 
guide.  
 After setting out the bowls, you should not pour t he water into them too quickly; you should 
begin by pouring slowly, then increase the amount y ou pour until just before the bowl is full, then 
decrease at the end. Do not allow the water to over flow, and do not just fill the bowl halfway. Fill i t 
almost to the top, leaving a space at the top the w idth of a grain of wheat. If one fills the bowl onl y 
partially, this becomes the cause of being deprived  of necessities for life; if they overflow, it is t he 
cause of corrupted wisdom.  
 Having heard this explanation, you might think tha t making water-bowl offerings is too 
complicated, and you aren’t going to do it. Do not think like that; although there are these points to  
observe to do the practice properly, we just need t o be careful when we make the offerings. Other 
than being conscientious while doing it, there is n ot much hardship involved. 
 
Doing prostrations 
 
It is not absolutely necessary to perform physical prostrations. If you can’t do them, you can 
generate faith in your mind, but if you do them, yo u should ensure that you do them properly. The 
palms should be put together with the thumbs tucked  inwards. This is related to Avalokiteshvara’s 
two hands at his heart, which hold a wish-fulfillin g gem. This is just one way to do it. In fact, in 
different Buddhist traditions, there are different ways to place the hands when doing prostrations.  
 With the palms together, we first touch the crown of the head, then the throat, then the heart, or 
center of the chest. In this way we create the caus es to obtain the buddha’s holy body, speech, and 
mind. The feet should be placed together, the body upright, and the head inclined slightly 
downwards. When you go down and place your hands on  the ground, the feet should be kept in their 
starting position, and touch your forehead to the g round. Come up quickly, without staying on the 
ground. The fingers should be kept together, not sp layed apart, and you should not lift yourself up 
by making fists. When we prostrate, we touch the fo rehead to the ground, which is to show respect 
to the objects to whom we prostrate: we are putting  ourselves in a lower position as a sign of 
respect. The reason to stand up quickly is to symbo lize that we do not stay in samsara for a long 
time. If we have the fingers far apart, we create t he cause to be born as a goose, a duck, and so fort h 
with webbed feet. If we make a fist as we come up, we create the cause to be reborn as a horse, 
donkey, or other animals with hoofed feet. If we st ay on the ground for a long time, we create the 
cause to stay in samsara for a long time.  If you are a bodhisattva, perhaps you do not mind s taying 
in samsara for a long time! Of course, here when we  say that you create the causes to stay in 
samsara for a long time, that means staying in sams ara for a long time under the influence of 
afflictions. Also don’t swing your arms too much, o therwise you might kill bugs in the air; keep 
your arms near your sides in a dignified way. If yo u are not careful, you may create negativities. If 
you know how to do prostrations, there are many ben efits; if you don’t know how to do them, there 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 36  are many drawbacks, so we should be attentive and c areful when we do them. Do not think it is 
difficult. 
 When we go down on the ground while doing long pro strations, there is a description of the body 
being like a tree falling to the ground. If we do l ong prostrations, it doesn’t make a difference if w e 
slide while we do it, or if we place our hands on t he ground in steps. It depends on the mind of 
regret in relation to our negative actions. This mi nd of regret can manifest very strongly, and a sign  
of that is that you slide on the ground when you do  long prostrations. The essential point is to place  
your entire body flat on the ground and generate th is wish to be protected, making the request 
“Please protect me, take care of me!” When we do pr ostrations, in addition to prostrating 
physically, in our mind we should have strong faith , and we should recite various words with our 
speech; in this way, prostrations become complete i n terms of body, speech, and mind. [Story about 
someone who made many prostrations to purify heavy negative karma and gained clairvoyance 
through it.] 
 
Special mantras 
 
There is a mantra that can be recited when we have no choice but to step over books, holy objects, 
and so forth. This mantra is OM VAJRA VEGAMA AH KRA MA HUM. We can simply recite this 
once when we have to step over holy objects. Of cou rse we should try to avoid doing this, but when 
it is unavoidable, we can recite this mantra. 
 Those of you who are accumulating large numbers of  prostrations, there is a mantra that you recite 
before you begin [OM NAMO MANJUSHRIYE NAMO SUSHRIYE  NAMO UTTAMA SHRIYE 
SOHA]. If you are not doing them to accumulate a la rge number, there is no need to recite it.  
 
We will now go back to the text.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 110, last paragraph: 
 
In that manner, by having entered into the exalted compassion of the Victors, your 
excellent qualities will increase more and more, wh ereby you will achieve the essence 
with regard to the support of leisures and endowmen ts; professing to make effort in 
hearing, contemplation and meditation without being  able to tame your mind [by] going 
for refuge will bring very little result. What is e xplicitly indicated here is a presentation 
of the three Mahayana uncommon refuges. The objects  of going for refuge will be 
indicated below with “Faith observing the buddhas a nd so forth” [4.33a]. 
 
To condense the meaning of this passage: if we are able to take refuge properly, we are able to 
receive properly the blessings of the buddhas, and our excellent qualities will increase more and 
more. In this way, we achieve the essence of our pr ecious human rebirth; we are able to take the 
essence of our precious human rebirth with leisures  and endowments. If we do not tame our mind 
by going for refuge in the Three Jewels in this way , even if we make a lot of effort in hearing, 
contemplating, and meditation, we will achieve very  little result.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 111: 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-2B. Meaning of the branches 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-2B1. Instructions on the Buddha Jewe l 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-2B2. Instructions on the Dharma Jewe l 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-2B3. Instructions on the Sangha Jewel  
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 37  2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-2B1. Instructions on the Buddha Jewe l 
COMMENTARY 
Concerning buddha, since buddha and enlightenment a re just the same character, with 
regard to not observing the exalted knower of all a spects, a defining quality that acts to 
[characterize] buddha, by not connecting forms and so forth, “know the equality 
between the object of observation and the observer, ” and… 
 
EXPLANATION {157}  
“A bodhisattva, at the time of practicing the Perfe ction of Wisdom, does not act to 
connect an exalted knower of all aspects to form; h e does not perfectly, subsequently 
see form itself…” are instructions for the sake of abandoning adherence to the Buddha 
as truly existent, because they instruct that “a fi nal exalted wisdom knowing the 
equality  between  the object of observation and the observer in 7 being empty of true 
existence is the Buddha Jewel .” That follows, because they instruct that “ with regard 
to not observing an exalted knower of all aspects as [existing] ultimately, there is no 
object to be adhered to, by not connecting and  connecting  forms and so forth —object 
and object-possessor, definition and definiendum, a nd sphere and cognizer—
ultimately.” 
 Instructions on an exalted knower of all aspects w ill serve as instructions on the 
buddha, because an exalted knower of all aspects is  a defining quality that acts to 
characterize buddha . Do not observe an exalted knower of all aspects a s [existing] 
ultimately, since buddha and enlightenment possessing the two purities are just the 
same character  in being empty of true existence . 
 
In this outline, we are looking at instructions on the Buddha Jewel. These instructions are for 
trainees who practice with regard to the Buddha Jew el. The trainees generate faith in the Buddha 
and seek the state of buddha. When doing so, they s hould not adhere to the Buddha as truly existent, 
so no matter what kind of practice they do in relat ion to the Buddha Jewel, the Buddha Jewel should 
not be adhered to as existing truly, or as existing  ultimately. Why do the instructions on the exalted  
knower of all aspects serve as instructions on budd ha? It says, “an exalted knower of all aspects is a  
defining quality that acts to characterize buddha.”  An exalted knower of all aspects characterizes 
Buddha, so whether or not something is a buddha dep ends on whether or not an exalted knower of 
all aspects is present.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 111: 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-2B2. Instructions on the Dharma Jewe l 
COMMENTARY 
Concerning Dharma, “All phenomena which are include d within those including all 
bases, antidotes, and aspects included within the t hree exalted knowers of all have no 
entitiness,” and…  
 
EXPLANATION 
“Do not connect, saying ‘The thing form exists;’ do  not connect, saying ‘Things do not 
exist’…” indicates instructions on the Dharma, {158 } because it instructs that “All 
phenomena which are included and summed up within those including all instances 8 
that are bases, antidotes, and aspects included as objects within the three exalted 
knowers of all have no entitiness  ultimately.”  
                                                 
7 Page 106 of the Drepung Loseling Library Society’s  1996 edition of Ornament of the Essence reads bar instead of pas 
here. 
8 gsal ba 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 38   
The Dharma Jewel refers to true paths and true cess ations. In this explanation, we see that the 
description is mainly of true paths, since it menti ons “the three exalted knowers of all.”  The 
essential meaning here is that when we go for refug e to the Dharma Jewel, when we practice or 
seek the Dharma, we should not adhere to it as trul y existent, or as existing ultimately. When we 
practice Dharma, it is best to view it as empty of true existence. Of course, it is best if we have th e 
realization of emptiness while we practice Dharma, but if we do not, we can at least contemplate its 
emptiness of true existence as we engage in Dharma practice.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 112: 
2B2C-1A2B-1B1B-2B3. Instructions on the Sangha Jewel  
COMMENTARY 
Concerning sangha, excluding the foe-destroyer who is included within the Buddha 
Jewel, the eight: the seven great beings, through i nstances of abiders in the result and 
approachers, together with the solitary realizers; through instances of the dull-faculty 
and so forth, complete in number as twenty. “Engage  the irreversible bodhisattva arya 
learners as just not produced.” Imparting these pas sages are instructions on the Three 
Jewels. 
 
EXPLANATION 
Imparting these passages, “Engage the irreversible bodhisattva arya learners as 
just not produced  ultimately, ” are instructions on the sangha, because they are 
instructions for the sake of stopping adherence to the Sangha Jewel as truly existent 
companions who practice the path . 
 
Here, we find a mention of the “eight persons,” the  eight abiders in the result and the approachers. 
There is also mention of twenty sangha. The detaile d explanation of these will come later, but now 
we can briefly discuss them. In general, there are eight approachers and abiders in the result. The 
eight, divided into four pairs, are: 
• Approacher to stream-enterer and abider in the resu lt of stream-enterer 
• Approacher to once-returner and abider in the resul t of once-returner 
• Approacher to non-returner and abider in the result  of non-returner 
• Approacher to foe-destroyer and abider in the resul t of foe-destroyer  
 
If we subdivide these eight, we will end up with th ousands and thousands of Sangha. In the Lharam 
class in the monasteries, there is a practice of en umerating the sangha, in which they list all the 
various sangha and compute the number. This is done  for the sake of creating the cause for sangha 
to increase. This is done once a year.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 112: 
 
QUALM: Further, how many types of that Sangha are t here? 
RESPONSE: The subject— the eight: the seven great beings, through instance s of 
three abiders in the result and  four approachers, together with the solitary 
realizers —are suitable to be divided into many {159} because , through instances of 
the dull-faculty and so forth , there are twenty in number  explained 9. 
 
                                                 
9 Yod emended to read chad pa yod in accordance with page 106 of the Drepung Loseling  Library Society’s 1996 
edition of Ornament of the Essence . 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 39  The “seven great beings” are the three abiders in t he result and the four approachers. With the 
solitary realizers, they make eight.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 112:  
 
QUALM: Do [they] not become the eight approachers a nd abiders? 
RESPONSE: The Mahayana foe-destroyer  is excluded  from the Sangha Jewel of this 
context, since it is included within the Buddha Jewel . It is for the sake of stopping 
adherence to the Three Jewels as refuges ultimately . 
 
When we talk about these eight approachers and abid ers, they usually refer to four approachers and 
four abiders in the result. Here, it says that “The  Mahayana foe-destroyer is excluded from the 
Sangha Jewel of this context,” which seems to imply  that the Mahayana foe-destroyer is included in 
the abider in the result of foe-destroyer. This is a bit awkward, since we usually explain these eight  
from the point of view of Hinayana practitioners, n ot from the point of view of Mahayana.   
 
Questions and answers 
 
Q: With regard to offering bowls, people usually le ave empty bowls upside-down on the altar; is 
that acceptable? 
A: In the morning, we put out the water bowls, and we take them down before sunset. At that point, 
they are left upside-down on the altar, so that is fine. 
 
Q: Buddha asked us to examine his teachings, and he  said that a cause would always match its 
result. So when it is said that placing water bowls  too far apart is the cause for being distant from a 
spiritual guide, how is this explained and what is the source of this explanation?  
A: This does not mean that if you place the bowls f ar apart just once, you will become distant from 
your spiritual guide. It is a case of accumulation of causes on many occasions; if one repeats this 
action many times, it becomes a cause to become dis tant from one’s spiritual guide. These offerings 
are done with faith in the Buddha who is the teache r, in the Dharma, which is the actual refuge, and 
in the Sangha, the companions who practice the path s. If we have faith in the Three Jewels, and we 
demonstrate that in our actions, it actually demons trates a dependent-arising for us to experience 
specific results. By making offerings properly, we create many good causes, and in that way many 
good results will come about. But if we are careles s when making offerings, if we do make them 
properly, it creates the cause for us not to experi ence good results. With respect to the various 
trainings, if with respect to the training of liste ning to the advice of the spiritual guide, if we fa il to 
observe them, that is the worst type of transgressi on. The result of becoming distant from the 
spiritual guide comes about through the accumulatio n of many causes, not just one.  
 
Q: In regard to the definitions and boundaries of t he approachers and abiders, it seems that an abider  
in the result of once-returner is an approacher to non-returner. Is that the case? 
A: An abider in the result of once-returner is not necessarily an approacher to non-returner. There 
are two types of abiders in the result of once-retu rner: a mere abider and a special abider. When one 
attains the result of the abider in the result of  once-returner, one is in meditative equipoise, and one 
is said to be a mere abider; when one arises in sub sequent attainment and strives to attain the state 
of non-returner, one becomes a special abider in th e result of once-returner, and one is also an 
approacher to the non-returner.  
 
Q: With regard to prostrations, the result should d epend on the motivation. For example, one could 
stay down and imagine prostrating to many buddhas, so why is there a negative result? 
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 14: 19-23 May, 2008 
 
 40  A: There is a simple answer. The visualization of t he buddhas should be done before one starts 
prostrating. If one waits until one is on the groun d, it is too late! Before beginning to prostrate, o ne 
can visualize all the various buddha-fields, seeing  oneself as surrounded by sentient beings, and so 
forth.  
 
 
/wheel END /wheel 