Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/Transcript pdf/ORN_GTTnotes_04.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:51:35.524981
================================================================================

Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 4: 18 – 22 February, 2008 
 
Masters Program 
Ornament for Clear Realization 
Notes on commentary by  Geshe Tenzin Tenphel 
 
 
Monday, 18 February 2008 
 
CATEGORY 5: Peak Application (Iè-‚ë9-) (continued)  
 
4. PEAK  APPLICATION  OF SUPREME  MUNDANE  QUALITY  
 
Definition:  A fourth partial concordance with definite discrimination that has attained an always 
abiding mind with respect to in finite meditative stabilizations, on account of having ripened the 
potency to generate the Mahayana pa th of seeing that is its result. 
 
Boundary:  exists only on the supreme mundane quality level of the Mahayana path of preparation 
 
 
Aspects of three exalted knowers: Attaining control and attaining stability 
 
Bodhisattva trains to attain  dexterity in meditative st abilization, to attain un ion of calm abiding and 
special insight; approaches clear appearance of emptiness until attaining direct realization of 
emptiness.  
• “Clear appearance” attained on path of preparation.   
• On supreme mundane quality of path of preparation, clear appearance becomes very 
powerful 
• When direct realization attaine d, path of seeing is attained.  
 
In general, all bodhisattvas are sharp-facultied, but we can differentiate between sharp- and dull-
faculty bodhisattvas.  
• Sharp-faculty = pervaded by realizing emptiness before generating bodhicitta 
• dull-faculty do not rea lize emptiness before generating bodhicitta  
 
Person definite in Mahayana lineage:   
 
• has calm abiding observing emptiness on path of accumulation . They analyze emptiness until 
inducing wisdom arising from analys is induced by bliss of pliancy.  
• When this bliss is induced, the bodhisattva attains heat level of path of preparation . 
Continues to analyze emptiness to impr ove clear appearance of emptiness.  
• On supreme mundane quality  level of path of preparation, almost directly realizes emptiness.  
• In next instant, directly realizes emptiness and attains path of seeing .  
 
Why are calm abiding and special insight necessary to directly realize emptiness?  
• Without calm abiding, cannot observe emptiness single-pointedly 
• Without special insight, cannot directly realize emptiness  
• Necessary to have union to realize emptine ss directly  
 
 1
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 4: 18 – 22 February, 2008 
Laxity and excitement prevent us from abiding on any obj ect single-pointedly; we need calm 
abiding to remain on object. Without special insi ght, no clear appearance of emptiness, not possible 
to directly realize it. Very powerful mind necessary  to directly realize emptiness. Within calm 
abiding, we analyze object withou t laxity and excitement, object becomes clearer and clearer.  
• Wisdom directly realizing emptiness  depends on medita tive stabilization  
• Generating meditative stabilization depends on carefully guarding ethics   
 
Ethics:  important to guard against attachment.  
1. Ignorance = main affliction; through this, others arise.  
2. Worst affliction = attachment. Je alousy, ill-will, etc., plus actio ns such as: ki lling, stealing, 
sexual misconduct, lying, harsh speech, divisive speech, idle gossip, c ovetousness, ill-will, 
wrong view (10 non-virtuous actions ), come from attachment.  
 
Nagarjuna’s Precious Garland mentions 16 forms of virtue. 10 virtues plus:  
1. abandonment of alcohol 
2. right livelihood 
3. abandoning harmfulness 
4. performing generosity respectfully 
5. offering to those who are worthy 
6. engaging in four immeasurables. 
 
Due to attachment, one engages in  ten non-virtues and actions opposit e to these six virtues. Those 
not practicing calm abiding need to guard against a ttachment, so those practicing calm abiding must 
definitely guard against it. 
 
re. Consumption of alcohol  
 
Alcohol consumption for monks and nuns is dange rous. They don’t lose ordination by consuming 
alcohol, but will be expelled from a monastery for doing so. Four defeats for fully ordained monks 
(causes for losing ordination) do not include alcohol consumption. Monks who consume alcohol are 
expelled from monastery, but lay people who don’t consume alcohol are expe lled from parties! 
 
 
5. PEAK  APPLICATION  OF THE PATH OF SEEING 
 
Definition:  A Mahayana clear realization of the truth abiding in a cla ss of direct antidote to the 
seeds of the conceptions that are objects  to be abandoned by the path of seeing.  
 
Boundary:  exists only on the Ma hayana path of seeing  
 
“Objects to be abandoned by the path of seeing: ” these will be discussed later in detail. In context of 
objects to be abandoned, we will discuss topic of de pendent-arising (in fifth chapter). In monastery, 
dependent arising is discussed in  context of first chapter.  
 
 
6. PEAK  APPLICATION  OF THE PATH OF MEDITATION  
 
Definition:  A Mahayana subsequent clear realization ab iding in a class of direct antidote to the 
seeds of the conceptions that are objects to be abandoned by the path of meditation. 
 
Boundary:  exists only on the [Mah ayana] path of meditation 
 2
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 4: 18 – 22 February, 2008 
 
• “Clear realization of truth” (in fifth topic) = path of seeing  
• “Subsequent clear realization” = path of meditation  
• On path of seeing, new, dire ct realization of emptiness 
• After path of seeing, one familiarizes w/emptin ess repeatedly. Subsequent = subsequent to 
path of seeing.   
 
 
7. UNINTERRUPTED  PEAK  APPLICATION  
 
Definition:  A bodhisattva’s final yoga – conjoined with a wisdom highly transformed from the 
Mahayana path of accumulation that cultivates the aspects of the three exalted knowers through 
gathering them together – that acts to directly produce an exa lted knower of all as pects that is its 
result. 
 
Boundary:  [exists at the end of the continuum of a sentient being] 
 
 
8. PERVERSE  ACHIEVING  THAT IS TO BE ELIMINATED  INDICATED  HERE 
 
Definition:  That which is included in either a seed of a conception or a manifest conception 
apprehending the two truths as not suitable to be subsumed as a single entity indicated here. 
 
Boundary:  exists from not having entered a path through the seventh ground 
 
• Two truths are a single entity  
• Someone who has directly re alized emptiness can still have manifest conception 
apprehending two truths as “not suitable to be subsumed as a single enti ty.” Possible for this 
person to have seed of this concep tion, not to mention for person who has not realized 
emptiness.  
• Someone on 7th ground has realized two truths as one entity, but if this person doesn’t apply 
exertion during subsequent attainment, will not have realization of phenomena as empty of 
true existence, like illusions. Phenomena still a ppear as truly existent. Can realize emptiness 
of true existence of phenomena by applying co arse exertion. This is sign of being obscured 
with regard to two truths  being single entity.  
 
What happens after 7th ground? Before attaining 8th ground, there is bodhisattva who has realized 
two truths but needs to apply coar se exertion to realize two truths as single entity during subsequent 
attainment.  
• “Coarse exertion” is not coarse compared to ordinary beings’ thinking (like ours). On eighth, 
ninth, and tenth grounds, such exertion not necessary; everythi ng appears as empty of true 
existence, like illusions, but bodhisattva is  not able to directly  realize two truths 
simultaneously.  
• Other than buddhas’ mind, no consciousness can realize two truths simultaneously. 
 
 
 3
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 4: 18 – 22 February, 2008 
CATEGORY 6: Serial Application (0*9-bÜ<-‚ë9-/-) – 13 Topics 
Definition:  A bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined with a wisdom that progressively cu ltivates the aspects 
of the three exalted knowers for the sake of attain ing stability in the aspects of the three exalted 
knowers. 
 
First, we have the six perfections: 
 
1. Perfection of generosity 
2. Perfection of ethics 
3. Perfection of patience 
4. Perfection of joyous effort 
5. Perfection of concentration 
6. Perfection of wisdom 
 
Followed by:  
 
7. Recollection of the Buddha 
8. Recollection of the Dharma 
9. Recollection of the Sangha 
10. Recollection of ethics 
11. Recollection of giving 
12. Recollection of the gods 
13. Entitiness of non-things 
 
Three terms:  
1. Generosity : entity of generosity = intention to  give. All of us can practice this. 
2. Perfection of generosity : included only on buddha ground.  
3. Practice of perfec tion of generosity : exists from Mahayana path  of accumulation through end 
of continuum of sentient being.  
 
• On Mahayana path of accumulation, there is practice of perfection of generosity, but no 
perfection of generosity.  
• Perfection = paramita  (Skt.); meaning = “gone to ot her side,” or “gone to buddhahood” 
• Practice of perfection of gene rosity: practice of generosity  conjoined with bodhicitta.  
 
Difference between first and eleventh topics  (perfection of generosity and recollection of giving):  
• Here, giving is generosity. Exam ple of (1) serial application th at is perfection of generosity 
= practice of generosity conjoined with bodhicitta.  
• (11) Recollection of giving = subsequently r ecollecting benefits of practicing generosity. 
 
Recollection of the gods (12):  
• This “god” is the “god of gods,” i.e. Shakyamuni Buddha 
• Seventh through ninth topics : context = going for ref uge to Three Jewels  
• Recollection of gods = recollection of Buddha’s advice, being conscientio us that Buddha is 
witness to one’s actions 
 
(13) Serial application of entitiness of non-things  
• This is realization of emptiness; all previous practices are conj oined with this realization  
 
 4
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 4: 18 – 22 February, 2008 
Definitions for these topics:  not explicitly stated here. We can look at definition of serial 
application—a bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined with a wi sdom that progressively cultivates the aspects 
of the three exalted knowers for the sake of attain ing stability in the aspects of the three exalted 
knowers—and add a phrase:  
• e.g. definition for serial application of perfection of generosity:  a bodhisattva’s yoga 
conjoined with a wisdom that progressively cultivates the aspects of the three exalted 
knowers for the sake of attaining stability in the aspects of the three exalted knowers 
conjoined with the practice of the perfection of generosity. 
• For definition of serial application of perfection of ethics, add phrase “conjoined with the 
practice of the perfection of ethics,”  etc.  
 
 
Subsequent attainment and calm abiding  
Q: Geshe-la said that “bodhisattva’s yoga” refers to either calm abiding or union of calm abiding 
and special insight. If bodhisattva  during subsequent attainment of  path of seeing has manifest 
bodhicitta, and teaches Dharma, etc., how can that bodhicitta be calm abiding? 
A: One doesn’t need to be in meditative st ate to have calm abiding. This bodhisattva teaches 
Dharma with motivation that arises through force of bodhicitta. Contemplati on is involved in their 
teaching, but it does not involve laxity and excitement. When or dinary beings contemplate, mind is 
scattered; for bodhisattva, there is  no laxity and excitement.  
 
Meditative equipoise and subseq uent attainment for a buddha 
For learner arya, activitie s of meditative equipoise and subse quent attainment cannot take place 
together. For a buddha arya, they are not mutually ex clusive; activity of subsequent attainment is 
activity of meditative equipoise, and vice versa. A buddha while  walking, eating, etc., is in 
meditative equipoise.  
 
If we ordinary people try to go in to meditative equipoise, we have to pay attention to the body; as 
we improve, attention becomes more focused on the mind. At level of buddhahood, there is no harm 
to meditative equipoise no matter what is happ ening to body. Nothing a buddha thinks becomes 
“non-meditative equipoise.” When the Buddha “arises from meditative equipoise” (e.g. in Heart 
Sutra ), this is just to common ap pearances of disciples. Even when Buddha appears to be in 
meditative equipoise, is engaged in  activities of subsequent atta inment, e.g. emanating bodies in 
different lands, etc. A bodhisattva has to stop subsequent attainme nt to enter into meditative 
equipoise. 
 
Different categories of emanation: 
A bodhisattva (from great path of accumulation on) can  emanate a stone as a house, a piece of wood 
as a bridge, etc. These emanations do not need to  be collected back. Emanations of himself (e.g. 
teaching Dharma) need to be “collected” back before he enters meditative equipoise.  
 
For bodhisattva on small path of accumulation, bodhi citta can still degenerate. From middling level 
of path of accumulation, more stable; on great le vel, attains power of ma gical emanations. Can go 
to different buddha lands, receive teachings, etc. Can also hear teachi ngs that are given elsewhere.   
 
 
 5
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 4: 18 – 22 February, 2008 
CATEGORY 7: Instantaneous Application (U+-%Ü#-07Ü-‚ë9-/-)– 4 
Topics 
Definition:  A bodhisattva’s final yoga that has attained stability in the aspect s of the three exalted 
knowers. 
 
1. Non-ripened instantaneous application  
2. Ripened instantaneous application 
3. Characterless instantaneous application 
4. Non-dual instantaneous application 
 
 
1. NON‐RIPENED  INSTANTANEOUS  APPLICATION   
 
2. RIPENED  INSTANTANEOUS  APPLICATION  
 
“Non-ripened” and “ripened:”  
 
Previously I gave these illustrations: 
• uninterrupted path for non-ripened 
• liberated path for ripened 
 
However, this isn’t so accurate.  
 
• “Non-ripened” refers to uncontaminated quali ties on seventh ground and below, because they 
involve coarse exertion  
• “Ripened” refers to uncontaminated qualities on  three pure grounds (e ighth through tenth), 
because coarse exertion has been pacified .  
 
 
3. CHARACTERLESS  INSTANTANEOUS  APPLICATION   
 
“Characterless: ” refers to lack of true existence 
 
 
4. NON‐DUAL INSTANTANEOUS  APPLICATION  
 
“Non-dual: ” emptiness or lack of apprehended and apprehender being different substances. 
Apprehended and apprehender are dual, but are not different entities .  
 
 
CATEGORY 8: Resultant Truth Body (7o<-/-å&ë<-`Ü-U¨-) – 4 Topics  
Definition:  A final result attained by the strength of cultivating the aspects of the three exalted 
knowers, which is the method for attaining it. 
 
1. nature body 
2. enjoyment body 
 6
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 4: 18 – 22 February, 2008 
3. emanation body 
4. exalted wisdom truth body 
 
 
1. NATURE  BODY 
 
Definition:  A final sphere possessing the two purities. 
 
“Two purities” =  
1. purity with respect to natural stains 
2. purity with respect to adventitious stains 
 
1. Nature body that is purity of natural stains: example = dharmata of a buddha’s mind 
2. Nature body that is purity of adven titious stains: non-ab iding nirvana   
 
 
2. COMPLETE  ENJOYMENT  BODY 
 
Definition:  A final form body possessing the five certainties.  
 
The five certainties  are: 
1. certainty of abode: it resides only in Akanishta (Not Low) 
2. certainty of body: it is adorned with the cl ear and complete signs and exemplifications 
3. certainty of retinue: it is su rrounded only by bodhisattva aryas 
4. certainty of Dharma: it teaches only the Mahayana Dharma 
5. certainty of time: it remains as l ong as cyclic existence is not empty 
 
• How long does cyclic existence last? There are many doubts and debates around this.  
• There is an end to cyclic existence, but when? There is an end to cyclic existence for an 
individual, therefore there is an end to cyclic existence.   
 
 
3. EMANATION  BODY 
 
Definition:  A final form body distinguished by no t possessing the five certainties. 
 
• If it doesn’t possess any of  the five certainties, we can ask, then Where does it abide, What is 
its body like? etc. An emanation body has disciple s from all three lineages, but we can check 
what kind of Dharma it teaches, etc.  
 
 
4. EXALTED  WISDOM  TRUTH BODY  
 
Definition:  An exalted knower that is a final in sight relative to modes and varieties.  
 
• Nature body and exalted wisdom truth body are objects of utilization of only buddhas 
• complete enjoyment body is object of utilization of bodhis attva aryas of first ground and 
above 
• emanation body can be seen by ordinary beings with pure karma 
 
There are also the exalted activities of an exalted wisdom truth body . 
 7
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 4: 18 – 22 February, 2008 
 
Tuesday, 19 February 2008 
 
• The text we will be using interweaves three texts:  
→ Gyeltsab Je’s Explanation: Ornament of the Essence  
→ Haribhadra’s Commentary: Clear Meaning  
→ Maitreya’s Ornament for Clear Realization . 
 
Ornament of the Essence begins with the Expression of Worship  
 
Expression of Worship 
 
Previous holy beings composed expression of worship. Is not just a “formula”—comes from 
heartfelt confidence in the objects mentioned.  
• Purpose of the expression of worship:  
1. to prevent obstacles from arising and  
2. to complete composition of treatise.  
It also offers extensive benefit to sentient beings  because it is done with vast, extensive motivation 
to benefit others.  
 
Gyeltsab’s Expression of Worshi p covers first three stanzas ( “The path traversed by tens of millions 
supreme scholars…” ).  
• First two stanzas: to direct gurus  
• Third stanza: to lineage gurus . 
 
• Fourth stanza  (“By connecting  the boundaries that are de finite in sequence…” ): explains 
reason for Gyeltsab Je’s com posing the treatise. Although he doe sn’t realize the system well, 
he will explain it. 
 
[Note correction to translation:] 
“By connecting  the boundaries that are definite in sequence 
And taking  the essence of the meeting point s of the root text and explanation, 
Not seeing the realization of even a mere portion of this system  
I generated a little interest  in uncovering this text.”  
 
• Fifth stanza  (“Those who do not possess the eyes…” ): some want enlightenment but are 
unable to find guides, they enter wrong paths, et c. GJ wants to open their eyes. Some wish 
for liberation and enlightenment, but make little effort.  
• Sixth stanza  (“Although this profound path is very difficult to realize…” ): exhortation to 
disciples; path is very profound, but because he has familiarized with path in many lives, will 
explain in order to repay ki ndness to deities and gurus.  
 
Body of the text 
 
“Here, all of us have obtained  leisures and endowments…”  
We shouldn’t act like “elderly mundane beings,” i.e. people simply concerned with this life, and for 
nothing beyond this life. Just being concerned with  gain, honor, etc., will bring no result. If we 
make effort only for this life, we obtain results only  for this life; we don’t receive benefit in future 
lives.  
 
Supports of humans or animals  
 8
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 4: 18 – 22 February, 2008 
We have fortunate rebirth, greater happiness than animals. However, humans have greater 
intelligence, etc., but also stronger desire, more  unhappiness. Humans more complicated, we apply 
intelligence to wrong objects. When we harm others , we harm ourselves; when we benefit others, 
we benefit ourselves.  
 
Acarya Asanga 
 
“Due to the deeds of turning the wheels of Dhar ma in three stages…Acar ya Asanga subsequently 
engaged in the systems which have been determined…”  
• Need to apply scripture and reasoning, then check if text’s explanat ion corresponds with 
reality, i.e. text does not c ontradict scripture/reasoning. 
• Text determines meaning of Ma itreya’s root text; we need to  determine meaning in our mind. 
Text needs to become part of our mind—then we have understood.  
 
“Also, he acted exceptionally with regard to many previous victors…” 
Six attributes related to Asanga:  
1. In past, made many offerings to buddhas 
2. Generated vast roots of virtue 
3. In this life, is being care d for by buddhas and bodhisattvas 
4. His intelligence surpasses others’ 
5. Accomplished well prayers to take responsibility for the teachings 
6. It was prophesized that he would comment on definitive and interpretable sutra sets 
 
“He thought ‘Trainees of future generations will view the Mahayana sutra sets as though they are an ocean…’” 
Future disciples will not understand relationship between earlier/later words, will not understand profound meaning.  
• Regent = Maitreya; Asanga sought  to meet Maitreya directly  
• It took 12 years for Asanga to behold Maitre ya directly, despite his having exceptional 
qualities  
• Finding “secrets of speech of the Muni:” although had understood Perfection of Wisdom 
sutras and general meanings of Ornament for Clear Realization, Asanga had to undergo 
hardships to realize hidden meanings.  
• After 12 years, became discouraged and abandone d practice. Saw a female dog, starving with 
rotting flesh filled with maggots. Cut flesh fr om his thigh and sought to remove the maggots 
with his tongue out of compassion for them . Opened eyes and saw Maitreya, who brought 
him to the Tushita pure land.  
 
“In dependence on the Bhagavan [Maitreya]’s mi raculous powers, he went to Tushita…” 
 
• Maitreya brought Asanga to Tushita, where he fully realized meaning of Ornament and 
Perfection of Wisdom sutras.  
• Asanga gave “five great treatises ” as gift to sentient beings:  
 the two types of Differentiation: 
1. Differentiation  of Phenomena and the Final Nature of Phenomena  
(Dharmadharmatavibhaga) 
2. Differentiation of the Middle and the Extremes (Madhyantavibhaga) 
 the two types of Ornament: 
3. Ornament for the Great Vehicle Sutras (Mahayanasutralamkara)  
4. Ornament for Clear Realization (Abhisamayalamkara) 
and 
 9
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 4: 18 – 22 February, 2008 
5. Great Vehicle Treatise on the Sublime Continuum (Mahayanottaratantrasastra) 
 
 
Interpretable and definitive meaning scriptures  
 
“…in general the Bhagavan’s scriptures taught two modes of differentiating between the 
interpretable meaning and the definitive meaning …” 
 
“According to the first , [note change in translation]  (a) the teaching that all phenomena are empty 
of being established by way of their own character…” 
 
• Asanga : charioteer of Chittamatra (Mind-Only or Cognition-Only)1 system 
• Nagarjuna : charioteer of Middle Way Consequen tialist (Prasangika-Mad hyamika) system.  
 
Differentiating sutras of defini tive and interpretable meaning 
 
• Prasangika-Madhyamikas:  
→ Definitive meaning = sutras teaching all phe nomena as empty of being established by 
way of own character  
→ Interpretable meaning = sutras  teaching person, a ggregates, etc., by means of various 
words/syllables  
• Chittamatra: 
→ Definitive meaning = scriptures teaching that imputational natures are not established by 
own character whereas other-powered natures and thoroughly established natures are 
established by way of their own character  
→ Interpretable meaning = those that do not teach this  
• “According to the first:” refers to  sutras in previous paragraph: Teachings of Akshayamati 
Sutra  and King of Meditative St abilizations Sutra  
• “Second type of sutras:” refers mainly to Sutra Unraveling the Thought;  Nagarjuna 
established these as interpretable meaning 
 
Prasangika-Madhyamika:   
• Definitive = sutra principally indicating emptiness  
• Interpretable = sutra not prin cipally indicating emptiness, i.e. talks of conventional 
phenomena  
 
Chittamatra:   
• Definitive meaning: If sutra differentiates between what is or is not established by way of its 
own character, then is definitive meaning (e.g. sutras teaching that imputational natures are 
not established by own charac ter but other two natures are established by own characters).  
• Interpretable: If sutra says that all phenomena are es tablished by way of their own character 
or that all phenomena are not established by way of their own character, then is interpretable 
meaning 
 
“With respect to that, Acarya Arya Asanga followed the two types of Differentiation …” 
 
Two types of Differentiation: 
 
                                                 
1 Note that the terms “Mind-Only” ( sems tsam ) and “Cognition Only” ( rig pa tsam ) are used interchangeably in this text 
to refer to the Chittamatra tenet system and its holders.  
 10
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 4: 18 – 22 February, 2008 
1. Differentiation  of Phenomena and the Final Nature of Phenomena   
2. Differentiation  of the Middle and the Extremes   
 
• “Latter sutra set” = Sutra Unraveling the Thought (refers to sutra sets in third turning of 
wheel of Dharma, but mainly Sutra Unraveling the Thought ) 
• Asanga was trailblazer for Chittamatra system and commented on intention of Hinayana 
sutra sets 
 
Three wheels of Dharma: 
 
1. all phenomena, from form through 37 harmonies with enlightenment, are established by way 
of their own character 
2. all phenomena from form through omniscient mi nd are not established by way of their own 
character  
→ seems like contradiction from explicit wording, so in third wheel: 
3. certain phenomena— other-powered and thoroughly established natures —are established by 
way of their own character, but imputational natures are not established by way of their own 
character.  
 
Meaning of established by own character:2
 
• Chittamatra: Existing from own side without be ing merely imputed by conception. It is 
findable upon analysis.   
• For Svatantrika-Madhyamika system, established by way of its own character = can be found 
when it is sought.  
• Prasangika-Madhyamika refutes  
1. what Chittamatra accepts as being established by way of its own character and  
2. what Svatantrika-Madhyamikas assert as established by way of its own character  
• Chittamatra asserts establishment by way of its own character; Autonomists refute this, saying Chittamatra definition of established by way of its own character is true existence, 
which is to be refuted.  
• For Chittamatra, phenomena exist from their ow n side, by way of their own character, truly, 
and inherently  
• For Prasangika, none of these are true 
• Svatantrikas say things do exist from own side , by their own character, and inherently, but 
not truly 
 
“The Differentiation of Phenomena and the Final Nature of Phenomena (Dharmadharmatavibhaga) 
taught (i) phenomena…” 
 
• According to Hinayana assertions, “rhinoceros-like solitary realizers and Mahayana 
lineage-bearers collect the accumula tions for a hundred eons and three  countless eons 
[respectively] on the path of accu mulation and then progress through  the heat level of the 
path of preparation and above in a single session.” This is not accepted by Mahayana 
systems.  
• According to Hinayana tenets, Buddha passed into parinirvana at age of 81, and his 
continuum ceased. This is not accepted by higher  tenet systems, who say it doesn’t make 
                                                 
2 Note on names of philosophical systems: Chittamatra = Mind-Only or Cognition-Only; Svatantrika-Madhyamika = 
Autonomist Middle Way; and Prasangika-Madhyamika = Consequentialist Middle Way. Sometimes these are 
shortened, e.g. to “Autonomist” or “Consequentialist.” 
 11
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 4: 18 – 22 February, 2008 
sense that after three countless  eons of accumulation, he only taught for short time before 
attaining parinirvana.  
 
 
Wednesday, 20 February 2008 (morning) 
 
 
Corrections to translation of Ornament of the Essence :3
 
1. p. 1 (fourth stanza) says: 
 
“Those who connect the boundaries t hat are definite in sequence and 
Take the essence of the meeting points of the root text and explanation, 
Not seeing the realization of even a mere portion of this system  
Generated little interest in uncovering this text.” 
 
It should read: 
“By connecting  the boundaries that are definite in sequence 
And taking  the essence of the meeting point s of the root text and explanation, 
Not seeing the realization of even a mere portion of this system  
I generated a little interest  in uncovering this text.”  
 
2. pp. 2-3: “The latter sutra sets teach…” should be “ The latter sutra set teaches …” 
 
3. p. 3: “…their (i) teaching that one portion, rather t han all, is not established by way of their 
own character, and (ii) teaching that one portion is established by way of their own character 
are taught to be interpretable meaning…”  
  
should read:  
“…(i) the teaching that all are not established by way of th eir own character and (ii) the 
teaching that all are established by way of thei r own character are taught  to be interpretable 
meaning, and the  teaching through clearly differentia ting the boundaries between what is and 
what is not established by way of their own character is taught to be definiti ve meaning.”  
 
4. pp. 3-4: “He also taught in his Hearers’ Grounds (Sravakabhumi) the teaching regarding a 
section of the hinayana basket on the manner in which rhinoceros-like solitary realizers and Mahayana lineage-bearers collect the accumulati ons for a hundred eons and countless eons 
[respectively] on the path of a ccumulation and then proceed to the heat level of the path of 
preparation and above in a single session.”  
 
Should read:   
“…collect the accumulations for a hundred eons and three  countless eons [respectively] on the 
path of accumulation and then progress through  the heat level of th e path of preparation…”  
 
More on differentiating sutras of de finitive and interpretable meaning 
 
According to Chittamatra:  
• Definitive meaning  = differentiating among phenomena, sa ying one portion is established by 
way of its own character, one portion is not established by way of its own character.  
                                                 
3 When necessary, we will note adjustments to the text that arise from clarifications made  by Geshe Tenphel during the 
teachings. 
 12
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 4: 18 – 22 February, 2008 
• Interpretable meaning  = does not discriminate in this way, e.g. it says that “all phenomena 
are established by way of their own character”  or “all phenomena are not established by way 
of their own character.”  
 
“Differentiating the boundaries” = saying one portion is like that, another is not like that.  
 
• This assertion is in accord with the third tu rning of the wheel of Dharma. According to 
Chittamatra, the second turning is interpretable.  
 
 
Gyeltsab Je’s Ornament of the Essence 
 
p. 4: “{6} The Great Vehicle Treatise on the Sublime Continuum (Mahayanottaratantrasastra) 
explained that…”  
 
• (Asanga’s) Great Vehicle Treatise on the Sublime Continuum:  asserts that all three lineage-
bearers (hearer, solitary realizer , Mahayana) need to realize em ptiness of true existence.  
• Those who adopt Mind-Only view are not suitable vessels at the beginning, i.e. need to be 
shown emptiness later. They are of “dull f aculty;” those of sharp faculty can be taught 
emptiness from the very start.  
• Asanga explained Mind-Only; is “t railblazer” or “opener of chario t tracks,” but is follower of 
Nagarjuna; used Perfection of Wisdom sutras and Matrix of One Gone Thus Sutra to explain 
that emptiness of true existence must be  realized by all three lineage-bearers. 
• Asanga received “five Dharmas of Maitrey a” from Maitreya and understood all their 
meanings. Realized meaning of first three treatises4 and explained from point of view of 
Mind-Only system; explained Great Vehicle Treatise on the Sublime Continuum  and 
Ornament for Clear Realization from point of view of Prasangika-Madhyamika.  
• His final view = Prasangika, but opened tracks of Chittamatra for disciples not ready for 
Prasangika view.  
• In Cognition-Only system, subtle emptiness is not asserted; it is mistaken to say that Sublime 
Continuum  is explained by way of Cognition-Only.  
• “Subtle emptiness” = from point of view of Prasangika 
• Although the Ornament is explained from point of view  of Svatantrika-Madhyamika, this 
introductory explanation is from point of view of Prasangika-Madhyamika.  
 
p. 4: “ In this treatise Ornament for Clear Realization (Abhisamayalamkara ), the final view of 
emptiness is taught again and again…” 
 
• Ornament for Clear Realization  is commentary on extensive, medium, and brief Perfection 
of Wisdom sutras; Commentary Clear Meaning  by Haribhadra is commentary on Ornament 
for Clear Realization ; Gyeltsab’s Explanation: Ornament of the Essence  is commentary on 
Haribhadra’s Commentary Clear Meaning.    
• Main text discussed: extensive, medium , and brief Perfection of Wisdom sutras. Ornament 
for Clear Realization  was obtained by Asanga in Tushita from Maitreya. Commentary Clear 
Meaning  also discusses commentators prior to Ha ribhadra, which we will look at soon.  
• Perfection of Wisdom sutras have  two kinds of subject matter: 
1. Emptiness – stages of emptiness taught explicitly  
2. Clear realizations – stages of realization taught in hidden way  
                                                 
4 The “Two Differentiations” and Ornament for the Great Vehicle Sutras . 
 13
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 4: 18 – 22 February, 2008 
• Ornament mainly  exposes hidden stages of clear realiza tions in Perfection of Wisdom sutras, 
but also discusses emptiness.   
 
p. 4: “Regarding this explanation of the Ornament for Clear Realization along with its commentary, 
there are three meanings:” 
 
1. Meaning of the title 
1A. Actual 
1A1. Translation of the title  
1A2. Explanation of the title 
1B. Ancillaries 
2. Meaning of the text 
3. Meaning of the conclusion 
 
1A1. Translation of the title 
 
Ornament of the Essence,  p. 5:  
 
ROOT TEXT 
Meaning of the title: Abh īsamaya alamkara n āma prajñaparamita upadhesha sh āstra vriti  
 
The word “vriti” seems to be a mistake here. It means “commentary,” so this should not be in the 
root text; the commentary we are using is Commentary Clear Meaning  by Haribhadra.  
 
COMMENTARY  
“In the Tibetan language: She rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa’i man ngag gi bstan…”  
 
1A2. Explanation of the title 
 
Three types of Perf ection of Wisdom: 
1. textual 
2. path 
3. resultant 
 
Later, Perfection of Wisdom is shown to be  perfectly explained by eight categories.  
 
• “‘Quintessential instructions’  causes the meaning of the sutras to be easily understood…”  
This passage explains why certain words appear in the title. “ Quintessential instructions ” 
appears in title because the Ornament causes the meaning of th e sutras to be easily 
understood by main trainees.  
• “Treatise:” Ornament possesses qualities of cure and protection . 
• “Since it approaches or realizes directly…:”  Subject matter  of Ornament is the eight clear 
realizations. The Ornament does not literally re alize directly.  
• “Just as an excellent form – a natural ornamen t – decorated with bracelets and the like…” : 
Ornament is a “clarifying ornament.”  
 
Four types of ornaments:  
1. natural ornament – excellent form; analogous to  Perfection of Wisdom  sutras (excellent 
corpus of the Mothers) 
2. beautifying ornament – bracelets, etc.; analogou s to eight categories and seventy topics 
 14
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 4: 18 – 22 February, 2008 
3. clarifying ornament – mirror; the treatise Ornament for Clear Realization;  comments on 
intention of Perfecti on of Wisdom sutras 
4. ornament of joy – joy; wise people genera ting joy when looking at this treatise  
 
“Due to commentating on the meaning of the root, it is a ‘commentary.’”  
 
Note change in text: “Due to commentating on the meaning of  the root, it is a ‘commentary.’”  
Delete “[sutras]”—“root” refers to the Ornament. Here, commentary refers to Haribhadra’s 
Commentary Clear Meaning.   
 
Treatise: cure and protection  
• Cure: curing afflictions in continua of trainees 
• Protection: protecting trai nees from lower realms and cyclic existence  
 
Ornament of the Essence, p. 6: 
1B. Ancillaries 
1B1. Enumeration of the bundles 
1B2. Translator’s homage 
1B1. Enumeration of the bundles  
EXPLANATION  
• “Bundle” is like an aggregate. 
 
1B2 Translator’s homage 
ROOT TEXT 
• Homage is not composed by author of text; it is added by the translator when translated 
from Sanskrit to Tibetan. 
 
2 Meaning of the text 
2A. Embarking on the explanation 
2B. Setting forth the explanation itself 
2C. The way of completing the explanation 
2A. Embarking on the explanation 
2A1. Expression of worship and promise to explain 
2A2. Proving that [Haribhadra] is suitable to compose the commentary 
2A3. Discarding arrogance and the reason for generating enthusiasm 
2A1. Expression of worship and promise to explain 
COMMENTARY 
“Respectfully I pay homage…”  
• Homage = to textual, path, and re sultant perfections of wisdom.  
 
EXPLANATION 
“…it should be taken to be all three here…”  
• Explicitly, this pays homage to  textual Perfection of Wisdom; but  we should take it as being 
homage to all three pe rfections of wisdom. 
 
“For the sake of what purpose?” 
 15
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 4: 18 – 22 February, 2008 
• Promise to explain text. Homage is made in order to reveal versified Ornament as ornament 
of the three Mothers.  
• This includes both expression of wo rship and promise to explain.  
 
“There is a purpose for making the promise to explain at the beginning of composing the 
commentary…” 
 
Four properties of the commentary: 
• Subject matter : reveals the meaning of the sutras and root treatise ( Ornament for Clear 
Realization ) 
• Purpose : understanding, in dependence on it, that the root treatise serves as an ornament for 
the three Mothers   
• Essential purpose : in dependence on that purpose, one will eventually attain omniscience 
• Relationship : “three properties…”  essential purpose is related to purpose, purpose is related 
to subject matter.  
 
This stanza indicates that Commentary Clear Meaning  has these four properties. This stanza also 
has these four properties, because its subjec t matter is the four properties of the Commentary Clear 
Meaning .  
 
Four properties of this stanza: 
 
• Subject matter : four properties… 
• Purpose : to realize that Commentary Clear Meaning  has four properties. 
• Essential purpose : to engage in purpose of Commentary Clear Meaning  
• Relationship : each property is related to the former. 
 
 
Wednesday, 20 February 2008 (evening) 
 
re. stanza on p. 6 from Commentary Clear Meaning :  
 
To the perfection of wisdom  
Respectfully I pay homage  
In order to thoroughly reveal its versified Ornament  
As serving as an ornament of all. 
 
This stanza indicate s four properties of Commentary Clear Meaning (subject matter, etc.). This 
stanza itself also has the four properties: 
1. Subject matter – four properties of corpus which is Commentary Clear Meaning   
2. Purpose – for sake of making one realize that Commentary Clear Meaning  has these four 
properties 
3. Essential purpose – so that one will engage in the corpus ( Commentary Clear Meaning ) 
4. Relationship – essential purpose is related to pur pose, purpose is related to subject matter, 
subject matter related to this very stanza  
 
• “In dependence on that purpose…” : in dependence on the Ornament, one engages in three 
Mothers, will engage in hear ing, contemplation, and meditati on, and attain omniscience.  
• In dependence on four properties of this stanza, we understand that Commentary Clear 
Meaning  has these four properties.  
 
 16
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 4: 18 – 22 February, 2008 
Going for refuge 
 
p. 7: “To summarize the essence, this stanza teache s that the excellent door for entering the 
teachings is going for refuge.” 
 
• Refuge  = door to enter Buddhist teachings  
• Renunciation (definite emergence)  = door for entering a path 
• Generated mind (bodhicitta)  = door for entering Mahayana  
 
To go for refuge, we need to be ab le to identify Three Jewels; to do this, we must be able to identity 
four noble truths; for this, we n eed to understand the two truths.  
 
Causes for refuge :  
• conviction  that Three Jewels can protect us 
• fear of cyclic existence and lower rebirths 
 
Why do composers of treatises ma ke an expression of worship? 
 
p. 7: “…the composers of treatises set forth an expr ession of worship for the sake of making known 
that going for refuge should come first at the beginning of any Dharma activity that is performed, 
such as hearing, contemplation, and meditation.” 
 
• composers of treatises = holy beings who compose treatises 
• Gyeltsab says that from time to time, there wi ll be some explanation on how to practice the 
meaning of the treatise 
• Gyeltsab composed a separate te xt re. practicing the meaning of  the treatise: 38 volumes of 
texts were written by Lama Tsong Khapa and his disciples—18 by Lama Tsong Khapa, 20 
by both Gyeltsab and Khedrup Je combined—t his text can be f ound there if we look. 
 
Haribhadra is suitable as author of Commentary Clear Meaning   
 
• At very beginning of Ornament of the Essence, Gyeltsab makes an expression of worship of 
Ornament of the Essence . He says “I did not understa nd this text well, etc.”  
• Since Ornament of the Essence  is an explanation of Commentary Clear Meaning, next 
Gyeltsab Je proves that author of Commentary Clear Meaning  was suitable to compose the 
commentary. Otherwise, why would Gye ltsab Je write a commentary on the Commentary 
Clear Meaning ? The following section proves th at Haribhadra is suitable. 
 
2A2. Proving that [Haribhadra] is suitable to compose the commentary  
2A2A. Proving that [Haribhadra] possesses the outer condi tion of quintessential instru ctions of the spiritual 
guide 
2A2B. Proving that [Haribhadra] possesses the inner condi tion of wisdom realizing all the meanings of the 
treatise 
2A2C. Thus [Haribhadra] is suitable to compose the commentary  
2A2A. Proving that [Haribhadra] possesses the outer condition of quintessential instru ctions of the spiritual 
guide 
 
Haribhadra has transmission from  four previous masters: As anga, Vasubandhu, Arya [Vimukti], 
and Honorable Vimuktisena (he received transm ission mainly from Honorable Vimuktisena, 
indirectly through the others).  
 17
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 4: 18 – 22 February, 2008 
 
First, a doubt:  “OPINION: Is there or is there not a commentary done by a previous acharya?…”   
 
Response:  quintessential instructions dependent on commentaries of  the four masters exist; 
Haribhadra has unbroken transmission. But there is no fa ult of repetition, sin ce previous masters did 
not “complete the purpose.” All four masters we re unable to “find” the Perfection of Wisdom 
sutras.  
• Asanga composed commentary but in terms of  trainees, purpose was not completed, because 
he composed from point of view of Chittamatra.  
• Vasubandhu was incomplete in terms of tenets, because held Chittamatra view 
• Arya Vimukti found meaning, but not all the words 
• Honorable Vimuktisena found words, but not meaning 
• Haribhadra found everything, i.e. entire meaning.  
 
Four previous masters were not complete in their gaining the Perfec tion of Wisdom sutras; 
Haribhadra says (in a following sect ion) that he did ga in the meaning, through force of requests to 
buddhas and their blessings.  
 
Previous commentaries are not suitable as commentar ies on all the Mothers, but Haribhadra’s is a 
commentary on all the Mothers, so there is no repetition.  
 
“Quintessential instructions” = explanation of meaning, passed fr om one master to another  
 
Ornament of the Essence, p. 8: 
2A2A-1. The way Acarya Asanga composed an exposition  
 
COMMENTARY  
“By having generated deep affection out of affecti on for migrating beings…” 
 
EXPLANATION  
“Composed an exposi tion of what?...” 
Note correction in Explanation: Ornament of the Essence : 
p. 8: “By his excellent qualities: (i) perfect ment ality and compassion, having generated deep, 
that is, exceptional, affection …” 
 
Should read:  
“By his excellent qualities: (i ) perfect mentality—compassion— having generated deep, that is, 
exceptional, affection…” 
 
Asanga – two types of excellent qualities :  
1. perfect mentality – compassion: affection for migrating beings 
2. perfect application – his being a refuge, having had opportunity to listen to teachings from 
Maitreya. By having generated compassion for the female dog (when he first encountered 
Maitreya directly), he thus  purified negativities.   
 
“Five types of continua: ” refers to the six types of bei ngs, with demigods included in gods. 
 
“Those who propound that the two brothers [A sanga and Vasubandhu] are same in view…” This is 
similar to passage on p. 4: “The assertion that Sublime Continuum was commentated upon in the 
manner of Cognition-Only by the Acarya is incorrect…” 
 18
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 4: 18 – 22 February, 2008 
 
• Asanga and Vasubandhu do not follow same vi ew; Asanga held Consequentialist view, 
Vasubandhu Mind-Only.  
 
For someone to “find” Perfection of Wisdom sutras, doesn’t necessarily mean they have realization; 
if they have quintessential instructions, they do not necessarily have realization; they have attained 
the scriptural Dharma. 
 
2A2A-2. The way Vasubandhu unraveled  
COMMENTARY  
“Vasubandhu, a root and branch of the purpose of migrating beings…” 
 
EXPLANATION  
 
Vasubandhu composed from point of view of Mind-Only.  
• Objects of knowledge as nature of inner = obj ects are in nature of mind. Correctly depending 
on objects as nature of mind, Vas ubandhu taught Mind-Only system.  
• Vasubandhu did not explain corr ectly. Correct explanation = abiding in middle free from 
extremes.  
 
2A2A-3. The way Arya [Vimukti] revealed  
COMMENTARY  
Also, he who is called Vimukti,  
 
Vimukti is included among aryas because he attained the path of seeing. Revealed with “mind 
abiding in middle.”  
 
 
Thursday, February 21, 2008  
 
Q: We said yesterday that the word “ vriti” (meaning “commentary”) in the title of Ornament for 
Clear Realization  is extra, because title of root text shouldn’t say “commentary,” but Gyeltsab 
explains this word in his explanation. Why doe s he explain it if it’s not part of the title?  
 
A: Gyeltsab’s commentary is on both Ornament for Clear Realization and Commentary Clear 
Meaning . If we say the title without “vriti,” it is the title of Ornament for Clear Realization ; with 
vriti, it is the title of Commentary Clear Meaning . Gyeltsab’s text is also a commentary on the 
Perfection of Wisdom sutr as, but not directly.  
 
Gyeltsab says at one point that  he is composing a commentary, but acknowledges that he too may 
make mistakes.  
 
• Gyeltsab mentioned (p. 7) “The ways of puttin g into practice the meaning of the treatise will 
be explained from time to time. Since I wish to compile them and compose a separate text, look there on how to practice. ” He wrote a commentary on Bodhisattvacharyavatara  
(Opening the Door to the Supreme Vehicle: The Way of Practicing Clear Realizations) which is in the fourth volume of his collected work s, and there are two other commentaries on how 
to practice in fifth volume of collected work s. One commentary talks about how to practice 
the eight categories a nd seventy topics.  
 19
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 4: 18 – 22 February, 2008 
 
 
Continuing Explanation: Ornament of the Essence   
 
p. 9:  
2A2A-3. The way Arya [Vimukti] revealed  
EXPLANATION 
 
“Thoroughly revealed. What? The Mother Sutras  and the Ornament. Understand it below…”  
 
Text says: “‘Also’ refers to the fact that the pr evious two [Asanga and Vasubandhu] were not 
exhaustive.”   
 
“Previous two:” can be interpreted as  
1. Asanga and Vasubandhu, meaning th ey were not exhaustive or 
2. That the ways of commenting by Vasubandhu were not satisf actory. Vasubandhu, “ By taking 
his belief as foremost / Thoroughly unraveled through correctly depending / On objects of 
knowledge as being  the inner. ”  
a. One way = taking his belief as foremost 
b. another = Thoroughly unraveled through correctly de pending / On objects of knowledge 
as being the inner.  
These two ways of commenting are not satisfactory.  
 
“The reason for his commenting in this way is his having seen the esse ntial meaning taken by 
Vasubandhu in the manner of the Cognition-Only…”  
 
“Master and student”—refers to Vasubandhu (master) and Arya Vimukti (his student).  
 
2A2A-4. The way Honorable Vimuktisena expounded  
COMMENTARY  
“After that, Vimuktisena…”  
 
EXPLANATION  
“Expounded. By who? Vimuktisena, who abided on the ground of faith…” 
 
• These four sections of the outline are to prove  that Haribhadra has the outer condition of 
quintessential instructions of the spiritual guide. Although the ways of explaining by these 
commentators were not complete, Haribhadra pulled them together and received the 
transmission.  
• In order to understand higher tenet systems, we need to understand the lower systems.  
 
2A2B. Proving that [Haribhadra] possesses the inner condition of wisdom realizing all the meanings of the 
treatise  
COMMENTARY 
“In that way, scholars illuminated  / All of these treatises / Not found by just some…” 
 
These four scholars did not find th e meaning and words of extensive,  medium, and brief Perfection 
of Wisdom sutras; mainly, they did not find the meaning.  
 20
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 4: 18 – 22 February, 2008 
• Asanga did not find meaning from point of view of trainees   
• Vasubandhu did not find meani ng from point of view of tenets  
• Arya Vimukti did not find mean ing from point of view of words  
• Honorable Vimuktisena did not find meaning from point of view of meanings   
 
EXPLANATION  
“In the way  explained above, the four scholars illuminated  some of the meanings of the words…” 
 
“All of these extensive, me dium, and brief treatises…” refers to Perfection of Wisdom sutras, not to 
those by the previous masters. The “meaning of the intention” was not found by Vasubandhu, etc.  
 
(The sentence “These which I found according with the commentary by way of the Ornament are 
amazing”  could also read: “These which are found accordingly commentated on  by way of the 
Ornament are amazing. ) 
 
“This statement indicates that he is fortunate and possesses special wisdom…” 
 
• These four scholars did not find the final essential meaning and the stages of clear 
realization. Haribhadra did not commit the fa ult of repetition, because he found them.  
• Haribhadra stating that “I have found the meani ng…” is not due to arrogance, because it is 
stated for the purpose of benefiting others.  
 
2A2C. Thus [Haribhadra] is suitable to compose the commentary  
COMMENTARY  
“Very difficult to find by those like them…” 
 
EXPLANATION 
“Very difficult to find , since it is not found even by those like  the scholars explained above…” 
 
Haribhadra: this profound path—eig ht clear realizations and meaning of emptiness—was found by 
power of blessings of buddhas. 
 
Purpose : done for sake of repaying kindness out of gratitude to the Buddha. 
 
What Haribhadra has found is “suitable to be an alyzed by scholars.” Thes e scholars make requests 
to the Buddha and will find this profound path.  
 
“By way of the modes of explana tion of the four acharyas, [Har ibhadra] demonstrates that he 
possesses the quintessential instructions…” 
 
 
Importance of relying on a spiritual guide 
 
Spiritual guide is root of path ; without proper reliance, root of  path is severed. Without proper 
reliance, one cannot generate real izations, even if one has intelle ctual understanding;  one will be 
unable to transform the mind.  
 
D Story about monk who meditated, but didn’t devel op realizations. Found that he had left one 
of his teachers out of his merit field, who taught him the alphabet when he was young. By 
putting this teacher in the cente r of the merit field, he was able to develop calm abiding. 
 21
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 4: 18 – 22 February, 2008 
D Not necessary to rely on just anyone from wh om we receive Dharma teachings as a guru. 
Disciple needs to have confidence in a teacher, thinking “I will rely on him/her as my guru,” 
in order for this relationship to arise. You can hear Dharma from a teacher in the form of a 
lecture, or discuss Dharma, etc.; this person doesn’t have to become your guru. 
D Four possibilities betwee n “lama” and “tulku”:  
1. lama who is not tulku: ordinary monk who b ecomes geshe, etc., gets disciples, who see 
him as their lama. 
2. tulku who is not lama: a lama passes away and is reincarnated; if his reincarnation does 
not have disciples, he is not a lama. 
3. both lama and tulku: His Holiness the Dalai Lama 
4. neither: plenty of examples! 
 
Some who are recognized as “reincarnations” (t ulkus) are not necessarily genuine tulkus.  
 
[Geshe-la told some stories about reincarnati ons of various lamas, including one who was 
recognized as a pig, and a hermit who was rebor n as a cow and then his carcass found by a 
benefactor from his previous life.] 
 
• Some have control over rebirth, and may decide to be reborn as an animal to benefit others. 
Some lamas may reincarnate in unfavorable st ates, but another lama may indicate a child 
with great merit as the “reincarna tion” in order to satisfy the requests of the lama’s disciples.  
 
Two categories of teachers : one is like a “parent” (a “home teacher”) who takes care of monks 
(housing, food, etc.) in a certain house of the m onastery. Others are responsible for the monks’ 
study, from whom monks can choose. Someone b ecomes one’s lama through choice. Depends on 
motivation from both sides, student and disciple; one decides whether their teacher is a lama to 
them or not.  
 
• We need to be careful about who we devote our selves to as our lama. Bad results can come 
from generating a negative mind towards one’s lamas.  
 
Ornament of the Essence , p. 10: 
 
“The four lines “In that way, …” [under outline 2A2B] indicate that [Haribhadra] understood [the 
Ornament ]…” 
 
Note:  delete “[v. 1.6…” and “v. 1.7” in this passage. 
 
• Important to be very careful about relying on a spiritual guide and the practice of refuge. 
Good practice of refuge depends on genera ting faith, understandin g qualities of Three 
Jewels. With good practice of refuge, relying on  spiritual guide will go well, and vice versa. 
Try to keep mind positive, otherwise we w ill experience difficulties. By improving and 
subduing mind, we come closer to the path, othe rwise, we become more and more distant 
from it. 
 
Good mind:  
Thoughts/attitudes toward others. Es pecially important to  be careful with ou r attitude toward 
teachers.   
 
 
 
 22
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 4: 18 – 22 February, 2008 
Friday, February 22, 2008 
 
Q: re. Arya Vimukti: “found the meaning but not the words”—what does this mean? 
 
A: He found some words, but not all, of the ex tensive, medium, and brie f Perfection of Wisdom 
sutras. He found the meanings in dependence on the words. He did not see, or meet, all the words. 
Maybe it’s like that.  
 
Meaning of not having found the words:  for example, Arya Vimukti’s text is a comp ilation of notes 
on Commentary Clear Meaning;  Arya Vimukti mentioned only three bodies of a buddha, not the 
exalted wisdom truth body, so he  didn’t explicitly find the wo rds, and didn’t comment on the 
exalted wisdom truth body.  
 
Different tenet systems 
 
• Maitreya composed Sublime Continuum and Ornament for Clear Realization  mainly from 
point of view of Consequentialist (P rasangika) system. Haribhadra composed Commentary 
Clear Meaning  from Autonomist (Svatantrika) point of  view. This was because of the level 
of the trainees, although his final point of view was Prasangika.  
 
In third turning of  wheel, Buddha taught Sutra Unraveling the Thought, which unravels meaning of 
first two wheels of Dharma.  
• First wheel = Vaibhashika and Sautrantika  
• Second wheel = Prasangika-Madhyamika system  
• Third wheel was from point of view of Chittamatra  
Buddha unraveled intention of thou ght of first two wheels in third wheel and revealed Chittamatra 
system. Intention in third wheel is not most accura te one, but was beneficial in that context.  
 
The text on Seventy Topics we studied previously (by JCG) is fr om Svatantrika point of view.  
 
Selflessness of persons and phenome na: Svatantrika and Prasangika  
 
• In Svatantrika-Madhyamika, selflessness of persons = lack of self-sufficient, substantially 
existent person, not lack of true existence.  
• For Prasangika-Madhyamika, selflessness of pe rsons = lack of truly existent person.  
• For Svatantrika-Madhyamika, obj ects of negation for selflessness of persons and selflessness 
of phenomena are different in terms of subtlety.  
• For Prasangika-Madhyamika, selflessness of persons and phenomena are not different in 
terms of subtlety, but in terms of basis of emptiness (e.g. a person or a phenomenon). 
Emptiness of true existence of a person is s ubtle selflessness of pe rsons; with a phenomenon 
other than a person, e.g. aggregates, its emptine ss of true existence is an emptiness of true 
existence of phenomena.  
 
p. 10: 
2A3. Discarding arrogance and the reason for generating enthusiasm {15} 
COMMENTARY  
 
“Although not my object of ut ilization in all ways…” 
 
 23
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 4: 18 – 22 February, 2008 
EXPLANATION  
 
“Although, except for that gained through the strength of the blessings of the virtuous spiritual 
guide…”  
 
This follows Haribhadra’s statement that he f ound meaning of the treatise. Without depending on 
the spiritual guide, he would not have gained the meaning, so it is “not freely my mind’s object of 
utilization,” i.e. it is only through the bl essings of the spiritual guide.  
 
• Haribhadra is enthusiastic  about composing in order to depo sit latencies to prevent himself 
from forgetting and cause others to generate realizations.  
• He is able to benefit self and others  because “composing such a comme ntary is an excellent 
method that accords with achieving the merits of generosity and the like for the sake of an 
exalted knower of all aspects.”  These two activities are conc ordant, because by achieving 
merits of generosity, etc., result = exalted know er of all aspects. Trainees by following this 
will attain exalted knower of all aspects. Both activities lead to buddhahood. 
 
“Just as it has been said in [Dharmakirti's] Commentary on [Dignaga's] 'Compendium of Valid 
Cognition' …” 
 
Correction to quotation from Pramanavarttikakarika :  
“A method that accords with the relationshi p acts to express the aims of beings”  
should read “A method that accords with th e relationship is speech that  acts to express the aims of 
beings.” 
  
• Aims of beings = high status  and definite goodness ; true paths lead to liberation, true origins 
lead to suffering. Speech that acts to  express method to attain these.  
• “Method” = method to attain high status and de finite goodness. Speech that express aims of 
beings is a method. This treatise, in that sense, is the method.  
 
Method refers to many things; can also refers a person’s practice. “Expre ssing aims of beings” = 
explaining how to achieve high status/definite goodness, i.e. how to practice. “Relationship” here refers to relationship between true paths a nd liberation, and true origins and suffering.  
 
“The Acarya [Haribhadra] himself composed this commentary by drawing well from the paths of 
reasoning…” 
 
• “Paths of reasoning:” reasoning by a valid cognizer. If we find contradiction with reasoning 
in a text, we shouldn’t rely on that  text. Reasoning = final method.  
 
“…there has been no misdeed.” No fault in composing commentary, because it was composed by relying on blessings of  spiritual guide. 
 
• Lama Tsong Khapa’s Golden Rosary: no misdeed because composed with thought of 
benefiting others.  
 
Ornament of the Essence,  p. 11: 
2B. Setting forth the explanation itself  
2B1. Expression of worship 
2B2. Having revealed to persons of faith in the extensive, to explain 
 24
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 4: 18 – 22 February, 2008 
2B3. Explaining other summarized meanings 
2B1. Expression of worship 
2B1A. Making a connection 
2B1B. Root text 
2B1C. Commentary 
2B1A. Making a connection 
COMMENTARY  
 
• Here, “expression of worship” = expression of worship of Ornament for Clear Realization .  
• Before stating what the root text is, a passage connects what came before and what comes 
later. Actual expression of worship is on p. 13: “That which through the knower of all leads 
hearers seeking pacification to peace…”  
 
“Arya Maitreya clearly show s himself to accord with the excellent conduct…” 
 
 
EXPLANATION  
“Arya Maitreya clearly shows himself to acco rd with the excellent conduct, whereby , from among 
the many procedures  …” 
 
Expression of own welfare  and others’ welfare . What is purpose of Maitreya’s own welfare? Paying 
homage to Mothers is purpose of own welfare; he accords with be havior, or conduct, of excellent 
beings. “ …[S]hows himself… ” means this is related to his own welfare.  
 
Others’ welfare: “for the sake of other  trainees to generate  irreversible lucidity .”  
• Lucidity = faith 
• Purpose for generating irreversible faith in trainees = so they will engage in treatise 
automatically.  
 
“In what do they generate faith and engage?” 
 
Four children:  
1. Hearer aryas 
2. Solitary realizer aryas 
3. Bodhisattva aryas 
4. Buddha aryas 
 
Cause  = three exalted knowers. They acco mplish goals of the four children.  
• Knower of bases accomplishes goal of hearer aryas and solitary realizer aryas  
• Knower of paths accomplishes goal of bodhisattva aryas 
• Exalted knower of all aspects acco mplishes goal of buddha aryas.  
 
• In dependence on knower of bases, hearer and solitary realizer ar yas attain stat e of liberation  
(pacification).  
• In dependence on knower of paths,  bodhisattva aryas are able to take care of three types of 
lineage-bearers .  
• In dependence on exalted knower of all aspects, buddha  aryas turn the wheel of Dharma for 
all three lineage-bearers .  
 
 25
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 4: 18 – 22 February, 2008 
“By means of being  preceded with expressing  the excellent qualities…” 
 
• Is knower of bases method for accomplishing aims of  hearer and solitary realizer aryas? To 
be precise, knower of bases is method for acco mplishing goals of hearer aryas and solitary 
realizer aryas that is its result . Knower of paths is method for accomplishing goals of 
bodhisattva aryas that is its result.  
 
“Results” = persons , e.g. hearer aryas, solita ry realizer aryas, bodhisattva  aryas; we could also say 
“children,” e.g., “knower of bases is method for accomplishing goals of hearer aryas and solitary 
realizer aryas who are its children ” (the hearers are the “children” of the knower of bases). Knower 
of bases leads hearers who are its children seeking pacification to peace.  
• Knower of bases is method for leading hear er learner aryas to peace (i.e. nirvana).  
• Knower of paths is method fo r leading bodhisattvas to accomp lish welfare of three lineage 
bearers. 
• Exalted knower of all aspects is method for l eading buddhas to turn the wheel of Dharma for 
three lineage-bearers.  
 
“QUALM: What purpose is there in  engaging in dependence on faith?” 
 
Correction to text: “ RESPONSE: Having establis hed with valid cognition that “Lucidity in the 
object-possessor of the perfection of wisdom is the principal cause of attaining all goodness…”  
 
Should be: “…Having established with valid cognition that  “Lucidity in the object-possessor of the 
perfection of wisdom is the principal among the initial causes  of attaining all goodness…”  
 
 
Lucidity and faith 
 
• “Lucidity” here refers to faith, specifically the faith of lucidity.  
 
Three kinds of faith:  
1. Faith of lucidity 
2. Faith of conviction 
3. Faith of aspiration, or “fa ith that clearly desires” 
 
Lucidity doesn’t necessarily involve analysis. When  dull-facultied disciples hear the Perfection of 
Wisdom sutras, especially th e Expression of Worship of Ornament for Clear Realization , they 
generate faith without analysis. Sharp-facultied disciples engage in analysis, and when they have 
seen there is no harm through reas oning, generate lucidity in the Ornament.  Dull-facultied disciples 
generate “great faith,” sharp-facu ltied develop “irreversible faith.” 
 
“Which valid cognizer established it?” 
 
Both subsequent attainment and meditative equi poise realize that in dependence on faith, all 
goodness will be attained. During me ditative equipoise, Ma itreya realized thr ough reasoning that 
the three exalted knowers are cause s for attaining all goodness; subs equent attainme nt induced by 
that also realizes that, whereby he composed expression of worship to  three exalted knowers. 
Although subsequent attainment and meditative e quipoise are the same for a buddha, here it is 
explained from point of view of appearance to tr ainees (i.e. as if Mait reya were not a buddha).  
 
“…[E]xalted wisdom of  individual knowledge” refers to meditative equipoise.  
 26
Masters Program: Ornament  
Week 4: 18 – 22 February, 2008 
 
 
END 
 27