Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Ornament of Clear Realization.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:53.038211
================================================================================

Overview of Ornament for Clear Realization  12 
 Overview of the  Ornament for Clear Realization 
 
  
 
The Perfection of Wisdom Sutras were ta ught by Shakyamuni Buddha during what 
is known as “the second turning of the wheel of Dharma.” They explicitly and 
extensively present the topic of emptiness of  true existence of all phenomena. In 
addition, they also set forth in a hidde n manner the different clear realizations 
developed by a spiritual aspirant on the pa th to buddhahood. In order to clarify and 
make explicit these clear realiz ations, Maitreya composed his Ornament for Clear 
Realization . Among the different commentaries on the Ornament , those by the Indian 
master Haribhadra are the basis for study in the Gelug tradition. Acharya 
Haribhadra commented on the Ornament  from the point of view of the Yogachara-
Svatantrika-Madhyamaka tenet system, and some of his assertions differ from those 
of the Prasangika-Madhyamaka tenet system , which is generally regarded as the 
highest among the tenet syst ems in Tibetan Buddhism. 
 The Ornament for Clear Realization  is composed entirely of verses and is divided 
into eight chapters. Each chapter presen ts one clear realization, which is 
characterized by specific topics. The topi cs help to enhance the understanding of 
each clear realization by describing different  features such as cause, entity, and result. 
 A total of eight clear realizatio ns are presented. The first three − an exalted 
knower of all aspects, a knower of paths, and a knower of bases − are objects to be 
generated; the next four − an application in complete aspects, peak application, 
serial application, and instantaneous application − are the four practices to be 
engaged in; and the final clear realization − exalted wisdom truth body 
5 − is the 
final object to be attained. In this way, th e entire bodhisattva path to enlightenment, 
or buddhahood, is clarified. However, the overall presentation is not a simple step-
by-step description of the path from the init ial point of entry until the attainment of 
the final result. Instead, th e entire path to enlightenm ent is revealed within the 
presentation of each clear realization. 
Brief Explanation of the Title 
The full name of the text in Sanskrit is Abhisamayalamkara-nama-prajñaparamita-
upadesha-shastra . This is translated into English as Treatise of Quintessen tial Instructions 
of the Perfection of Wisdom Calle d Ornament for Clear Realization.  
Overview of Ornament for Clear Realization  13 
  A Buddhist “ treatise”  possesses two qualities: cure an d protection. It helps to cure 
the disease of the afflictions, and it protects  sentient beings from the general 
sufferings of cyclic existence, and partic ularly from the sufferings of the lower 
realms. This text is known as a “ quintessential instruction ” because it is an instruction 
or a means for easily realizing the meanin g of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras.  
 With respect to the word “ ornament ,” the Ornament  itself is described as a 
clarifying ornament because it clarifies the hidden meaning of the Perfection of 
Wisdom Sutras. There are four types of ornaments described in the commentaries: 
natural, beautifying, clarifying, and joyf ul ornaments. For example, a person’s 
beautiful body is a natural ornament, whic h is further adorned with the beautifying 
ornaments of bracelets and so forth. When th is is reflected in a clarifying ornament, 
such as a mirror, it generates joy in th e mind of the person, which is a joyful 
ornament. Similarly, the natural ornament is  the beautiful body of the Perfection of 
Wisdom Sutras, which is adorned by th e beautifying ornaments of the eight 
categories6 and seventy topics. When this appears in this treatise, the Ornament for 
Clear Realization, which is  the clarifying ornament because it reflects the whole 
meaning of the Perfection of Wisdom Su tras adorned with the eight categories and 
seventy topics, it generates joy in the mi nds of the trainees, the joyful ornament. 
 The term “clear realization” refers to a path. A path is defined as an exalted 
knower conjoined with an uncontri ved mind of definite emergence.7 A clear 
realization is a consciousness to which the name “path” has been given because just 
as an external path leads a person to hi s destination, a consciousness-path leads a 
being to a higher level of spiritual realization. The Ornament  presents the different 
clear realizations developed by a bodhis attva, as well as those possessed by a fully 
enlightened buddha. 
Overview of the Eight Categories and Seventy Topics 
The eight categories are set forth in the eight chapters of the Ornament  (see note 6 
for an explanation of the difference between the eight clear realizations and the eight 
categories). Each category is presented by means of different numbers of topics, 
totaling seventy topics as follows:   1. Exalted Knower of All Aspects  (10 topics)  2. Knower of Paths    (11 topics)  3. Knower of Bases    (9 topics)  4. Application in Complete Aspects (11 topics)  5. Peak Application    (8 topics) 
Overview of Ornament for Clear Realization  14 
  6. Serial Application    (13 topics) 
 7. Instantaneous Application  (4 topics)  8. Resultant Truth Body   (4 topics)  The eight categories are grouped into:  
1. the three objects to be cultivated,  
2. the four means for attaining them, and  
3. the final result.  
 The three exalted knowers are the objects to be practiced and cultivated by the four 
applications. Meditating on the three exal ted knowers refers to meditating on the 
aspects of the three exalted knowers. One way of meditating on the aspects is to 
generate the mind in the nature of the as pects. This is akin to meditating on 
compassion in order to generate the mind in  the nature of compassion. It is not like 
the case of an eye consciousness perceivi ng a form, in which the object, form, 
remains separate from the mind perceiving it . An exalted knower of all aspects is the 
means that enables the buddhas to turn  the wheel of Dharma and set forth 
teachings suited to the dispositions of the trainees. With a knower of paths, a 
bodhisattva arya is able to guide trainees on their respective pa ths based on his own 
realizations. By means of a knower of bases,  hearer and solitary realizer aryas achieve 
their desired goal, the peace of nirvana, in which true sufferings and true origins 
have been pacified. 
 The four applications are the means for attaining these three exalted knowers; hence, they are the causes of the three exalte d knowers. They are yogas, or practices, 
in the continuum of a bodhisattva, that ar e either calm abiding or a union of calm 
abiding and special insight meditating on th e aspects of the exalted knowers. Such a 
union refers to a special wisdom that sees its object clearly and is maintained on the basis of a concentrated mind.
8 An application in complete aspects cultivates all 173 
aspects of the three exalted knowers in order to gain control over them. Once 
control has been achieved, one enters th e peak application. A serial application 
progressively cultivates the aspects of the three exalted knowers for the sake of 
attaining stability with respect to them, an d this will give rise to the instantaneous 
application once stability in the aspect s of the three exalted knowers has been 
attained. This last application occurs in th e instant just prior to the attainment of 
buddhahood and is the direct cause for enlightenment.  The final result of the applications is th e resultant truth body – the final object of 
attainment. “Resultant truth body” is syno nymous with buddha; by learning about 
Overview of Ornament for Clear Realization  15 
 its excellent qualities, one is moved to gene rate a strong aspiration to achieve it for 
the sake of benefiting others. 
 Following are descriptions of each of the eight categories, together with the topics 
that characterize them. 
1. Exalted Knower of All Aspects 
The first chapter of the Ornament  describes an exalted knower  of all aspects, which is 
the omniscient mind of a buddha. It is a culminated exalted wisdom that knows all 
aspects of all objects of knowledge. The ma nner in which it is presented is by way of 
the ten topics, beginning with the Mahaya na conventional generated mind. These 
ten topics serve to characteri ze such an exalted knower and thus help us develop an 
understanding of the omniscient mind. The ten topics are:   
1. Mahayana conventional generated mind  (Skt. bodhicitta ).  
This is presented first, since it is on ly with the development of such a mind 
aspiring to achieve enlightenment for th e sake of all sentient beings that one 
enters the Mahayana path. 
2. Mahayana instruction .  
These are instructions on the two trut hs, the four noble truths, the Three 
Jewels, and so forth. 
3. Mahayana path of preparation .  
This is the second of the fi ve paths of a bodhisattva. 
4. Lineage abiding in the nature , the support of Mahayana achievings.  
In general, a lineage abiding in the natu re is also known as “buddha-nature.” 
All sentient beings possess this lineage, which is the reason that they have the 
potential to achieve buddhahood. 
5. Objects of observation  of Mahayana achievings.  
All phenomena are presented as the object s of observation of a bodhisattva’s 
practice. 
6. Objects of intent  of Mahayana achievings.  
These are the final results that  a bodhisattva exerts effort to achieve. 
7. Achieving of armor .  
This is the bodhisattva’s practice of a ll six perfections within each of the six 
perfections. 
8. Achieving of engagement .  
T h i s  i s  t h e b o d h i s a t t v a ’ s  p r a c t i c e  o f  e n g a g i n g  w i t h  j o y o u s  e f f o r t   t o  d e v e l o p  meditative absorptions, the six perfecti ons, the four immeasurables, and so 
forth. 
Overview of Ornament for Clear Realization  16 
 9. Achieving of accumulation .  
This is the bodhisattva’s practice to accumulate the two vast collections of 
merits and wisdom. 
10. Achieving of definite emergence .  
This is the bodhisattva’s practice of th e pure grounds, that undoubtedly issues 
forth the exalted knower of all aspects. 
2. Knower of Paths 
Knowers of paths are clear realizations fo und only in the continua of Mahayana 
aryas – i.e., bodhisattva aryas and buddh a aryas. They are of three types:  
- those that know hearers’ paths,  
- those that know solitary realizers’ paths, and  
- those that know Mahayana paths.  
A bodhisattva arya develops these knower s of paths in the manner of actually 
generating in his or her continuum the diff erent realizations shared with hearers and 
solitary realizers, as well as those unique to the Mahayana. It is not just a matter of 
knowing the different realizations and atta inments in a theoretical fashion. With a 
knower of paths, a bodhisattva is able  to guide sentient beings of different 
dispositions, according to their different inclinations, to their desired goals of a 
hearer’s or solitary realizer’s nirvana or a buddha’s enlightenment. A knower of 
paths is characterized by eleven topics: 
 
1. Branches of a knower of paths .  
These are the causes, entity, and result of a knower of paths. 
2. Knower of paths knowing hearers’ paths .  
This is a Mahayana arya’s clear realiz ation of what is to be known for the 
purpose of guiding sentient beings with an  inclination for the hearers’ path to 
a hearers’ nirvana. The principal realiz ation is a realization of the selflessness 
of persons. 
3. Knower of paths knowing solitary realizers’ paths .  
This is a Mahayana arya’s clear realiz ation of what is to be known for the 
purpose of guiding sentient beings wi th an inclination for the solitary 
realizers’ path to the solitary realizers’ nirvana. The principal realization in this 
case is the realization of the emptiness of apprehenders and apprehendeds 
being different substances. 
4. Mahayana path of seeing .  
This is the first occasion when a bodhisattva gains a direct realization of the emptiness of true existence. 
Overview of Ornament for Clear Realization  17 
 5. Function of a Mahayana path of meditation.  
These are the beneficial qualities that  are attained through the force of 
cultivating the Mahayana path of meditation. 
6. Mahayana path of meditation of belief.  
This is a subsequent clear realization, i.e., a clear realization of a bodhisattva 
on the Mahayana path of meditation, that is convinced that the three Mother 
Sutras are the source of attaining one’ s own aim, others’ aims, and both one’s 
own and others’ aims. 
7. Benefits of the Mahayana path  of meditation of belief . 
These refer to the excellent qualities achi eved through the force of cultivating 
the Mahayana path of meditation of beli ef. The benefits are to receive praises, 
venerations, and laudations. 
8. Path of meditation of dedication .  
This is a conceptual Mahayana clear re alization that acts to transform one’s 
own or others’ roots of virtue into a cause for complete enlightenment. 
9. Path of meditation of rejoicing .  
This is a conceptual Mahayana clear real ization that is very joyful regarding 
one’s own or others’ roots of virtue. 
10. Path of meditation of achieving .  
This is a non-conceptual Mahayana clea r realization that deposits an imprint 
for achieving the final realization of a buddha. 
11. Path of meditation of purity. 
This is a non-conceptual Mahayana clea r realization that deposits an imprint 
for achieving the final ab andonment of a buddha. 
3. Knower of Bases 
A knower of bases is an exalted wisdom de veloped by all aryas. The word “bases” 
refers to the sixteen aspects of the four no ble truths. The principal realization in this 
case is the wisdom directly realizing the sel flessness of persons. Through this knower 
of bases, hearers and solitary realizers se eking the peace of nirvana are led to the 
total pacification of all sufferings. This category is characterized by nine topics. 
[Note: not all the topics under this head ing are applicable to all aryas—some are 
applicable only to Mahayana aryas. Also, topics 7 and 8 exist on the Mahayana paths 
of accumulation and preparation, as well as  on the Mahayana arya paths: the paths 
of seeing and meditation.] 
 
1. Knower of paths not abiding in cy clic existence through knowing. 
Overview of Ornament for Clear Realization  18 
 This is a Mahayana arya’s clear realiz ation that does not abide in the extreme 
of cyclic existence through knowing. Th is knowing – the wisdom realizing the 
selflessness of persons – liberate s one from cyclic existence. 
2. Knower of paths not abiding in so litary peace through compassion. 
This refers to a Mahayana arya’s clea r realization that does not abide in the 
extreme of solitary peace through co mpassion. Due to great compassion, a 
bodhisattva does not dwell in the soli tary peace of nirvana and does not 
disregard the sufferings of other sentient beings. 
3. Knower of bases that is distant from the resultant Mother. 
This knower of bases, which is a Hinayana arya’s clear realization, is devoid of 
great compassion and bound by the concepti on of true existence. Therefore, it 
is far from achieving the resultant Moth er – the complete enlightenment of a 
buddha.  
4. Knower of bases that is near to the resultant Mother . 
This knower of bases is a Mahayana arya’s  clear realization, and is described as 
“near” to the resultant Mother due to possessing great compassion and the 
wisdom directly realizing emptiness. 
5. Knower of bases of the discordant class. 
This knower of bases, which is a Hinayana arya’s clear realization, is devoid of 
special method and wisdom and, thus, should not be cultivated by a 
bodhisattva. Hence, it is labe led as the discordant class. 
6. Knower of bases of the antidotal class. 
Being conjoined with special method an d wisdom, this knower of bases is to 
be cultivated by a bodhisattva. 
7. Applications of a bodhisattva indicate d in the context of  the knower of 
bases.  
These applications of a bodhisattva cultivate the antidote to the perverse 
conceptions adhering to true existence. 
8. Equality of the applications of a bodhis attva indicated in the context of the 
knower of bases.  
These are applications of a bodhisattva th at stop adherence to true existence 
with respect to the entities of phenom ena, their divisions, definitions, 
definienda, and so forth. 
9. Path of seeing explicitly indicated in this context.  
This presents the sixteen instants of  the Mahayana path of seeing, which 
directly realize freedom from the elaborations of true existence. 
Overview of Ornament for Clear Realization  19 
 4. Application in Complete Aspects 
An application in complete aspects is a bodhisattva’s meditation on the 173 
different aspects of the three exalted knower s by way of a union of calm abiding and 
special insight. This is for the purpose of attaining control over these different 
aspects. It is characterized by eleven topics: 
 
1.  Knower-aspects of the antidotal cla ss explicitly indicated in this context 
2. Principal applications explicitly indicated in this context 3. Excellent qualities of  Mahayana applications 
4. Faults of the applications 5. Yoga of the path perfection of wisdo m (also known as “characteristics of the 
applications”) 
6. Mahayana partial concordance with li beration explicitly indicated in this 
context 
7. Mahayana partial concordance with definite discrimination explicitly 
indicated in this context 
8. Bodhisattva sangha who has atta ined a sign of irreversibility 
9. Application of equality of cy clic existence and solitary peace 
10. Application of pure land 
11. Application of skillful means 
 
[Since the fourth category, application in  complete aspects, is the main subject 
matter of this Basic Program Manual, its to pics are not elaborated upon in this 
introductory section.] 
5. Peak Application 
A peak application is attained when a bodhisattva attains control over the 173 
aspects of the three exalted knowers. It occurs on the Mahayana path of preparation. 
“To attain control” means to achieve the ab ility to meditate on all 173 aspects in the 
correct order without mistake in  a single session. This application is characterized by  
eight topics:  
1. Peak application of heat.  
The peak application of the heat level of  the Mahayana path of preparation is 
attained when the bodhisattva attains the twelve signs that indicate its 
attainment. 
 
Overview of Ornament for Clear Realization  20 
 2. Peak application of peak.  
The bodhisattva on the  peak application of the peak level possesses an 
increase in merit  
3. Peak application of forbearance.  
The bodhisattva on the  peak applicatio n of the forbearance level has attained 
a stable wisdom realizing a complete similitude of the three exalted knowers 
and a stable method that does not fors ake the welfare of sentient beings.  
4. Peak application of su preme mundane quality .  
The bodhisattva on the  peak application of the supreme mundane quality 
level, the fourth level of the path of  preparation, has attained a thorough 
stability of mind with resp ect to limitless meditative stabilizations, which ripen 
the capacity of the bodhisattva to ge nerate the Mahayana path of seeing. 
5. Peak application of th e path of seeing.  
This peak application acts as the direct antidote to the acquired conceptions 
of true existence and their seeds. These  conceptions are presented in four 
categories:  
i. the conception of true existence of objects to be engaged in,  ii. the conception of true existence of objects to be turned away from,  iii. the conception of true existe nce of object-possessors apprehending 
substantial existents, and  
iv. the conception of true existenc e of object-possessors apprehending 
imputed existents. 
6. Peak application of the path of meditation.  
Similarly, the peak applic ation of the path of medi tation is presented along 
with the four types of innate conception  of true existence that are abandoned 
by it. 
7. Uninterrupted peak application .  
This is the peak application of the last instant of the path of meditation, just 
prior to the attainment of buddhahood. It functions to directly produce an 
exalted knower of all aspects, th e omniscient mind of a buddha. 
8. Perverse achieving that is to be eliminated indicated here.  
This refers to the sixteen types of wron g conceptions that ar e to be eliminated. 
They are all related to conceiving the two truths, ultimate truth and 
conventional truth, as not suitable  to be posited on  a single base. 
6. Serial Application 
A serial application is a bodhis attva’s practice to attain st ability in his meditation on 
the 173 aspects of the three exalted knower s. In order to do so, these aspects are 
Overview of Ornament for Clear Realization  21 
 meditated on serially or progressively. Th e wisdom that progressively cultivates these 
aspects is conjoined with a bodhisattva’s pr actices, of which thirteen are described 
here: 
 
1–6. The serial applications of the six pe rfections: generosity, ethics, patience, 
joyous effort, concentration, and wisdom. 
7–12. The serial applications of the six recollections. These are recollection of 
the Buddha , Dharma,  Sangha, ethics, giving, and the gods.  
13. The serial application of the entiti ness of non-things. This is the wisdom 
realizing the emptiness of true existence. 
7. Instantaneous Application 
When serial application is perfected, its resu lt is an instantaneou s application. This 
application has attained stability in the 173 aspects of the three exalted knowers. It exists only on the last instant of the path of meditation, which is also known as “the 
end of the continuum of a sentient being.” Beyond this point, a bodhisattva has achieved enlightenment and is  no longer a sentient being. This application can be 
conceptually divided into four, although these four are, in reality, one entity: 
 
1. Non-ripened instantaneous application 
2. Ripened instantaneous application 
3. Characterless instantaneous application 
4. Non-dual instantaneous application 
8. Resultant Truth Body 
The final result that is attained by the st rength of cultivating the 173 aspects of the 
three exalted knowers is a resultant truth body, or a buddha. When divided, there 
are:  
1. Nature body (Skt. svabhavikakaya ). The emptiness of true existence of the 
mind of a buddha. 
2. Complete enjoyment body (Skt. sambhogakaya ). The form body of a buddha 
that is perceivable only by bodhis attva aryas in Akanishta pure land. 
3. Emanation body (Skt. nirmanakaya ). The form body of a buddha that is 
emanated for the sake of guiding ordinary beings. 
4. Exalted wisdom truth body (Skt. jñanakaya ). The enlightened mind of a 
buddha.  
Overview of Ornament for Clear Realization  22 
  
As an auxiliary topic, the tw enty-seven types of exalted ac tivities of a buddha are also 
presented here. 
Conclusion 
To summarize, the Ornament  presents the final result of the Buddhist path, a 
resultant truth body, along with its excell ent qualities. When one comes to see the 
marvelous qualities of a buddha, one is mo ved and develops the aspiration wishing 
to achieve that buddhahood. However, buddh ahood, or complete enlightenment, is 
not attained by merely wishing for it, nor ca n it be bestowed by someone else. It is 
necessary to cultivate it. Therefore, the Ornament  describes the four applications: 
application in complete aspects, peak  application, serial application, and 
instantaneous application. If asked, what are the objects to be cultivated by these 
applications? The answer is the three exal ted knowers: an exalted knower of all 
aspects, a knower of paths, and a knower of bases. In this way, through presenting 
the eight categories and seventy topics, the Ornament  sets out the complete path of a 
bodhisattva and reveals the hidden teaching s of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras. 
 