Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/Personal notes/Personal notes- Knower of Paths.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:11.843378
================================================================================


- Definition of knower of paths: A Mahayana arya’s clear realization
conjoined with a wisdom directly realizing emptiness in the continuum of
the person who possesses it in his continuum.
- Knower of paths is mutually  inclusive  with  a  Mahayana  arya’s  exalted
knower.
Eleven topics of a knower of paths
1. Branches of a knower of paths
2. Knower of paths knowing hearers’ paths
(Mutually inclusive with ‘a Mahayana arya’s exalted knower abiding in a
class of hearers’ realizations’)
3. Knower of paths knowing solitary realizers’ paths
(Mutually inclusive with ‘a Mahayana arya’s exalted knower abiding in a
class of solitary realizers’)
realizations”)
4. Mahayana path of seeing
5. Function of a Mahayana path of meditation
6. Mahayana path of meditation of belief
7. Benefits of a Mahayana path of meditation of belief
8. Path of meditation of dedication
9. Path of meditation of rejoicing
10. Path of meditation of achieving
(Mutually inclusive with “a path of meditation of purity”)
11. Path of meditation of purity

Explaining the knower of paths which proceeds to the exalted knower  of  all
aspects
-  The EKAA (exalted knower of all aspects) is explained in the 1st  chapter
so that the trainees can generate enthusiasm for the result.
-  The knower of paths is explained  in  the  2nd  chapter  because  without
cultivating and knowing the knower of paths, there is no attainment  of  the
EKAA.  So in order to attain the EKAA, one needs to cultivate and  know  the
knower of paths.

Someone says: The bodhisattva’s paths of seeing  and  meditation  have  been
indicated, therefore there is no  need  to  explain  them  again  under  the
knower of paths.
Our system: This opinion is not correct. The explanation cites  three  wrong
conceptions:
1. 1st misconception: Although the paths of seeing and  meditation  included
   within the knower of paths, when indicating that ‘The direct  realization
   of the ten topics is the EKAA which is the object  of  seeking,’  it  has
   been taught that all phenomena are directly seen by an EKAA. In order  to
   attain that, it is sufficient to meditate solely on the  meaning  of  the
   mode of abidance. There is no need to meditate on the complete  paths  of
   the  three  vehicles.  [This  person  thinks  that  in  order  to  attain
   omniscience, it is not necessary to meditate on the paths  of  the  three
   vehicles.]
2. 2nd misconception: Omniscience will be attained even by merely going  for
   refuge to the Three Jewels.
3. 3rd misconception:  Hearers  and  solitary  realizers  need  to  generate
   disillusionment with cyclic existence. Bodhisattvas don’t need to develop
   this because they need to remain in cyclic  existence  for  the  sake  of
   others’ welfare.

- For the sake of refuting these wrong conceptions, the knower of  paths  is
explained in the 2nd chapter; a cause of  the  EKAA  is  explained  so  that
these conceptions can be eliminated.
- Our system:
  -  Simply meditating on  the  mode  of  abidance  will  not  lead  to  the
attainment of  omniscience.  It  is  necessary  to  meditate  on  the  three
vehicles in their entirety.
   - Merely going for refuge to the Three  Jewels  will  also  not  lead  to
omniscience.
   - It is incorrect to say that hearers  and  solitary  realizers  need  to
generate the mind of definite emergence but  bodhisattvas  do  not  need  to
generate this. Bodhisattvas need to develop  this  mind  but  they  need  to
remain in cyclic existence for others’ welfare. The mind of renunciation  in
a bodhisattva is stronger compare to hearers and solitary realizers  because
it  is  not  just  generated  through  consideration  of  oneself   but   in
consideration of all sentient beings. Therefore, bodhisattvas  are  able  to
remain in cyclic existence for other’s welfare.
-  Bodhisattvas are not bodhisattvas from the very beginning. A  bodhisattva
has to be preceded by training in the small and medium scopes  of  the  path
to enlightenment before generating the great scope.
- On the occasion of the medium scope, the bodhisattva trains  in  the  mind
of renunciation.
- On the occasion of the great scope, this  mind  becomes  extended  to  all
sentient beings.
- For this reason, this chapter is set out for the purpose of  making  known
that it is necessary to train in renunciation and so forth.

The branches of the knower of paths
- There are the 5 divisions:
 1. In order to make the gods suitable, eclipsing with  light  [The  natural
    lights of the tathagatas eclipse the contaminated light of the gods  and
    so forth.]
 2. Definite object  [The cooperative condition, generating the mind  toward
    enlightenment]
 3. Pervaded
 4. Nature
 5. Its action
- 1st branch:  a branch that is the separation from  the  manifest  obstacle
(manifest obstacle is manifest pride).
    - This branch of the knower of paths destroys the manifest pride of  the
gods. Shakyamuni Buddha eclipsed the light of  the  gods  with  the  natural
light from his body. In this way the gods are made suitable  for  generating
conventional bodhichitta and the knower of paths.
   - If one  has  manifest  pride,  it  will  prevent  one  from  generating
conventional  bodhicitta,  so  one  is  not  the  support  for  conventional
bodhichitta. Thus one is also not a support for the knower of paths.
   -  During the time of Shakyamuni Buddha, he taught in many  places,  such
as Tushita Pure Land. Many trainees including gods would  come.  Once,  many
gods, the six types of the desire realm gods, came to  the  teachings.  They
emitted light from their  bodies  and  felt  very  proud  because  of  their
radiance. The contaminated light of the gods arose from  the  maturation  of
their karma. Because of this pride,  it  was  not  beneficial  for  them  to
listen to the Dharma.
-  Buddha then caused his natural light to eclipse  the  contaminated  light
of the gods. This is done in order to destroy the strong pride of the  gods.
 When the gods’ strong pride was diminished, they  became  suitable  vessels
for  receiving  the  teachings  and   suitable   supports   for   generating
bodhicitta.
- The purpose for the Tathagata’s doing this is:
   -   to  achieve  the  suitability  to  generate  the  generated  mind  of
enlightenment and the knower of paths through having destroyed strong  pride
and
  - in order to make known  that  realizations  of  the  generated  mind  of
enlightenment and a knower of paths are generated only in  the  continua  of
these persons in which strong pride has been destroyed.

- 2nd branch: generation of a mind towards enlightenment.
  - The object that is  support  for  generating  the  knower  of  paths  is
posited as bodhisattvas and this is a definite object.
  - Before a bodhisattva can become skilled in the path that cultivates  the
three paths in their entirety, the  bodhisattva  must  generate  bodhicitta,
the  desire  to  attain  enlightenment.   Without  generating   conventional
bodhicitta, there is no way to attain the knower of paths.
  - The knower of paths is that which knows the  complete  three  paths,  so
one needs to generate conventional bodhicitta.
- Earlier on, we talked about the gods and so forth  in  whom  strong  pride
has been destroyed as suitable to generate  bodhicitta  and  the  knower  of
paths. It is not saying that they are  the  actual  support  that  generates
bodhicitta and the knower of paths. In terms of the  supports  who  actually
generate the knower of paths  are  those  who  have  generated  conventional
bodhicitta

- 3rd branch: is the  substantial  cause,  the  awakening  of  the  Mahayana
lineage.
 - All sentient beings are pervaded by buddha lineage. All  sentient  beings
are suitable to be the support for generating the knower  of  paths.  It  is
not just bodhisattvas who are suitable to generate it.
 -“The knower of paths is definite to the individual object” means that  the
knower of paths is  not  just  found  in  anyone.  It  is  definite  to  the
individual object. This  individual  object  is  the  support  who  actually
generates it. This means that the knower of paths is  found  only  in  those
who have generated the mind towards enlightenment (bodhicitta).  The  person
who generates it without being obstructed by other paths  is  only  one  who
has generated this bodhicitta.
 -“Sons of the gods, even those who have not generated their  mind  aspiring
for unsurpassable perfect complete  enlightenment  will  also  generate  the
mind aspiring for unsurpassable perfect complete  enlightenment.  Those  who
have entered the perfect faultlessness lack the might to generate  the  mind
towards unsurpassable perfect complete enlightenment. This is  because  they
have severed the boundaries of the continuum of cyclic  existence.  However,
if they were to generate the mind aspiring for unsurpassable  enlightenment,
one should rejoice in them.”
  - Those who have entered faultlessness are those on the hearer’s  path  of
seeing. They do not take rebirth in cyclic existence even through the  force
of compassion and prayers. Having intentionally given up rebirth by  way  of
karma and  afflictions  and  put  a  stop  to  it,  they  have  severed  the
continuity of rebirth in cyclic existence.
  - “However, if they were to generate the mind aspiring for unsurpassable
enlightenment, one should rejoice in them” means that if those indefinite
in the hearers’ lineage do enter the Mahayana, one should rejoice in that.
  - For the sake of being able to enact the welfare of  the  three  lineage-
bearers, one familiarizes with directly knowing the paths of all  the  three
lineage-bearers. Having first generated the  desire  to  attain  buddhahood,
one has to meditate on the three paths as a method  to  achieve  buddhahood.
Otherwise, it is clear that one would not be skilled  in  the  divisions  of
how to practice the path.
- According to Nagarjuna and his followers who assert one final vehicle,
this is interpretable.
- According to Asanga and his followers who assert three final vehicles,
this is literally acceptable.

- 4th branch: - is the nature of a knower of paths
- A knower of paths is superior in  nature  to  hearers’  paths  because  it
bears the nature of acting as a branch  that  accomplishes  others’  welfare
without principally abandoning the  afflictions.  For  bodhisattvas,  mainly
bodhisattva aryas, afflictions such as  attachment  act  as  a  branch  that
accomplishes others’ welfare. They do not principally work  to  abandon  the
afflictions.

- 5th branch - is the function of a knower of paths.
   - Its actions of the knower of  paths  are  also  superior  to  those  of
hearers because  bodhisattvas  do  not  actualize  the  perfect  end  at  an
improper time. They bear the function of ripening  and  liberating  infinite
sentient beings.
   - If bodhisattvas have completed the three conditions and  actualize  the
perfect end, then it is actualizing the perfect end at a proper time.
   -  If bodhisattvas actualizing it before they have  completed  the  three
conditions, then it is actualizing the perfect end at the improper time.
   -  These three conditions are:
   1. Having fully completed prayers
   2. Having fully ripened sentient beings
   3. Having fully purified the buddha land
- The knower of paths  has  this  superior,  or  special,  function  because
  bodhisattvas do not actualize the perfect end at an improper time.
- If they were to actualize it at an improper  time,  the  knower  of  paths
  would not possess the special function and the welfare of migrating beings
  would be severed.
- By actualizing the perfect end at the proper time,  the  knower  of  paths
  would possess the special function and the  welfare  of  migrating  beings
  will be enacted effortlessly, spontaneously.

-  Syllogism: The subject - hearers and  solitary  realizers  foe-destroyers
(who have separated from the attachment of the three realms)  and  even  the
other yogis (who have  not  separated  from  attachment)-  are  pervaded  by
lineage, since the knower of paths is an object to be cultivated   in  order
to attain buddhahood.
- All sentient beings will progress to this final state  of  buddhahood  and
there is no sentient being who will not eventually attain  the  final  state
of buddhahood.
-  The teaching that there are three final vehicles bears  an  intention  is
not literally acceptable. This is explained  in  the  system  of  the  great
trail-blazers, Nagarjuna and Asanga.
 - In the Descent into Lanka Sutra, those of  the  hearer  vehicle  are  not
perfectly liberated by the hearer’s vehicle. They  are  perfectly  liberated
by the finality of the Mahayana.
- In the White Lotus Sutra, the three vehicles taught by  the  buddha  is  a
skilful means of the guides to guide sentient beings.
- In the Glorious Lion's Roar of Shrimaladevi Sutra, there are  three  types
of nirvana; each of these is a method of the tathagatas.
- “Manjushri, if the tathagatas were to teach  the  Mahayana  to  some,  the
hearer’s vehicle and the solitary realizer’s vehicle to  some,”  then  there
are five faults:
1. that the tathagatas’ exalted minds would be completely impure
2. that they would have the fault of strong adherence
3. that they would have trifling great compassion
4. that they would discriminate as different
5. that they would be masters who are stingy in regards to the Dharma.
- If the tathagatas were to teach the Mahayana only to some, the  tathagatas
would have these five faults, but this is not the case.
- In fact, all those of the Mahayana lineage, those of the hearers’  lineage
and those of the solitary realizers’ lineage are taught in order  to  attain
the state that has been attained by the Buddha himself. The Buddha does  not
have these five faults, because he teaches one final vehicle.
- The dharmadhatu, pure by nature that is  free  from  all  elaborations  of
true existence  exists  in  all  sentient  beings  without  any  difference.
Although dissimilar divisions of its entity do not exist even slightly,  the
conception of true existence that apprehends the aggregates and so forth  as
truly existent, the erroneous apprehension of dharmadhatu, is  the  root  of
all afflictions,
- This conception of true existence is similar to one were  to  apprehend  a
mottled rope as a snake, this would be a  mistaken,  baseless  apprehension.
It is something that arises adventitiously  in  the  continuum  and  can  be
separated from by applying the antidote.
- If the stains of sentient beings are suitable to be separated from;
  - then hearers and solitary realizers foe-destroyers would be suitable  to
abandon the knowledge obscurations  i.e.  they  can  abandon  the  knowledge
obscurations.
  - the buddhas would show the methods for abandoning the stains.
- The teaching (in the Sutra Unraveling  the  Thought  and  similar  sutras)
given to trainees (Mind-Only), who bears the Mahayana lineage  but  are  not
suitable to be taught the profound path for the time being, that  there  are
three final vehicles is intended and taught for the  sake  of  guiding  them
i.e..
- Basis of intention: those who are not ready have to be lead through  their
respective paths or vehicles.
- The purpose: for the sake of taking care of lineage-bearers who are to  be
led  to  the  Mahayana  path  without  refuting  that   the   emptiness   of
apprehenders and apprehendeds being different substances is truly existent.
-  For Mind-Only trainees, one leads  them  to  the  Mahayana  path  without
refuting the emptiness of  apprehendeds  and  apprehenders  being  different
substances as truly existent. For such trainees, one does  not  refute  non-
duality as being truly existent. Although this non-duality is  not  refuted,
there  is  damage,  because  in  fact,  all  phenomena  are  empty  of  true
existence.

One final vehicle vs. three final vehicles
- All Buddhist systems of tenets, Hinayana and Mahayana, accept three
vehicles: Hearer, Solitary realizer, and Great Vehicles.These are three
different modes of practice for three different types of individuals.
- The Vaibhashikas, Sautrantikas, and Cittamatrins who follow Asanga accept
that there are three final vehicles. There are some beings who never attain
the highest achievement because, after completing their lower vehicle, they
do not pass on to the higher. Specifically, it means that there are some
sentient beings who never attain buddhahood.
- The Prasangikas and Svatantrikas agree that there is only one final
vehicle, saying that when Buddha taught three final vehicles the basis in
his own thought was that temporarily there are three different vehicles.
His purpose in teaching three final vehicles was to overcome the fright of
those who could not imagine completing the immeasurable collections of
merit and wisdom of the Mahayana.
- The explicit teaching of three final vehicles is contradicted by the
presence of a Buddha nature in every sentient being.

Setting forth other systems that assert that there are three final vehicles

- Mind-Only trainees assert that there are three final  vehicles  (hearers’,
solitary realizers’ and Mahayana lineages) exist ultimately  because  other-
powered natures and thoroughly established natures are truly existent.
- Based on the fact that other-powered natures  and  thoroughly  established
phenomena are  ultimately  existent,  the  lineage  of  sentient  beings  is
something definite to the individual; this  means  it  is  specific  to  the
individual.
-  Because lineage exists ultimately and  is  definite  to  the  individual,
therefore  the  final  vehicle  is  also   definite   as   three   different
individuals. Although the interests and thinking of  trainees  are  suitable
to transform slightly, the lineage cannot change in  a  complete  way.  Thus
there are three final vehicles.
- In the Mind-Only system, there are of certain  sentient  beings  who  will
never attain nirvana. They  are  called  persons  “whose  lineage  has  been
severed.”
-Mind-Only School take the explanation of one final  vehicle  as  a  meaning
requiring interpretation that is not literally  acceptable.  The  one  final
vehicle has been taught by intending the seven bases of intention:
1. there is no difference in the dharmadhatu of the  three  vehicles,  which
   is like space [Cittamatrins do not assert one final vehicle and this is a
   basis of intention]
2. the persons of the three vehicles are similar in realizing selflessness
3. the liberations in which sufferings and origins have been  abandoned  are
   similar
4. since a lineage-bearer  indefinite  in  the  hearer  lineage  enters  the
   Mahayana and becomes a buddha, even two different lineages enter the same
   path,
5. the  tathagatas  have  practiced  the  deeds  of  bodhisattvas  from  the
   beginning and when some of those definite in the hearer lineage  practice
   the deeds of bodhisattvas for some time, then give  them  up  and  attain
   nirvana, the tathagatas think, “By having previously practiced the  deeds
   of a bodhisattva I attained buddhahood”; likewise, by the  power  of  the
   buddhas one gains just once a  similar  thought,  “By  having  previously
   practiced the deeds of a bodhisattva I will attain buddhahood”
6. emanated hearers show the manner of  attaining  nirvana  by  way  of  the
   hearer’s vehicle many times for the sake of trainees, and
7. there is none but one final vehicle.
- according to the Mind-Only school, the purpose for teaching that there  is
only one final vehicle is to lead those who are  indefinite  in  the  hearer
lineage to the Mahayana, and to take care of those  who  are  indefinite  in
the Mahayana lineage so that they do not fall into other vehicles.
- But there is damage to this teaching of there being one final vehicle:
  - in terms of scripture - the Sutra Unraveling the Thought and  so  forth,
and
  - in terms of reasoning -the reasoning that  prove  other-powered  natures
and thoroughly established phenomena are truly existent.
-  The basis of intention means the basis of the  Buddha’s  intention;  what
the Buddha was thinking.
- Our system – there is no need to say that there is one  final  vehicle  as
the basis  of  intention  because  we  actually  assert  it.  Therefore  the
assertion of one final vehicle is literally acceptable. That  there  is  one
final vehicle is established by reasoning and by scripture.
- According to Cittamatrins, they assert  three  final  vehicles.  They  say
that there is this basis of intention that  there  is  none  but  one  final
vehicle.
- The Cittamatrins think that Buddha Shakyamuni taught  that  there  is  one
final vehicle in order to take care of the trainees.  But  the  Buddha  does
think that there is one final vehicle and this is the situation in  reality.

- The Cittamatrins assert that the Buddha taught to certain  disciples  that
there is none but one final vehicle, and that there is a basis of  intention
in the Buddha’s mind for saying that. This is what they say the  Buddha  was
thinking when he taught that there is none but one final vehicle.
- According to the Chittamatrins, the Buddha himself does  not  accept  that
there is one final vehicle. The Buddha said to some disciples that there  is
none but one final vehicle. The Cittamatrins take  that  to  mean  that  the
Buddha said  that,  based  upon  their  assertion  of  the  seven  bases  of
intention.
- For the Autonomy school, when the Buddha said that there is none  but  one
final vehicle, there is no basis of intention behind  that,  because  it  is
literally acceptable.

2 Analyzing whether or not there is a limit to samsara

-Is it possible for all sentient  beings  to  attain  buddhahood?  Yes,  all
sentient beings are pervaded  by  the  lineage,  so  they  will  all  attain
buddhahood and there is only one final vehicle.
- If it is possible for all sentient beings to attain buddhahood then:-
   - When sentient beings would become fewer and fewer, the buddhas  in  the
future would thus have fewer sentient beings to liberate. They  would  enact
the welfare of fewer sentient beings and in that  way,  they  would  not  be
able to fully complete the accumulation of merit.
  -  [A  time  when  there  is  only  a  small  number  of  sentient  beings
left,e.g.1000, others’ welfare would not become trifling because  the  1,000
sentient beings would be all sentient beings. So one would still be able  to
enact the welfare of all sentient beings]
  - When all sentient beings have become buddhas, buddhas  would  not  enact
the welfare of even one sentient being, whereby  others’  welfare  would  be
interrupted and they would fall into the extreme of peace.
  - [If all sentient beings became buddhas and there would not be  even  one
sentient being. In that case there would  not  be  any  need  to  enact  the
welfare of sentient beings. It  is  not  the  case  that  there  is  others’
welfare to be enacted and that became interrupted. When there  are  no  more
sentient beings, buddhas can relax, and abide in the sphere of peace!]

- If it were not possible for  all  sentient  beings  to  attain  buddhahood
then:
   - perfect complete buddhas who desire to place  all  sentient  beings  in
the state of enlightenment would lack the result of  turning  the  wheel  of
Dharma by way of the twelve deeds until cyclic existence is empty
   -  even  seeking  the  mere  pacification  of  the  suffering  of  cyclic
existence of all sentient beings would not be the complete  fully  qualified
great compassion of the Mahayana.
  - There would be contradiction with the teaching. If  the  bhagavans  were
to stay in their superior state and not place sentient beings who are  in  a
lower state in their superior state, then  there  would  be  five  types  of
damage. The consequence that the bhagavans would be stingy  with  regard  to
the Dharma and so forth..

- If all sentient beings can attain the pacification of suffering of  cyclic
existence, then it would be  well  proven  that  there  is  only  one  final
vehicle, and their attainment of buddhahood would be proven effortlessly.
- Haribhadra and Vimuktisena proved by  scripture  and  reasoning  that  the
teaching that there are sentient beings for whom it is impossible to  attain
even mere liberation bears an intention and is not literally acceptable.
- If it is possible for all sentient beings to attain buddhahood, then  also
the explanation that  there  is  no  limit  to  cyclic  existence  would  be
incorrect.
-  One final vehicle: supported by position that all sentient beings can
attain buddhahood
-  Three final vehicles: supported by position that not all sentient  beings
can attain buddhahood



Refuting other system
Someone say: You are not  able  to  prove  that  sentient  beings  are  just
suitable to attain buddhahood, let  alone  establishing  that  all  sentient
beings will definitely attain buddhahood.
 - In order to  prove  that  the  result  (buddhahood)  is  suitable  to  be
produced, one has to state  as  the  sign:  “The  collection  of  causes  is
complete.”
 - But if the collection of causes of buddhahood were to be complete in  all
sentient beings, then it follows that it would be impossible  for  there  to
be a sentient being who has not entered the path to liberation. [this  means
that if the collection of causes for buddhahood were to be complete  in  all
sentient beings, then all sentient beings would have  entered  the  path  to
liberation.]
 - Thus you must conclude that  there  is  no  exhaustive  limit  to  cyclic
existence as you cannot pinpoint a time, saying “prior to this  time,  there
is a sentient being, and after this time, there is no sentient being.”

Our response: This teaching, ‘The significance of the proof  that  there  is
one final vehicle is that all sentient beings  who  have  entered  the  path
will attain buddhahood’:
- is intended to propound this reasoning called definite  pervasion  by  way
of suitability to  produce  the  result  if  the  collection  of  causes  is
complete. This means that if the collection  of  causes  is  complete,  then
there is pervasion that the result is suitable to be produced.
 - is not intended to mean that if the result is suitable  to  be  produced,
then  the  collection  of  causes  are  pervaded  by  being  complete;  that
contradicts reasoning.
-  For you, it is not obvious that this can  be  established  by  reasoning,
but according to our system, we can establish it by reasoning.
- If the result is suitable to be produced, there is no pervasion  that  the
collection of causes is  complete.  For  example,  a  seed  is  suitable  to
produce the result  of  a  sprout,  but  there  is  no  pervasion  that  the
collection causes is complete.
-  If the collection of causes is complete,  there  is  pervasion  that  the
result is suitable to be produced.
- In other words, if the result is suitable to be produced,  then  there  is
no pervasion that the collection of causes  is  complete.  This  is  because
even though a barley sprout is suitable to be produced from a  barley  seed,
it is not established that the collection of causes is complete.
- One is suitable to generate the realization, but that does not  mean  that
the causes for generating the realizations are complete.

- In the 1st case: Arya hearers are suitable to attain buddhahood.
- If you accept that the collection of causes for buddhahood  are  complete,
it follows that they have entered the Mahayana path.
- The former consequence is “it follows that the  collection  of  causes  of
buddhahood would be complete.”
- The sign of this consequence is  “because  they  are  suitable  to  attain
buddhahood.”
- The latter consequence is “it follows that they have entered the  Mahayana
path,”
- The sign of this consequence is  “because  the  collection  of  causes  of
buddhahood is complete.”
- The pervasion of the former consequence: “if they are suitable  to  attain
buddhahood, then the collection of  causes  of  buddhahood  is  pervaded  by
being complete.”
- The pervasion of the latter consequence: “if the collection of causes  for
buddhahood is complete, they are pervaded by  having  entered  the  Mahayana
path.”
- You have accepted the sign and pervasion of both  the  former  and  latter
consequences, as well as the predicate of the latter consequence.
   - The predicate of the  latter  consequence  -  “they  have  entered  the
Mahayana path.”
- So you have accepted that the  arya  hearers  have  entered  the  Mahayana
path.
- By accepting all these, your position that not all  sentient  beings  have
merely entered a path would degenerate.
- [According to this person:
-  all sentient beings have entered a path because the collection of  causes
for buddhahood is complete. The  collection  of  causes  for  buddhahood  is
complete because they are suitable to attain buddhahood.
- there are sentient beings who have not entered  the  path  to  liberation.
His original opinion: “if someone is suitable  to  attain  buddhahood,  then
the collection of causes must be complete. If the collection  of  causes  is
complete, the person must have entered the  path”.  As  a  result  of  these
consequences, our system says his position would degenerate.]

- In the 2nd case:  Arya hearers are not suitable to attain buddhahood
- there would be a direct contradiction because if you  say  that  they  are
not suitable to attain buddhahood, then it  would  directly  contradict  the
position that all sentient beings are suitable  to  achieve  buddhahood.  It
would also contradict there being only one final vehicle.
  -  You  necessarily  assert  that  if  all  sentient  beings  will  attain
buddhahood, then a time when all sentient beings  have  attained  buddhahood
is possible.
- [This person does assert that there is one  final  vehicle  but  has  some
internal contradictions; as he says  that  eventually  all  sentient  beings
will attain buddhahood. The problem is  the  collection  of  causes  is  not
complete.  If they enter the path  then  slowly  the  collection  of  causes
would become complete and they would attain buddhahood.]
Our system: if all sentient beings will attain buddhahood, then a time  when
all sentient beings have attained buddhahood is possible. Since that is  the
case, you must necessarily assert that, if all sentient  being  will  attain
buddhahood, then a time when all sentient being have attained buddhahood  is
possible.

Someone says: The way in which there is no future limit to cyclic  existence
is like this: although all sentient beings will attain  buddhahood,  a  time
when all sentient beings have attained buddhahood is impossible.
- If you assert that all sentient beings  will  attain  buddhahood,  then  a
time when all sentient beings have attained buddhahood is pervaded by  being
possible, then in the consequence:
   - “It follows that a time when all things have disintegrated is  possible
because all things will disintegrate.”
- The fault is: “If a time when all things have disintegrated  is  possible,
then it follows that a time when all things do not exist is possible.”
- You would have to assert that if a time when all things do  not  exist  is
impossible, then a time when things do not exist is impossible.
- It follows that prior to a certain point,  things  exist,  but  from  that
point onwards, things do not exist, because a  time  when  all  things  have
disintegrated is possible.

Our system: It follows that from that point onwards things  are  impossible,
then it follows that you are able to prove that prior  to  a  certain  point
blue exists but from that point onwards blue does not exist because  a  time
when blue has disintegrated is possible.
- If you say that the sign [a time when blue has disintegrated is  possible]
is not established, then it follows that it is permanent  (blue)  and  is  a
functioning thing.
- it is permanent because it is impossible for it to have disintegrated.
- it is a functioning thing because it has been produced from its cause.

Our system: “It follows that a time when all sentient beings  have  attained
buddhahood is possible because they will attain buddhahood.
Someone says: It follows that all sentient beings  are  pervaded  by  having
already died because all sentient beings are pervaded by dying.
Someone says: Although all sentient beings will  attain  buddhahood,  it  is
not certain that they will attain buddhahood.
Our system: Has this ascertaining consciousness of yours  that  thinks  that
all sentient beings will attain buddhahood come through the force  of  valid
cognition or not?
- It follows that it  is  certain  that  all  sentient  beings  will  attain
buddhahood  because  you  have  ascertained  through  the  force  of   valid
cognition that all sentient beings will attain buddhahood.
Someone says: The pervasion is not  established,  because  although  it  has
been ascertained through the force of valid cognition, it is not certain  in
reality.
Our system: It follows that this ascertaining consciousness  of  yours  that
thinks,  “All  sentient  beings  will  attain   buddhahood”   is   a   wrong
consciousness that is mistaken with  respect  to  the  object  of  adherence
because there is  ascertainment  by  your  awareness,  thinking  “They  will
attain buddhahood,” but there is not even the slightest certainty that  they
will attain buddhahood in reality.
Someone say: The production  of  smoke  by  fire  is  established  by  valid
cognition but the production is not certain.  Otherwise  in  that  case,  it
would be impossible for it to be hindered by adverse  conditions.  Likewise,
if it is ascertained that all sentient beings will attain  buddhahood,  then
hindrances that are adverse conditions for their  attainment  of  buddhahood
would be impossible.
Our system: Both the analogy and the meaning are not established. If  it  is
not ascertained by valid cognition, then the meaning of the  thesis  is  not
established by valid cognition (the meaning of the thesis is  “all  sentient
beings will attain buddhahood.”).
-  If the production of smoke by fire is ascertained through  the  force  of
valid cognition, it would be strange to say that the production of smoke  is
uncertain.
In summary
-  Someone say: All sentient beings will attain buddhahood  but  it  is  not
certain that they will attain it.
- Our system: All sentient beings will attain buddhahood and it  is  certain
that they will attain buddhahood. If you do not understand  the  meaning  of
the thesis  (that  “all  sentient  beings  will  attain  buddhahood”),  then
positing that all sentient beings  will  attain  buddhahood  does  not  make
sense. You claim that all sentient beings will attain  buddhahood  but  that
it is not definite that they will attain buddhahood. If you say  that,  then
you are saying that there  is  no  correct  proof  whatsoever  for  whatever
thesis is posited  by  us.  You  simply  demonstrate  yourself  to  be  very
foolish.

Our system: You accepted that the final vehicle is one and yet you say  that
it  is  uncertain  that  hearer  and  solitary  realize  aryas  will  attain
buddhahood. This is a contradiction.  According to  our  system,  hindrances
that are adverse conditions  to  attaining  buddhahood  are  possible.  Even
though such hindrances are possible, they can  be  gradually  eliminated  so
that one eventually  attains  buddhahood.  We  do  not  say  that  there  is
attainment of buddhahood without having encountered hindrances.
- The Tibetan word for “buddha” - sang and gye.
- Sang has the connotation of elimination of faults
- gye has the connotation of development of excellent qualities.
- Only through the elimination of faults  does  one  eventually  attain  the
state of buddhahood, in which the excellent qualities have  been  developed.
So we do accept the existence of faults  and  hindrances  that  need  to  be
eliminated in the course of attaining buddhahood.
- Example of despite hindrances being possible,  the  result  can  still  be
produced: When planting some crops, adverse conditions  such  as  birds  who
eat the seeds or rain not falling. Despite the possibility of these  adverse
conditions, crops still grow. Birds may come and  eat  the  seeds  and  when
they fly to another place, the seeds in their  excrement  can  grow  in  new
ground.

- In the 2nd case, that the ascertaining consciousness has not come  through
the force of valid cognition.
- If that  ascertaining  consciousness  of  yours  thinking,  “All  sentient
beings will attain buddhahood” has not come from the  force  of  your  valid
cognition, then:
-  (i) it follows that it is inappropriate for you  to  propose  the  thesis
that “All sentient beings will attain buddhahood”
- (ii) it follows that your subsequent cognizer thinking “They  will  attain
buddhahood” does not engage the concordant meaning, because that  they  will
attain  buddhahood  is  not  established  by  a  valid  cognition  in   your
continuum. [if the thesis is not established by valid cognition, one  cannot
have a subsequent cognizer induced by it.]
 - If you say that there is no pervasion, then you  would  necessarily  make
the deprecation, “A correct sign of  non-observation  of  the  non-appearing
does not exist.”
-  In that  case,  you  would  necessarily  be  asserting  that  “Since  the
reasoning is similar also  for  other  correct  signs,  there  is  no  proof
whatsoever for all hidden phenomena.”

- The purpose of stating a correct sign of non-observation is so that we  do
not make such mistakes.
- Syllogism containing a correct sign of non-observation: the subject  –  in
an open-air yard that is devoid of smoke – fire does not exist, because  the
direct effect smoke does not exist.
- Syllogism containing an incorrect sign of non-observation: the  subject  –
Jane – has no good qualities, because I do not see any good quality in her.

-  According to our system all sentient beings will  attain  buddhahood  and
the reasons to prove this are:
  -  the minds of sentient beings are not truly existent,
  -  the stains are adventitious,
  -  the stains have not entered the nature of the mind.
  -  when these stains encounter powerful antidote  they  can  be  separated
from.
- If the minds of all sentient beings are not pure by nature, then  we  must
assert that a truly existent phenomenon [the mind of a  sentient  being]  is
possible among objects of knowledge.
-  As a result of  that,  we  would  not  be  able  to  establish  by  valid
cognition that all phenomena are empty of true existence,  and  there  would
be no way to posit ultimate truths.
- If their minds are established by valid cognition to  be  pure  by  nature
[means to be empty of true existence], then that all  sentient  beings  will
attain buddhahood is established in dependence on  the  reasoning  that  the
stains that are the conceptions of true existence as well as their  imprints
are adventitious and are suitable to be separated from with respect  to  the
mind.
-  If that were not the case, we would  have  to  assert  that  stains  have
entered the nature of the mind, just like the tirtika practitioners.

-  Someone  says:  Although  the  above  stains  are  established  by  valid
cognition to be suitable to be separated from, it is  not  established  that
the antidotes that will destroy the stains are suitable to be  generated  in
the continuum.
Our system ask: Is that because
 1. there is no method for destroying the stains in the continua of sentient
    beings?
 2. although there is a method, there is no one who knows it?
 3. although there is someone  who  knows  the  method  for  destroying  the
    stains, generating an aspiration seeking that method is not possible  at
    any time?
 4. although that is possible, a person who knows  the  method  teaching  it
    motivated by mercy is not possible?
 5. although having been taught, engaging in and cultivating that method  is
    not possible?

- The 1st  is  not  reasonable  because  by  having  cultivated  the  wisdom
realizing selflessness one is able  to  exhaust  all  stains.  [“The  wisdom
realizing  selflessness”  is  the  wisdom  realizing  the  selflessness   of
phenomena, rather then merely  the  wisdom  realizing  the  selflessness  of
persons.]
- The 2nd is not  reasonable  because  a  teacher  who  has  culminated  the
cultivation of the method, the wisdom realizing selflessness  of  phenomena,
for the welfare of sentient beings is well established by reasoning.
- The 3rd is not reasonable because:
  -(i) it is not possible for sentient beings to not  seek  high  status  in
dependence on being urged by the buddhas,
  -(ii) even though for the time being sentient beings may  not  generate  a
mind seeking definite goodness [liberation and  omniscience],  all  sentient
beings possess the two types of buddha lineage i.e. the lineage  abiding  in
the nature and developmental lineage.
  -(iii) since the buddhas’ exalted compassion  that  wishes  to  place  all
sentient beings in buddhahood does  not  degenerate,  sentient  beings  will
generate first disillusionment  regarding  cyclic  existence  for  the  time
being and later an aspiration seeking nirvana.
   - The buddhas take care of all sentient beings. It is not the  case  that
they only take care of some sentient beings and neglect the rest.  In  fact,
buddhas enact the welfare of all  sentient  beings  until  cyclic  existence
becomes empty. For the time being there are  sentient  beings  who  are  not
suitable vessels but still the buddhas take care of all sentient beings.  It
is not that they only take care of Buddhists and those who  take  refuge  in
them, or those who have generated renunciation, bodhicitta and  right  view.
They take care of all sentient beings, life after life. It is said  that  in
the vicinity of each sentient being, all the buddhas are present.
- This is also established in  dependence  on  a  correct  sign  that  is  a
scripture that is pure by way of the three analyses:
1. a direct valid cognizer,
2. inferential valid cognizer by the power of fact, and
3. inferential valid cognizer by way of belief.

There are three categories of phenomena:
1. manifest or obvious phenomena,
2. slightly hidden phenomena, and
3. very hidden phenomena.
- Manifest phenomena can be realized without relying upon a correct  reason.
They can  be  realized  simply  by  a  direct  cognizer.  E.g.  of  manifest
phenomena: objects of the five sense consciousnesses.
- Slightly hidden phenomena are such that when they are  initially  realized
by ordinary beings they are necessarily realized by way of  a  correct  sign
or reason.  They  cannot  be  directly  perceived.  E.g.of  slightly  hidden
phenomena: impermanence, the selflessness of persons, and  the  selflessness
of phenomena.
- Very hidden phenomena also cannot be directly perceived  and  also  cannot
be realized using a sign by way of fact. They can only be  realized  through
a valid scripture. E.g of very hidden phenomena:the presentation of  actions
and their results; for example, a certain result occurs  due  to  a  certain
action at a certain time.
- A valid scripture is necessarily one that is a scripture that is  pure  by
way of the three analyses.
  - 1. First we need to check that the manifest phenomena indicated  by  the
scripture are not damaged by a direct valid cognizer. This is  something  we
can verify.
  - 2. The second  point,  regarding  slightly  hidden  phenomena  that  are
indicated by the scripture, we should check that there is no  damage  by  an
inferential valid cognizer. This is something we can  check  using  analysis
and  contemplation,  such  as  checking  the   reasons   for   impermanence,
selflessness, and so forth.
  - 3. For  very  hidden  phenomena,  we  need  to  check  that  within  the
scripture,  the  earlier  words  and  later  words  regarding  very   hidden
phenomena do not contradict each other. In addition there is no  reason  for
the composer of the scripture to lie, to say something that is false.
- The 4th is not  reasonable  because  when  sentient  beings  generate  the
aspiration  seeking  high  status  and  definite   goodness,   the   buddhas
immediately help them. It is as though  the  buddhas  are  waiting  to  help
sentient beings, such that as soon as they  are  ready,  they  receive  help
from the buddhas.
- The 5th is not reasonable because it is proven  in  the  Maitreya’s  text,
Sublime Continuum, that at  a  certain  time,  due  to  the  conditions  for
awakening the lineage becoming complete, the lineage will be awakened.
It is not easy to awaken the lineage, but as soon as  it  is  awakened,  one
will engage in the method. As soon as the  lineage  is  awakened,  one  will
have the aspiration seeking high status and definite goodness.

-Someone says: it follows that a time when there is  no  sentient  being  at
all is possible because all  sentient  beings’  having  attained  buddhahood
exists.
-Our  system:  (1)  when  all  sentient  beings  have  attained  buddhahood,
sentient beings do not exist.
                      (2) sentient beings, when  all  sentient  beings  have
attained enlightenment, exist.
- When all sentient beings have attained enlightenment, there  would  be  no
sentient beings [sentient beings do  not  exist]  because  they  would  have
become buddhas.
- Those beings that are referred to as sentient beings  exist  even  at  the
time of buddhahood but at that time when they have become buddha,  they  are
not be known as sentient beings.
- When they are  buddhas,  they  are  not  sentient  beings  but  they  were
sentient beings. They were the sentient beings who became buddhas.
- Because things are transitory, the consequence that:
  - a time when there is no sentient being is possible must be accepted
  - a time when there is no sentient being who is the  object  for  enacting
welfare by the buddhas is possible
-Our system: when all sentient beings have attained enlightenment, there  is
no sentient being and there is no sentient  being  who  is  the  object  for
enacting welfare by the buddhas.

Someone says: It follows that a time when the continuity of sentient  beings
who are the objects for enacting welfare by the buddhas  have  been  severed
is possible because all sentient beings’ having attained buddhahood exists.
Our system: The subject- an eighth ground bodhisattva – it  follows  that  a
time when his continuity has been severed is  possible  because  his  having
attained buddhahood exists.
-  In our own system, the following two statements are very different.
  -“all sentient beings’ having  attained  buddhahood  exists”-  this  means
that in the future all sentient beings will attain buddhahood; due to  which
all sentient beings’ having attained buddhahood exists i.e. a time when  all
sentient beings have attained buddhahood is possible.
  -“all sentient beings have attained buddhahood”-  this   means  that  they
have attained buddhahood now.

Someone says: Buddhahood does not exist in the continuum  of  a  bodhisattva
on the path of accumulation but exists when he has attained buddhahood.
Our system: You can just apply this to the other  argument  and  say:  “When
all sentient beings have attained manifest complete  buddhahood,  it  exists
in their continua. On the occasion of the learners’ paths,  buddhahood  does
not exist in the continua of all sentient beings.”

Someone says: If cyclic existence had a beginning  it  would  be  causeless.
Therefore, there is no beginning limit. But does an end limit exist or not?
Our system: Saying “The mere  generality  cyclic  existence  has  no  future
limit, but a particularity of  cyclic  existence  has  a  future  limit”  is
contradictory.
  - Therefore, both the generality cyclic existence and a  particularity  of
cyclic  existence  have  future  limits  because  the  significance  of  the
teaching in a certain scripture - that a future limit  to  cyclic  existence
is not evident - is that childish beings should not conceive of  a  definite
time, thinking, “Some sentient being will attain  liberation  at  just  this
time, not before or after.”
  - Just as explained before, know that a  time  when  all  sentient  beings
have attained liberation is possible.

Qualm: When hearer and  solitary  realizer  foe-destroyers  arise  from  the
sphere of peace and  enter  the  Mahayana  path,  do  they  enter  from  the
Mahayana path of accumulation or from the path of seeing and above?
Someone says: Considering the two cases:
- (1) for hearers foe-destroyers have the realization  of  the  selflessness
of phenomena, they should not enter from the  Mahayana  path  of  seeing  or
below because, since they have already realized emptiness, there is no  need
for them to generate the Mahayana path of  seeing.  Therefore,  they  should
enter the Mahayana path from the 7th ground or above.
- (2)  for  hearer  foe-destroyers  do  not  have  the  realization  of  the
selflessness of phenomena, they  need  to  generate  the  Mahayana  path  of
seeing.
   - In order to generate that, they need to generate the Mahayana  path  of
preparation that meditates on emptiness by way of a meaning generality  with
the wisdom arisen from meditation.
   - In order to generate that, they need to generate the Mahayana  path  of
accumulation which determines emptiness by way of hearing and thinking.
   -  Therefore, they should enter the Mahayana path from the Mahayana  path
of accumulation.
Our system (fling): That is very unreasonable.  In  the  case  of  asserting
that hearers foe-destroyers do not have the realization of  selflessness  of
phenomena, it follows that there is no need for them to generate a  Mahayana
path  of  seeing  in  the  continuum  because  hearer  foe-destroyers   have
familiarized with selflessness that  has  already  been  directly  realized,
what can you say?

Someone reply: the Mahayana path of seeing is  not  distinguished  by  newly
realizing  mere  selflessness.  Rather,  it  is  differentiated   by   newly
realizing emptiness by way of direct cognition.  Therefore,  it  has  to  be
newly generated.
   - Hearer foe-destroyers need to newly attain the Mahayana path of  seeing
that realizes emptiness. They do not need to attain  the  Mahayana  path  of
seeing that newly realizes selflessness because they have  already  realized
selflessness, but they need to attain  the  Mahayana  path  of  seeing  that
newly realizes emptiness.
Our system: - even for hearers  with  the  realization  of  selflessness  of
phenomena, they have to newly generate the Mahayana path of  seeing  because
that path of seeing is distinguished by the two accumulations:
    1. the extensive accumulation of merit and
    2. the accumulation of exalted wisdom.
 - even for hearers with the realization of selflessness of phenomena,  they
have to newly generate the Mahayana path of seeing that is  included  within
the accumulation of merit.
 -In order to generate the Mahayana path of seeing, we need to generate  its
causes:  the  Mahayana  path  of  accumulation  and  the  Mahayana  path  of
preparation.
-Someone says: According to the system that hearer foe-destroyers  who  have
the realization of selflessness of phenomena can  enter  the  Mahayana  path
from the 7th ground and above because the  accumulation  of  merit  included
within the lower paths is completed on the 7th ground and  above.  So  there
is no need to enter from a lower path.
Our system: If it is as you asserted, then those who wish to quickly  attain
enlightenment should enter the hearer’s path because they  will  attain  the
result of a hearer foe-destroyer in at most  three  lifetimes,  after  which
they can enter the Mahayana path from the 7th ground. In this way they  will
attain enlightenment very quickly.
- Otherwise they would have to  gather  the  accumulations  for  up  to  one
countless great eon on the Mahayana paths of accumulation and preparation.
- The sharpest hearers can attain the state of a hearer foe-destroyer it  in
  one lifetime. Some hearers will attain it in the  intermediate  state  and
  some in the next lifetime.
- Those of middling faculty will attain it in three lifetimes
- Those of dullest faculty will attain it in fourteen lifetimes.

- Our system: even if  hearer  and  solitary  realizer  foe-destroyers  have
realized both subtle selflessnesses directly, when they enter  the  Mahayana
path, they definitely enter from the path of accumulation.
- This is because on the path of accumulation they have  to  determine  well
  by hearing and contemplation all the various divisions included within the
  accumulation of merit.
- After that, they have to move on to the path of  preparation,  where  they
  familiarize with these infinite divisions  by  way  of  a  mundane  wisdom
  arisen from meditation.
- After that, they move to the first ground, where they attain 12 sets of  a
  hundred excellent qualities, and so forth.
- Even if they have directly realized both subtle selflessnesses, they  have
  to proceed in this gradual way.
- If one asserts that hearers and solitary  realizers  are  ordinary  beings
  when  they  abide  on  the  Mahayana  path  of  accumulation,  that  is  a
  deprecation of aryas.
- If one says the objects of abandonment such as afflictions that have  been
  abandoned by a supramundane path can return, then that is  a  great  wrong
  view that asserts that liberation is not something that can be trusted.
- In order to  attain  buddhahood,  both  the  accumulations  of  merit  and
  exalted  wisdom  are  needed  because  when  one  attains  the  state   of
  buddhahood, one knows all objects  of  knowledge  as  though  they  are  a
  myrobalan fruit resting on one’s palm.
- In the state of buddhahood, there  is  no  difference  between  meditative
  equipoise and subsequent attainment. Whether one is eating  or  explaining
  the Dharma, one can still be placed in meditative equipoise.
- A  buddha  is  able  to  enact  the  welfare  of  sentient  beings  in  an
  effortless, spontaneous manner as long as samsara is not empty.
- Without the extensive two accumulations acting as a support, there  is  no
  way to perform these activities.
-  By  comparing  hearer  and  solitary  realizer  foe-destroyers  who  have
  realized emptiness and Mahayana aryas, although they do not differ in  the
  direct realization of emptiness, they do differ very much in their ability
  and power to destroy the discordant classes.
- Regardless of whether or not hearer foe-destroyers are  asserted  to  have
  the realization of selflessness of  phenomena,  i.e.  of  emptiness,  they
  enter the Mahayana path from the Mahayana path of accumulation.
-  Comparing  someone  definite  in  the  Mahayana   lineage   and   someone
temporarily definite in the hearers’  lineage  entering  the  Mahayana  path
from the path of accumulation at the same  time,  someone  definite  in  the
Mahayana lineage will attain enlightenment more quickly than the  hearer  or
solitary realizer foe-destroyer.
- This  is  because  hearer  or  solitary  realizer  foe-destroyer  who  has
attained solitary liberation has the tendency  to  occasionally  enter  into
the sphere of peace, i.e. nirvana, due to being captivated by the  bliss  of
the sphere of peace. Therefore a lot of time is wasted.
- In the systems that assert three final vehicles, two main types of  hearer
and solitary realizer foe-destroyers:
  1. Hearer and solitary realizer foe-destroyers  who  proceed  to  solitary
peace: they aim for solitary nirvana and are satisfied upon attaining that
  2. Hearer  and  solitary  realizer  foe-destroyers  who  train  again  for
enlightenment. This means that  after  attaining  the  state  of  hearer  or
solitary realizer foe-destroyer, they again  train  for  the  attainment  of
buddhahood.

Nature of the knower of paths

- Bodhisattva aryas do not take the afflictions, mainly  the  attachment  of
the desire realm,  as  their  principal  object  of  abandonment.  For  this
reason, the knower of paths is said to be superior to the paths  of  hearers
and solitary realizers.
- By way  of  the  generated  mind  towards  enlightenment  being  the  very
engagement to enact the welfare of sentient beings for as  long  as  samsara
exists, the contaminations  of  desire  and  existence  will  serve  as  the
branches of accomplishment of others’ welfare  by  bodhisattva  aryas.  [The
contaminations of existence are the contaminations of the form and  formless
realms]
-  Someone  says:  The  afflictions  explained  here  are  fully   qualified
afflictions and are the cause for bodhisattva aryas taking rebirth.
   - As a proof of this assertion,  Illuminating  the  Twenty  Thousand  and
Haribhadra’s Great Commentary stated: Bodhisattva aryas take rebirth by  way
of these fully qualified afflictions. However,  they  do  not  generate  the
faults of the afflictions. The afflictions,  the  contaminations  of  desire
and existence, are causes for arya bodhisattvas to take rebirths.
  - These afflictions are the contaminations of the  desire  realm  and  the
form and formless realms. They are not abandoned by bodhisattva aryas.  Even
so, bodhisattvas do not  come  under  the  influence  of  these  afflictions
because they do not generate the faults of the afflictions.
- The principal objects of abandonment of a bodhisattva  are  the  knowledge
obscurations. The conceptions of true existence are  deliberately  abandoned
and the afflictive obscurations are abandoned by the way.
- Bodhisattvas do not take the afflictive obscurations as principal  objects
of abandonment. If they were to do so, there would be the danger of  falling
into the sphere of peace through attaining  liberation.  So  they  take  the
knowledge obscurations as the principal objects of abandonment  and  do  not
deliberately abandon the afflictive obscurations.
- The afflictions such as attachment  and  anger  have  many  degrees:  very
coarse, very subtle, etc. They are abandoned on the path of seeing  and  the
path of meditation.
- They are not deliberately abandoned quickly. They  are  abandoned  on  the
various grounds of the paths of seeing and meditation.
- On the paths of accumulation and preparation, bodhisattvas  train  greatly
in bodhicitta, great compassion, and the realization of  emptiness.  As  the
result  of  which  their  minds  are  very  pacified  and  when  afflictions
manifest, they are unable to harm the bodhisattvas. When afflictions  become
manifest in ordinary beings, their minds become unhappy and unpeaceful.
- For bodhisattvas, who have trained their minds  very  well  in  meditative
stabilization and so forth,  when  afflictions  become  manifest,  they  are
unable  to  cause  their  minds  to  become  unpeaceful  i.e.  the  manifest
afflictive obscuration are  unable  to  harm  the  bodhisattva.  Bodhisattva
aryas see the afflictions as being  like  illusions.  This  is  because  the
minds of bodhisattvas are very well trained. In fact the  bodhisattvas  have
the power to cause them to become manifest.

- Our system: Consider the two possibilities:
1. Do bodhisattva aryas, not  being  able  to  take  rebirth  as  they  wish
   through the force of compassion and their prayers, need afflictions as an
   aid?
2. Or is it that, even though they do not wish for the afflictions,  due  to
   fear that the  self  will  be  severed  just  before  death-transference,
   craving for contaminated aggregates arises, and  that  craving  aids  the
   bodhisattvas to transmigrate?
  - The 2nd case: that  craving  for  contaminated  aggregates  just  before
death-transference is an aid contradicts  bodhisattvas  not  taking  rebirth
under the influence of afflictions. As you said  earlier  that  bodhisattvas
do not take rebirth under the influence of the afflictions.
 - The 1st case: bodhisattvas need afflictions as an  aid  also  contradicts
bodhisattvas not taking rebirth under the influence of the  afflictions.  As
in Sublime Continuum: ‘Aryas have abandoned from the root the sufferings  of
sickness,  aging,  and  death.  Rebirth  through  the  force  of  karma  and
afflictions does not exist for them.’
   ­ The “aryas” here refers to Mahayana aryas. Mahayana aryas have abandoned
     from the root the sufferings of sickness, aging, and death but Hinayana
     aryas have not.
   ­ Hinayana aryas, having attained the Hinayana path of seeing, would take
     from one up to 14 lifetimes to attain the  state  of  a  foe-destroyer.
     Having attained the arya state, they do not newly accumulate karma  for
     taking rebirth but may still have karma for  taking  rebirth  that  was
     accumulated before they attained the arya state. Through the  force  of
     such karma, they can take rebirth up to a total of 14 lifetimes.
   ­ During this period, the kind of aggregates they have  is  the  same  as
     ours:  they  are  contaminated,  appropriated   aggregates.   Regarding
     sicknesses, due to the karma of falling sick becoming  less  and  less,
     they also become sick less and less.
   ­ For Mahayana aryas, upon attaining the path of seeing, they have a body
     that is the nature of mind. They do not have gross  bodies  like  ours.
     Therefore, they do not have sicknesses, aging, or death.
- If we claim they need afflictions as a cause for taking rebirth, it  would
contradict with Uttaratantra and other teachings.
- This mean the possibility of bodhisattva aryas, not  being  able  to  take
rebirth as they wish through the force  of  compassion  and  their  prayers,
need afflictions as an aid.
- If they need afflictions as an aid to take rebirth, then they  would  have
to take rebirth under the influence of the afflictions. Therefore, this  1st
case contradicts their  not  taking  rebirth  under  the  influence  of  the
afflictions.
- Our system: The passage from  the  Great  Commentary:  “They  abandon  the
dormant  afflictions  included  within  ignorance  and  view  but  not   the
contaminations of desire and  existence,  because  they  intentionally  take
rebirth in cyclic existence” does not indicate the cause for rebirth.
- It indicates that the contaminations of desire and existence are a  branch
  of accomplishing others’ welfare.
- These afflictions are a branch of producing thousands of sons, by  way  of
  having taken the bodies of wheel-turning kings and so  forth  through  the
  force of compassion and their prayers.
- The afflictions are also not a  cause  for  taking  rebirth  in  the  form
  realm.
-  In  fact  the  contaminations  of  existence  are  also   a   branch   of
  accomplishing others’ welfare in the upper realms [form realm].
- Therefore afflictions included within the objects to be abandoned  by  the
  path of seeing have been abandoned exhaustively in them.
Someone says: The eight causes for taking rebirth  explained  in  the  Sutra
Requested by Sagaramati are not actual  afflictions.  They  are  imputed  as
afflictions.
      -The  causes  for  taking  rebirth  in  ordinary  beings  are   called
   afflictions because they are similar in function to the afflictions.
- Our system: This is not correct  because  those  eight  causes  are  fully
complete factors of method of a  knower  of  paths.  There  is  no  need  to
examine the qualm wondering, ‘Do bodhisattvas specifically abandon them?’
    - If these afflictions explained here are designated, not  actual,  then
also the afflictions that are  to  be  deliberately  abandoned  by  hearers’
paths would be designated because bodhisattvas  act  to  achieve  their  own
enlightenment  without  having  deliberately  abandoned   the   afflictions.
Bodhisattvas use these afflictions  as  branches  of  accomplishing  others’
welfare when they are in the desire realm or the form  realm.  They  do  not
deliberately abandon them.
Two sets of afflictions that we need to distinguish:
1. The contaminations of desire and  existence.  These  are  fully-qualified
  afflictions and they are not deliberately abandoned by bodhisattvas.
2. The eight causes for taking rebirth are not actual afflictions or  fully-
  qualified afflictions. They are  simply  imputed  as  afflictions  because
  bodhisattvas use them as causes for taking rebirth. These eight causes for
  taking rebirth are:
  1. Not being satisfied with seeking the accumulation of merit
  2. Upholding rebirth in cyclic existence according to one’s wishes
  3. Wishing to meet the buddhas
  4. Not being disillusioned with respect to activities to  ripen  sentient
     beings
  5. Striving to uphold the excellent Dharma
  6. Enthusiasm, thinking: “What activities of sentient beings are there?”
  7. Not discarding the dormancies that desire the Dharma
  8. Not giving up the applications with respect to the perfections
­ 1. Bodhisattvas not being  satisfied  with  seeking  the  accumulation  of
  merit.  [the  support  of  a  human  being  is  the  supreme  support  for
  accumulating merit because there are many opportunities  for  accumulating
  merit. For that reason, there is a cause for taking rebirth in the  desire
  realm.]
­ 2. If there is good reason to take rebirth in cyclic existence,  one  does
  so according to one’s wishes. “Upholding rebirth” means taking rebirth and
  making use of that rebirth.
­ 3. Wishing to meet the buddhas: In general, there is no place where  there
  is no buddha. Here it means the buddha who displays the supreme  emanation
  body, performs the various deeds of explaining the Dharma, etc.  By  being
  reborn in a place where  there  is  a  supreme  emanation  body,  one  can
  accumulate merit. In general, the buddhas perform their  activities  in  a
  place where sentient beings have great merit because by explaining  Dharma
  to such sentient beings, they are able to ripen them. So  there  is  great
  benefit. When the buddhas explain the Dharma in  a  place  where  sentient
  beings have little merit, there would not be much benefit.
­ 4. This refers to bodhisattvas’ not  being  discouraged,  or  tired,  when
  ripening sentient beings.
­ 5. This means that one hears the Dharma, puts it into practice, and causes
  others to also hear and practice the Dharma. This is how  one  strives  to
  uphold the Dharma.
­ 6. This means thinking about the activities that benefit sentient  beings,
  not generating dislike towards those activities, and not being slack. When
  bodhisattvas see the amount  of  activities  that  need  to  be  done  for
  sentient beings, the kind of sufferings they undergo, and  so  forth,  the
  stronger their enthusiasm and courage become. When ordinary  people  think
  about  the  suffering  of  sentient  beings,  their  minds  easily  become
  discouraged. But when bodhisattvas think about the suffering  of  sentient
  beings, they actually generate enthusiasm in dispelling the  suffering  of
  sentient beings.
­ 7. This refers to always depositing the latencies that desire the Dharma.
­ 8. In that way, a bodhisattva  does  not  give  up  the  applications.  He
  practices the applications regarding the perfections.
- These contaminations of the desire  realm  and  the  form  realm  are  not
necessary as causes for taking rebirth. In fact, they  are  fully  qualified
afflictions used as branches for accomplishing  others’  welfare.  Not  only
are the faults of  the  afflictions  not  generated,  they  actually  become
branches of accomplishing others’ welfare.
-Bodhisattvas on the 7th ground and below accomplish the body of the  nature
of mind with  effort  in  dependence  on  the  level  of  the  latencies  of
ignorance and uncontaminated karma.
-Bodhisattvas on the three pure grounds  as  well  as  hearer  and  solitary
realizer  foe-destroyers  accomplish  this  body  of  the  nature  of   mind
spontaneously, without effort.
- Bodhisattva aryas do not need the  afflictions  to  take  rebirth  because
they have this body of the nature of mind.
- The function of a knower of paths  does  not  actualize  the  perfect  end
until one has fully completed prayers, fully ripened  sentient  beings,  and
completely purified the buddha land.
- The reason for that is through the  wisdom  observing  emptiness  and  the
skillful means of compassion  and  so  forth,  one  fully  gathers  sentient
beings who have not been gathered and so forth.
- The function of a knower of paths is superior to the function of  hearers’
paths

The nature of knower of paths has three divisions:
1. knower of the nature of hearers’ paths
2. knower of the nature of solitary realizers’ paths
3. knower of the nature of bodhisattvas’ paths.
- The knower of the nature of hearers’ paths - this refer to the  knower  of
  paths that knows hearers’ paths.
- The nature of a knower  of  paths  is  the  knower  of  paths  that  knows
  hearers’ paths, solitary realizers’ paths, and bodhisattvas’ paths.
- In order to know the knower of paths, we have to  know  how  to  cultivate
  all the three paths.
- In order to understand the nature  of  a  knower  of  paths,  we  have  to
  understand the knower of paths that knows hearers’ paths,  the  knower  of
  paths that knows solitary realizers’ paths, and the knower of  paths  that
  knows bodhisattvas’ paths.
- Buddha aryas enact the welfare of the three lineage-bearers. In  order  to
  attain the state of buddhahood, during  the  occasions  of  the  learners’
  paths, one has to train in  the  similitudes  so  that  when  one  attains
  buddhahood, one is able to enact  the  welfare  of  these  three  lineage-
  bearers.
- Having described the 1st of the five branches of the knower of paths  [‘In
order to make the gods suitable, eclipsing with light’], it  is  appropriate
to describe the mode of knowing hearers’ paths on the occasion of  a  knower
of paths, since it is necessary to completely cultivate  all  paths  of  the
three vehicles in order to attain an EKAA.
- Regarding the mode of completely cultivating a knower of paths-  the  mode
of  completely  cultivating  a  knower  of  paths  involves  the   mode   of
cultivating hearers’  paths,  cultivating  solitary  realizers’  paths,  and
cultivating Mahayana paths.
- These knowers of paths knowing hearers’ paths cultivate the 16 aspects  of
the  four  noble  truths  by  means  of  being  conjoined  with  bodhicitta,
dedication, and the wisdom not observing true existence.
- The knower of paths knowing hearers’ paths needs to be meditated  upon  by
bodhisattvas for the sake of taking care of hearer lineage-bearers.
- The knower  of  paths  knowing  hearers’  paths  in  the  continuum  of  a
bodhisattva  is  an  exalted  wisdom  directly  realizing  the  16  aspects,
impermanence and so forth.

Qualm: Would it not become a knower of bases? Why is it called a  knower  of
paths?
Our system: The knower of paths  knowing  hearers’  paths  is  presented  by
means of being conjoined with the three attributes: bodhicitta,  dedication,
and the wisdom realizing emptiness.
- It is not presented from the point of view  of  observing  hearers’  paths
  and then meditating on their emptiness.
- The exalted wisdom directly realizing the 16 aspects  of  the  four  noble
  truths, impermanence and so forth, is a hearers’ path.
- If we consider this exalted wisdom directly realizing the  16  aspects  in
  the continuum of a bodhisattva arya, it is a hearer’s path, and it is also
  a knower of paths. Therefore it is a  knower  of  paths  knowing  hearers’
  paths. [Note: a hearer’s path is not necessarily included within hearers.]
- An exalted wisdom directly  realizing  impermanence  and  so  forth  in  a
  bodhisattva on the path of seeing  is  both  a  knower  of  paths  knowing
  hearers’ paths and a knower of bases.
- In the 2nd chapter (Knower of Paths), this exalted wisdom is indicated  in
  a manner  of  being  conjoined  with  the  three  attributes:  bodhicitta,
  dedication, and the wisdom realizing emptiness.
- In the 3rd chapter (Knower of Bases), it is not indicated by way of  being
  conjoined with these three attributes. It  is  indicated  by  way  of  the
  isolates of the realizations of impermanence and so forth. The purpose  is
  for the sake of passing through them having viewed  them  by  knowing  and
  seeing.
- Although the exalted wisdoms  realizing  impermanence  and  so  forth  are
  indicated in 2nd & 3rd chapters, they are indicated in different ways.
- The sequence of the four aspects of true sufferings:
(1) Impermanence due to being produced from conditions,
(2) Suffering due to being under the control of karma and afflictions,
(3) Emptiness due to being empty of a self that is another object, and
(4) Selflessness due to its entity not being established as a self
- These are the four aspects  that  pacify,  since  the  characteristics  of
those that are selfless are not established as a self.

- Syllogisms:  the  subject-the  contaminated,  appropriated  aggregates-are
  impermanent because they are produced from conditions.
- The predicate is “impermanent”
- The reason is “produced from conditions”
-  Similarly  the  syllogisms:  the  subject—the  contaminated  appropriated
  aggregates—are suffering, because they are under the control of karma  and
  afflictions.
- The characteristic of being empty is the aspect  of  being  selfless,  and
  the characteristic of being selfless is the aspect of peace.
- The two aspects, empty  and  selfless,  are  different.  Empty  refers  to
  coarse selflessness. Selfless refers to subtle selflessness.
- Both aspects of empty and selfless are concordant in property because  the
  characteristic of empty is the aspect of being selfless.
- This means that the  nature  of  being  empty  of  a  permanent,  unitary,
  independent self, is the aspect of selfless.
- Within  the  characteristic  of  being  empty  of  a  permanent,  unitary,
  independent self, the meaning  of  the  emptiness  of  a  self-sufficient,
  substantially existent self is complete.
- This does not mean that a permanent, unitary, independent self is a  self-
  sufficient, substantially existent self.
-  “Emptiness” refers to the emptiness of a permanent, unitary,  independent
  self
- “Selflessness”  is  the  emptiness  of  a  self-sufficient,  substantially
  existent self.
- The characteristic of being empty of  a  permanent,  unitary,  independent
  self has the complete meaning  of  the  emptiness  of  a  self-sufficient,
  substantially existent self.
- If you were to contemplate the  emptiness  that  is  the  emptiness  of  a
  permanent, unitary, independent self, this would help you  understand  the
  selflessness that is the emptiness  of  a  self-sufficient,  substantially
  existent self.
-  We  have  to  contemplate  these  three  characteristics:  the  lack   of
  permanence, the lack of unitariness, and the lack of independence.
- With regard to  the  lack  of  permanence,  we  contemplate  the  lack  of
  abidance for even one instant.
- Then we contemplate the lack of  unitariness  by  thinking  about  how  it
  relies on parts, therefore it is not unitary.
- Then we contemplate the lack of independence  by  thinking  about  how  it
  depends on causes and conditions.
- Through contemplating the emptiness that  is  the  lack  of  a  permanent,
  unitary, independent self, one will eventually be led to  the  realization
  of selflessness that is  the  lack  of  a  self-sufficient,  substantially
  existent self.
- One has to contemplate and check if the self is  permanent,  unitary,  and
  independent by checking:
- Is it permanent in the sense of abiding forever?
- Is it unitary in the sense of not relying on parts?
- Is it independent in the sense of not relying on causes and conditions?
- By contemplating this, one will come to the conclusion that  the  self  is
  not self-sufficient, substantially existent.
- By understanding that the self is impermanent, one understands that it  is
  not inexpressible as being either permanent or impermanent.
- By understanding that it  relies  on  parts  and  depends  on  causes  and
  conditions, one understands that it is not inexpressible as  being  either
  one entity with or a different entity from the aggregates.
- In this way, one comes to realize that the self  is  not  self-sufficient,
  substantially existent.
- The “inexpressible” in this context means we are not able to express,  for
  example, the self as permanent or impermanent, or as one entity  with  the
  aggregates or a different entity from the aggregates. We are not  able  to
  describe the self as one of these possibilities.
-  In  fact  the  self  can  be  expressed  as  being  either  permanent  or
  impermanent because it can be expressed as impermanent.
- If the self is self-sufficient, substantially existent, then it  would  be
  inexpressible as either permanent or impermanent.
- The realization of the emptiness  of  a  permanent,  unitary,  independent
  self definitely  benefits  the  understanding  of  the  lack  of  a  self-
  sufficient, substantially existent self.
- For that  reason,  we  say  the  characteristic  of  the  emptiness  of  a
  permanent, unitary, independent self has the complete meaning of the  lack
  of a self-sufficient, substantially existent self.
- The entity of this aspect, empty, is the aspect of  selfless.  The  entity
  of empty has the complete meaning of selfless, and the  characteristic  of
  selfless has the complete aspect  of  peace  [means  peace  in  not  being
  established as a self.]

- The aspects of true origins: The subject – craving – is the aspect of:
(1) cause, like a disease, because it serves as the root of suffering
(2) origin, like a boil, because it produces suffering again and again
(3) strong production, like a pain, because it produces intense suffering
(4) condition, like the aspect of a negativity, because it is a  cooperative
condition for future rebirth.

There are 7 aspects that are the common aspects of true sufferings and  true
origins.
  1. The aspects of disillusioned:
     (1) the antagonist
     (2) the bearer of the property of destruction
      2.   The aspects of separate from attachment:
     (3) moving
     (4) strongly disintegrating
      3.   The aspects of cease:
     (5) fear
     (6) infectious disease
     (7) harm
- One generates disillusionment towards true sufferings  and  true  origins.
E.g. contaminated aggregates have the aspects  of  the  antagonist  and  the
bearer of the property of destruction.
- Based on taking care of this body through looking for  food,  lodging  and
so forth, we create much negativity, which will  ripen  in  the  future  and
cause suffering. In this sense, the  body  is  like  an  antagonist,  or  an
enemy.
- This body has the property of disintegration, becoming destroyed. It  does
not abide for a long time. Therefore it is the bearer  of  the  property  of
destruction.
- We have disillusionment towards them because  we  want  to  separate  from
them as if we see them as enemies.
-  The  aspects  of  separate  from  attachment  are  moving  and   strongly
disintegrating.
- For the aspect of moving, due to not remaining  for  a  second  period  of
time.
- For the aspect of strongly disintegrating without  relying  on  conditions
and causes arising later.
- As soon as a thing is established, it is  established  in  the  nature  of
disintegration. This disintegration does not rely on causes  and  conditions
arising later.
- The objects from which attachment is to be separated  are  true  suffering
and true origins.
- The aspect of fear  is:  in  dependence  on  apprehending  the  person  as
established as a self, there is fear.
When one heard a loud noise, one would be afraid. There  is  grasping  at  a
self or I; this is the aspect of fear.
- In dependence on that conception  of  self,  different  kinds  of  disease
arise. There is the aspect of infectious disease.
- In dependence on that, harm arises. If we cling strongly to the  self,  we
are easily afraid that harm will come. The stronger our conception of  self,
the stronger the fear will be.
 -The three: disillusionment, separation from attachment, and cessation  are
posited respectively on the occasions of the path of seeing, the end of  the
path of meditation, and nirvana without remainder.
- By implication, entry for the sake of these three is attained on the  path
of preparation, on the occasion of the  path  of  meditation  excluding  the
end, and on the occasion of nirvana with remainder.
- Two types of Lesser Vehicle nirvanas: those with remainder and those
without remainder.
- Nirvana with remainder of miserable aggregates that were wrought by
former [contaminated] actions and afflictive emotions.
- Nirvana without remainder is asserted to be a state devoid of miserable
mental and physical aggregates.
- In order to be disillusioned regarding true sufferings  and  true  origins
on the path of seeing, there is entry into the path of preparation.
- On the path of accumulation the four noble truths  are  determined  mainly
through hearing and contemplation. Upon attaining the path  of  preparation,
one has the union of calm abiding and special insight and  one  is  able  to
suppress the manifest afflictions. This is why there is entry into the  path
of preparation, into the path of seeing, and  so  on.  This  does  not  mean
there is no mind of disillusionment on the path of accumulation.

- There are four aspects of true cessations:
(1) cessation,
(2) pacification,
(3) sublimity, and
(4) definite emergence.
-The aspect of the self-entity  of  the  cessation  of  true  cessations  is
cessation [the 1st of the four attributes] is  the  aspect  of  selflessness
because it is an aspect in which the afflictions have been abandoned.
-True cessation is the aspect of pacification because it is a separation  in
which sufferings have been pacified.
-True cessation is the aspect of isolation, the  nature  of  the  aspect  of
sublimity because it is a separation that is in the  entity  of  cleanliness
and happiness.
- The subject-a separation with the characteristic of definite  emergence-is
the aspects of:
 1. emptiness,
 2. signlessness,
 3. wishlessness, and
 4. lacking manifest compositional action
- (i) it is an abandonment where the manner  through  which  one  definitely
emerges is free from the three: truly existent entity, cause and result
- (ii) it is an abandonment in which what definitely emerges  is  free  from
truly existent manifest application with exertion.
-Emptiness in this context refers to the emptiness of a self of persons  and
of “mine,” i.e. belonging to the self.
-Signlessness refers to a lack of the signs of discrimination.
-Wishlessness refers to a lack of wish with respect to the three realms.
- Lacking manifest compositional action refers  to  a  lack  of  action,  or
karma, for taking future rebirths.
- When one attains an arya path, one does not newly create karma for  taking
rebirth, therefore “lacking manifest compositional action.”

4 The aspects of true paths, the  wisdom  directly  realizing  selflessness,
    are:

 1. path - it is a path that actually proceeds to nirvana
 2. suitability - it is suitable as the direct antidote  to  the  seeds  of
    afflictions
 3. achievement - it directly realizes the mode of abidance of the mind
 4. deliverance - it is a path that utterly extinguishes suffering
- Bodhisattvas need to know hearers’ and solitary realizers’  paths  by  way
of being conjoined with bodhicitta, dedication,  and  the  wisdom  realizing
emptiness. These are to be known for the sake of taking care of trainees.
- Bodhisattvas need to know these paths in the manner of generating them  in
the continuum.
- In order to newly, completely know  the  four  noble  truths  with  direct
cognition, this has to be preceded by its  cause,  the  partial  concordance
with definite discrimination
- Those definite in the Mahayana lineage do not generate the  hearers’  path
of accumulation, hearers’ path of preparation, hearers’ path of seeing,  and
so forth but they know hearers’ paths.
- Bodhisattvas do know the hearers’ path of accumulation up to the  hearers’
path of no-more-learning, and are able to take  care  of  those  abiding  on
these paths.
- A hearers’ path of accumulation is necessarily included in  the  continuum
of a hearer on the path of accumulation, a hearers’ path of  preparation  is
necessarily  included  in  the  continuum  of  a  hearer  on  the  path   of
preparation, a hearers’ path of no-more-learning is necessarily included  in
the continuum of a hearer on the path of no-more-learning, and so forth.
- However, a hearers’ path is not necessarily included in the  continuum  of
a hearer. The same applies for solitary realizers.
-  However,  it  does  not  apply  for  Mahayanists.  A  Mahayana  path   is
necessarily included in the continuum of a Mahayanist.
- However, a buddha’s path is not necessarily included in the  continuum  of
a buddha because a buddha’s path and path are mutually inclusive.
- The direct knowing of the paths of arya hearers must be  preceded  by  its
cause, the partial concordance with definite discrimination.
- For someone who is definite in the Mahayana lineage:
 - Heat level: the realization of the 16  attributes  [impermanence  and  so
forth] by way of meaning-generality that is  initially  conjoined  with  the
wisdom that is a special insight realizing  emptiness  by  way  of  meaning-
generality. (Note: realization of the 16 attributes  by  way  of  a  meaning
generality that is initially conjoined with the wisdom  realizing  emptiness
by way of  a  meaning  generality  exists  even  on  the  Mahayana  path  of
accumulation).
-  Peak  level:  That,  when  increased,  and  which  is  the  2nd   partial
concordance with definite discrimination. - Forbearance  level:  That  which
is  the  3rd  partial  concordance  with  definite  discrimination  and   is
conjoined with the attainment of a forbearance in  which  adherence  to  the
permanent, the  impermanent,  and  so  forth  as  truly  existent  has  been
stopped.
- Supreme mundane quality level: That which is the 4th  partial  concordance
with definite discrimination and is conjoined with a  wisdom  that  realizes
that the apprehenders, the ten grounds, are not truly  existent  objects  to
be abided upon.
Qualm: Why are they not truly existent objects to be abided upon?
Our system: If phenomena were truly existing objects to be abided upon,  the
buddhas must see it by means of a direct exalted knower, but they do not.
- If phenomena were truly existent, the  buddhas  must  see  them  as  truly
existent. Then, would the Bhagavan’s incomplete causes for abiding be:
   1. due to him having exhausted the power to enact the welfare of sentient
      beings?
   2. due to him being separated from great exalted mercy-compassion?
   3. due to him degenerating from the power gained over the abidance of his
      compositional factor of life?
   4. due to him having exhausted the potency of karma for his life power to
      abide?
   5. due to there being no sentient being to be subdued?
- The answer to all of these questions is “No.”   It  would  be  strange  to
assert that the Buddha enacted  activities  for  sentient  beings  only  for
forty years  after  he  had  accumulated  merit  for  three  countless  eons
motivated by the wish to benefit sentient  beings  for  as  long  as  cyclic
existence exists. The accumulations were complete and culminated.   If  that
were the case, there would be a huge discrepancy between the cause  and  the
result.

- Hearer says: When a supreme emanation  body  demonstrates  the  manner  of
passing beyond sorrow that nirvana is one in which the continuity of  matter
and cognition has been severed. [When a hearer or solitary realizer  attains
nirvana without remainder, if the continuity of matter  and  cognition  were
severed, that would determine the number of final  vehicles  as  being  more
than one.]
-  Our  system  says  that  this  assertion  is  damaged  by  scripture  and
reasoning.

-  The emptiness of not existing ultimately.
(1) The aggregates of forms and so forth and  their  emptinesses  themselves
are not mutually different ultimately because they are empty  of  their  own
entitiness ultimately.
(2) Forms and so forth do not exist  ultimately  because  if  they  were  to
exist truly, that would  be  suitable  to  be  observed,  but  that  is  not
observed
(3) Abidance by way of observing forms and so forth as  existing  ultimately
is stopped, because they are neither permanent nor  impermanent  by  way  of
existing ultimately,
(4) The Very  Joyous  ground  [path  of  seeing]  and  so  forth  lack  true
existence as objects to be abided upon because if  they  exist  truly,  that
must  be  seen  by  the  tathagatas.  But  the  tathagatas  having  attained
buddhahood in manifest complete enlightenment do not see phenomena  such  as
the ten grounds as objects to be abided upon ultimately.
- The cause of a knower of hearers’ paths is the four levels  of   the  path
of preparation, a partial concordance with  definite  discrimination,  is  a
mundane wisdom arisen from meditation [but a definite discrimination is  not
a mundane wisdom].
- The heat level being a realization of the 16 attributes conjoined  with  a
wisdom realizing emptiness.

- Solitary realizers have mild afflictions. They do not have much desire  to
go here and there. They like being quiet  and  avoid  crowded  places.  They
prefer being alone.
- Compared to bodhisattvas, they have little compassion and  do  not  engage
in the extensive welfare of others.
- They are of middling faculty i.e. they are neither  very  sharp  nor  very
dull.
- They desire to attain enlightenment “without  competition,”  i.e.  without
companions.
- Their mode of training in the path is as follows:
(1) When they are ordinary beings, having pleased the buddhas who arise  and
collected merit for a hundred eons, they attain the result of  foe-destroyer
in the future life in which they attain the path of seeing.
(2) They collect the accumulations for an indefinite  period  of  time  i.e.
the accumulations are not collected for a specific period  of  time,  as  in
the previous mode.
(3) Having  completely  generated  the  partial  concordance  with  definite
discrimination and below in the presence of  a  master,  they  generate  the
path of seeing in a future life, and then in a following rebirth attain  the
state of a foe-destroyer.[Following rebirth can either be the  next  rebirth
or the very last rebirth].
-Two types of solitary realizers:
    - those who rely on a master to generate an arya path and
    - those who do not rely on a master to generate an arya path.
- In the life  in  which  they  attain  the  state  of  foe-destroyer,  they
definitely do not rely on a master because if they did  rely  on  a  master,
they would be hearers.
- Solitary realizers make three kinds of prayers:
  1. They pray to be reborn in their last life in a land where there is  no
     supreme  emanation  body  displaying  the  deeds  of  taking  care  of
     trainees, and so forth.
  2. They pray to attain the state of  foe-destroyer  in  their  last  life
     without relying on a master.
  3. They pray to teach the Dharma without  speech,  but  through  physical
     manifestations, or expressions of the body.







- A self-arisen foe-destroyer, who is  a  solitary  realizer  foe-destroyer,
does not need to be taught by others in  the  life  of  his  last  existence
because in that life he realizes enlightenment by  himself  without  relying
on a master.
- The exalted  wisdom  of  the  rhinoceros-like  solitary  realizer  teaches
Dharma through manifestations or expressions of the body, without  sound  or
speech.
- Because solitary realizer  foe-destroyers  do  not  use  speech  to  teach
Dharma, their realizations cannot be realized by the  effect  sign  that  is
speech teaching the Dharma [Trainees are unable  to  realize  the  excellent
qualities of solitary realizers from the effect  sign  of  speech].  So  the
realizations or the exalted wisdoms of solitary realizer foe-destroyers  are
said to be more profound.
- Solitary realizers’ realizations  can  be  realized  by  trainees  through
teaching the Dharma by way of physical manifestations.
- Hearer foe-destroyers teach Dharma using speech.  As  a  result  of  using
speech to teach  Dharma,  the  trainees  are  able  to  infer  the  type  of
realizations  in  the  continua  of  these   hearer   foe-destroyers.   [The
realizations of hearers can be realized from the effect sign of speech.]
- “Solitary realizer teaches what is far more profound  than  the  profound;
he teaches what is far more subtle than the subtle.”
- “profound” refers to selflessness of persons.
- “what is far more profound” refers to emptiness of duality (non-duality.)
- “he teaches what is far more profound than the  profound”  means  that  he
teaches non-duality
- “the subtle” refers to true cessations in which the conception of self  of
persons has been abandoned
- “what is  far  more  subtle”  refers  to  true  cessations  in  which  the
conception of duality has been abandoned.
- “he teaches what is far  more  subtle  than  the  subtle”  means  that  he
teaches true  cessations  in  which  the  conception  of  duality  has  been
abandoned i.e. the conception of forms and so forth as external objects  has
been abandoned.
- Bodhisattvas realize that apprehendeds lack inherent existence is for  the
sake of guiding solitary realizer lineage-bearers.
- Solitary realizers do not need to rely on being taught by others, i.e.  by
masters, buddhas and so forth, in their  last  existence.  This  is  because
previously, when they engaged in hearing and so forth,  they  made  prayers,
“In the  future,  in  the  life  of  my  last  existence,  may  I  actualize
enlightenment by myself without relying on  a  teacher.”  Due  to  this,  in
their  last  existence  they  are  able  to   actualize   enlightenment   by
themselves.
- Hearers are different from solitary realizers. They may pray, “In my  last
existence,  having  relied  on  being  taught  by  others,  may   I   attain
enlightenment.” However, hearers do not necessarily make such prayers.
- Hearers are those who like companionship and they like being  around  with
others.
- Hearers hear the Dharma and practices what they can. Even  for  the  parts
that they cannot practice, they cause others to hear them.
- There are hearers who have lots of liking for buddhas,  bodhisattvas,  and
other teachers. So it is possible for them to pray, “In my last life, may  I
attain enlightenment by relying on buddhas and bodhisattvas.”
- Solitary realizers teach the Dharma by  using  expressions  of  the  body,
whereas hearers teach the Dharma through articulating the Dharma.
- The way in which solitary  realizers  teach  the  Dharma  is  said  to  be
superior because through the force of exalted wisdom  attained  by  solitary
realizers themselves and through the force  of  prayers  and  so  forth,  by
having taught the Dharma without sound, cause others to engage  in  the  ten
virtues, to engage in realizing selflessness, and so forth.
- There is no contradiction that the solitary realizers  teach  Dharma  even
without sounds, because they are able to generate realizations  in  trainees
as are appropriate even without sounds.
- The bodhisattvas and the solitary realizer learners  are  similar  because
they make similar prayers, and that the buddhas and solitary  realizer  foe-
destroyers are similar.
- Solitary realizers mostly teach without  speech.  However,  sometimes  the
solitary realizers do teach with speech.
- The reason for solitary realizers making prayers not using words to  teach
the Dharma is because articulation of words distracts them  from  meditative
stabilization. It also disturbs the continuum of meditative stabilization.
- The reason for that is because one does not  speak  words  without  having
investigated the entity and without having analyzed the attributes.
- When solitary realizers are learners, they have nature of  not  liking  to
be with many people and of not liking to talk much because it distracts  the
mind. They like to be alone.
- Because  they  understand  that  speech  distracts  the  mind,  they  make
prayers, “When I attain  enlightenment,  may  I  be  able  to  teach  Dharma
without speech.” By the power of those prayers being actualized,  when  they
become solitary realizer foe-destroyers,  they  then  teach  Dharma  without
speech, using manifestations of the body.
- Our  system:  A  solitary  realizer,  through  teaching  the  Dharma  with
physical manifestations without using sound  can  cause  others  to  realize
their  excellent  qualities.  Therefore  teaching  Dharma  with  speech  and
teaching it with body do not  differ  with  respect  to  causing  others  to
realize one’s mental prowess.
- Someone says: That is not correct:
 - (i) if one displays magical emanation with the  body,  the  trainees  can
realize that one has these powers of magical emanation  but  cannot  realize
that one has the realization of selflessness.
- (ii) because they are able to realize that one possesses a realization  of
selflessness from the effect sign of speech.
- Our system: The reason solitary realizers do not teach Dharma with  speech
is  that  when  one  articulates  words,   the   continuum   of   meditative
stabilization is disturbed and the solitary realizers  are  distracted  from
their meditative stabilization.
- In case the display of magical manifestations were to definitely  rely  on
  a motivation thinking ‘I want to display  magical  emanations’  then  that
  reason for not teaching Dharma with speech would not be correct.
- This is because if this display of magical emanations also  requires  such
  motivation, their meditative stabilization would be disturbed.
- Hence, one is able to display magical emanations without relying  on  such
  a motivation since the ability to produce realizations of high status  and
  definite goodness in the continua of  trainees  in  dependence  on  seeing
  those magical emanations is the result of prayer.
- This is explained as meaning being able  to  produce  the  realization  of
  Dharma in the listener. It is not correct to negate only the  teaching  of
  Dharma with the body. You must be able to explain what it means  to  teach
  the Dharma.
- The path of the solitary realizers is  to  be  known  by  bodhisattvas  as
being perfectly encapsulated by the possession of three attributes:
   1. The path of solitary realizers abandons the conception of apprehendeds
      as external objects
   2. It does not abandon the conception of apprehenders as truly existent
   3. It is supported by lineage.
In the case of bodhisattvas, the three attributes are:
   1. Generated mind
   2. Dedication
   3. The wisdom realizing the emptiness of true existence.

Someone says: The views of solitary realizers and the propounders  of  Mind-
Only are not similar.
 - The solitary realizers have abandoned the conception of apprehendeds  and
   adhere to apprehenders as truly existent.
 - The Mind-Only proponents realize apprehendeds and apprehenders as lacking
   true existence.
Our system: You have not examined this closely at all. What is  the  meaning
of a solitary realizer realizing apprehendeds as lacking true existence?
Someone answers: Solitary  realizers  realize  the  bases  as  lacking  true
existence but do not realize  the  sense  consciousnesses  as  lacking  true
existence.
Our system: If one is newly realizing the emptiness of an object,  one  must
apply  much  contemplation  to  realize  its  emptiness.  But  after  having
realized the emptiness of one object, in order to realize the  emptiness  of
other objects, one just needs to recall the previous  reason.  There  is  no
need to go through the kind of extensive reasoning as with the first  object
in order to realize the emptiness of other objects.
 - As in Aryadeva’s Four Hundred Stanzas: After seeing the emptiness of  one
thing, by applying a similar reasoning, one will  understand  the  emptiness
of all things.
Someone says: Solitary realizers realize that forms  and  so  forth  do  not
exist as external objects. They do not realize that there is no  apprehender
that is a different substance from those forms and so forth.
Our system: It is impossible that one has negated form as being a  different
substance  from  sense  consciousness,  but  has   not   negated   a   sense
consciousness as being a different substance from the form.
      - Form is one substance  with  the  sense  consciousness  apprehending
form
      - Sense consciousness apprehending form is one substance with form.
-In both Mind-Only and Autonomy  (Svatantrika)  systems,  the  emptiness  of
form  and  the  sense  consciousness  apprehending  form   being   different
substances is non-duality. This is the non-duality of form and  it  is  also
the non-duality of the sense consciousness apprehending form.
- The view of the solitary realizers  and  the  view  of  the  Mind-Only  do
differ in terms of being higher or lower.
- They do not have  similar  tenets  because  in  general  their  views  are
different.
- However, the principal object of cultivation  of  solitary  realizers  and
the final view of Mind-Only do not differ: they are the same.
      - The principal object of cultivation of  the  solitary  realizers  is
non-duality.
      - The final view of the propounders of Mind-Only is also  non-duality.

- In general the views of the  solitary  realizers  and  the  Mind-Only  are
different  because  there  are  some  solitary  realizers  who  realize  the
emptiness of true existence, but the Mind-Only assert  that  some  phenomena
are truly existent.
- There are three types of propounders of Mind-Only:
      - hearers who are propounders of Mind-Only
      - solitary realizers who are propounders of Mind-Only, and
      - bodhisattvas who are propounders of Mind-Only.
- If you look at hearers who are propounders of Mind-Only,  their  principal
object of cultivation would be selflessness of persons.
-  Even  bodhisattvas  meditate  on  the  emptiness  of   apprehenders   and
apprehendeds being different substances on the  occasions  of  the  path  of
preparation, path of seeing, and path of meditation as they  are  the  paths
where there is a union of calm abiding and special  insight  observing  non-
duality.
- Although bodhisattvas pass through it having viewed them  by  knowing  and
seeing on the occasion of the path of  seeing,  they  are  not  diligent  in
mainly familiarizing with it on the occasion  of  the  path  of  meditation.
This realization is cultivated by the way.
- This will transform into the non-dual instantaneous  application  that  is
the uninterrupted path at the end of the continuum of a sentient being.
- The knower of bases that is included  within  this  realization  has  been
presented  only  in  terms  of  solitary  realizers,  the  support  of   the
presentation,  but  in  general  it  is  not  generated  only  in   solitary
realizers. It is also generated in bodhisattvas.
- Although solitary realizers observe the scriptural basket of  hearers  due
to the distinction in faculty,  they  realize  the  coarse  selflessness  of
phenomena.
- Solitary realizers’ paths are to be directly known by  bodhisattvas.  They
are not to be known in all ways by way of actualization.  Bodhisattvas  have
to directly know solitary realizers’ paths.
- Concerning solitary realizers’ paths: only to meditate on the  16  aspects
of the truths is negated because solitary realizers do not only meditate  on
the 16 aspects. They also meditate on non-duality.
- Non-possession of the definite apprehension is  negated  because  solitary
realizers also meditate on non-duality i.e.  the  definite  apprehension  of
solitary realizers only meditating on the  16  aspects  of  the  truths  not
being possessed because solitary realizers also meditate on non-duality.  So
the non-possession of the definite apprehension is negated.
- Solitary  realizers  do  not  abandon  conceptualizations  that  apprehend
consciousness as truly existent.
- They are supported on lineage, the dharmata  of  the  supported  qualities
included within the solitary realizer’s vehicle.
- That very exalted wisdom that directly realizes apprehendeds as not  being
established as external objects is called a solitary realizers’ path.
- The exalted wisdom (that  directly  realizes  that  apprehendeds  are  not
established as external objects) in the continuum of a solitary realizer  is
supported upon the dharmata of his six sources.  [Here,  supported  has  the
sense of being liked a backing support. It does not have the sense of  being
the support that is an object of observation.]
- That which is present in the continuum of a bodhisattva is supported  upon
his lineage abiding in the nature. The lineage belonging  to  the  continuum
of a bodhisattva should not be taken to be a solitary realizers’ lineage.
- The exalted wisdom in  the  continuum  of  a  solitary  realizer  and  the
dharmata of his six sources are related because  the  dharmata  of  the  six
sources is feasible. It is possible to realize  apprehendeds  as  not  being
established as external objects.
-  If that dharmata were not possible, it would not be possible  to  realize
apprehendeds as not being established as external objects.
- It is the same for bodhisattvas because the lineage abiding in the  nature
is feasible. It is possible for a bodhisattva to realize  that  apprehendeds
are not established as external objects.
- Explicit presentation - the exalted wisdoms of  the  four  levels  of  the
path of preparation that realize emptiness
- Implicit presentation - the four levels of the path  of  preparation  that
by means of a meaning-generality realize the emptiness of  apprehendeds  and
apprehenders being different substances are shown.

