Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/Personal notes/Personal notes- Serial Application.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:11.828742
================================================================================


Chapter 6: The Serial Application
The serial  application  that  is  cultivated  for  the  sake  of  attaining
stability
-SA is  explained  after  having  explained  PA  so  that  one  is  able  to
cultivates the aspects of the 3EKs progressively for the sake  of  attaining
stability in the aspects of the 3EKs.
-Attaining stability in  the  aspects  of  the  3EKs  means  that  when  one
cultivates a single aspect, one does not need to specifically cultivate  the
other aspects. One would engage in the  cultivation  of  the  other  aspects
without having to do so specifically.
-  Through  the  force  of  having  cultivated  the  aspects  of  the   3EKs
progressively, upon attaining the IA, when one cultivates the  aspects  upon
a single basis, then, without having to cultivate the aspects  with  respect
to other bases, one understands them. This is the power of  having  attained
stability  in  the  aspects  of  the  3EKS  through  the  force  of   having
progressively cultivated the aspects.
- The AICA exists on the Mahayana PoA. The SA also exists  on  the  Mahayana
PoA. This means that on the  Mahayana  PoA,  there  is  cultivation  of  the
aspects progressively and also cultivation of the aspects through  gathering
them together. Between attaining control over  and  attaining  stability  in
the aspects of 3EKs, attainment of stability  is  probably  more  difficult.
The attainment of stability and control depends on the  amount  of  training
that one does. As much as one can train in attaining stability and  control,
that much the mind becomes developed to attain these qualities.
- The first 3  chapters,  the  aspects  of  the  3EKs  have  been  explained
individually.
- That in the 4th chapter, which  is  the  chapter  on  the  1st  of  the  4
applications, these  aspects  have  been  explained  so  that  they  can  be
cultivated through gathering them together.

6.1         Those with generosity through to wisdom,
            Remembering the Buddha and so forth, and
            Phenomena, entitinesses lacking the thing,
            Are asserted to be the activities of the serial.
-There are 13 topics in this chapter on the SA which are:
(1-6) the 6 perfections
1. perfection of generosity
2. perfection of ethics
3. perfection of patience
4. perfection of joyous effort
5. perfection of concentration
6. perfection of wisdom
(7-12) the 6 recollections
7. recollection of the Buddha
8. recollection of the Dharma
9. recollection of the Sangha
10. recollection of ethics
11. recollection of giving
12. recollection of the gods
13. entitiness of non‐things
-#12 -recollection of the gods -referring  to  the  buddha  aryas,  such  as
Shakyamuni Buddha. What does it mean to recollect these gods?  It  means  to
recollect them as witnesses. When one recollects the gods as  witnesses,  it
means that one practices in an honest way. One does not have  the  slightest
deceitfulness in one’s practice; one practices in  a  very  sincere  manner.
One does not hold what other people say or  think  in  the  highest  regard.
Rather, one places the buddha aryas such as Shakyamuni Buddha  as  witnesses
to one’s practice.
- The perfection of generosity refers to the  practice  of  generosity,  and
the recollection of giving involves thinking about the benefits of giving.
- #13th entitiness of non-things is a wisdom realizing emptiness.
-All the above 12 topics  -the  perfection  of  generosity  through  to  the
recollection  of  the  gods-are  conjoined  with   this   wisdom   realizing
emptiness.
-In the 6 perfections, one should undertake cultivation by  means  of  being
conjoined with the conduct of the 6 perfections, for example,  when  one  is
practicing  the  perfection  of  generosity.  it  is  important  for  the  6
perfections to be present.
- If the practicing the perfection of generosity, it is not  conjoined  with
the 6 perfections in their entirety,  the  practice  of  the  perfection  of
generosity does not become perfect.  This  is  because,  if  the  discordant
classes are present, one will be tainted by many faulty states of mind  such
as pride, jealousy, miserliness, impatience, etc.
- By making sure that one’s practice is conjoined with the conduct of the  6
perfections  in  their  entirety,  one  becomes  free  from  the  faults  of
miserliness, immorality, impatience, laziness, distractedness,  and  corrupt
wisdom, and in that way one’s practice becomes perfect.
-Someone asks: In order to complete the ten grounds, does not one  need  the
ten perfections? Why is it that only the 6 perfections are stated here?
-Response: Because the last 4 perfections from among the 10 perfections  are
included within the perfection of wisdom, there is  no  fault.  It  is  said
that the 4 perfections:
(1) perfection of skillful means
(2) perfection of prayer
(3) perfection of power
(4) perfection of exalted wisdom
are included in the perfection of wisdom.
-How is perfection of skillful means included in the perfection  of  wisdom?
One example of skillful means is through relying on wisdom, one is  able  to
rejoice in others’ virtues, instead of becoming jealous.
-Being able to rejoice in  others’  virtues  is  actually  very  intelligent
behavior because through this slight action of  rejoicing,  which  does  not
require much hardship, one can accumulate very powerful merit.  The  ability
to do this depends on wisdom. It is said that  this  action  is  reliant  on
wisdom.
-Perfection of prayer does not mean simply  uttering  a  prayer.  Prayer  is
followed up by practice. For  prayer  that  is  followed  up  by  action  is
contingent on wisdom.
-Perfection of power-Power has  the  ability  to  not  be  overcome  by  its
discordant classes. This ability definitely depends on wisdom.
-Perfection of exalted wisdom. There are many kinds of  exalted  wisdom.  In
this context, the main exalted wisdom is the exalted wisdom of varieties  or
conventionalities.  This  is  not  a  wisdom  realizing  emptiness  but   it
definitely depends on wisdom.
-One perform recollection of the Buddha by means of the  causes.  The  three
types of causes are:
1. the close placements of mindfulness and  so  forth-  this  indicates  the
  partial concordance with definite discrimination
2. the cultivation of the aspects of the  branches  of  enlightenment  -this
  indicates the PoS
3. the 8 branches of aryas’ paths -this indicates the PoM
-The perfect way to recollect the Buddha is to recollect the  actual  causes
of attaining the state of a buddha.
One can think, “I want to attain the state of buddha, so I must  create  the
causes. What are its causes? They are the close placements  of  mindfulness,
the branches of enlightenment, and the 8 branches of aryas’ paths.”
-Recollection of the Dharma: One has to recall/remember:
(i) virtuous activities and engage in them
(ii) non-virtues and discard them
(iii) unspecified phenomena and leave them in equanimity.
-To engage in this recollection of the Dharma means  to  correctly  practice
the Dharma.
-Recollection  of  the  Sangha  means  that  one  cultivates  without  being
separated from recollection of the bodhisattva arya irreversible  sangha  as
assistants.
-Someone who is at the stage of the SA is able  to  practice  this  kind  of
recollection. For us, it is difficult to recognize who the bodhisattva  arya
irreversible sangha are. It is important for  us  to  recall  the  excellent
qualities of the bodhisattva arya irreversible sangha and  then  to  try  to
attain their qualities.
-Recollection of ethics means turning away from discordant classes.
-Recollection of giving  involves recollection of the benefits of giving.
-Recollection of  the  gods   involves  recollecting  the  buddha  aryas  as
witnesses.

Chapter 7: The Instantaneous Application
The instantaneous application that has attained stability
-IA is explained after having explained the SA because IA arises  after  the
SA.
-On the occasion of SA, one progressively  cultivates  the  aspects  of  the
3EKs. Because of having culminated that cultivation, one attains the IA.
-On the occasion of IA, when one actualizes one aspect, one engages  in  the
other aspects. This ability to actualize all the aspects takes place in  the
shortest instant of time in which an action can be completed.
-Many conditions need to be complete in order to attain an IA. One needs  to
perform this cultivation over many eons, gather the accumulations  of  merit
and wisdom, and undertake purification.
-From among the 3 countless great eons, the  period  of  the  1st  countless
great eon is the period of greatest hardship for a bodhisattva. For  someone
definite in the Mahayana lineage, the direct  realization  of  emptiness  is
attained on the PoS. On the PoA and PoP,  one  does  not  have  this  direct
realization, and as a result one does not have the ability to  suppress  the
afflictions in a very powerful manner. The bodhisattva experiences  hardship
during these two paths (PoA and PoP) as compared to the latter  2  countless
great eons.
-Compared to ordinary beings, bodhisattvas  are  more  skilled  in  handling
afflictions. Although the afflictions may  manifest  on  the  PoA  and  PoP,
because bodhisattva are skilled in their attitudes, the afflictions  do  not
bring about great suffering for them. Ordinary  beings,  due  to  not  being
skilled in handling the afflictions, experience  great  suffering  when  the
afflictions manifest.
- There are 4 types of IA:
   i. Non-ripened instantaneous application
  ii. Ripened instantaneous application
 iii. Characterless instantaneous application
  iv. Non-dual instantaneous application
-These four are one entity but are differentiated by different isolates.

Non-ripened instantaneous application
-The 1st of the 4 instants is  the  manifest  complete  enlightenment  of  a
single instant with the characteristic  of  actualizing  all  uncontaminated
qualities that are non-ripened  (since  they  have  been  accomplished  with
exertion on the 7th ground and below) in a single instant.
-The qualities accomplished with exertion on the 7th ground  and  below  are
the objects of this 1st type of IA.
-“on the 7th ground and below” does not refer to the non-ripened IA.  It  is
a description of its objects.
- “Non-ripened” is a reference  to  qualities  that  are  accomplished  with
exertion on the 7th ground and below
- “ripened” refers to qualities that are accomplished without exertion.
- It is said that on the 7th ground and below, a bodhisattva  needs  to  put
in coarse exertion, whereas on the 8th through the 10th ground, there is  no
need for coarse exertion.
- This IA is a single-pointed realization of emptiness at  the  end  of  the
continuum of a sentient being. It is  an  uninterrupted  path  that  single-
pointedly realizes emptiness.
-Definition of a non-ripened IA: A  bodhisattva’s  yoga  that  serves  as  a
direct antidote to the knowledge obscurations by means  of  being  conjoined
with wisdom  such  that  when  one  uncontaminated  non-ripened  quality  is
actualized, those concordant in type with it  are  also  actualized  in  the
shortest instant in which an action is completed.
      7.1   Because all uncontaminated qualities are
            Included within each of generosity and so forth,
            This realization of a subduer
            In a single instant is to be understood.
-This realization conjoined with a wisdom in which the  uncontaminated  non-
ripened paths are actualized in a single  instant  in  the  continuum  of  a
subduer abiding on the uninterrupted path at the end of the continuum is  to
be understood as the first IA.
- The conventional bodhicitta in the continuum of a bodhisattva  abiding  on
the uninterrupted path at the end of the continuum does not act as a  direct
antidote to the knowledge obscurations.
-The realization of the subduer bodhisattva  abiding  on  the  uninterrupted
path at the end of the continuum should be known as “the  manifest  complete
enlightenment in a single instant” because it is not exhausted only  in  one
being included within many, rather, it is a final application in which  that
very exalted wisdom at the  end  of  the  continuum  (cultivating  a  single
instant that observes  the  exalted  wisdom  of  generosity  and  so  forth)
cultivates by way of including generosity and so forth, through  to  the  80
excellent exemplifications.
- At the time of cultivating one instant of uncontaminated  exalted  wisdom,
one is able to cultivate all uncontaminated paths.
-As in the definition of a non-ripened instantaneous application,  when  one
uncontaminated non-ripened quality is actualized, those concordant  in  type
with it are actualized.
- One is able to actualize the concordant uncontaminated  qualities  because
at the time of the uninterrupted path, one is able to do that due to:
(i) the conducive conditions for cultivating in that way being complete
(ii)  one  is  separated  from  adverse  conditions,  i.e.  the  errors   of
definitely apprehending  things  that  are  the  two  truths  as  individual
entities
- The text is saying that at the time of  the  uninterrupted  path,  one  is
separated  from  these  minds  apprehending  the  two  truths  as  different
entities, but in fact, at this point, one has not abandoned these  kinds  of
minds. One has not exhausted them but they are not present.
- The reason for being able to extinguish the stains that apprehend the  two
truths as different entities is because it  occurs  in  the  system  of  the
great trailblazer Acarya Aryadeva:
(i) since the two truths are one entity, the stains that apprehend  the  two
truths as different entities can be abandoned.
(ii) in the perspective of the seer that is an arya’s meditative  equipoise,
the dharmata of all things appear as only one aspect; they do not appear  as
dissimilar
-Whichever  person  directly  sees  the  thusness  of  one  thing  sees  the
thusness, the dharmata, of all things - this must be applied to one  person:
when one person directly sees the  emptiness  of  one  object,  this  person
directly sees the emptiness of all objects.
-A bodhisattva at the end of the continuum  of  a  sentient  being  directly
sees all phenomena. What does the bodhisattva not  directly  realize?  These
minds that directly realize all phenomena need not be manifest. If  you  say
such a bodhisattva does not realize conventional  truths,  it  follows  that
such a bodhisattva does not  know  the  alphabet  which  is  a  conventional
truth! The trick is that you have to say  “with  a  single  mind”—that  very
mind directly realizing emptiness does  not  directly  realize  conventional
truths, but the bodhisattva does realize conventional  truths.  The  ability
to realize conventional truths and ultimate truths directly  with  a  single
mind is a unique quality of buddhas.
7.2         Like all are set in motion together
            When the apparatus of a watermill
            Is propelled by a being with a single stride,
            Likewise it knows in a single instant.
-The exalted wisdom at the  end  of  the  continuum  is  able  to  know  all
uncontaminated exalted wisdoms in a single instant,  because,  like  in  the
analogy of a watermill, when this watermill is propelled by someone  with  a
single stride, the entire watermill turns.
-Likewise, through the accumulation of many  conditions,  the  uninterrupted
path at the end of the continuum is such that when a  single  uncontaminated
wisdom is observed in a single instant, all those  concordant  in  type  are
actualized.
- The various conditions that cause this ability:
      -the projection of prayers made in the past
      -the force of dharmadhatu in which all phenomena are  the  same  taste
in the nature of thusness.
-When this uninterrupted path at the  end  of  the  continuum  observes  one
phenomenon (i.e. an uncontaminated  non-ripened  quality),  then  the  other
uncontaminated non-ripened qualities  are  also  actualized  in  this  short
instant of time. [i.e. when one object of observation  is  actualized,  then
the  rest  are  also  actualized.  (Strictly  speaking,  it  is  the  wisdom
conjoined with the uninterrupted  path  that  actualizes  these  objects  of
observation: the uncontaminated non-ripened qualities.]
-When the uninterrupted path at  the  end  of  the  continuum  observes  the
emptiness of one uncontaminated  non-ripened  quality,  the  emptinesses  of
other uncontaminated non-ripened qualities are actualized.  [i.e.  when  one
actualizes the emptiness of one object, the emptinesses of all  objects  are
actualized.]
-When we say the uninterrupted path observes an object, this does  not  mean
that the uninterrupted path realizes the object. This uninterrupted path  is
said to observe that object and realize its emptiness.
-In the definition: this bodhisattva's yoga that is conjoined with a  wisdom
such that when one  uncontaminated  ripened  quality  is  actualized,  those
concordant in type with it are also actualized in the  shortest  instant  in
which an action is  completed.  This  uninterrupted  path  itself  does  not
actualize but it is conjoined with a wisdom such that if and when  a  branch
of enlightenment is actualized, those concordant in type are actualized.
- In that very instant, when you realize the emptiness  of  one  phenomenon,
you realize the emptiness of all phenomena.
- In the next instant after  the  instantaneous  application,  one  directly
realizes the two truths with a single consciousness.

7.2  RIPENED INSTANTANEOUS APPLICATION
- Having indicated the first of the manifest complete  enlightenments  in  a
single instant, the second will be indicated; this is the ripened IA.
7.3           At the time when the state of ripened qualities,
            The perfection of wisdom,
            The nature of all wholesome qualities, is produced,
            Exalted wisdom in a single instant.
-The uninterrupted path at the end of the continuum, at the  time  when  the
exalted wisdom at the end of the  continuum,  the  state  of  uncontaminated
ripened qualities that have been attained without exertion,  the  perfection
of wisdom, the nature of all wholesome qualities  (since  it  is  free  from
stains), is produced is the manifest complete enlightenment with respect  to
all  uncontaminated  qualities  in  a  single  instant,  because  it  is   a
bodhisattva’s final exalted wisdom.
-Comparing non-ripened IA with the ripened IA:
    -the non-ripened  IA  is  involved  with  non-ripened  qualities.  These
qualities are accomplished with coarse exertion.
   - the ripened IA, the qualities involved  are  ripened  qualities.  These
qualities  are  attained  without  exertion,  or  having   pacified   coarse
exertion.
- For ripened IA the uninterrupted path being conjoined with a  wisdom  such
that,  when  one  ripened  uncontaminated  quality  is   actualized,   those
concordant in type are also actualized in the shortest instant.
-This uninterrupted path is conjoined with such a wisdom.  It  is  not  that
the uninterrupted path itself  actualizes  one  ripened  quality,  and  then
those concordant in type are also actualized in the shortest  instant.  This
point also applies to the non-ripened IA.
-This uninterrupted path at the end of the  continuum  lasts  a  very  short
period of time: the shortest instant in which an action is completed.  Right
after this, a bodhisattva attains buddhahood.
- The exalted wisdom that is the  uninterrupted  path  at  the  end  of  the
continuum conjoined with a wisdom  realizing  the  uncontaminated  qualities
that are the states of the ripened (since they have  been  attained  without
exertion) in just a single instant. At that time when the exalted wisdom  at
the end of the  continuum  is  produced  is  the  second  manifest  complete
enlightenment in a single instant, the perfection of wisdom, because  it  is
a  final  application  conjoined   with   a   wisdom   that   realizes   the
uncontaminated ripened exalted wisdoms in a single instant.
- That uninterrupted path at the end of the continuum is able  to  do  that,
because it is able to do that since it is free from all  stains  -  that  is
the state of ripened qualities of the completely pure class,  the  antidote,
by way of having separated from all discordant  classes  that  are  the  two
obscurations through the bodhisattvas cultivating the antidote,  the  wisdom
realizing  selflessness  (is  the  wisdom  realizing  the  selflessness   of
phenomena), for three  countless  eons-  is  produced,  like,  for  example,
autumn moonlight that is free from obscurers such as dust, smoke, mist,  and
so forth.
- “Having separated from all discordant classes” mean  that  all  discordant
classes that are the two obscurations are absent, but it is  not  that  they
have been abandoned. The obscurations are not present,  but  they  have  not
been abandoned.
“the example of autumn moonlight” -in the evening, if the sky is  cloudy  or
dusty, one is not able to see the moonlight clearly.  If  it  is  free  from
those “obscurers,” the moonlight can be seen clearly. Likewise,  because  of
the obscurations being absent, the exalted wisdom is able to see clearly.
- The lineage abiding in the nature is defined as: the dharmata of the  mind
that is together with stains, its support, that  is  suitable  to  transform
into the nature body.
- The boundaries of the lineage abiding in the nature are  from  not  having
entered a path through to the end of the continuum of a sentient being.
- For a bodhisattva at the end of the continuum,  is  the  dharmata  of  the
mind of this  bodhisattva  the  lineage  abiding  in  the  nature?  Is  this
bodhisattva’s mind together with stains?
-In the continuum of someone at the end  of  the  continuum,  there  are  no
stains. Even though the obscurations have not been abandoned, they  are  not
present. If that is the case,  the  mind  of  someone  at  the  end  of  the
continuum is not a mind with stains i.e. the dharmata of this  mind  is  not
the lineage abiding in the nature. As soon as the uninterrupted path at  the
end of the continuum is generated, the stains are  not  present;  they  have
been kicked out!
- The mind has this factor of being clear and knowing. This factor is not  a
stain, and it continues  to  exist  even  after  attaining  buddhahood.  The
stains that are the conceptions of true existence, the  conceptions  of  the
self, etc., are abandoned when one attains buddhahood.
- In this uninterrupted path at the end  of  the  continuum,  there  are  no
stains. This mind does not  have  stains,  but  it  has  not  abandoned  the
stains. The stains are being abandoned; they have not been abandoned.
- The fact that it has not abandoned the stains is a fault,  so  the  faults
have not  been  exhausted.  Precisely  because  the  faults  have  not  been
exhausted, one is not a buddha. As soon as they  are  exhausted,  one  is  a
buddha.

7.3 CHARACTERLESS INSTANTANEOUS APPLICATION
In that way, having shown the  second,  the  third,  the  manifest  complete
enlightenment in a single instant with the characteristic of  all  phenomena
in a single instant as without characteristics.
    7.4    Through abiding on all phenomena as being like dreams,
             By means of the conduct of generosity and so forth,
             It realizes, in a single instant,
             That phenomena lack characteristics.
- The uninterrupted path at the end of the continuum  is  the  characterless
IA, because it is a final application that directly realizes,  in  a  single
instant, that phenomena of the thoroughly  afflicted  class  and  completely
pure class lack characteristics ultimately. It  is  able  to  realize  that,
because it is a final application that, through abiding on  the  realization
of all phenomena as being like dreams, by means of the conduct  of  the  six
perfections, generosity and so forth, has familiarized  with  that.[“through
abiding  on”  means  this  uninterrupted   path   is   supported   on   this
realization.]
-Definition: A bodhisattva’s yoga that serves as a direct  antidote  to  the
knowledge obscurations by means of being conjoined with the wisdom  directly
realizing emptiness.
-The characterless IA is an uninterrupted path  conjoined  with  the  wisdom
directly realizing emptiness. This does  not  mean  that  the  uninterrupted
path itself does not directly realize emptiness; in fact, the  uninterrupted
path does realize emptiness.
- The 3rd manifest complete enlightenment in a single instant, since  it  is
a  final  application  bearing  the  aspect  of  definitely  realizing   the
entitinesses of  generosity  and  so  forth  that,  through  just  a  single
instant, knows  “All  phenomena  are  without  characteristics  ultimately,”
thoroughly afflicted and the completely  pure  phenomena  are  just  without
characteristics ultimately.
- The 10th ground bodhisattva at the end of the continuum is  able  to  know
that, because:
(i) abiding through realizing in that way  with  respect  to  all  phenomena
with the entitiness of dreams, the  appropriated  aggregates  and  so  forth
that appear but lack nature, and
(ii) abiding through achieving the 6 perfections, generosity and so forth
he has familiarized with them for 3 countless eons.
- That follows, because, by previous familiarization with all  phenomena  as
being like dreams on the 9th ground and below, having  experienced  the  two
accumulations, he is preceded by having attained and familiarized  with  the
state of realization.
- The uninterrupted path at  the  end  of  the  continuum  has  the  ability
described because of having familiarized with the state  of  realization  in
the past.
- On the 10th ground, there is also familiarization that contributes to  the
ability at the end of the continuum.
-The expression in the text, “the 9th ground and  below”  does  not  include
the part of the 10th ground before the end of the continuum.  However  there
is  also  familiarization  taking  place  there  that  contributes  to   the
wonderful abilities at the end of the continuum.
Q&A: From the conception of true existence, the  conception  of  a  self  of
persons arises, and from the conception of a self of  persons,  afflictions;
attachment, anger, etc. arise. As soon as one  abandons  the  conception  of
self, the afflictions have been abandoned. There is no need to  abandon  the
conception of true existence. These are the tenets of the Autonomy school.
-  When  the  knowledge  obscurations  are  abandoned,  simultaneously   the
afflictive obscurations are abandoned.
-  Even  non-manifest  conceptions  of  true  existence   leave   latencies.
Different kinds  of  latencies  are  left  on  our  continua:  we  can  have
virtuous,  non-virtuous,  and  unspecified  latencies  (neutral  latencies).
Likewise, there are 3 types of feelings—happy, suffering,  and  unspecified.
In a state of the absence of happy and suffering  feelings,  we  should  not
conclude that there are no feelings, because there can  be  unspecified,  or
neutral feelings.

Topic 7.4   NON-DUAL INSTANTANEOUS APPLICATION
In that way, having indicated the third, the fourth, the  manifest  complete
enlightenment with the characteristic of all phenomena in a  single  instant
as the characteristic of non-duality:
    7.5          Like not seeing a dream and that which sees it
             In a manner of duality,
             It sees in a single instant
             The thusness that is the non-duality of phenomena.
- The uninterrupted path at the end of the  continuum  is  the  non-dual  IA
because it is a final yoga conjoined with a wisdom that  sees  in  a  single
instant the thusness  that  is  the  non-duality,  the  emptiness  of  being
different substances, of phenomena that are apprehendeds  and  apprehenders,
for example, like not seeing the mountains, houses, and so forth of a  dream
and the consciousnesses that see them in a manner of different substances.
- As long as we have the single-pointed meditative equipoise of  a  sentient
being that observes emptiness,  this  meditative  equipoise  cannot  observe
conventionalities. It cannot  observe  the  emptiness  of  apprehendeds  and
apprehenders being different substances.
- The 4th manifest complete enlightenment in a single  instant,  because  it
is a final application that is conjoined with the wisdom directly  realizing
in  just  a  single  instant,  “All  phenomena  that  are  apprehendeds  and
apprehenders are also of such a nature of being  empty  of  being  different
substances,”  the  suchness  of  phenomena,  the  lack  of  duality  between
apprehendeds and apprehenders.
- The bodhisattva who abides at the end of the continuum is able to  realize
that,  because  he  has  uprooted  the  latencies  of  mistakes   in   which
apprehendeds and apprehenders appear dualistically.
- Because it is a final  application  through  having  readily  familiarized
with uninterruptedly abandoning the mistakes of dualistic appearances for  a
long time, for example, like not seeing
(i) the mountains, houses, and so forth of dreams as other objects that  are
apprehendeds and
(ii) the seeing of dreams as apprehenders that are different substances,  in
a manner of apprehendeds and apprehenders that are different substances.
- In YAMWS, the existence of external objects is  refuted.  This  refutation
takes  place  in  the  context  of  the  emptiness   of   apprehendeds   and
apprehenders being different substances, and  the  “apprehenders”  here  are
sense consciousnesses.
-In  YAMWS,  this  refutation  does  not  take  place  in  the  context   of
apprehenders that are conceptions.
- YAMWS refute external objects in the  context  of  apprehenders  that  are
sense consciousnesses. They say that  there  are  no  forms  that  exist  as
external objects, or as different substances from their  apprehenders.  Such
an assertion is also shared by the MOS..
-Despite this agreement between YAMWS and MOS, not  every  aspect  of  their
assertions is the same.
      -In MOS, form is refuted to exist by way of its own character  as  the
basis for the designation/imputation “form”
      -In YAMWS form does exist by way of its own  character  as  the  basis
for receiving the imputation “form.”
-In YAMWS, form does exist by way of its own character as the basis for  the
conception apprehending form. Likewise, form also exists by way of  its  own
character as the basis for engaging the expression “form.”
-In MOS, form does not exist by way of its own character as  the  basis  for
the conception apprehending form, and does not  exist  by  way  of  its  own
character as the basis for engaging the expression “form.”
-According to MOS, form’s existing by way of its own character as the  basis
for engaging the term “form” is an imputational factor.
-Being an imputational  factor,  it  does  not  exist  by  way  of  its  own
character. An imputational factor is merely imputed by conception  and  does
not exist from its  own  side.  If  something  exists  by  way  of  its  own
character, it cannot be an  imputational  factor.  If  something  is  merely
imputed by conception, it does not exist  from  its  own  side,  or  is  not
established from its own side.
-According to AMWS, if it is an established base, it is  pervaded  by  being
established from its own side  and  pervaded  by  being  merely  imputed  by
conception. When AMWS say that an established  base  is  necessarily  merely
imputed by conception, the word “merely” does not eliminate  existence  from
its own side; rather, it eliminates true existence.
- In MOS, in  the  expression  “merely  imputed  by  conception,”  the  word
“merely” eliminates existence from its own side
- In CMWS, it also eliminates existence from its own side. In this  respect,
their assertions are similar, but there are still big  differences,  because
in MOS, if it is an established base, it is not  pervaded  by  being  merely
imputed by conception; for example,  other-powered  natures  and  thoroughly
established natures  exist,  but  are  not  merely  imputed  by  conception,
because they are truly existent.  In  other  words,  in  MOS,  if  something
exists, it does not necessarily exist from its own side.
-In contrast, the CMWS says that  if  it  is  an  established  base,  it  is
pervaded by being merely imputed by conception, because it  is  pervaded  by
being empty of existence from its own side.
Q&A: Why is the emptiness of apprehendeds and apprehenders  being  different
substances a conventionality? The subtle selflessness  of  persons  and  the
emptiness of duality are conventional truths. When we  use  this  expression
“ultimate truth,” it refers to emptiness  of  true  existence.  Just  saying
“the emptiness of something” does not mean  it  is  the  emptiness  that  we
speak of in this context. The emptiness  of  water  in  my  cup  is  not  an
ultimate truth. Although the word “emptiness” is  there,  the  emptiness  of
water in my cup is not an emptiness in this context.
Q&A: Why is it that in YAMWS, external objects are refuted  and  yet  it  is
asserted that form exists by way of its  own  character  as  the  basis  for
engaging the term “form”?
The doubt is: how can form not be established as an external object and  yet
be established from its own side as the  basis  for  imputation.  In  YAMWS,
there is no form that does not rely on inner consciousness. Since  there  is
no such form, form does not exist as an external object. At the  same  time,
YAMWS says that form exists by way of its own character  as  the  basis  for
engaging the term “form,” because if it were not like that,  then  the  term
“form” would not apply exactly in the correct  way  to  form.  Therefore  it
must exist from its own side as the basis for engaging the term “form.”
Q&A: In chapter 7,  there  are  four  types  of  applications:  non-ripened,
ripened, characterless, and non-dual IA. How do these four IA relate to  the
bodhisattva; are there four different types of persons who  cultivate  these
four applications?
It is possible for a person to have all four applications in his  continuum.
We say that in a single uninterrupted path at the end of the continuum,  all
four applications are  complete.  A  bodhisattva,  no  matter  how  dull  in
faculty, is pervaded by having attained a sign  of  irreversibility  on  the
eighth ground. This means that a bodhisattva at the end of the continuum  of
a  sentient  being  is  irreversible  from  enlightenment,  upon   attaining
enlightenment, there is no way to reverse from enlightenment and become non-
enlightened.
-The non-ripened qualities that are  accomplished  on  the  7th  ground  and
below do not exist in the continuum  of  a  bodhisattva  at  the  end  of  a
sentient being’s continuum. An example is any  uncontaminated  quality  that
is generated with coarse exertion in the continuum of this bodhisattva.
- In the definition of a non-ripened instantaneous  application:  “when  one
uncontaminated non-ripened quality is actualized, those concordant  in  type
with it are also actualized in the shortest instant in which  an  action  is
completed.” When we go through such descriptions, we are not saying that  an
uncontaminated non-ripened quality is actualized, it is about  the  capacity
to do so. When this happens, then those concordant in type with it are  also
actualized in the shortest instant in which  an  action  is  completed.  The
meaning of “actualize” is to take as its object. When a certain  quality  is
actualized, then this quality is taken as the object by the wisdom.

Chapter 8: The Truth Body
-The reason for explaining the truth body after having explained IA  because
in the instant after the IA, the truth body  arises.  The  truth  body  here
should be understood as the resultant truth  body.  There  are  4  types  of
resultant truth body:
1. Nature body
2. Complete enjoyment body
3. Emanation body
4. Exalted wisdom truth body
-There are two types of nature body:
1. the nature body that is a factor of purity with respect  to  adventitious
stains
2. the nature body that is a factor  of  purity  with  respect  to  inherent
existence.
- The nature body that is a factor of purity with  respect  to  adventitious
stains is a true cessation. It is a factor  of  having  separated  from  the
adventitious stains.
- The nature body that is a  factor  of  purity  with  respect  to  inherent
existence refers to the dharmata with respect to the  exalted  wisdom  truth
body.
-The dharmata of the exalted wisdom truth body is  basically  the  emptiness
of true existence. This  purity  with  respect  to  inherent  existence  has
existed since beginningless time. Although there  is  purity  from  inherent
existence since beginningless time, this purity is obscured by  adventitious
stains as long as one has not attained buddhahood. Therefore  we  only  talk
about the nature body that is a factor of purity with  respect  to  inherent
existence when one attains buddhahood. Before one  attains  buddhahood,  one
is obscured by adventitious stains. Upon attaining buddhahood,  one  becomes
separated from these obscurations  of  adventitious  stains.  Therefore  the
purity with respect to inherent existence becomes the nature body that is  a
factor of purity with respect to inherent existence.
- The exalted wisdom truth body is the omniscient mind.
- The complete enjoyment  body  is  a  final  form  body  possessing  the  5
certainties:
1. Certainty of time
2. Certainty of retinue
3. Certainty of body
4. Certainty of Dharma in that it teaches only Mahayana Dharma
5. Certainty of abode (which is Akanishta).
- Does this Akanishta refer to the Akanishta that is one of  the  17  levels
of the form realm?
It is included in the form realm, but it is not the Akanishta  that  is  one
of the 17 levels of the form realm. Their relationship between these  is  of
being like a town and a monastery in the countryside. The Akanishta that  is
one of the 17 levels is like the town, and the Akanishta of this context  is
like a monastery in the countryside. Inhabitants of the  Akanishta  in  this
context are form realm gods. In fact, they are  bodhisattva  aryas  who  are
form realm gods.
- There are 3 emanation bodies:
1. Supreme emanation body
2 Artisan emanation body
3. Birth emanation body
-An example of a birth emanation body is the birth  emanation  body  in  the
form of a god in Tushita pure land. Before Shakyamuni  Buddha  came  to  the
Southern Continent, he was in Tushita pure land. That emanation in the  form
of a god is an example of a birth emanation body. If the Buddha  emanates  a
bug, a dog, etc., they would be birth emanation bodies.
- An example of an artisan emanation body is the emanation  as  a  celestial
musician in  order  to  subdue  the  pride  of  the  king  of  Smell-eaters.
Shakyamuni Buddha emanated as a musician playing the lute. This king of  the
Smell-eaters was  the  last  disciple  of  the  supreme  emanation  body  of
Shakyamuni Buddha before his passing into paranirvana. This  king  was  very
proud of his ability to play the lute, and the Buddha displayed  an  artisan
emanation body of a musician who was able to play as well as the  king.  The
king had thought, “Nobody on this continent can play as well as  me.”  Then,
when he heard the musician play as well as him, he called  the  musician  to
play for him. The musician removed one of the strings of his  lute,  and  he
was still able to play just as well as before.  He  removed  another  string
and was still able to play beautiful  music,  and  he  continued  to  remove
strings until there were no strings left, but he  was  still  able  to  play
beautiful music even without any strings. As a result of this, the  king  of
the Smell-eaters became his disciple.

Demarcation in the time of accomplishing the result
- At the time of the uninterrupted path at the end of the continuity of  the
10 grounds, dualistic appearances have vanished: there is not the  slightest
appearance of apprehendeds and apprehenders as different  substances,  there
is not the slightest appearance of true existence,  and  there  is  not  the
slightest  appearance  of   conventionalities.   Because   of   not   having
exhaustively  abandoned  the  stains  that  apprehend  the  two  truths   as
different entities, in the perspective of the seer that is  this  meditative
equipoise, there is not the slightest appearance of conventionalities.
- However, at that time, it abides in the nature of having attained all  the
classes of clear  realizations  that  are  the  21  sets  of  uncontaminated
exalted wisdom without exception.
- Then in the very next instant when the liberated path is produced, due  to
dualistic appearances having vanished with respect to objects  of  knowledge
that are modes, in the perspective of the seer that is that liberated  path,
which has become like water placed in water, all the  objects  of  knowledge
that are varieties (conventional truth) are directly seen  like  an  amalaki
fruit placed on the palm of the hand.
-  Simultaneously,  the  knowledge  obscurations  have   been   exhaustively
abandoned, the perfect end has been actualized,  the  truth  body  has  been
actualized, and one has attained  manifest  complete  enlightenment  in  all
ways  with  respect  to  all  phenomena.  The  four   exalted   bodies   are
simultaneously attained at this time.
 - At the time  of  attaining  the  truth  body,  one  achieves  a  complete
enjoyment body, which possesses  the  5  characteristics,  the  5  excellent
qualities, and the 5 certainties. This complete enjoyment body  is  supposed
to be of a later similar type of that very  exalted  body  that  is  adorned
with the signs and exemplifications when one is abiding at the  end  of  the
continuity of the 10 grounds. These are like a similitude  of  the  buddha’s
signs and exemplifications.
- The 5 characteristics are:
1. The characteristic of being uncompounded, in being free from production
   and disintegration
2. The characteristic of abandonments and realizations
3. The characteristic of having abandoned superimpositions and deprecations
4. The characteristic of having separated from the three kinds of
   obscurations: afflictive obscurations, knowledge obscurations, and
   obscurations to absorptions
5. The characteristic of being clear light by nature
- The 5 excellent qualities are:
   1. The excellent quality of being inestimable, i.e. very vast or
      extensive
   2. The excellent quality of transcending enumeration, i.e. the excellent
      qualities are so many, they cannot be counted
   3. The excellent quality of not being objects that can be utilized as
      they are by the dialecticians
   4. The excellent quality of being unparalleled, i.e. being unrivaled,
      unequaled, unsurpassable, and highest
   5. The excellent quality of final purity from stains
-Through the enjoyment body acting as an empowering condition, one  achieves
a supreme emanation body that takes care of trainees  by  means  of  the  12
deeds. Although the emanation body and the supreme  emanation  body  do  not
exist  as  a  composite,  understand  that  some  instances  of  a  buddha’s
emanation  body  are  attained  in  a  manner  of   having   established   a
relationship with the enjoyment body in dependence on a single set  that  is
a composite of direct causes. This  means  that  an  enjoyment  body  and  a
supreme emanation body are produced by the same set of causes. This  enables
us to posit that the  4  exalted  bodies;  the  nature  body,  the  complete
enjoyment body, the emanation body, and the exalted wisdom  truth  body  are
attained simultaneously.
- At that time, the supreme  emanation  body  has  not  yet  been  attained,
because the supreme emanation body arises  through  the  complete  enjoyment
body acting as an empowering condition.
- It is said that the four exalted bodies are actualized at the same time.
- The complete enjoyment  body  attains  enlightenment  on  the  support  of
Akanishta.
- In the presence of the bodhisattva aryas, the complete enjoyment  body  is
attained in Akanishta. To these bodhisattva  aryas,  there  is  no  need  to
display an emanation body. So emanation body in  the  desire  realm.  It  is
said  that  the  emanator  attains  enlightenment  in  Akanishta,  and   the
emanation attains enlightenment in the desire realm.
- Since it is said that 4 bodies  are  attained  simultaneously,  the  birth
emanation body is one of the  3  divisions  of  the  emanation  body  arises
simultaneously with the complete enjoyment body?
Identifying the entity of the three exalted bodies
-The dharmata that is the purity with  respect  to  inherent  existence  has
been existing since beginningless time, but the  nature  body  that  is  the
factor of purity with respect to inherent  existence  comes  into  existence
only when one attains buddhahood.
- Someone says: Since purity  exists  since  beginningless  time,  then  the
nature body that is the factor of purity should  exist  since  beginningless
times.
- This nature body that is the factor of purity  with  respect  to  inherent
existence is actually the mode of abidance  of  the  mind.  When  one  is  a
sentient being, this purity of inherent existence, this mode of abidance  of
the mind, is obscured by stains. At that time, the mode of abidance  of  the
mind is not known as the nature  body,  but  when  one  has  eliminated  the
stains and attained buddhahood, the mode of abidance of the  mind  is  known
as the nature body that is a factor  of  purity  with  respect  to  inherent
existence.
- The stains that are obscuring the mode of abidance of  the  mind  (or  the
dharmata of  the  mind)  are  suitable  to  be  removed.  These  stains  are
adventitious. Due to the existence of a powerful  antidote  eventually  they
will be removed.
- The dharmata of the mind is  therefore  suitable  to  transform  into  the
buddha’s exalted body. In fact, it is suitable to transform into the  nature
body. This nature body comes into existence  when  one  attains  buddhahood.
Prior to attaining buddhahood, one does not have a nature body.
- Someone says: “Since this nature body possessing the two  purities  arises
only at the time of buddhahood, and  does  not  exist  in  the  continua  of
sentient beings since beginningless time, therefore it must be permanent.”
- Our system: This nature body arises when one attains  buddhahood,  however
the dharmata of the mind has been existing since beginningless time.
- The substances that constitute this microphone can be said to exist  since
beginningless time. However, the form of  this  microphone,  the  substances
having this particular construction,  came  into  existence  only  when  the
microphone  was  constructed.  Therefore,  the  actual  microphone   is   an
occasional phenomenon i.e.it has  existed  only  for  a  certain  number  of
years.
- This microphone did not exist  since  beginningless  time.  Therefore  the
dharmata of this microphone came into existence  when  the  microphone  came
into existence. This dharmata is permanent, but it has  not  been  existence
from beginningless time. The dharmata of the  microphone  is  an  occasional
phenomenon that came into existence  only  when  the  microphone  came  into
existence.
- You need to differentiate between the object and the substances that  make
up the object. Although the substances that  make  up  the  microphone  have
been existing from beginningless  time,  the  microphone  itself  came  into
existence only much later.
-In tantra, the 21 sets of uncontaminated exalted wisdom are posited as  the
exalted wisdom truth body, the fourth exalted body.  Haribhadra  categorized
this exalted wisdom truth body as the 4th exalted  body,  but  he  does  not
assert that is not subsumed under the 3 exalted bodies. Haribhadra  did  not
incur the fault of denying that the exalted wisdom truth  body  is  subsumed
under the 3 exalted bodies. He explained the exalted wisdom  truth  body  as
the 4th exalted body merely as a way of categorization.
-The 3 exalted bodies are: the nature body,  the  complete  enjoyment  body,
and the emanation body.
- If it is an enjoyment body, it has to be a person, a buddha arya.
- The supreme emanation body is the body that  appears  to  ordinary  beings
with pure karma, and it is the body that  displays  the  12  deeds  to  such
beings.
Eliminating wrong conceptions regarding that
- Asserting that the nature body of  a  buddha  is  not  a  fully  qualified
buddha  is  a  negativity  greater  than  other  negativities   because   it
deprecates the exalted body possessing the two purities.
- If that were the case, it follows  that  it  would  not  even  be  a  mere
excellent quality, because it would neither be  a  final  excellent  quality
nor a temporal excellent quality that is not that.
-If you say  that,  that  it  is  not  a  final  excellent  quality  is  not
established, then your position that it is not a buddha would degenerate.
-If you accept that it is not even a mere excellent  quality,  it  would  be
neither an excellent quality of final abandonment nor an  excellent  quality
of final realization.
-Two types of excellent quality:
    - the excellent quality of final abandonment
    - the excellent quality of final realization.
- Buddhas are always in meditative equipoise on thusness. Within  the  state
of meditative equipoise on thusness, the buddhas are able  to  see  the  two
truths simultaneously, so definitely the buddhas directly  see  conventional
truths even while in meditative equipoise.
- The presentation of the form bodies is made  through  taking  the  exalted
wisdom of a buddha as the basis of designation. The form bodies of a  buddha
are not made of particles that are included in  matter.  They  are  not  the
ordinary bodies that we know. It is said that on the  buddha  ground,  there
are no subtle particles that are included in matter, All  are  solely  self-
appearances of the buddha’s exalted wisdom.
The four exalted bodies that are attained simultaneously.
   1. Nature body
   2. Exalted wisdom truth body
   3. Complete enjoyment body
   4. Supreme emanation body

Topic 8.1 NATURE BODY
8.1         The nature body of the Subduer
            Has attained the uncontaminated qualities,
            Is pure in all ways, and
            Bears the characteristics of the nature of those.
-The nature body of the Subduer is distinguished by three attributes:
 1. the attribute of possession: it is an exalted body that has attained the
    21 sets of uncontaminated qualities, the close placements of mindfulness
    and so forth
 2. the attribute of separation: possesses the two purity  in  all  ways  in
    being free from the two obscurations along with their latencies
 3. the attribute of entity. purity in bearing the characteristics of  being
    empty of true existence, the  nature  of  those  uncontaminated  exalted
    wisdoms
Definition of a nature body: a final sphere possessing the two purities.
There are two types of nature body:
   i) a nature body that is a factor of  purity  with  respect  to  inherent
      existence [or inherent stains]
  ii) a nature body that is a factor of purity with respect to  adventitious
      stains
-When we talk about the nature body that is a factor of purity with  respect
to inherent existence in this system, this refers to a nature body  that  is
a factor of purity with respect to true existence; in  other  words,  purity
with respect to its nature being free from true existence.
- Attribute of possession, there  are  21  sets  of  uncontaminated  exalted
wisdom. These include the 37 harmonies with enlightenment. The 37  harmonies
with enlightenment generally do not have to  be  supramundane,  but  the  37
harmonies  with  enlightenment   included   in   the   buddha   ground   are
supramundane.---Attribute of separation: The  obscurations  suitable  to  be
utterly extinguished by antidotes because the stains are adventitious.
-Attribute of entity: The nature body is empty of true existence.
-It is pacified from the beginning. The nature body  is  emptiness  of  true
existence of a buddha’s mind.  This  emptiness  of  true  existence  is  not
something that is newly produced by causes. As soon as  the  exalted  wisdom
truth body comes into existence, the nature body comes into existence.
- The nature body is attained through a supramundane path but  not  attained
by any method. Since it is not a mere mundane path and  is  not  created  by
conditions, it is attained through extensive method and profound wisdom.
-The remaining three exalted bodies (complete enjoyment body, the  emanation
body, and the exalted wisdom truth body) are  not  different  entities  from
the nature body. Although they are not different entities  from  the  nature
body, they are posited as different from the nature body.
- There is a purpose for positing them as three different exalted bodies:
      -the exalted wisdom truth body is presented as the  direct  object  of
utilization of only buddhas mutually among themselves
      - the complete enjoyment body is posited as the object of  utilization
of bodhisattva aryas and those above
      - the supreme emanation body is posited as the object  of  utilization
of sentient beings with pure karma.
- Ordinary beings with pure karma refer to them having pure karma  from  the
point of view of their karma being free from obscurations that  prevent  the
supreme emanation bodies from appearing to them. So it does  not  mean  that
their karma is pure in every way.
- Emptiness of true existence is not a different entity from  the  basis  of
emptiness.
 -A vase is empty of true existence. A  vase  is  the  basis  of  emptiness.
Because it is empty of true existence, vase and emptiness of true  existence
are one entity. If vase and emptiness of vase were not one  entity,  no  one
would be able to understand that a vase is empty of true existence.
- Real conventionality: A chair, a table
- Unreal conventionality- You can posit non-existents (e.g. rabbit’s  horns,
a flower in the sky, etc), but unreal conventionalities do not  have  to  be
non-existents. Examples of existent unreal conventionalities:  a  dream,  an
illusion, a mirage, an echo, a reflection, etc. These are  renowned  in  the
world as falsities.

Topic 8.2  THE EXALTED WISDOM TRUTH BODY
8.2         The harmonies with enlightenment; the immeasurables;
            The liberations; the natures of
            The nine serial absorptions;
            The natures of the ten totalities;
8.3         The sources that are the masteries,
            Eight types due to the classifications;
            Without afflictions; the exalted knower of wishes;
            The clairvoyances; the individual correct knowledges;
8.4         The four purities in all ways;
            The ten powers; the ten strengths;
            The four fearlessnesses;
            The three types of absence of anything to guard against;
8.5         The three types of close placements of mindfulness;
            The nature that does not have forgetfulness;
            Perfectly destroyed latencies;
            Great compassion for beings;
8.6         The eighteen unmixed qualities of a subduer alone;
            Those which are explained and
            The exalted knower of all aspects and [so forth]
            Are called the “truth body.”
- The exalted wisdom truth body is divided into 21  sets  of  uncontaminated
exalted wisdom:
-1st set consists the 37 harmonies with  enlightenment:  the  CPoM,  and  so
forth, through to the 8 branches of arya paths.
-2nd set also known as the Brahma abodes consists of the 4 immeasurables:
      - immeasurable love
      - immeasurable compassion
      - immeasurable joy
      - immeasurable equanimity
Why immeasurable love and so forth are called the “Brahma abodes”? It is
said that the god Brahma cultivates love, compassion, joy, and equanimity
in relation to immeasurable sentient beings.
-3rd set consists of 8 items:
     - Liberation in which that having form views forms
     - Liberation in which that not having form views forms
     - Liberation of the attractive
     - Liberation of Infinite Space
     - Liberation of Infinite Consciousness
     - Liberation of Nothingness
     - Liberation of the Peak of Existence, or Without Discrimination Not
       Without Discrimination
     - Liberation of cessation
-The liberation in which that having form views forms and the liberation  in
which that not having form views forms correspond to by  the  internal,  the
yogi, being placed in the discrimination  of  himself  as  having  form  and
being placed in the discrimination of the mere aggregates  of  the  4  names
without  having  form,   viewing   external   forms   in   the   aspect   of
unattractiveness.
- The purpose of  liberation  of  the  attractive:  When  the  continuum  is
discouraged due to having meditated on unattractiveness  through  the  first
two, the liberation of the attractive is:
(a) for the sake of uplifting it, and
(b) for the sake of examining whether or not the first two liberations  have
been accomplished. If  adherence  is  not  produced  even  though  one  pays
attention to the attractive,  then  the  first  two  liberations  have  been
accomplished.
 - With regard to the next four liberations of the formless:
     - Liberation of Infinite Space
     - Liberation of Infinite Consciousness
     - Liberation of Nothingness
     - Liberation of the Peak of Existence, or Without Discrimination Not
       Without Discrimination
are for the sake of being liberated from the obscurations of  relishing  the
taste (i.e. the taste  of  meditative  absorption)  and  for  the  sake  of]
keeping them distant.
-When one attains the 4th concentration, one has the  branch  of  equanimity
feeling. Because of the presence of this feeling, there is  a  great  danger
of the obscurations  of  meditative  absorption  arising.  Because  of  this
danger, one cultivates the liberation of Infinite  Space  so  that  one  can
become liberated from the obscurations of absorption (which are referred  to
as “the obscurations of relishing the taste” in this  text  )  and  for  the
sake of keeping these obscurations distant.
-There are 3 realms: the desire realm, form realm, and formless realm.
-In the desire realm, suffering feeling is predominant. In order  to  become
free from this, one cultivates the concentrations. By being  separated  from
suffering feeling, one attains the contaminated  happiness  feeling  of  the
first  three  concentrations.  Because  this  happiness  feeling  is   still
contaminated, in time one will become dissatisfied with  it,  and  thus  one
works to separate  from  this  contaminated  happiness  feeling,  eventually
obtaining  the  equanimity  feeling  of  the  fourth   concentration.   This
equanimity feeling is still contaminated; therefore, in  time,  one  becomes
tired of it and tries to separate  from  it,  and  cultivates  the  formless
absorptions.
- The liberation of cessation is cultivated for the sake of being  liberated
from the obscurations of coarse discrimination and feeling.
 - One can train in dexterity in the meditative stabilizations, for  example
going from the 1st to the 2nd, the 2nd to the 3rd, 3rd to  the  4th  ,  then
down  to  the  3rd  ,  2nd  ,  and  1st.  By  training  in  such  meditative
stabilizations  in  this  way,   one   attains   dexterity   in   meditative
stabilization such that one can actualize any concentration as one wishes.
- For  the  final  concentrations,  this  is  possible  for  any  of  the  4
concentrations: there is a final 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th concentration.
-4th set consists of
      - 4 form realm concentrations
      - 4 formless absorptions
      - 1 absorption of cessation
- 9 absorptions that abide serially;
-5th set consists of 10 objects of observation:
      -4 elements: earth, water, fire, wind
      -4 colors: blue, yellow, red, white
      - space
      - consciousness
- Based  on  these  10  objects  of  observation,  there  are  10  types  of
meditative stabilizations of the totalities.
- The purpose of training in observing  these  is  to  attain  control  over
earth,  water,  fire,  wind,  blue,   yellow,   red,   white,   space,   and
consciousness.
- The purpose of training in these meditative stabilizations of totality  is
to gain control over these objects  of  observation.  So  one  is  basically
training in emanation.
-The purpose of training in the totalities  is  to  gain  control  over  the
elements and these various derivatives that have arisen from  the  elements.
By training in the totality of space, one is able to  travel  in  space;  by
training in the totality of consciousness, one is  able  to  accomplish  the
abandonment of the afflictions, the four individual correct knowledges,  and
so forth.
- From among the 12 sources, these totalities are posited only with  respect
to 4 of them
      -these 4 are the form source, the  source  of  object  of  touch,  the
phenomena source, and the mental source.
- The 4 colors are posited with respect to the form source
- The 4 elements with respect to the source of object of touch
- Space with respect to the phenomena source
-Consciousness with respect to the mental source.
-The totalities  are  posited  with  respect  to  10  types  of  objects  of
observation.
- The meaning of the name “totality” is that acting to  pervade  and  spread
to all without exception.
If something is not  able  to  pervade  all,  it  is  not  a  totality.  The
criterion is that in which the class of it is present  can  be  pervaded  by
it.
- Because the class of the 5 sense powers is not present  in  the  forms  of
the environment, the 5 sense powers are not classified as totalities.
-Because the class of odors and tastes is not present in the  forms  of  the
form realm, odors and tastes are not totalities.
-Because sounds do not have a continuity  of  similar  class,  thereby  they
cannot be emanated to pervade all,  therefore  sounds  are  not  posited  as
totalities.
-From among the 12  sources,  only  4  are  included  with  respect  to  the
totalities; the rest are excluded.
-The 12 sources include 6 objects and 6 sense powers
- The list of the 6 objects is:
   1. Form source
   2. Sound source
   3. Odor source
   4. Taste source
   5. Source of object of touch
   6. Phenomena source
-From among the 6 objects,  the  totalities  are  posited  with  respect  to
forms, objects of touch, and phenomena, not the other 3.
- The 6 sense powers are:
   1. Eye sense power
   2. Ear sense power
   3. Nose sense power
   4. Tongue sense power
   5. Body sense power
   6. Mental sense power
The first 5 are excluded; from among  the  6  sense  powers,  we  posit  the
totalities only with respect to the mental power.
Q&A: The bodhisattva on the uninterrupted path at the end of  the  continuum
understands has non-manifest minds in his continuum and  knows  about  these
minds. But the bodhisattva does not think,  “This  mind  is  not  manifest.”
This bodhisattva is on the uninterrupted path, so  of  course  he  does  not
have these kinds of thoughts.
In fact, it is possible to have more than one main mental mind  manifest  at
the same time. In the AMWS, there are 4 types of direct perceivers:
      - sense direct perceivers
      - mental direct perceivers
      -self-knowing direct perceivers
      -yogic direct perceivers.
- Simultaneous with this mental main mind observing emptiness,  there  is  a
self-knowing direct perceiver experiencing that mental main mind. This self-
knowing direct perceiver is another main mental mind that is manifest.  This
is a unique assertion of the YAMWS. This is not  accepted  by  CMWS  because
they refute self-cognizers.
-  With  regard  to  the  characterless  instantaneous   application,   this
bodhisattva’s yoga that  serves  as  a  direct  antidote  to  the  knowledge
obscurations and the wisdom  directly  realizing  emptiness  are  different,
because the bodhisattva’s yoga that serves  as  a  direct  antidote  to  the
knowledge  obscurations  is  a  main  mind,  whereas  the  wisdom   directly
realizing emptiness is a mental factor. And in general, the wisdom  directly
realizing emptiness is not necessarily a direct antidote  to  the  knowledge
obscurations. In this case, we can say that the  wisdom  directly  realizing
emptiness is concomitant with  the  bodhisattva’s  yoga  that  serves  as  a
direct antidote to the knowledge obscurations.
Differences among the liberations, the masteries, and the totalities
-The liberations produce  the  masteries,  and  the  masteries  produce  the
totalities.
-The  cultivation  of  the  totalities  purifies  the  masteries,  and   the
cultivation of the masteries purifies the liberations.
-It is difficult to master form because when  one  masters  form,  one  will
also attain the power to master the formless.
-6th set: masteries consist of 8 items:
- 4 masteries of shapes: (“Shapes” refer to these various types of forms)
  -(1-2) the yogi discriminates himself as form and views external forms  in
the aspect of great and small
  -(3-4) the yogi discriminates  himself  as  formless  and  views  external
forms in the aspect of great and small.
   -On top of that, these various forms, great and small, can be  viewed  as
beautiful, not beautiful, good, bad, etc.
   -The ability  to  do  this  depends  on  having  accomplished  meditative
stabilization.
    -The   masteries   and   totalities   are   contingent   on   meditative
stabilization. Having mastered these various forms, one knows  them  through
calm abiding and sees them through special insight.
-4 masteries of colors:
  - blue, yellow, red, and white,
-The yogi knows these colors through calm abiding,  and  sees  them  through
special insight.
- The  masteries  of  shape  arise  from  causes  that  are  the  first  two
liberations (liberations of the yogi discriminating himself as  having  form
and discriminating himself as not having form)
- The masteries of colors arise from  causes  that  are  the  liberation  of
attractiveness
- Within discrimination of himself as  formless,  the  yogi  views  external
forms as blue, etc.
- To  understand  the  remaining  3;  the  masteries  of  yellow,  red,  and
white,you have to apply a similar format.
-The various masteries here are attained through meditative stabilization.
-By accomplishing meditative stabilization, one attains the liberations
-In dependence on the liberations, one attains the masteries
-In dependence on the masteries, one attains the totalities.
-7th set: the meditative stabilization without afflictions:
-Buddha aryas and hearer foe-destroyers have  the  meditative  stabilization
without  afflictions.  However,  their  meditative  stabilizations   without
afflictions act in different ways.
-When hearer foe-destroyers go  to  a  town,  through  the  force  of  their
meditative stabilization without afflictions, they  merely  do  not  act  as
observed object conditions for the afflictions related to the  desire  realm
in the continua  of  others  that  are  to  be  abandoned  by  the  path  of
meditation, when they meet people in the town.
- When buddha aryas go to a town and meet people in the  town,  through  the
force of their meditative stabilization without  afflictions,  not  only  do
they merely not act as observed object  conditions  for  the  production  of
afflictions in the people who  meet  them,  their  meditative  stabilization
without afflictions acts as a condition for the afflictions in the  continua
of other people, other sentient beings to be uprooted.
-8th set: the exalted knower of wishes
(i) spontaneously enacting others’ welfare by means of perfectly  separating
from and pacifying all signs of exertion that motivates correct  actions  of
body and speech
(ii) destroying grasping to all objects of knowledge as truly existent
(iii)accomplishing the prayers that eliminate others’  doubts  by  means  of
the exalted knower without obstructions, engagement of  the  exalted  knower
without grasping and obstructions during the occasions as  long  as  samsara
exists and until the attainment of liberation by all sentient beings
-9th set: consists of 6 clairvoyances:
   1. Clairvoyance of the divine eye
   2. Clairvoyance of the divine ear
   3. Clairvoyance of magical emanation
   4. Clairvoyance knowing others’ minds
   5. Clairvoyance recalling previous states
   6. Clairvoyance of exhaustion of contaminations
- In dependence on the 6  clairvoyances,  one  can  perform  many  types  of
emanations.
-10th set consists of 4 individual correct knowledges:
   1. Individual correct knowledge of phenomena
   2. Individual correct knowledge of meanings
   3. Individual correct knowledge of terminology
   4. Individual correct knowledge of confidence
-11th set consists of 4 four purities:
   1. Purity of support
   2. Purity of object of observation
   3. Purity of exalted mind
   4. Purity of completely pure exalted wisdom
1. Pure body support, due to having gained mastery over the taking on  of  a
   body, abiding in it, and relinquishing it
2. Pure object of  observation,  pure  utilization,  due  to  having  gained
   mastery over emanating and transforming forms, odors, tastes, objects  of
   touch, and so forth
3.  Pure  exalted  mind,  due  to  having  gained  mastery  over  meditative
   stabilization
4. Completely pure  exalted  wisdom,  due  to  having  gained  mastery  over
   wisdom.
-12th set consists of 10 powers:
   1. power over life, being able to abide as long as one wishes for eons
   2.  power  over  mind,  due  to  having  attained  power  over  countless
      meditative stabilizations
   3. power over necessities, due to having  gained  mastery  over  the  Sky
      Treasury
   4. power over actions, due to having attained  power  over  demonstrating
      the results of actions such as crafts and artistic skills
   5. power over rebirth as one wishes
   6. power over imagination, such as the ability to display all  the  world
      systems filled with the bodies of buddhas
   7. power over wishes, due to being able to display  emanations  of  great
      enlightenment
   8. power over magical  emanation,  due  to  power  over  displaying  many
      dissimilar magical manifestations to the various trainees at one time
   9. power over exalted wisdom, due to knowing  all  objects  of  knowledge
      without obstructions
  10. power over Dharma, due to having attained the power that is  skill  in
      all the words and meanings of Dharma.
-These ten powers are attained from the 8th ground.
- For power over wishes, due to being able to display  emanations  of  great
enlightenment, a bodhisattva is  able  to  display,  e.g.,  the  body  of  a
buddha, a body  adorned  with  the  signs  and  exemplifications,  but  this
emanation is not an actual buddha body. It  is  simply  an  emanation  of  a
buddha body. Bodhisattva on the 8th ground has the ability to  display  such
emanations, but does  not  having  the  ability  to  display  actual  buddha
bodies. They can display only similitude of buddha bodies.
-13th set consists of 10 strengths
-14th set consists of 4 fearlessnesses
-15th set consists of the completely pure  behavior  of  body,  speech,  and
mind of the Tathagata
- In the context of the 39 uncommon aspects of the EKAA [as in  Chapter  4],
there is a set of 10 strengths and 4 fearlessnesses.
-The completely pure behavior of body, speech, and mind of the Buddha,  such
that he does not have the thought to conceal his  shortcomings;  the  Buddha
does not have the thought, “I need to hide my mistakes,” or “I need to  keep
my shortcomings secret.” Regarding erroneous conduct  of  the  three  doors,
the Buddha does not think, “I need to hide my mistakes of  the  three  doors
from others.” These are the three types of  absence  of  anything  to  guard
against.
-16th set consists of 3 close placements of mindfulness
- When a buddha teaches Dharma to an assembly,  some  in  the  retinue  will
listen with respect, some will listen with disrespect, and some will  listen
with a mixture of both respect and  disrespect.  Towards  those  who  listen
with respect, a buddha does not  generate  a  mind  of  favoritism;  towards
those who listen with disrespect, a buddha  does  not  generate  dislike  or
aversion; and towards those  who  listen  with  a  mixture  of  respect  and
disrespect, a buddha will not  generate  indifference.  A  buddha  will  not
generate both grasping and anger.
-17th set: possesses the nature of not having forgetfulness with respect  to
the welfare of sentient beings
- Buddhas attain  buddhahood  for  the  sake  of  sentient  beings.  Besides
enacting the welfare of sentient  beings,  buddha  aryas  do  not  do  other
activities. When it is said that the buddha aryas  have  exalted  compassion
and only enact the welfare of sentient beings, we must know  that  from  the
side of sentient beings,  certain  attributes  must  be  complete.  Sentient
beings who are the objects to which the buddha aryas enact the welfare  need
to fulfill certain conditions from their side. Simply by the buddhas  having
great compassion, sentient  beings  are  not  benefited.  Buddha  aryas  see
sentient beings all the time, and as soon as the opportunity  to  help  them
arises, the buddhas immediately help them.
-18th set: possesses perfect destruction of the latencies of the 3 doors
- the buddhas have exhaustively abandoned the dormancies of  the  afflictive
and knowledge obscurations.
-19th set: possesses the great compassion that is the thought to  accomplish
benefit and happiness with respect to all beings
-The Buddha has no other work, besides seeing us and thinking of  benefiting
us. The buddhas see sentient beings all the time, and this seeing  does  not
require an effort to specifically, deliberately look at sentient beings.
-20th set consists of 18 unmixed qualities of a buddha
- These 18 unmixed qualities were discussed in chapter four.
-21th set: EKAA directly realizing the 10  topics  of  principal  cause  and
effect and so forth
- Those included within the term “and so forth”—the  finalities  of  the  KP
and KB explained in the 2nd and 3rd  chapters  are  also  the  wisdom  truth
body.
Positing those as the exalted wisdom truth body
- The four exalted bodies:
      1. nature body
      2. complete enjoyment body
      3. emanation body
      4.exalted wisdom truth body
-These bodies are different. Although  they  are  different,  they  are  not
different entities. They are one entity.
-Our system asserts that the exalted wisdom truth  body  is  different  from
the 3 exalted bodies
- Although the 4 exalted bodies are  not  different  entities,  the  exalted
wisdom truth body is different from the 3 exalted bodies.
    8.1 The nature body of the Subduer
       Has attained the uncontaminated qualities,
       Is pure in all ways, and
       Bears the characteristics of the nature of those.
-According to our system, stanza 8.1 indicates  the  nature  body  having  3
attributes. It does not principally indicate the exalted wisdom truth  body.
One of the 3 attributes of the nature body mentioned in this stanza is  that
the nature body has attained the 21 sets of uncontaminated exalted wisdom.
-Form bodies are the self-appearances of the exalted wisdom truth body.  The
exalted wisdom truth body dawns in the aspects of the form  bodies,  but  we
would not say that the exalted wisdom truth body is the form  bodies.  There
is a reason for saying that the truth bodies are exalted  bodies  for  one’s
welfare, and the form bodies are exalted bodies for others’ welfare.
-The exalted wisdom truth body is the direct object of utilization  of  only
buddhas. It is an exalted body that is subtler than the form bodies.
-The complete  enjoyment  body  is  the  direct  object  of  utilization  of
bodhisattva aryas and those above
-The emanation bodies are direct objects of utilization of  ordinary  beings
with pure karma.
-Thus there is a reason for positing them as different bodies.
-When one attains buddhahood, one simultaneously attains the 4  bodies.  The
birth emanation  body  is  said  to  be  attained  simultaneously  with  the
complete enjoyment body. The supreme emanation body arises  when  there  are
beings with pure karma to perceive the supreme emanation body.
Meditative stabilization without afflictions
- This is the 7th of the 21 sets of uncontaminated exalted wisdom. Here,  we
are  looking  at  how  the   buddha’s   meditative   stabilization   without
afflictions is superior to that of the hearers and so forth.
8.7   The hearers’ without afflictions
            Abandons the afflictions of people who look;
            The victors’ without afflictions cuts the continuity
            Of the afflictions of those in towns and so forth.
- The buddhas’  meditative  stabilization  without  afflictions  is  greatly
superior to the hearers’ meditative stabilization without afflictions.
-  The  hearers  and  solitary  realizers  need  to  check  whether  or  not
afflictions will be produced in others who observe them. If  they  see  that
they will be produced, they think, “That would be  inappropriate,”  so  they
absorb into the meditative stabilization without afflictions and then go  on
their alms round.
- After they absorb into  the  meditative  stabilization,  they  arise  into
subsequent attainment. At  that  time,  they  do  not  have  the  meditative
stabilization and then they go to town. However, through the  force  of  the
previous meditative stabilization without afflictions, when others  look  at
them, they the hearers do not serve as  the  observed  object  condition  of
afflictions.
-The  buddhas  absorb  into  the  meditative  stabilization  merely  through
relying on their wish. When they go into the town and others  observe  them,
not only do others not  generate  afflictions,  but  their  afflictions  are
gradually cut from their root.
Meditative stabilization of the exalted knower of wishes
-The tathagatas’ exalted knower of wishes has been  shown  as  distinguished
from the knower of wishes of the hearers and so forth.
 8.8  The buddhas’ exalted knower of wishes is asserted
            To be spontaneous, to have abandoned grasping,
            To be unobstructed, to abide permanently, and
            To answer all questions.
- The buddhas’ exalted knower of wishes is greatly superior to the  hearers’
knower of wishes, because:
(1) engage naturally without the signs of exertion
(2) be separated from grasping to forms and so forth, through  not  adhering
to things as truly existent
(3)  be  unobstructed  exalted  wisdom  with  respect  to  all  objects   of
knowledge,  since  the  two  obscurations   (afflictive   obscurations   and
knowledge obscurations) along with their latencies have been abandoned
(4)  abide  permanently,  because  of   the   action   of   the   meditative
stabilization abiding as long as samsara exists
(5) answer all questions, due to having  acquired  the  culmination  of  the
four individual correct knowledges


Here we have an objection related to a  point  we  discussed  yesterday  [p.
584, second to last paragraph]:  “(4)  abide  permanently,  because  of  the
action of the meditative stabilization abiding as long as  samsara  exists.”
Someone thinks that if this is the case, then  the  Buddha  Bhagavan  should
enact the welfare of all sentient beings permanently by directly  displaying
the appearances of the exalted bodies. It is incorrect for  the  Buddha  not
to enact the welfare of sentient beings even occasionally by  means  of  the
exalted bodies directly appearing to certain sentient  beings,  because,  as
mentioned, the Buddha should reside permanently in the truth body  with  the
entitiness of great exalted compassion as long as cyclic  existence  exists.
In order to counter this objection, there will be one stanza.
      This objection says that the Buddha should enact the  welfare  of  all
sentient beings  permanently,  as  long  as  cyclic  existence  exists,  but
occasionally the Buddha does not  enact  the  welfare  of  certain  sentient
beings by means of the exalted bodies directly appearing to them. The  reply
is in the next outline. It is divided into two:
Reliance on the attribute of  the  accumulations  in  sentient  beings’  own
continua
8.9         Through the thorough ripening of the causes,
            It appears as this and that
            Beneficial activity
            For anyone, anywhere, at any time.
-Although the Buddha remains  until  cyclic  existence  ends  to  enact  the
welfare of sentient beings, occasionally  certain  sentient  beings  do  not
receive the benefit because of their lack of  accumulations.  Due  to  their
not having gathered the accumulations, the buddhas do not appear to them.
-Buddhas attain buddhahood for the sake  of  enacting  the  welfare  of  all
sentient beings. If  there  is  benefit,  they  will  definitely  enact  the
welfare of sentient beings. If there is no benefit,  these  activities  will
not be performed.
-It is not easy to enact the welfare of sentient beings,  because  from  the
side of sentient  beings,  certain  attributes  need  to  be  complete.  The
exalted bodies of the buddhas  are  culminations  of  the  accumulations  of
merit and exalted wisdom. In order for such bodies to appear  to  a  certain
person, that person needs to have merit. If that person  lacks  merit,  then
even if the buddhas were to emanate bodies right in front  of  that  person,
that person would be unable to see them.
- The fact that a certain person is unable to perceive a  buddha  arya  even
if the buddha arya is in front of them is not the fault of the  buddha.  Due
to the person  having  accumulated  negativities,  the  buddha  arya  cannot
appear. In order to see the buddhas, it is  necessary  to  have  accumulated
merit and purified negativities. If a person does not have enough  merit,  a
buddha image may not appear at all, or it may appear  as  various  kinds  of
other objects.
- Hearing the Dharma directly from a buddha depends on the outer  and  inner
conditions.
- The inner condition refers to trainees having met the  Mahayana  spiritual
guide in the past, due to  which  one  cultivates  faith.  Through  repeated
cultivation of faith, one develops faith.
- The outer condition is  the  teaching  of  Dharma  to  whichever  sentient
being, at whatever time, and in a way that the Dharma  will  be  beneficial,
both temporarily and in the long run.
- Although certain sentient beings appear to not be directly ripened by  the
buddhas,  this  is  not  because  the  capacity  of  the  buddhas’   exalted
compassion has degenerated. It is due to the shortcomings of those  sentient
beings’ karma. Sentient beings, from their own side, need to have  completed
the inner and outer conditions.  If  the  outer  and  inner  conditions  are
present from the side of the sentient beings, the  buddhas  will  definitely
enact the activities of welfare in accordance with their needs, because  the
buddhas have completed the two accumulations and accomplished past  prayers.

An analogy to explain why the exalted body does not directly appear  if  the
conditions in sentient beings’ continua are not complete
8.10  Just as, even though the king of gods might have sent down rain,
            An unsuitable seed does not grow,
            Due to lacking fortune, they do not experience the excellences
            Even though the buddhas arise.
- Even though the buddhas actually arise in the world,  there  is  a  reason
for certain sentient  beings  not  directly  meeting  them  because  due  to
lacking the fortune to directly see the buddhas. They do not experience  the
excellences of hearing the excellent Dharma  and  so  forth,  just  as,  for
example, even though the king of  gods  might  have  sent  down  rain,  with
respect to that which is unsuitable as a seed due to having  been  burnt  by
fire and so forth, a green sprout does not grow.
- Indeed the buddhas are special beings who are skilled in fully  completing
all temporal and ultimate hopes in the minds of  sentient  beings.  However,
certain sentient beings do not have the chance to actually meet the  buddhas
and perceive them. This is because the sentient beings lack the fortune  for
that.
- When we talk about this  fortune  for  meeting  the  buddhas,  seeing  the
buddhas,  hearing  the  Dharma,  etc.,  this  fortune  must  be  created  by
ourselves.
- According to our own system, when  we  say  the  buddhas’  exalted  wisdom
pervades all  objects  of  knowledge,  it  mean  that  this  exalted  wisdom
realizes all objects of knowledge.
- It is not  correct  to  say  that  the  truth  body  with  the  nature  of
uncontaminated exalted wisdom pervades all  objects  of  knowledge,  because
this truth body exists only in  the  supports  of  certain  individuals  who
abide in Akanishta. In other words, when one attains  buddhahood,  one  does
so on the support of Akanishta. Since one  attains  the  complete  enjoyment
body in Akanishta, it is not true that the truth body pervades  all  objects
of knowledge.
8.11  Because the activities in that way are extensive,
            The Buddha is definitely described as pervasive;
            Because that itself is without extinction,
            He is also described as “permanent.
- Buddha is described as pervasive because the activities of the Buddha  are
extensive due to engaging all  sentient  beings.  For  sentient  beings  who
possess the fortune,  buddhas  appear  directly  to  them  and  enact  their
welfare. Although the buddhas do not  directly  enact  their  welfare,  they
indirectly enact their welfare.
- Buddha is permanent. The exalted wisdom truth body is not permanent.
- The reason for  describing  the  Buddha  as  “pervasive”  because  of  his
extensive performance of activities of  others’  welfare  by  means  of  the
exalted body directly appearing at all opportune times  to  directly  subdue
the trainees.
 -A buddha is permanent because  within  buddha,  there  are  permanent  and
impermanent parts. The nature body, which is permanent, is  included  within
buddha.
- Something with permanent  and  impermanent  parts  said  to  be  permanent
because from between permanent and impermanent parts,  the  permanent  parts
are principal. The  permanent  parts  are  principal  because  they  do  not
disintegrate.

Topic 8.3 COMPLETE ENJOYMENT BODY
- Complete enjoyment body, the entitiness of the  form  body,  blazing  with
the excellent signs and exemplifications.
- “Enjoyment body” is an abbreviation of “complete enjoyment body.”
- A sign is that which  characterizes  a  person  who  possesses  it  as  an
excellent being.
- An exemplification is that which makes known to  others  that  the  person
who possesses it is an excellent being.
- In the presentation  here,  signs  is  being  explained  first,  then  the
exemplifications. This is because the signs are  principal  in  relation  to
the exemplifications, and the  exemplifications  are  like  members  of  the
retinue of the signs.
8.12  This nature of the thirty-two signs and
            Eighty exemplifications is asserted to be
            The complete enjoyment body of the Subduer
            Because of thoroughly enjoying the Mahayana.
-The form body of the  Subduer  residing  only  in  Akanishta,  bearing  the
nature of the 32 signs and 80 exemplifications  is  the  complete  enjoyment
body, because it is an exalted body  distinguished  by  the  5  certainties,
completely and thoroughly enjoying the Mahayana Dharma and so forth.
The resultant signs
- The five interceding stanzas will explain the 32 signs
8.13  Hands and feet having the signs of wheels, tortoise feet,
            Digits of the hands and feet joined with webs,
            Hands along with feet smooth and tender,
            Seven [regions] of the body elevated,
8.14  Long digits, broad heels, a large and upright body,
            Knees not protruding, hairs pointing upward,
            Calves like the antelope’s, long and beautiful arms,
            Secret organ well retracted in a sheath
8.15  Golden-hued skin, soft skin,
            Hairs growing singly and excellently clockwise,
            Face adorned with a treasure hair, torso like the lion’s,
            Tops of the shoulders rounded, broadness between the  shoulders,

8.16  With respect to this, the appearance  of  even  tastes  that  are  not
delicious as the best of tastes,
            Body is symmetrical like a nyagrodha tree,
            Possessing a protrusion  on  the  crown,  tongue  beautiful  and
long,
            The melodious voice of Brahma, cheeks like a lion’s,
8.17  Very white teeth, even teeth, well set,
            Forty complete in number,
            Azure eyes, eyelashes like a magnificent cow’s:
            These thirty-two are the signs.
|Causes of the 32 signs                    |Entity of resultant signs               |
|1. Due to seeing off and receiving gurus, |possesses hands and feet possessing the |
|offering himself as a retinue servant, and|signs of wheels when one attains        |
|so forth at the time of a learner in the  |buddhahood                              |
|past                                      |                                        |
|2. Due to having culminated mental        |possesses two soles of the feet without |
|firmness in having perfectly adopted      |depressions that abide very evenly on   |
|whichever of the three vows in the past,  |the ground similar to the underside of  |
|without transgressing any of the vows     |the tortoise                            |
|3. Due to having relied upon the 4 means  |possesses fingers and toes being joined |
|of gathering disciples                    |with webs like those of the king of     |
|- generosity ( giving whatever the        |swans that allow ornaments such as rings|
|trainees need)                            |to be worn                              |
|-speaking pleasantly (not using harsh     |                                        |
|speech)                                   |                                        |
|-enacting the welfare (behaving in        |                                        |
|accordance with the world means that even |                                        |
|though one may have high realizations, one|                                        |
|behaves in accordance with the needs of   |                                        |
|the disciples)                            |                                        |
|- behaving accordingly with what one has  |                                        |
|taught.                                   |                                        |
|4. due to having given sublime food and   |possesses hands and feet that are smooth|
|drink and so forth                        |and tender                              |
|5. due to having given very sublime       |possesses 7 elevated areas since the    |
|lickables (such as yogurt, noodle soup,   |areas of the backs of the 2 hands and   |
|tsampa porridge) and so forth             |tops of the 2 feet, the 2 regions       |
|                                          |between the shoulders, and the nape are |
|                                          |elevated through being fleshy,          |
|6. due to having liberated that to be     |possesses long fingers and long toes    |
|killed                                    |                                        |
|7. due to having helped to live           |possesses broad heels                   |
|8. due to having abandoned killing        |possesses a large and upright body      |
|9. due to having perfectly adopted        |possesses kneecaps of the legs and      |
|virtuous qualities                        |anklebones that do not protrude outwards|
|10. due to having advanced the perfect    |possesses hairs of the body that point  |
|adoption of virtue i.e. besides perfectly |upward                                  |
|adopting virtue oneself, one also advances|                                        |
|the perfect adoption of virtue in others  |                                        |
|11. due to having devoted to and imparted |possesses calves that are not           |
|the knowledges, crafts, and so forth      |debilitated (weak), proportionate, fully|
|                                          |developed, and rounded, like the Enaya  |
|                                          |antelope’s                              |
|12. due to not having rejected beings who |possesses long beautiful arms           |
|beg for wealth and possessions            |                                        |
|13. due to having caused all beings to    |the secret organ retracted in a sheath  |
|behave chastely and having safeguarded the|                                        |
|confidential words of secrets             |                                        |
|14. due to having given sublime mats      |possesses golden hue                    |
|15. due to having given excellences, fine |possesses soft skin                     |
|houses and so forth                       |                                        |
|16. due to having completely abandoned    |possesses body hairs that curl clockwise|
|disquiet and so forth                     |individually                            |
|17. due to having honored and set all     |possesses a face adorned with a treasure|
|higher beings in accordance with their    |hair which is located between the       |
|states as human beings. “Higher beings”   |eyebrows,                               |
|refers to beings who have shown us        |                                        |
|kindness, e.g. one’s teachers, parents,   |                                        |
|friends, relatives, etc. In accordance    |                                        |
|with how much kindness they have shown us,|                                        |
|one should honor and show respect to them.|                                        |
|18. due to not having ridiculed others    |upper part of the body is very broad    |
|with haughty words in any way             |                                        |
|19. due to having trained and acted in    |tops of the shoulders that are very     |
|accordance with that pleasantly spoken and|rounded, that are rounded and well      |
|well spoken by others                     |connected like the neck of a golden     |
|                                          |vase, with a network of veins that are  |
|                                          |not prominent                           |
|20. due to having given medicine and so   |possesses broadness between the         |
|forth                                     |shoulders. The shoulders are well-formed|
|                                          |and balanced; they look good            |
|21. due to having given others medicine,  |knowing of the best of tastes i.e. when |
|doctors, and so forth.                    |the Buddha tastes things that are not   |
|                                          |delicious, they transform into delicious|
|                                          |tastes                                  |
|22. due to having perfectly caused the    |symmetry like the banyan tree, the      |
|construction of groves, parks, and so     |Buddha’s height is equal to the length  |
|forth                                     |of his armspan                          |
|23. due to having exceptionally given     |possesses a crown protrusion that is    |
|temples and so forth                      |round and balanced                      |
|24. due to having spoken soft and pleasant|possesses a long tongue that is able to |
|words smoothly and so forth over three    |touch the opening of the ear and the    |
|countless eons in the past                |hairline, above the forehead, and is    |
|                                          |like the color of a red utpala flower   |
|25, due to having caused sentient beings  |possesses the melodious voice of Brahma |
|of all the world systems to understand the|that has the 5 branches; speech         |
|excellent Dharma                          |1.that will be known and thoroughly     |
|                                          |known                                   |
|                                          |2.that is worthy of being listened to   |
|                                          |and lacks discordances                  |
|                                          |3.that is deep and resounding           |
|                                          |4.that is not unruly and is pleasant to |
|                                          |the ear                                 |
|                                          |5. that is unconfused and clear.        |
|26. due to having abandoned senseless talk|possesses cheeks that are as round and  |
|                                          |full as a mirror disc, like the lion’s  |
|27. due to having honored and so forth all|possesses white teeth                   |
|beings                                    |                                        |
|28. due to pure livelihood                |possesses even teeth                    |
|29. due to having always used truthful    |possesses teeth that are well set. There|
|words over 3 countless eons               |are no gaps in between                  |
|30. due to having abandoned slanderous    |possessing forty teeth; 20 above & 20   |
|words over 3 countless eons               |below                                   |
|31. due to having viewed all sentient     |possesses eyes like azure gems, since   |
|beings like an only son over 3 countless  |the black and white portions are not    |
|eons                                      |mixed and they are free from reddish    |
|                                          |streaks                                 |
|32. due to having viewed sentient beings  |possesses upper and lower lashes are    |
|without anger, grasping, confusion, and so|spread well and are not mixed like cow’s|
|forth over a long period                  |eyelashes                               |


-When one attains buddhahood,  one  displays  various  types  of  bodies  to
benefit the trainees.
- The complete enjoyment body can be seen only by highly realized trainees
- For  disciples  without  that  good  fortune,  emanation  bodies  must  be
manifested
- For those who do not even have the good fortune to perceive the  emanation
bodies, even grosser bodies must be manifested,  and  for  this  reason  the
buddhas must manifest even in the form of ordinary beings.
- In this way, the exalted activities of the buddhas become  more  and  more
coarse due to the poor fortune of the trainees.
- The complete enjoyment body is in Akanishta. There  are  many  Akanishtas,
Akanishta pure lands.
- A complete enjoyment body can take female form.
- Since the causes of the signs have been accomplished, the  signs  will  be
accomplished
8.18  These signs will be perfectly accomplished
            Due to having thoroughly completed {376}
            The corresponding causes that act to accomplish
            The signs with respect to this.
- By having thoroughly completed those which are  the  causes  that  act  to
accomplish whichever sign, these 32 signs will arise.
8.19  Seeing gurus off and so forth;
            Firm perfect adoption;
            Relying on gathering; giving
            Sublime things; liberating
8.20  That to be killed; perfectly adopting
            Virtue; advancing it and so forth:
            The characteristics of the causes that act to accomplish them
            Are as they have been explained in the sutras.
- Through having familiarized with  those  causes  of  the  signs  explained
above, one will definitely accomplish the resultant signs.
- The excellent exemplifications
    8.21   The Subduer’s nails that are copper colored,
             Glossy, and raised; digits
             Rounded, well-developed, and tapered;
             Veins not prominent and without knots;
    8.22   Anklebones do not protrude; legs equal;
             The gait of a lion, an elephant,
             A swan, and a leader; proceeds in a clockwise manner,
             Beautifully, and upright; body that is elegant,
    8.23   Cleansed, well proportioned,
             Clean, soft, and pure;
             Signs are thoroughly complete;
             Body that is well-built and comely;
    8.24   Strides are even; two eyes that are
             Clear; youthful-looking;
             Body that is not feeble and is well-developed;
             Body that is very firm;
    8.25   Limbs are thoroughly distinct;
             Sight is unobscured and clear;
             Waist is round, moderately sized, without depressions, and
             Belly is flat; navel is
    8.26   Deep and curled clockwise;
             Attractive when beheld;
             Pure conduct; body is
             Without moles;
    8.27   Hands that are smooth like cotton;
             The lines of the hands are radiant, deep, and long;
             Face is not too long;
             Lips are as red as the bimba fruit;
    8.28   Tongue is supple, slender, and
             Red; voice is thunderous,
             Supple, and smooth; canine teeth are round,
             Sharp, white, even, and
    8.29   Tapered; nose is prominent and
             Supremely clean;
             Wide eyes and thick eyelashes,
             Like lotus petals;
    8.30   Eyebrows are long, smooth, and
             Glossy, and even hairs;
             Arms are long and well-developed; ears are equal and
             Completely unimpaired;


    8.31   Forehead is well-defined and
             Broad; head is well-formed;
             Hair is as black as bees,
             Dense, smooth, untangled, and
    8.32   Not bristly, fragrance
             Captivating the minds of beings;
             Shrivatsas and svastikas:
             Asserted to be the Buddha’s excellent exemplifications.
|Causes of exemplifications                  |Entity of resultant exemplifications  |
|1.due to having culminated separation from  |possesses nails that are copper       |
|attachment to all compounded phenomena      |colored                               |
|2.due to possessing the culminated          |possesses nails that are glossy       |
|extraordinary thought of benefiting all     |                                      |
|sentient beings in the long-term            |                                      |
|3. due to having been born in the best of   |possesses nails that are raised       |
|human classes                               |without any unevenness i.e. no bumps  |
|4. due to having culminated the modes of    |possesses digits that are rounded     |
|practice of the achievings without misdeeds |                                      |
|5. due to having culminated the collection  |possesses digits that are             |
|of roots of virtue in the past              |well-developed                        |
|6.due to having culminated perfect          |possesses digits that are tapered     |
|engagement serially or progressively in the |                                      |
|classes of realizations of the 3 vehicles   |                                      |
|7.due to having guarded against the 10      |possesses veins of the body that are  |
|non-virtuous paths of actions of the body   |not prominent from the outside        |
|and so forth and wrong livelihood           |                                      |
|8.due to having untied the knots of the     |possesses veins that are without knots|
|afflictions and having become freed         |                                      |
|9.due to possessing intelligence with       |possesses smaller anklebones that do  |
|respect to very hidden phenomena since he   |not protrude                          |
|has realized the profound secret point      |                                      |
|10.due to having acted to liberate beings   |possesses legs that are not unequal;  |
|from all locations of difficult migrations  |do not differ in length               |
|such as cyclic existence                    |                                      |
|11.due to skill in outshining human beings  |possesses the gait of a lion because  |
|                                            |he is fearless among human beings     |
|12.due to skill in outshining evil nagas and|possesses the gait of an elephant.    |
|so forth                                    |This means that if one follows the    |
|                                            |Buddha, one can be sure that one is   |
|                                            |following an unmistaken path          |
|13.due to skill in traveling through space  |possesses the gait of a swan. Buddha’s|
|like a bird                                 |feet did not contact the ground when  |
|                                            |he walks on the ground.               |
|14.due to skill in being a leader of beings,|possesses the gait of a leader. The   |
|sentient beings’ guide to the desired       |Buddha is like a leader for sentient  |
|destinations                                |beings.                               |
|15. due to proceeding in accordance with the|reverses and proceeds in a clockwise  |
|path of circumambulation                    |manner. When Buddha begins to walk, he|
|                                            |would always use the right foot first,|
|                                            |because in accordance with the path of|
|                                            |circumambulation, one would go in a   |
|                                            |clockwise manner, turning towards the |
|                                            |right                                 |
|16.due to skill in being attractive and     |proceeds beautifully                  |
|beautiful to behold when he is proceeding   |                                      |
|17. due to always not having a crooked mind |proceeds without swaying. Buddha walks|
|that pays attention to two loci             |in a very straight, stable manner, not|
|                                            |swaying from side to side.            |
|18.due to perfectly expressing others’      |possesses a body that is elegant since|
|excellent qualities                         |it is well-developed and dignified    |
|19.due to not being defiled by qualities of |possesses a body that is as though    |
|negativities of the three doors             |cleansed since it is clean and pure   |
|20. due to having taught Dharma in          |possesses a body that is well         |
|accordance with the minds of the trainees   |proportioned since the height, girth, |
|                                            |and so forth are neat and not mixed-up|
|21.because of behavior of body, speech,     |He is clean due to a body that is pure|
|mind, and so forth that was clean.          |                                      |
|22. because of a compassionate mind         |possesses a body that is soft         |
|23. because of a pure mind free from stains |possesses a body that is pure         |
|24.because of having thoroughly completed   |possesses signs that are complete     |
|all the subduing qualities that destroy the |                                      |
|afflictions and conceptualizations in his   |                                      |
|continuum                                   |                                      |
|25.because of having expressed to others    |possesses a body that is well-built   |
|excellent qualities that are (i) vast due to|due to it being broad and comely in   |
|being extensive and                         |features,                             |
|(ii) beautiful due to being pleasing.       |                                      |
|26. because of an equanimous mind towards   |possesses strides that are even since |
|all sentient beings                         |they do not differ in span            |
|27. because of having taught the pure Dharma|possesses two eyes that are clear     |
|that generated only excellent qualities     |since there are no specks and the like|
|28. because of having taught a Dharma along |possesses a body that is very         |
|with examples that is easy to understand    |youthful-looking                      |
|29. because of a mind that is always        |possesses a body that is not          |
|dauntless regarding difficult matters       |physically feeble                     |
|30. because of roots of virtue superior to  |possesses a body that is physically   |
|all worlds                                  |well-developed                        |
|31. due to having extinguished the karma for|possesses a body that is very firm    |
|taking rebirth                              |since the flesh is not flabby         |
|32. due to having very distinctly taught the|possesses primary limbs, such as hands|
|forward and reverse cause and effect        |and legs, and secondary limbs, such as|
|processes of dependent-arising for the sake |digit joints, that are very distinct  |
|of freeing trainees from cyclic existence.  |since the components are              |
|                                            |differentiated                        |
|33. due to having completely taught the     |possesses sight that is without visual|
|meaning of the words based upon high status |aberration of adventitious defilements|
|and definite goodness that are very pure.   |and is clear                          |
|34. due to having caused excellent ethics in|possesses a waist that is round. This |
|his students                                |probably refers to the front part of  |
|                                            |the belly not sticking out too much.  |
|35. due to not being polluted and not being |possesses a waist that is moderately  |
|defiled by the faults of cyclic existence   |sized since the waist is appropriately|
|since he has destroyed them with antidotes  |sized. This means that the waist is   |
|                                            |not too skinny and not too fat.       |
|36. due to having destroyed the inflatedness|possesses a waist that is without     |
|of pride                                    |depressions since the waist is not too|
|                                            |long                                  |
|37. due to having turned away from the      |possesses a belly that is flat without|
|limited and taught unlimitedly the Dharma   |highs and lows. This means the belly  |
|that is to be known                         |does not have bulges at certain places|
|                                            |and depressions at other places, and  |
|                                            |so on.                                |
|38. due to having realized the profound     |possesses a navel that is deep        |
|Dharma                                      |                                      |
|39.due to having caused his students to     |possesses a navel whose creases are   |
|uphold the instructions in accordance with  |curled clockwise                      |
|himself                                     |                                      |
|40. due to having caused beautiful behavior |possesses beautiful conduct           |
|of the 3 doors in all his retinue           |                                      |
|41. due to a pure mind since it is stainless|possesses conduct of the 3 doors that |
|                                            |is pure                               |
|42. due to having separated from (i)        |has no moles or black marks on the    |
|teaching a wrong path and (ii) teaching     |body                                  |
|subduing Dharma that is untimely, such as   |                                      |
|subduing trainees at an inopportune time    |                                      |
|43.due to having taught the Dharma that     |possesses hands that are very smooth  |
|becomes a cause for attaining well-being of |like cotton                           |
|the body, speech, mind, and so forth        |                                      |
|44.due to having equalized his own being and|possesses lines of the hands that are |
|other beings and attained the status of a   |clearly radiant (shiny)               |
|great splendid trainee-in-virtue. To        |                                      |
|equalize his own and other beings means to  |                                      |
|be free from the bias of attachment and     |                                      |
|aversion. This attitude of bias involving   |                                      |
|attachment and aversion obscures the mind   |                                      |
|from seeing reality and prevents the mind   |                                      |
|from being clear. By equalizing one’s own   |                                      |
|being and others’ beings, one develops a    |                                      |
|clear mind.                                 |                                      |
|45. due to having abided in the culmination |possesses lines of the hands that are |
|of realizing the profound Dharma            |deep that are visible from a long     |
|                                            |distance                              |
|46.due to granting happiness in the         |possesses lines of the hands that are |
|short-term and benefiting in the long-term, |long                                  |
|and perfectly giving pure teachings again   |                                      |
|and again also in the future                |                                      |
|47.due to having taught plenty of trainings |possesses a face that is not too long |
|in accordance with the many levels of the   |                                      |
|trainees                                    |                                      |
|48.due to having realized that all worlds of|possesses lips that are as red as the |
|environments and inhabitants are like a     |bimba fruit in which reflections of   |
|reflection                                  |forms can appear                      |
|49.due to having subdued all trainees with  |possesses a tongue that is supple     |
|smooth words                                |                                      |
|50. due to having taught abundant logic of  |possesses a tongue that is very       |
|reasoning that is an excellent quality      |slender                               |
|51.due to having taught a subduing Dharma   |possesses a tongue that is red        |
|for destroying afflictions that is difficult|                                      |
|to fathom by childish beings who have       |                                      |
|grasping to I and mine.                     |                                      |
|52.due to not having had any trepidation,   |possesses a thunderous voice          |
|apprehensiveness, and fear thinking, “I     |                                      |
|shall conceal shortcomings.                 |                                      |
|53. due to having spoken pleasantly and so  |possesses a voice that is pleasant,   |
|forth through speech that is delightful to  |supple, and smooth                    |
|the ears                                    |                                      |
|54.due to having exhaustively restrained the|possesses canine teeth that are round |
|9 entwinements with samsara: subsequent     |                                      |
|grasping and so forth.                      |                                      |
|55. due to having tamed the strong          |possesses canine teeth that are sharp |
|afflictions in beings who are difficult to  |                                      |
|tame.                                       |                                      |
|56. because of having acted to destroy with |possesses canine teeth that are white |
|the very wholesome subduing Dharma that     |                                      |
|destroys afflictions.                       |                                      |
|57. due to having abided on the ground that |possesses canine teeth that are even  |
|realizes the equality of samsara and        |since they do not differ in length    |
|nirvana.                                    |                                      |
|58. due to having perfectly taught the      |possesses canine teeth that are       |
|serial clear realizations of the 3 vehicles |tapered                               |
|through their stages                        |                                      |
|59. due to having abided in the supreme     |possesses a nose that is prominent    |
|wisdom realizing emptiness that is complete |                                      |
|in the factor of method.                    |                                      |
|60.due to beings who are the trainees       |possesses a nose that is clean since  |
|possessing excellent pure conviction        |it is free of snot and the like       |
|61.because of having taught the very        |possesses eyes that are wide          |
|extensive innumerable Mahayana Dharma       |                                      |
|62. due to having led limitless multitudes  |possesses eyelashes that are thick    |
|of sentient beings through having abided in |                                      |
|cyclic existence                            |                                      |
|63. due to having pleased all young female  |possesses eyes with the white and     |
|god, anti-god, and human migrating beings   |black parts defined since they are    |
|who are difficult to please, since he is    |unmixed, like the lovely complete     |
|worthy of praise by them.                   |petals of a lotus                     |
|64. due to constantly watching migrating    |possesses eyebrows that are long      |
|beings in the future, through looking ‘How  |                                      |
|will they be in the future?’                |                                      |
|65. due to being skilled in the gentle      |possesses eyebrows that are smooth    |
|subduing Dharma through subduing with the   |                                      |
|gentle Dharma that does not rely on the five|                                      |
|fires and the like. “The five fires and the |                                      |
|like” refers to perverse practices, which   |                                      |
|involve torturing the body, e.g. walking on |                                      |
|fire, standing on a trident, and so forth.  |                                      |
|The Dharma taught by the Buddha is gentle,  |                                      |
|in that it does not employ these rough      |                                      |
|methods.                                    |                                      |
|66. due to the mental continuum having been |possesses eyebrows that are glossy    |
|thoroughly moistened by virtue              |                                      |
|67. due to seeing the faults of afflictions |possesses hairs of the eyebrows that  |
|                                            |are even since they do not differ in  |
|                                            |length                                |
|68. due to having turned away the worst harm|possesses arms that are long and      |
|of sentient beings: the causes of general   |well-developed                        |
|cyclic existence and of bad migrations in   |                                      |
|particular.                                 |                                      |
|69. due to being victorious over attachment |possesses ears that are equal since   |
|and so forth that are difficult to conquer  |they do not differ in length or size  |
|70.due to having set all sentient beings who|possesses ear sense powers that are   |
|are the trainees in happiness without       |unimpaired such as ears that are      |
|degenerating their continua.                |unimpaired in engaging sounds         |
|71. due to not having been influenced by all|possesses a forehead that is          |
|that is fabricated by views holding to      |well-defined and a hairline that      |
|extremes, such as the 62 bad views, which   |stands out well                       |
|have not been able to change his original   |                                      |
|view.                                       |                                      |
|72.due to having defeated all wrong         |possesses a forehead that is broad    |
|propounders.                                |                                      |
|73. due to having completed the best of     |possesses a head that is very         |
|prayers in which one prays to attain        |well-formed like the parasol          |
|buddhahood for others’ welfare.             |                                      |
|74. due to having turned away from all      |possesses hair that is as black as    |
|craving to objects—forms, sounds, and so    |bees                                  |
|forth—the joy of objects.                   |                                      |
|75. because of having exhaustively abandoned|possesses hair that is dense without  |
|those dormancies that are to be abandoned by|intermediary gaps                     |
|the PoS and PoM.                            |                                      |
|76. due to having known the teachings with a|possesses hair that is smooth         |
|smooth mind that is without the roughness of|                                      |
|holding to extremes                         |                                      |
|77. due to a mind that is not disturbed by  |possesses hair that is untangled      |
|attachment and so forth                     |                                      |
|78. due to words that are always not harsh  |possesses hair that is not bristly and|
|since he has exhaustively abandoned harsh   |not stiff                             |
|words.                                      |                                      |
|79. due to having scattered the flowers of  |possesses hair that is fragrant       |
|the branches that serve as the causes of    |                                      |
|enlightenment before the Three Jewels       |                                      |
|80. due to the exalted body having been     |possesses hands and feet that are     |
|beautiful in all ways. It has also been     |adorned with shrivatsas, vajra-like   |
|taught that there is a shrivatsa at the     |patterns on the thumbs and the big    |
|heart.                                      |toes, svastikas that are squarish     |
|                                            |patterns on the palms of the hands and|
|                                            |the soles of the feet, and, on their  |
|                                            |edges, nandyavartas of seven patterns |
|                                            |swirling clockwise on the feet on the |
|                                            |fourth toes and so forth              |




-Q&A: For the supreme emanation body,  these  form  bodies  are  established
from the self-appearances of the exalted wisdom. Exalted  wisdom  refers  to
the exalted wisdom truth body. The buddhas can manifest different  kinds  of
bodies; among these, there are coarse bodies. In order for  sentient  beings
to perceive them, the buddhas  manifest  coarser  and  coarser  bodies  that
appear in the form of bodies like ours, with  coarse  flesh  and  so  forth.
These very coarse bodies that are emanated for the sake of  sentient  beings
show signs of aging, falling sick, dying, and so forth.
-Complete enjoyment body is  not  accomplished  from  form  included  within
matter. It is established  from  forms  that  are  self-appearances  of  the
exalted wisdom truth body. The exalted wisdoms of the  buddhas  are  objects
of only the buddhas. They are objects of utilization  of  buddhas  mutually,
and lower beings are not  able  to  perceive  them.  As  a  result,  buddhas
display the complete  enjoyment  body,  and  coarser  than  that,  emanation
bodies. The grossest of the bodies are the emanations  of  ordinary  beings.
These emanations can take the form of beings  like  us,  appearing  to  have
coarse flesh, etc. They are said to be included within matter although  they
are not matter.
- The supreme emanation body has all the 32 signs and 80 exemplifications.
- For 19, 21 & 23 - the causes are different, but the results are similar.
- Regarding the nandyavartas (in number 80), there  are  these  3  types  of
patterns [shrivatsas, svastikas, and nandyavartas]. On the  thumbs  and  big
toes, there are the shrivatsas. On the palms of the hands and soles  of  the
feet, there are the svastikas. On the edges of the  hands  and  feet,  there
are the nandyavartas.
-The “nandyavartas  of  7  patterns”  probably  do  not  correspond  to  the
auspicious symbols, or even to the 7 royal emblems. The 7 patterns are  said
to swirl clockwise; it seems that all 7 patterns swirl clockwise.
-  A  wheel-turning  king   has   the   similitudes   of   the   signs   and
exemplifications of a buddha.

Topic 8.4   SUPREME EMANATION BODY
8.33  The exalted body through which
            The various benefits  to  migrating  beings  are  simultaneously
enacted
            As long as cyclic existence exists
            Is the uninterrupted emanation body of Muni (the Subduer).
- The emanation body is the form body of the buddha that  does  not  possess
the 5 certainties:
1. It does not possess the certainty of abode, i.e. it does not reside  only
   in Akanishtha;
2. It does not possess the certainty of retinue, i.e. it is  not  surrounded
   only by bodhisattva aryas;
3. It does not possess the certainty of Dharma, i.e. it does not teach  only
   the Mahayana Dharma.
4. With regard to the certainty of time, there  are  2  possibilities:  when
   the supreme emanation body enters parinirvana (final  nirvana),  it  does
   not remain as long as cyclic existence is not empty. This does  not  mean
   that it has stopped enacting the welfare of sentient beings. Although  it
   has entered  parinirvana  in  one  continent,  it  can  remain  in  other
   universes, or other world systems. So this emanation body also remains as
   long as cyclic existence is not empty.
5. The certainty of body is satisfied by the supreme  emanation  body,  i.e.
   not  all  emanation  bodies  have  the  clear  and  complete  signs   and
   exemplifications, but the supreme emanation body definitely has them.
-The emanation body of the Buddha Bhagavan does not have to be  the  supreme
emanation body of the Buddha Bhagavan; it is  just  the  emanation  body  in
general and is not specified as the supreme emanation body.
-The supreme emanation body enacts the desired aims of pure sentient  beings
(sentient beings with pure karma) by directly appearing to them.  The  other
emanation bodies, such as artisan emanation bodies, enact the  desired  aims
of sentient beings with impure karma.
-  Several  types  of  emanation  body:  supreme  emanation  body,   artisan
emanation body, and birth emanation body.
- The supreme emanation body is the principal emanation body.
- When we say that the emanation body is  distinguished  by  not  possessing
the five certainties, it means that it does not  possess  all  of  the  five
certainties. In other words, it can possess, e.g. just  one  certainty.  For
example, the supreme emanation body possesses the certainty of  body,  being
adorned with the signs  and  exemplifications.  But  of  course,  there  are
emanation bodies that do not possess any of the  five  certainties.  We  can
have an emanation body in the form of an ordinary  being/person;  this  does
not possess any of the five certainties.

The exalted activities that are deeds
-The remaining 3 exalted bodies  are  of  the  nature  of  the  nature  body
because that is the dharmata of those.
-The remaining 3 exalted bodies (excluding the nature body) are:
      - the exalted wisdom truth body
      - the complete enjoyment body
      -the emanation body (mainly the supreme emanation body).
      - The nature body is not dharmata. Only the nature body  that  is  the
factor of purity with respect to inherent existence is dharmata.
-They are not causeless and do not  arise  from  discordant  causes  because
they arise  through  the  strength  of  cultivating  the  two  accumulations
[accumulation of exalted wisdom and accumulation of merit].
     - The accumulation of exalted wisdom mainly  deposits  an  imprint  for
the exalted wisdom truth body (but it also deposits an imprint for the  form
bodies).
     - The accumulation of merit mainly deposits the imprint  for  the  form
bodies (but it also deposits an imprint for the exalted wisdom truth  body).

- The 3 exalted bodies that have been imputed as real  conventionalities  do
not arise causelessly, because:
(i) the exalted wisdom truth body that is a direct object of utilization  of
only buddhas arises in reliance upon having  gathered  the  accumulation  of
exalted wisdom, its cause
(ii) the complete enjoyment body that is  a  direct  object  of  bodhisattva
aryas and above  who  are  arises  in  reliance  upon  having  gathered  the
accumulation of merit, its cause
(iii) the supreme emanation body arises  from  having  gathered  factors  of
both accumulations.
-Acarya Haribhadra in  his  Great  Commentary  clearly  indicated  that  the
remaining three exalted bodies respectively arise from the  accumulation  of
exalted wisdom, the accumulation of merit, and factors of both.
-Each of the remaining 3 exalted bodies arises from  both  the  accumulation
of exalted wisdom and the accumulation of merit.
  Q&A: CMWS say that true cessations are ultimate truths,  whereas  for  the
AMWS, they are not  ultimate  truths.  This  is  because  in  CMWS,  a  true
cessation is a dharmata, whereas  in  AMWS,  it  is  a  conventional  truth.
According  to  CMWS,  dharmata  is  obscured  by  the  conception  of   true
existence. When the conception of true existence has been abandoned and  has
been exhausted, dharmata is clearly seen. For this reason, CMWS says that  a
true cessation is a dharmata. According to  AMWS,  a  true  cessation  is  a
separation from the  object  of  abandonment  and  this  separation  is  not
dharmata.
-Definition of an exalted activity of an exalted wisdom truth body:  A  very
positive excellent quality arisen from an exalted wisdom  truth  body  (that
acted as the empowering condition) which is its cause.
- Exalted activity of an exalted wisdom  truth  body  is  divided  into  two
types:
   i. Exalted activities existing in the objects of the actions, and
  ii. Exalted activities existing in the agent
- When divided, there are 27 exalted activities:
      - 26 existing in the objects of the actions
      - one existing in the agent.
- “Object of the actions” refers to trainees, and “the agent” refers to  the
Buddha.
- The exalted activities are exalted activities of the exalted wisdom  truth
body. This means that the exalted activities  arise  in  dependence  on  the
exalted wisdom truth body.
- The exalted wisdom truth body dawns to sentient beings in  the  aspect  of
the complete enjoyment body  and  the  emanation  body.  In  that  way,  the
exalted wisdom truth body enacts the welfare of sentient beings.
8.34ab      Similarly, as long as cyclic existence exists,
            The activities of this are asserted to be uninterrupted.
-The truth body is uninterrupted. The exalted activities of this truth  body
are asserted to be uninterrupted because it  has  been  preceded  by  having
culminated the accumulation of causes for being uninterrupted in  that  way.
“Truth body” refers to the exalted wisdom truth body.

Setting on the path
Setting on the PoA
Setting in the excellent attitude
8.34c The activities in which migrations have been pacified;
- He initially sets trainees in the excellent attitude,  because  he  enacts
the exalted activities of setting trainees in generating the  attitude  that
seeks liberation in which the aspirations of migrators of  happy  migrations
and bad migrations seeking merely high status  (within  samsara)  have  been
pacified. Through this, setting trainees in a support of  the  path  (refers
to a human rebirth) has been implied, but, explicitly, setting  trainees  in
the attitude seeking liberation has been indicated.
- The buddha sets trainees in the attitude seeking liberation, so that  they
do not simply seek higher rebirths within samsara.
Setting in the applications that ripen others’ continua
8.34d Setting in the four means of gathering disciples;
- He sets [trainees] in ripening others’ continua, because he sets  trainees
in the four means of gathering disciples: generosity,  speaking  pleasantly,
conduct of welfare, and according with the meaning.
Setting in the view that realizes the four truths
8.35ab      The realization of the thoroughly afflicted
            And the completely pure;
- He sets trainees in the wisdom that realizes the four  truths  because  he
sets trainees in the realization that:
      -(i) sufferings and origins that are the thoroughly  afflicted  causes
and results are to be discarded and
      -(ii) paths and cessations that are the  completely  pure  causes  and
results are to be adopted.

Setting on the PoP
Setting in the excellent attitude
8.35cd      Sentient beings [in] the meaning that is exactly
- He sets trainees in the pure attitude of others’ welfare, because he  sets
sentient beings in the realization  of  the  meaning  that  is  exactly  the
meaning of the mode of abidance that he himself has realized.
-The “excellent attitude” here refers to the excellent attitude  of  others’
welfare.
Setting in the applications that ripen their own continua
Setting in the actual
8.35d … the six perfections;
He sets trainees in the method to thoroughly complete  the  qualities  of  a
buddha in their own continua because  he  sets  them  in  the  complete  six
perfections.
-In other words, the Buddha  sets  the  trainees  on  the  PoP  in  the  six
perfections. Although we say the trainees are set in  the  six  perfections,
it means they are set in the practice of the six perfections.
Setting in the conduct of the welfares of the two
8.36a The paths of buddhas; …
- He sets trainees in the conduct of the welfares of  the  two,  because  he
sets them in the paths of the ten virtues that  progress  to  the  state  of
buddhas.
- This means Buddha sets trainees in the basis  of  one’s  own  welfare  and
others’ welfare.
- “the basis of one’s welfare and others’ welfare”  means  the  practice  of
the paths of the ten virtues. By  practicing  well  the  paths  of  the  ten
virtues, one builds a  good  foundation  for  accomplishing  one’s  own  and
others’ welfare.
Setting in the pure view
8.36ab      … the emptiness of
            Inherent existence; …
- He sets trainees in the pure view, because he sets them in  realizing  the
emptiness of inherent existence ultimately  with  a  mundane  wisdom  arisen
from meditation.
Setting on the PoS
8.36b … duality have been extinguished;
- He sets trainees in  newly  realizing  emptiness  with  direct  cognition,
because he sets them in newly and directly realizing the emptiness in  which
the elaborations of dualistic appearances have been extinguished.

Setting on the PoM
Setting on the two: the ground Stainless and so forth
8.36c Terminology; … {400}
- He enacts the exalted activity of setting trainees  on  the  2nd  and  3rd
grounds, because he sets them in the perfections of ethics and  patience  by
way of understanding that all phenomena included within  those  two  grounds
are mere terminology, mere imputations.
Setting on the three: the 4th ground and so forth
8.36c … not observed;
-After that, he enacts the exalted activity of setting  trainees  on  the  3
grounds, because he sets them, by means of being distinguished by  realizing
that all phenomena are not observed ultimately, in;
(i) the wisdom that knows the harmonies of enlightenment on the 4th ground
(ii) the wisdom that knows the four truths on the 5th ground
(iii) the wisdom that knows dependent-arising on the 6th ground.
by means of being conjoined with the realization that  phenomena  lack  true
existence (emptiness of all phenomena).
- In other words, they know the harmonies with  enlightenment  by  means  of
being conjoined with the realization of emptiness, the four truths by  means
of being conjoined with the realization of emptiness, and  dependent-arising
by means of being conjoined with the realization of emptiness.
Setting on the 7th ground
8.36d Thoroughly ripening the embodied;
- After that, he enacts the exalted activity of setting trainees on the  7th
ground because he acts to thoroughly ripen the  embodied  by  means  of  the
perfection of skillful means included within that ground.
Setting on the 8th ground
Setting in the KP that knows the 3 paths
8.37a The bodhisattvas’ paths;
-After that, he enacts the exalted activity of setting trainees on  the  8th
ground because he sets them in the  KP  that  directly  knows  the  3  paths
characterized by the bodhisattvas’ paths included within that ground.
-“KP that directly knows the 3 paths” refer to the KP  that  directly  knows
hearers’ paths, KP that directly knows solitary  realizers’  paths,  and  KP
that directly knows bodhisattvas’ paths.
Setting in the pacification of the conception of true existence
8.37b Turning away from adherence;
-After that, he enacts the exalted activity of setting trainees on  the  8th
ground because he sets them in the turning away from the manifest  adherence
to true existence included within that ground.
Setting in the attainment of the imputed Buddha Jewel
8.37c Attaining enlightenment; …
- After that, he enacts the exalted activity of setting trainees on the  8th
ground because he sets them  in  the  attaining  of  enlightenment  that  is
imputed as the Buddha Jewel included within that ground.
- The Buddha sets these 8th grounders  in  the  attaining  of  enlightenment
that is imputed “Buddha Jewel.It is said that the 8th ground bodhisattva  is
an imputed Buddha, although he is not an actual Buddha.
- Why is it that  a  bodhisattva  on  the  lower  grounds,  such  as  a  7th
grounder, is not known as an imputed Buddha Jewel? Because an  8th  grounder
does not need coarse exertion to  enact  the  welfare  of  sentient  beings,
whereas 7th grounders and below do need coarse exertion.
Setting in the application of pure land
8.37cd      … purifying of
            The buddha land; …
- After that, he enacts the exalted activity of setting trainees on the  8th
ground because he sets them in the purifying of  the  buddha  land  included
within that ground.
Setting on the 9th ground
Setting in the definite attaining of buddhahood themselves
8.37d … definite;
 -After that, he enacts the exalted activity of setting trainees on the  9th
ground because he sets them in the definite attaining of buddhahood  without
falling into other vehicles included within that ground.
-It is said that on the 8th ground, a bodhisattva, no matter  how  dull,  is
pervaded  by  having  attained  a  sign  of  irreversibility.  There  is   a
confidence of attaining buddhahood. The Buddha sets 9th  -grounders  in  the
ability to set others in  the  definite  attainment  of  buddhahood  without
falling into other vehicles.”
Setting in the ripening of others
8.38a The immeasurable welfare of sentient beings;
- After that, he enacts the exalted activity of setting trainees on the  9th
ground because he sets them in accomplishing  the  immeasurable  welfare  of
sentient beings included within that ground.
- The 9th -grounders themselves set others  in  the  definite  attaining  of
buddhahood. The Buddha is able to cause 9th -grounders to set others in  the
definite attaining of buddhahood.
Setting on the 10th ground
Setting in relying upon  the  spiritual  guide  included  within  the  tenth
ground
8.38b The excellent qualities of relying upon the buddhas and so forth;
- After that, he enacts the exalted activity  of  setting  trainees  on  the
10th ground because he sets them  in  accomplishing  the  special  excellent
qualities of relying upon the buddhas, hearing the excellent Dharma,  making
offerings, and so forth included within that ground.
Q&A: The complete enjoyment body arises in reliance on the  accumulation  of
merit, and that the supreme emanation body arises from  both  accumulations.
Why is it that  the  accumulation  of  merit  is  emphasized  more  for  the
complete enjoyment body than for the emanation body?
- We would say that  both  the  complete  enjoyment  body  and  the  supreme
emanation body are the  results  of  having  completed  both  accumulations.
However, the results are utilized in a  greater  way  with  respect  to  the
supreme emanation body, because one needs to display a  body  that  is  also
seen by ordinary beings with  pure  karma,  so  greater  merit  and  greater
exalted wisdom are required. You need to utilize greater exalted  wisdom  in
order to emanate a supreme emanation body.
- Under the section on exalted activities, we see divisions such as  setting
trainees on the PoA, setting them on the PoP, setting them on the  PoS,  and
so forth. What does it mean  to  “set”  trainees  on  a  certain  level?  In
accordance with the interests and  dispositions  of  trainees,  one  has  to
explain the Dharma.
- One starts by explaining, for instance, the path of the small  scope:  how
to abandon the ten non-virtues and cultivate the ten virtues; then one  goes
on to explain the middle scope, etc.
-In brief, one has to explain the Dharma in such a  way  that  the  trainees
are able to generate the excellent qualities of realizations,  such  as  the
realizations of renunciation, bodhicitta, and the correct view.
-It is very significant  to  say  the  exalted  activities  arise  from  the
exalted wisdom truth body, because  the  exalted  wisdom  truth  body  knows
exactly the interests and dispositions of the trainees;  it  knows  what  is
beneficial  and  not  beneficial  for  trainees,  what  is  a  suitable   or
unsuitable time to explain the Dharma, etc.
-For this reason,  it  is  said  that  these  exalted  activities  arise  in
dependence on the exalted wisdom truth body.
- These exalted activities displayed by a buddha arya  arise  in  dependence
on the exalted wisdom truth body  in  his  continuum.  Through  the  exalted
wisdom truth body appearing directly in  forms  that  can  be  perceived  by
sentient beings, the welfare of sentient beings is enacted.
Setting in increasing realization
Setting in the attainment of the branches of enlightenment
8.38c The branches of enlightenment; …
- After that, he enacts the exalted activity  of  setting  trainees  on  the
10th  ground  because  he  sets  them  in  completing  all  virtues  without
exception that are  the  branches  of  enlightenment  included  within  that
ground.
Setting in actions and results not going to waste
8.38cd      … actions
            Do not go to waste;
-After that, he enacts the exalted activity of setting trainees on the  10th
ground  because he sets them in directly  seeing  that  actions,  no  matter
subtle or gross, do not go to waste and are infallible included within  that
ground.
- regarding karma, once one has created a non-virtuous  action,  unless  one
confesses it properly by way of the four opponent  powers,  the  karma  will
definitely ripen. It is just a matter of time  before  the  non-virtue  that
has been created will come to fruition.
-On purifying negative karma that has been  created,  for  someone  who  has
realized emptiness, if the four opponent  powers  are  engaged  in  and  one
performs confession, it is possible that one does  not  need  to  experience
even the slightest result that one would otherwise have  to  experience.  In
other words, for this person, purification can refer  to  purification  from
the root, such that the result does not have to be experienced at all.
-If a person who has not realized emptiness engages  in  the  four  opponent
powers, purification is not purification from the root.  Although  there  is
purification, the negativities will still yield some  result,  for  example,
instead of experiencing a heavy result, one experiences  a  lighter  result,
for a shorter period of time. For example, the result may take the  form  of
a headache.
-“anger  destroys  roots  of  virtue”  means  that  anger  can  destroy  the
accumulation of merit,  specifically  the  accumulation  of  merit  gathered
while not being conjoined with the wisdom realizing emptiness.
- Anger can destroy roots of virtue, and the degree  to  which  it  does  so
depends on the object at which one gets angry. For example,  if  the  object
is a bodhisattva with high realizations, then the negativity  will  be  very
heavy and one seriously destroys one’s roots of virtue. If  the  bodhisattva
is of lower realizations, then the negativity is less  heavy  and  one  does
not destroy as many roots of virtue.
-Another factor that can affect the degree to which one destroys  the  roots
of virtue with anger is whether or not the objects have shown kindness.  For
example, teachers with whom one has  established  Dharma  relationships  and
one’s parents of this life are very important objects.
- Karma is divided into 3 types: that experienced in the present life,  that
experienced in the next life, and that experienced in some other life  after
the next one.
-Karma created in relation to teachers with whom one has established  Dharma
relationships and one’s parents of this life probably  will  be  experienced
in this life.
- It is said that as we pass into more degenerate times,  karma  will  ripen
in a quicker manner.
- “Degenerate times” means that the afflictions in the continua of  sentient
beings become  stronger  and  stronger.  As  a  result  of  the  afflictions
becoming  stronger,  one’s  non-virtues  increase  and  one  produces   more
negative  karma.  Because  of  the  strong  negative  karma   created,   the
experiences due to the fruition of that karma also arrive more quickly.
Setting in knowing the truths
8.38d … seeing the truths;
- After that, he enacts the exalted activity  of  setting  trainees  on  the
10th ground because he sets  them  in  directly  seeing  the  complete  four
truths included within that ground.
- When we talk about the direct seeing of the complete  four  truths,  there
is direct seeing of the complete four truths included in the 10th,  9th  and
8th grounds, and so forth. Here, the buddha sets them in the  direct  seeing
included in the 10th ground. The trainees are on the ninth ground,  and  the
buddha is setting them in the tenth ground.
Setting in the extinction of errors
8.39a Abandoning the errors;
-After that, he enacts the exalted activity of setting trainees on the  10th
ground because he sets them in  exhaustively  abandoning  the  four  errors:
cleanliness, happiness, permanence, self, and so forth included within  that
ground.
- “the four errors” refers to the four errors of (1)  apprehending  what  is
unclean  as  clean,  (2)  what  is  suffering  as  happiness,  (3)  what  is
impermanent as permanent, and (4) what is selfless as self.
Setting in the absence of the basis
8.39b The mode of the absence of the basis;
- After that, he enacts the exalted activity  of  setting  trainees  on  the
10th ground because he  sets  them  in  the  mode  of  the  absence  of  the
conception of true existence, the  basis  for  generating  the  four  errors
included within that ground.
- In this AMWS  system, there is a differentiation between  the  final  root
of samsara and the root of samsara.
- The conception of true existence is posited as the final root of samsara
-The conception of self is posited as the root of samsara.
- From the conception of true existence, the conception of self arises,  and
from that conception, various afflictions arise.
-In the absence of the conception of true existence, one will not  have  the
conception of self and the afflictions.
- In this section, we talk about setting trainees in various levels  of  the
path. Whether or not the trainees are  able  to  generate  the  realizations
mainly depends on the trainees themselves. The trainees need to  contemplate
the benefits of a certain realization or quality and then  put  effort  into
generating that excellent quality.  There  is  no  generation  of  excellent
qualities or  realizations  just  by  listening  to  others  explaining  the
Dharma.
Setting in the completion of the completely pure
8.39c The completely pure; …
- After that, he enacts the exalted activity  of  setting  trainees  on  the
10th ground, because he sets them in the completion of the  completely  pure
that realizes the equality of all phenomena included within that ground.
Setting in the completion of the accumulations
8.39c … the accumulations;
- After that, he enacts the exalted activity  of  setting  trainees  on  the
10th  ground,  because  he  sets  them  in  the  completion   of   the   two
accumulations that are the causes  of  enlightenment  included  within  that
ground. {
Setting in the realization of cyclic existence and peace as equal
8.39d Not knowing the compounded and
8.40a The uncompounded as different;
- After that, he enacts the exalted activity  of  setting  trainees  on  the
10th ground,  because he sets them in
    -(i) not knowing the compounded samsara and the uncompounded nirvana  as
different ultimately and
    -(ii)directly knowing them as not different ultimately  included  within
that ground.
Setting in the result of the path
8.40b And setting in nirvana:
-After that, he sets trainees in the result of the  path,  because  he  sets
them in non-abiding nirvana included within that ground.
Summary
8.40cd      The exalted activities of the truth body
            Are asserted to be of twenty-seven types.
-The exalted activities of the exalted wisdom truth  body  are  asserted  in
sutra to be of 27 types.
Setting in seeking liberation, the attitude of middling beings
-After having set trainees in high status, he acts to set them initially  in
the attitude seeking liberation. This  is  the  attitude  in  which  seeking
migrations in cyclic existence has been pacified.
Setting in the four means of gathering disciples
-It is not limited to just that, because he enacts the exalted  activity  of
setting trainees in the four properties of gathering  disciples:  generosity
that acts to gather sentient beings and so forth.
Setting in knowing the four truths
-It is not limited to just that, because he causes trainees to  realize  the
discordant classes, sufferings and origins, and  the  antidotes,  cessations
and paths, respectively from  the  point  of  view  of  the  objects  to  be
discarded and to be adopted, through knowing that is  arisen  from  hearing,
arisen from contemplation and meditation, and so forth.
Setting in the attitude of others’ welfare
-It is not limited to just that exalted activity,  because  he  then  enacts
the exalted activity of setting trainees in the welfare of sentient  beings,
that is, the nature of such characteristics of the four immeasurables,  love
and so forth that are others’ welfare, through being  devoid  of  subsequent
grasping, anger, and so forth with  respect  to  sentient  beings,  like  an
illusionist.
Setting in the conduct
-He sets trainees in special conduct, because, after that, he sets  trainees
in familiarizing with the six perfections, distinguished  by  realizing  the
purity of the three spheres—the object, the activity,  and  the  agent—one’s
own welfare.
Setting in the basis of accomplishing the two welfares
-After that, he enacts the exalted  activity  of  setting  trainees  in  the
basis  of  all  excellent  qualities,  because  he  sets  trainees  in   the
characteristic of one’s and others’ welfares,  the  paths  of  buddhas,  the
paths  of  action  of  the  ten  virtues,  which  are  definitely  necessary
regardless of what is being accomplished.
-“paths of buddhas” refer to the paths of action of  the  ten  virtues,  and
these paths of action are said to be  definitely  necessary,  regardless  of
what is being accomplished. By engaging in the paths of actions of  the  ten
virtues, one can attain a good rebirth, or a positive support; as  a  result
of that, one  is  able  to  practice  the  Dharma  well  and  fulfill  one’s
potential, and in that way one will be able to  enact  both  one’s  own  and
others’ welfares.
Setting on the path of preparation
- After setting trainees on the PoA, then he sets them in the  PoP,  because
he places them  in  the  familiarization  with  the  emptiness  of  inherent
existence ultimately of all phenomena with  a  mundane  wisdom  arisen  from
meditation.
Setting on the path of seeing
- After that, he sets them on the PoS because he sets them in realizing  the
property that is the lack of duality of apprehendeds and  apprehenders,  the
characteristic of newly and directly realizing  progression  to  all  [means
dharmadhatu], bearing the property of  dharmadhatu,  the  first  ground,  in
dependence on the perfection of generosity.
Setting on the path of meditation
Setting on the second through to the 5th grounds
- Then, he sets them in the 2nd through to the 5th grounds because  he  sets
them in knowing that all phenomena are imputed as terminology, not  existing
ultimately and existing just conventionally,  by  means  of  completing  the
four perfections of ethics through to concentration and so forth of the  2nd
ground and so forth, since it serves as the cause of  thoroughly  completing
the two accumulations.
Setting on the 6th ground
-He  sets  them  on  the  1st  through  to  the  5th   grounds.   Similarly,
sequentially he sets them on  the  6th  ground,  because  he  sets  them  in
realizing  that  all  phenomena   cannot   be   observed   ultimately,   the
characteristic of not adhering to things that are  knowers  and  objects  of
knowledge as truly existent on the 6th ground, in dependence  on  completing
the perfection of  wisdom  (realizing  all  phenomena  that  are  dependent-
arisings  are  like  reflections)  from  the  empowering  condition  of  the
perfection of concentration.
Setting on the 7th ground
- He sets them on the 6th ground. After  that,  he  sets  them  on  the  7th
ground, because he  sets  them  in  ripening  sentient  beings  through  the
strength of completing the perfection of skillful means on the 7th ground.
Setting on the 8th ground
Setting in special conduct
-He sets them on the 7th ground. Then, he  sets  them  on  the  8th  ground,
because he sets them in the conduct of the six perfections, the path of  the
bodhisattvas that is not in common with that of the hearers and so forth  on
the 8th ground, through the strength of completing the perfection of power.
Setting in the extinction of the manifest conception of true existence
-It is not limited to just that, because then, he sets them in  exhaustively
abandoning the manifest adherence to any phenomenon  as  truly  existent  on
that  8th  ground  itself.  Know  that  it  is  impossible  for  a  manifest
conception of true existence to occur once this ground is attained.
Setting on the 9th ground
-After that, he sets them on  the  9th  ground,  because  he  sets  them  in
attaining the enlightenment that turns the wheel  of  Dharma  well,  through
the force of completing the perfection of prayer on the 9th ground.
Setting on the 10th ground
Setting in the 10th ground just attained
-After that, he sets  them  on  the  10th  ground  that  is  just  attained,
because, having set them in various pure buddha lands  of  environments  and
inhabitants on the 10th ground that is just attained, he sets them in  being
obstructed  by  one  rebirth,  through  the  strength  of   completing   the
perfection of exalted wisdom.
-On the various pure buddha  lands  of  environments  and  inhabitants,  the
environments are the environments of the buddha lands, and  the  inhabitants
of the pure buddha lands are the bodhisattvas. We can say that in  the  pure
buddha land, the environments and inhabitants are pure. The  bodhisattva  on
the 10th ground is similar to a buddha. In  these  pure  buddha  lands,  the
tenth-ground bodhisattva teaches the Dharma.
Q&A:
- The ordinary body of a person on the PoP transforms into the  mental  body
when he attains the PoS.
- Why we create more negativity when we get  angry  at  a  teacher  or  a
bodhisattva, because they usually have  compassion  and  forgiveness?  It
depends on whether or not that person has shown you kindness, and if  so,
whether that kindness is small, great, etc. If that person has  benefited
you a lot, then the negative karma
created with such a person would be heavier.
- With parents and teachers, the consideration is the benefit  and  kindness
they have shown you. But if there is a 1st  grounder  and  a  10th-grounder,
both of whom are not your parents/teachers,  there  is  more  negativity  in
generating anger towards the  10thgrounder,  because  the  10thgrounder  has
higher realizations, and more  excellent  qualities,  and  has  trained  for
longer time on the path.
Setting in being obstructed by one rebirth
Setting in the certainty of attaining buddhahood in the next rebirth
-He sets them in that way because he sets them in individually  ascertaining
perfect complete enlightenment in just the second rebirth,  the  self-entity
that is obstructed by one rebirth also on that 10th ground itself.
- A bodhisattva is obstructed by one  rebirth  means  that  the  bodhisattva
does not attain enlightenment in the present life. The  bodhisattva  has  to
take a rebirth and then attains enlightenment in that 2nd rebirth.
-  Setting  trainees  on  certain  levels  means  the  buddhas  giving  them
teachings so that they can work toward and attain that level.
-When we talk about trainees being set  in  the  various  levels,  it  is  a
matter of the attainment of various realizations, one after another. We  are
talking about trainees attaining the actual realizations that allow them  to
proceed on the path. This does  not  mean  that  they  just  understand  the
meaning of the words of the  teachings;  they  have  to  attain  the  actual
realizations.
Setting in the spontaneous welfare of others
-He sets them in that, because he sets  them  in  enacting  the  welfare  of
sentient beings in the world systems of the  ten  directions  equal  to  the
buddhas.
- On the 10th ground, during subsequent attainment, a bodhisattva  is  equal
to a buddha from the point of view  of  enacting  the  welfare  of  sentient
beings. During meditative equipoise, the  10th  ground  bodhisattva  is  not
considered equal to the buddha.
Setting in the completion of the remaining qualities of a buddha
-He sets them in that because he sets them in  the  excellent  qualities  of
arriving in the presence of the buddhas in all the world  systems,  ripening
sentient beings, completing clairvoyances, and so forth, and then sets  them
in the last existence.
- This outline is about completing the  remaining  qualities  of  a  buddha.
There are qualities that a bodhisattva has not yet attained at  this  point,
so the bodhisattva needs to attain these.
-“Setting trainees in the excellent qualities of arriving  in  the  presence
of the buddhas in all the world systems” means that the  trainees  are  able
to go to the buddhas in all the world systems to hear the Dharma from  them,
and this will  benefit  them  in  terms  of  the  generation  of  the  final
excellent qualities.
-These trainees are also set in “ripening sentient  beings,”  through  which
the trainees can increase the accumulation of merit, which  will  help  them
to attain the final qualities of buddhahood.
-“Completing clairvoyances” probably refers  to  the  trainees  training  in
meditative stabilization to improve their dexterity, and “sets them  in  the
last existence” refers to setting  these  trainees  in  the  last  existence
before attaining buddhahood.
Setting in the last existence
Setting in the distinctive abilities
Setting in the ability to induce enlightenment
 - He sets them in the distinction of also that 10th ground  itself  through
such stages, arriving in the presence of the buddhas and so  forth,  because
he sets them in the complete branches of enlightenment,  the  characteristic
of the qualities that act to induce the production of all of  the  excellent
qualities of unsurpassable enlightenment on that itself, the self-entity  of
the path of distinction of the 10th ground.
- This outline  is  “setting  in  the  last  existence,”  meaning  the  last
existence on the 10th ground.
Setting in the ability of actions not going to waste
-He sets them in the distinction of also that  10th  ground  itself  through
such stages, arriving in the presence of the buddhas and  so  forth  because
he sets them in directly realizing that the  relation  between  actions  and
results does not go to waste by way of high status and definite goodness.
Setting in the distinctive realizations
Setting in the realization of the varieties
-He sets them in the distinction of also that  10th  ground  itself  through
such stages, arriving in the presence of the buddhas and  so  forth  because
he sets them in directly realizing that all things that are the four  truths
are reality exactly.
Setting in the realization of the modes
-He sets them in the distinction of also that  10th  ground  itself  through
such stages, arriving in the presence of the buddhas and  so  forth  because
having set them in directly knowing that  the  compounded  samsara  and  the
uncompounded nirvana are not different ultimately through the entitiness  of
emptiness, after that he sets them in the result.
- Compounded samsara and uncompounded nirvana are not different  ultimately;
they are equal in being empty of true existence.
- Samsara and nirvana are not equal. However, they are equal in being  empty
of true existence, in being dependent-arisings. Because they are  dependent-
arisings, emptiness of true existence is feasible. Because the  presentation
of dependent-arising is  feasible,  the  presentation  of  samsara  and  the
presentation of nirvana are also feasible. If, instead, the presentation  of
dependent-arising were  not  feasible,  the  presentations  of  samsara  and
nirvana would also not be feasible.
Setting in the distinctive abandonments
Setting in the extinction of errors
- He sets them in the distinction of also that 10th  ground  itself  through
such stages, arriving in the presence of the buddhas and  so  forth  because
he sets them in the exhaustive abandonment of all the four errors.
- Four errors: apprehending what is unclean as clean, what is  suffering  as
happiness, and so forth.
Setting in the extinction of their bases
- He sets them in the distinction of also that 10th  ground  itself  through
such stages, arriving in the presence of the buddhas and  so  forth  because
he sets them in the exalted  wisdom  that  has  exhaustively  abandoned  the
conception of true existence, the basis of the errors
-The conception of true existence gives rise to the conception of self,  and
from the conception of self, various afflictions arise.  The  conception  of
true existence mentioned here is the final root of cyclic existence in  this
system.
Setting in the distinctive accumulations of pure causes
Setting in the accumulation of causes for the truth body that is  purity  by
way of nature
-He sets them in the distinction of also that  10th  ground  itself  through
such stages, arriving in the presence of the buddhas and  so  forth  because
he sets them in the purity of a bodhisattva abiding on the 10th ground  with
the characteristic of purity by way of nature distinguished  by  being  free
from adventitious stains.
- As the adventitious stains are purified more and  more,  the  purity  with
respect to inherent stains becomes more and more manifest. In  this  system,
there is this description of these two distinct processes. In  this  system,
purity with respect to  adventitious  stains  and  purity  with  respect  to
inherent stains are different.
Setting in the accumulation of  causes  for  being  free  from  adventitious
stains
-He sets them in the distinction of also that  10th  ground  itself  through
such stages, arriving in the presence of the buddhas and  so  forth  because
he sets them in the complete accumulation of causes for the  purity  of  the
buddha ground that is free from all stains.
- This discussion of the  buddha  setting  the  trainees  “in  the  complete
accumulation of causes for the purity of the  buddha  ground  that  is  free
from all stains” refers to the trainees who are at the end of the  continuum
of a sentient being. Not only are they in the last existence, but they  have
arrived at  the  end  of  the  continuum  of  a  sentient  being.  Once  the
accumulation of causes for the purity of the  buddha  ground  that  is  free
from all stains is complete,  the  trainees  attain  enlightenment  in  that
instant.
-Purity  with  respect  to  inherent  stains  and  purity  with  respect  to
adventitious stains  are  related:  by  being  free  from  the  adventitious
stains, the purity with  respect  to  inherent  stains  is  established.  By
eliminating the adventitious stains, the obscurations preventing the  seeing
of the dharmata of the mind are removed. When one completely eliminates  the
stains while being in the state of seeing dharmata, one is able to  see  all
phenomena—all modes and varieties.
Setting in the result of the path
-After that, he sets them in the result of the path because he sets them  in
non-abiding nirvana on the tathagata ground.
-“abiding in  non-abiding  nirvana”  means  abiding  in  a  nirvana  without
abiding in cyclic existence or solitary peace.
Summary
Therefore, just as the truth body is uninterrupted, also  the  27  types  of
exalted activities of this truth body are uninterrupted, because,  since  it
is asserted to enact the welfare  of  sentient  beings  as  long  as  cyclic
existence exists, the exalted activities are enacted uninterruptedly.
- If you look at the presentation of the 27 exalted  activities,  it  begins
with the exalted activity of setting trainees  in  seeking  liberation  from
samsara. Does this mean that prior to this, there are no exalted  activities
of the exalted wisdom truth body? No. Even prior to the  generation  of  the
aspiration seeking liberation, there are exalted activities of  the  exalted
wisdom truth body. Starting from the slightest virtuous  mind  generated  by
any sentient being, there is the enactment of  exalted  activities.  Various
kinds of emanations are produced by the buddhas; the  emanations  appear  in
diverse forms: some pleasant, some unpleasant, etc.  As  long  as  there  is
benefit, these emanations are produced.
The sequences of the other topics of the words should also be understood  in
dependence on the first and last of the seventy topics
- In the course of the Explanation: Ornament of the Essence by Gyeltsab Je:
      - for the topic of  the  generated  mind,  the  boundaries  have  been
explained: the  generated  mind  is  attained  from  the  Mahayana  path  of
accumulation, and on the small path of accumulation you have the first  type
of generated mind, on the middling you have the  second  type  of  generated
mind, etc.
      - for the last topic, the exalted  activities,  the  boundaries,  e.g.
the exalted activities  of  setting  trainees  in  generating  renunciation,
setting them on the path of accumulation, on the path of preparation, etc.
-The boundaries have been clearly indicated  for  these  two,  but  for  the
other topics, the boundaries have not  been  clearly  indicated.  The  point
here is that the boundaries for the  other  68  topics  must  be  understood
based on what has been explained for the first and the last topics.
Indicating other summarized meanings
Summarizing into six meanings
-The 8 summarized meanings have been explained to  benefit  sentient  beings
with faith in the extensive elaboration of the meanings.
-The 8 meanings can be summarized into 6,  and  this  is  for  persons  with
faith in the middling.
- The summarized meanings can be summarized into 3, which is done for  those
with faith in the brief.
-In the Ornament for Clear Realization, we see the explanation of 8,  of  6,
and of 3  summarized  meanings  because  of  the  different  disciples  with
different kinds of likings.
    9.1           The characteristics; the application of those;
      That highly; the sequence of those;
      The final; the fruition:
      Another set of summarized meanings is the set of the six types.
- The set of six types is made up of
      (1) the 3 exalted knowers, counted as one;
      (2-5) the 4 applications, counted individually
      (6) the truth body.
- The 3 EKs are explained as characteristics. They characterize whatever  is
an object  of  cultivation  of  the  applications  as  an  object  of  valid
cognition. In other words, the object of characterization is the  object  of
cultivation of the applications. They are  characterized  as  an  object  of
valid cognition by the characteristics; and these  characteristics  are  the
3EKs.
- The AICA cultivates  the  aspects  of  the  3EKs  through  gathering  them
together. It cultivates them collectively for the sake  of  gaining  control
over them.
- The PA has attained control over the aspects of the 3EKs.
-The SA involves the cultivation of the aspects of the 3EKs serially.
-AICA cultivates the aspects of the 3EKs through  gathering  them  together.
On the occasion of the AICA, it is not that there is no serial  cultivation.
Likewise, we talk about PA as having gained control over the aspects of  the
3EKs but this does not mean  that  having  attained  the  PA,  there  is  no
cultivation through gathering the aspects together. We would say that  there
are both types of cultivation: through gathering the  aspects  together  and
progressively.
- IA is the occasion in which one has attained stability in the  aspects  of
the 3EKs. This IA is said to be a final  application,  because  realizations
of the learners’ path lack progression to distinction beyond it.
- The truth body along with the activities is the occasion of  the  fruition
of the realizations of the 3 exalted knowers of all, since it is  the  final
result of those applications.
- “the truth body along with the activities” means the truth  body  and  the
activities of the exalted wisdom truth body.
-One  cultivates  the  aspects  of   the   3EKs   through   practicing   the
applications, starting from the AICA and  finally  one  has  the  IA.  After
that,  one  attains  the  exalted  wisdom  truth  body  from  which  exalted
activities arise. Without attaining the exalted  wisdom  truth  body,  there
are no exalted activities of the truth body.
- The truth body along with the activities is  the  final  result  of  those
applications. However, the exalted activities of the  exalted  wisdom  truth
body are not the final result of those applications because they exist  even
before entering the path.
- If the meanings of the words of the set  of  the  6  types  of  summarized
meanings are to be explained, they should be explained  in  accordance  with
how the set of 8 meanings has been explained above.
9.2         The three types of objects; the causes,
            The natures of the four applications; and
            The result, the truth body along with the exalted activities:
            Another set of summarized meanings is the three types.
- We cultivate the aspects of the 3EKs. How are  they  cultivated?  Just  as
generating the mind into the entity of  compassion  is  called  ‘cultivating
compassion,’ one cultivates the aspects of the 3EKs by generating them  into
the entity of the applications. The aspects of the 3EKs are  generated  into
the entity of the applications.
-These  3EKs  are  considered  the  objects,  and  the  causes  are  the   4
applications; the truth body along with exalted activities  is  the  result.
In this way, we have the set of three summarized meanings.
- The 4 applications are yogas that are unions of calm abiding  and  special
insight in the continuum of a bodhisattva that cultivate those.
- The truth body along with the exalted activities  is  a  final  object  of
attainment of those applications.
Q&A :
- The 4 bodies are one entity, but different isolates.
-“The  subject—the  remaining  3   exalted   bodies   that   are   property-
possessors—are not different entities from the  nature  body,  because  they
are exalted bodies that are of the entities of dharmata, emptiness  of  true
existence, ultimately.” Why are the 3 exalted bodies  one  entity  with  the
nature body? The reason is that the 3 exalted bodies are of  the  entity  of
the emptiness of true existence.
- The 4  exalted  bodies  are  the  same  entity  in  being  empty  of  true
existence. This is why  we  say  that  all  objects  of  knowledge  are  one
taste/entity in being empty of true existence.
-When we say that causes and results are  different  entities,  we  are  not
saying they are not the same in being empty of true existence. We  say  that
a cause and its result are not one  entity;  they  are  different  entities.
However, we can also say  they  are  one  entity  in  being  empty  of  true
existence. This is a different context: when we say  cause  and  result  are
different entities, it is from the point of view of  their  being  different
substances; they are functioning things that are different substances.
- The OfCR can be summarized into 8, 6, or  3  summarized  meanings.  Recall
that the OfCR is a commentary  on  the  3  types  of  Perfection  of  Wisdom
Sutras: extensive, medium, and brief. This means  that  in  each  of  the  3
types of Perfection of Wisdom Sutras, we should be able to find  the  8,  6,
and 3 summarized meanings. This explanation of  the  3  sets  of  summarized
meanings (8, 6, and 3)  is  explained  to  be  presented  for  the  sake  of
trainees with liking for the extensive, middling, and brief elaborations  of
the meanings. They are  not  presented  from  the  point  of  view  of   the
faculties of the trainees.
-The 3 types of Perfection of Wisdom  Sutras  -the  extensive,  medium,  and
brief -are explained to be taught respectively for sharp-faculty,  middling-
faculty, and dull-faculty trainees.
      - the extensive Perfection  of  Wisdom  Sutra  is  taught  for  sharp-
faculty trainees
      -the medium Perfection of Wisdom Sutra for middling-faculty trainees
      -the brief Perfection of Wisdom Sutra for dull-faculty trainees.
- sharp-faculty trainees do not need much commentary to  understand  certain
points; middling-faculty trainees need more commentary than those  of  sharp
faculty; and dull-faculty trainees need plenty of commentary  to  understand
the same points.
- Those of sharp faculty can understand points that are explained  based  on
a slight amount of explanation. Since they have this ability  to  comprehend
the material, even if a very extensive explanation is given, they  are  able
to absorb it.
-Those of middling faculty need  more  commentary  to  understand  the  same
points because their ability to grasp these points is lesser than  those  of
sharp faculty. If too much is said, they will have difficulty  comprehending
the material.
- Those of dull faculty, if a lot of explanation is given, they  are  unable
to absorb the material because they have a very limited ability compared  to
the other two types of trainees. In order to  understand  the  same  points,
they need a lot of explanation, but  if  a  very  extensive  explanation  is
given, they have difficulty in assimilating all the material.
- According to our system, the 3 sets of summarized meanings (8, 6,  and  3)
arise due to trainees with different types of liking: liking for  extensive,
middling, and brief elaborations of the meanings.
- Our system says that these 3 types of  persons  should  be  differentiated
according to their likings for extensive, middling, and brief,  rather  than
according to their faculties -sharp, middling, and dull.
- The 8, 6, and 3 summarized meanings are present in each of the 3 Mothers:
      -In the brief Perfection of Wisdom Sutra,  or  Eight  Thousand  Stanza
Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, some of the meanings have been taught by way  of
the complete meaning, explicitly and implicitly
      -In the middling Mother, or medium Perfection  of  Wisdom  Sutra,  the
complete words that explicitly indicated the meanings have been taught
      -In the extensive Mother, or extensive  Perfection  of  Wisdom  Sutra,
names that are many enumerations for each meaning have been taught.
- The 3 types of Perfection of Wisdom Sutras differ in the amount of  words,
but not in the meanings. This is because the Ornament for Clear  Realization
is supposed to be an ornament of all three Mothers.
- When we talk about the  3  types  of  sutras,  they  are  correlated  with
faculties, but when we talk about the 3 sets of  summarized  meanings,  they
are correlated with the trainees who like  extensive,  middling,  and  brief
elaborations of the meanings.
- This commentary Clear Meaning was composed by  Haribhadra.  In  dependence
on what did he compose it? He composed it in reliance  on  the  instructions
of the past acaryas.
-He composed this commentary Clear Meaning  by  means  of  having  seen  the
meanings through the force of using Arya Vimuktisena’s  commentary.  On  top
of that, he composed it after having asked  Vairocana,  the  perfect  abbot,
for permission. He  first  explicitly  paid  homage  to  Vairocana  who  had
understood all the meanings of the treatise, and then he composed  it  after
having received permission from Vairocana.
-How did he compose it? Haribhadra did not explain the  Ornament  for  Clear
Realization elaborately in his commentary because he  wanted  to  present  a
brief commentary that was easy to understand. For that reason,  he  did  not
compose this commentary in a very elaborate manner.
- Haribhadra is saying that his wisdom is unclear, and therefore  he  cannot
compose the treatise based on his direct cognition of the meanings; he  thus
composed this treatise through engaging in generalities.
- The meanings of the treatises are objects  of  the  direct  cognitions  of
aryas. They are very difficult to realize, so how can these meanings be  the
objects of my direct cognition?
- Haribhadra says that  since  these  meanings  of  the  treatises  are  not
objects of my direct cognition, it is possible that many mistakes have  been
made. If that is the case,  may  those  scholars,  or  skilled  beings,  who
possess Dharma eyes (i.e. who are wise) forgive  my  mistakes.  There  is  a
purpose for having composed the treatise with effort because it was done  in
order to benefit oneself and others.
Q&A: -We should understand that the accumulation of  merit  mainly  deposits
imprints for the form bodies; the  accumulation  of  exalted  wisdom  mainly
deposits imprints for the exalted wisdom truth  body.  This  does  not  mean
that the accumulation of merit does not deposit an imprint for  the  exalted
wisdom truth body, and the accumulation of exalted wisdom does  not  deposit
an imprint for the form bodies. From the complete enjoyment body  acting  as
the empowering condition, the supreme emanation body  arises.  The  complete
enjoyment body arises in dependence on having gathered the  accumulation  of
merit; without the accumulation of merit acting as a  backing  support,  how
could the supreme emanation body arise?
