Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/Personal notes/Personal notes - Supports of Achieiving_Lineage Abiding in Nature.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:11.616581
================================================================================


The Supports of the Achievings (Lineage Abiding in the Nature)
Lineage according to the Cittamatra system
- A sutra says: “That lineage of the bodhisattvas, passing down from
beginningless time, has come. What is the attribute of the six sources
obtained by way of dharmata?”
- Cittamatrins interpret this passage to explain the lineage
- The mind-basis-of-all, which is asserted to exist by the Cittamatra
followers of Asanga, is a 7th consciousness (other than the usual six),
which is a “repository of seeds or predispositions, including those that
simultaneously produce an apprehending subject and an apprehended object.
- There are two types of lineage:
  1. Lineage abiding in the nature
  2. Developmental lineage.
- There are two main systems of Cittamatra, in terms of assertions
regarding the mind-basis-of-all:
1. Those following reasoning (mainly followers of Dharmakirti), who do not
assert a basis-of-all
  - Lineage is the potency that is suitable to produce the realizations of
any of the 3 vehicles when the uncontaminated seed that exists upon the six
inner sources meets with conditions.
2. Those following scripture (mainly followers of Asanga), who do assert a
basis-of-all:
 (a) Lineage abiding in the nature: When the uncontaminated seeds that
exist on the basis-of-all are not nourished by conditions, they are called
“lineage abiding in the nature”
 - Developmental lineage: When the uncontaminated seeds are nourished by
the conditions of hearing, they will become the “developmental lineage.”
- The terms “mind-basis-of-all” and “basis-of-all” are synonymous.
- Cittamatra sees lineage as an impermanent phenomenon, not as emptiness.
- According to the Cittamatrins, there are 3 attributes to this lineage:
1. It is passed down since beginningless time
2. It is attained through the force of dharmata (i.e. attained naturally)
3. It is an uncontaminated seed
-“Dharmata” here should not be taken as that asserted by the Middle Way
school, but as that asserted by the Cittamatrins. This dharmata does not
refer to emptiness. When we say “it is attained through the force of
dharmata” means it is attained naturally, or in a primordial way.
- Different kinds of lineage:
- Mahayana lineage: nourished by hearing profound and extensive Dharma
- Hearers’ lineage: nourished by hearing the hearers’ Dharma
- Solitary realizers’ lineage: nourished by hearing merely the Dharma that
 apprehendeds lack nature
- Definite lineage: definite in the cause of the realizations of the
 individual vehicles by way of entitiness.[“By way of entitiness” means
 “naturally.” So that which is definite in causing realizations in a certain
 vehicle naturally is called the definite lineage.]
- Indefinite lineage: suitable to be transformed into the cause of any of
 the vehicles by conditions.[This depends on conditions; if one meets a
 Mahayana teacher, one may enter the Mahayana, if one meets a Hinayana
 teacher, one may enter the Hinayana, and so forth.]
- Severed lineage: unsuitable to be nourished by the condition of hearing
 [Regardless of what type of hearing this person engages in, their lineage
 cannot be nourished and is known as the “severed lineage,” the lineage that
 is cut.]
- There are three types of definite lineage:
   1. definite Mahayana,
   2. definite hearer, and
   3. definite solitary realizer lineages.
-  Someone definite in the Mahayana lineage will meet a Mahayana teacher,
and enter the Mahayana vehicle without changing. The same goes for the
hearer and solitary realizer lineages.
- Those who are indefinite in lineage can enter any of the vehicles,
depending on the kind of teacher they meet.
- If one meets a hearer teacher, one will enter the hearer lineage.
- If one meets a solitary realizer teacher, one will enter the solitary
realizer lineage.
- If one meets a Mahayana teacher, one will enter the Mahayana lineage.
- Cittamatrins see lineage as a potency, or uncontaminated seed. This
presentation is “merely the system of the Cognition-Only in Maitreya’s
Ornament for the Great Vehicle Sutras.
- Madhyamika: The teaching of that very pure nature, the dharmata of
sentient beings’ minds, is the lineage, is explained to be the Middle Way
system.
- It is incorrect to say that the uncontaminated seed included within
compounded phenomenon, is the actual lineage abiding in the nature. That
seed is actually “the lineage that arose from perfect adoption,” not the
actual lineage abiding in the nature. One should know that this is an
application of an imputed name. It is merely imputed as ‘lineage abiding in
the nature.’
-The conclusion is that the presentation of lineage abiding in the nature
according to the Cittamatrin (Mind Only) school is incorrect.
- In the Autonomy school, the principal object of cultivation of the
solitary realizers is non-duality, i.e. the emptiness of apprehendeds and
apprehenders being different substances.
- However, from the point of view of the Cittamatra school, solitary
realizers do not take non-duality as their principal object of meditation.
They do not meditate on non-duality to attain liberation. They mainly
meditate on selflessness of persons.
- According to the Cittamatra school, the object of cultivation of hearers
and solitary realizers is the same.

Lineage according to the Middle Way Autonomy system
- Our system:  There are two types of lineage:
  1. Lineage abiding in the nature
  2. Developmental lineage. [Also known as the lineage that arises from
perfect adoption due to conditions]
- The lineage abiding in the nature : the dharmata that is the emptiness of
true existence of sentient beings’ minds that is suitable to transform into
a nature truth body (a buddha’s uncompounded body).
- The truth body which it transforms into is the very pure nature that is
devoid of all stains refers to the nature body.
Definition from Jetsun Chokyi Gyeltsen’s General Meaning: the dharmata of a
mind that is together with stains, its support that is suitable to
transform into a nature body. [Support = support of the mind; the dharmata
is the support of the mind.]
Definition from Seventy Topics: the common locus of that which is a
dharmata in the continuum of a bodhisattva and that which acts as the
actual supporting basis of Mahayana achievings.
• Note the difference: the 2nd is the support of the Mahayana achievings,
while the 1st is not.
- The developmental lineage is a potential deposited by the conditions of
hearing, contemplation, and meditation, and is also nourished by the same
conditions.
The development lineage, the “lineage that arose from perfect adoption,” is
just that which is suitable to transform into a buddha’s form body. (a
buddha’s compounded body)
- Through reasoning, we can establish that the existence of a potential
upon sentient beings’ minds such that it is suitable for one to separate
from stains and suitable for one to generate aryas’ realizations is
established by reasoning. This means that if you think about these points,
you will be able to establish them.
- How do we establish by reasoning that one can separate from stains?
- The stains have not entered the nature of the mind, and are incidental,
or adventitious.
- If they were part of the mind, i.e. in the sense that they have entered
the nature of the mind, then whenever the mind was manifest, the stains
would be manifest. However, this is not something we observe.
- Also, if the stains were in the nature of the mind, we would have to
extinguish the mind in order to extinguish the stains.
- Also, the stains can be separated from, because they are erroneous states
of mind that lack a valid support. Thus they can be eliminated; one can
separate from them.
- Cittamatrins posit this as the lineage abiding in the nature. Arya
  Vimuktisena says such a lineage arising from perfect adoption is not the
  actual lineage abiding in the nature. This is the imputed lineage abiding
  in the nature and is the fully qualified developmental lineage.
 - Lineage abiding in the nature is the support
 - Developmental lineage is the supported
- According to our system, the actual fully qualified lineage abiding in
the nature is the dharmata of sentient beings’ minds. The lineage that
arose from perfect adoption is an imputed lineage abiding in the nature.

- Acarya Arya Vimuktisena said: This uncontaminated seed as asserted by the
Cittamatrins, is not a lineage abiding in the nature, because the meaning
of it is not complete.
-Someone says: This reason is not established because this uncontaminated
seed has the meaning of acting as the cause of aryas’ realizations.
Our system: If what you say is correct, then it follows that the perfect
adoption of virtues such as realizing emptiness, realizing bodhichitta, and
so forth, due to meeting certain conditions, is a lineage abiding in the
nature. You cannot counter this consequence that it follows that even that
perfect adoption due to conditions is a lineage abiding in the nature.”
[Due to conditions refers to due to conditions such as listening to the
Dharma and so forth. It is not something that is passed down from
beginningless time].
- This lineage abiding in the nature acts as a support for realizations of
the individual vehicles: hearer’s vehicle, the solitary realizer vehicle,
and the Mahayana vehicle.
- Indefinite lineage since it is suitable to transform into the support of
any of the three vehicles.
- Madhyamika does not assert a severed lineage because in the commentary on
the Mahayana Treatise on the Sublime Continuum, the explanation of severed
lineage was proven to an explanation bearing an intention.
- Basis of intention for the explanation of a severed lineage: teaching
severed lineage is to make it known that the path to liberation will not be
generated in the continuum for long time-innumerable eons.
- Purpose for the explanation of a severed lineage: Severed lineage was
taught for the sake of causing those who have hatred for the Mahayana
dharma to overcoming hatred for the Mahayana Dharma, since that is the
cause for those bearing wrong view and craving to not attain enlightenment
for a long time. They will not attain nirvana or enlightenment quickly and
they will only attain it after a very long time.
- Damage to the literal (i.e. why the sutra presentation cannot be taken
literally): It is unreasonable that sentient beings will never purify
stains, because
1. The lineage that is pure by nature exists in all sentient beings
2. The buddhas’ exalted activities engage all sentient beings
- The sutra citation says “Those bearing wrong view and craving bear the
property of never attaining nirvana” cannot be literally accepted as there
is “damage to the literal.” The main reason is that the buddhas’ exalted
activities engage all sentient beings, and since that is the case, all
sentient beings will be caused to attain nirvana.
- It is not suitable to teach that sentient beings never “become pure,”
i.e. attain enlightenment. That which is suitable to be pure exists in all
sentient beings. This is the intention of teaching:
Although beginningless, possessing an end,
The bearer of the property of permanent purity by nature,
Is not seen, concealed by a cover on the outside since beginningless time,
Just like a concealed golden statue.
- The Bhagavan taught that such a lineage abiding in the nature is
beginningless, but that it does have an end. When the stains have been
completely eliminated, it comes to an end.
- Other extreme positions that contain many wrong assertions:
     - because even though the stains will be purified, the  stains  in  the
       continuum of some sentient beings are permanent.  [The  view  is  not
       correct because  stains  in  the  continua  of  sentient  beings  are
       impermanent, not permanent.]
     - because even though they are impermanent, the method  for  destroying
       them is not possible. [The view is wrong because there  is  a  method
       for destroying those stains.]
     - because even though it is possible, nobody  knows  the  method/  [The
       view is wrong because there is someone who knows the method.]
     - because even though someone knows it, there is  some  sentient  being
       for whom it is not possible to generate a mind seeking it  [The  view
       is wrong because sentient beings can generate the  mind  seeking  the
       method.]
     - because even though someone knows it, a person who cares for sentient
       beings with mercy is not possible. [The view is wrong  because  there
       is a person who cares for sentient beings with mercy.]
     - because it is not possible  for  some  inferior  sentient  beings  to
       generate disillusionment due to suffering. [The view is wrong because
       sentient beings can generate disillusionment due to suffering.]
     - even though it may be generated, he will  not  become  an  object  of
       exalted compassion of the buddhas, and so forth. [The view  is  wrong
       because all sentient beings are objects of the exalted compassion  of
       the buddhas; they are cared for by the buddhas. There is no  sentient
       being for whom the  stains  cannot  be  abandoned  and  in  whom  the
       antidotes cannot be generated.]
- Developmental lineage is divided into Mahayana lineage, hearers’ lineage,
solitary realizers’ lineage, indefinite lineage, etc. These divisions are
in terms of temporal occasions. However, relative to the final, all
sentient beings have the “buddha lineage.”
-Someone says: Although you assert that all sentient beings are  bearers  of
the tathagata essence, lineage-bearers of that  tathagata  essence  are  not
asserted by the Cittamatrins.
-Our system: If you are not able to understand the great texts, it would be
wonderful if you remained neutral and left the texts alone. For those who
lack the power, they should not engage in discriminating “this is right,
this is wrong,” and so on.
- The lineage explicitly taught here is divided into 13 types by way of the
occasion
- Bodhisattvas are the conventional supports of the achievings and they are
also divided into 13 types by way of the occasion.
- Through observing and meditating on emptiness of true existence of the 6
inner sources, aryas’ realizations will be generated. Hence it is called
“lineage.”
- When familiarization with that becomes more outstanding, the potential of
the developmental lineage will also become more outstanding; hence it is
called “lineage that transforms from development.
- Someone says: Since lineage precedes the generated mind of enlightenment,
the partial concordance with liberation, partial concordance with definite
discrimination, and so forth, it should be explained first. Why, then, is
it explained after bodhicitta and the path of preparation?
- Our response: That is the sequence of the meaning from the point of view
of cause and effect. Here, the result (generated mind) is explained first,
while the cause (lineage) is indicated later.
- This is the sequence of explanation. Hence there is no fault. From the
point of view of cause and effect, first there is lineage, followed by
bodhicitta, and so on. Here, in the sequence of explanation, the result is
explained first, and the cause later.
- This reasoning is similar to the way in which the order of explanation of
the four noble truths and the three exalted knowers, as opposed to the
order of generation, is explained.
• In terms of cause and result:
1. Awaken lineage
2. Generate bodhicitta, partial concordance with liberation, partial
concordance with definite discrimination, etc.
• In terms of this explanation: when bodhicitta, the partial concordance
with liberation, and so forth are generated in one’s continuum, one will be
able to realize the existence of lineage in one’s continuum.
- Someone says: Why are there still so many sentient beings who have not
attained nirvana if they all have the lineage abiding in the nature and
infinite buddhas have come?
- Our response: This is due to possessing the four hindrances of lineage
which are:
   1. Predominance of afflictions
   2. Being held by negative companions
   3. Being deprived of necessities of life, and
   4. Being under the control of other sentient beings
Due to possessing any of these, one is not yet able to attain nirvana.
- Since lineage abiding in the nature exists in all sentient beings, why is
it presented from the path of preparation?
- Although lineage abiding in the nature exists before the Mahayana path of
preparation, it is explained at this point because:
     - In dependence on the Mahayana path of preparation one separates from
the four hindrances of lineage.
     - By observing and familiarizing with the lineage abiding in the
nature by way of the wisdom arisen from meditation, one will be able to
attain the aryas’ qualities. Therefore lineage is presented from the path
of preparation.
How to lead disciples by way of their lineage?
- First one has to cause trainees to hear the teachings of the Hinayana and
Mahayana.
- In dependence on this, one comes to know their faculties. One needs to
lead them through the stages of the path of the small, middling, and great
scopes.
- If the trainee belongs to the Mahayana lineage:
   - one must cause them to engage in accumulating merit and exalted wisdom
and in purification, referring to purifying hindrances to generating the
Mahayana path.
   - they will have joy in meditating on great compassion, engaging in
extensive generosity, guarding extensive morality, and joy in cultivating
patience, etc. One will thus lead them to generate bodhicitta.
- Even before attaining bodhicitta, they are said to be bodhisattvas who
have not generated the mind of enlightenment. But of course they are not
bodhisattvas yet.
-  they will not enter the great scope immediately. They first need to
generate the attitudes of the small and medium scopes. On that basis, they
can generate the attitude seeking others’ benefit, and bodhicitta.
- Then one needs to check if they can engage in the bodhisattva deeds, and
if they can guard the bodhisattva vows without breaking them. If they are
suitable to do that, one should cause them to uphold the engaging vows.
- If the trainee belongs to the Hinayana lineage:
   -  Some disciples, due to having familiarized with hearer and solitary
realizer paths in the past, will generate strong disillusionment with
cyclic existence and has the strong aspiration seeking liberation for
themselves at the beginning.
  - If it is unsuitable for the time being to lead them to the Mahayana,
one should lead them through the paths of the middle scope that aim for
liberation.
- One needs to examine the interest of the trainees, cause their lineage to
be awakened, and then cause them to engage in the path. The main point here
is that one awakens the lineage and leads trainees according to their
lineage.
- For a Mahayana person, the paths of the small and middle scopes are the
methods for awakening the lineage and for engaging in the stages of the
path after it has been awakened.
What is the lineage that is the support of the achievings?
- Without awakening the Mahayana lineage, one will not engage in the
generated mind of enlightenment, and even if one were to engage in it, it
would not be firm. Hence, it is necessary to awaken the lineage.
- Thirteen supported achievings
• The first six qualities of realization (qualities are the achievings)
1. Heat level of Mahayana path of preparation
2. Peak level
3. Forbearance level
4. Supreme mundane quality level
5. Path of seeing
6. Path of meditation
• The other seven: (correlation between these and the path of seeing and
path of meditation)
7. Uninterrupted path of the path of seeing: Abandoning by way of
approaching the generation of the antidotes, the uninterrupted paths, and
approaching the cessation of the seeds that are the objects of abandonment.
8. Uninterrupted paths of the path of meditation
9. Liberated paths of the path of seeing and path of meditation: the
liberated paths that fully contact those objects of abandonment.
10. 8th bodhisattva ground: “wisdom along with compassion, which stop the
extremes of cyclic existence and solitary peace.
11. 9th ground: the enactment of others’ welfares is uncommon with hearers
and so forth
12. 10th ground: the achievings of the sequence of others’ welfare
13. 10th ground: exalted wisdom engaging in the two types of objects of
knowledge, modes and varieties, without exertion”
•Know their support as lineage [the lineage abiding in the nature]
The dharmata that is the support of the six qualities of realization that
is with stains is called lineage.
- Dharmata = support
- Achievings = supported (here we speak of 13 achievings, or qualities,
supported by 13 dharmatas)
- When we talk about the dharmatas of these achievings, they are the
different kinds of lineages.
- The first 6 qualities are thus the achievings.
- The dharmata of these six are the dharmata of the four levels of the path
of preparation, the path of seeing, and the path of meditation.

Individual entities
 1-4  the 4 Mahayana partial concordances with definite discrimination
 5    the Mahayana path of seeing
 6    the Mahayana path of meditation
 7    achieving of the antidotes: the uninterrupted paths
 8    achieving of abandoning
 9    achieving of thoroughly contacting those: the liberated paths
 10   achieving of wisdom along with compassion
 11   achieving uncommon to hearers and so forth
 12   achieving of the sequence of others' welfare
 13   achieving of the exalted wisdom engaging without exertion
1‐4. The dharmata of the mundane partial concordances of definite
discrimination- is their support because it is the dharmata of those that
will be enhanced more and more through observing and meditating on it.
5. Dharmata that is the support of the supramundane path of seeing that
newly realizes emptiness by way of direct cognition
6. Dharmata that is the support of the path of meditation that familiarizes
with that already realized is called “lineage.”
7. Uninterrupted paths of the path of seeing
8. Uninterrupted paths of the path of meditation
9. The dharmata which is the support of the liberated path in which
conceptualizations have been abandoned is the 9th type of lineage.
10. Attained from the 8th ground- After that, the support of wisdom and
method with the characteristic of not abiding in the extreme of samsara or
nirvana (by the force of previous prayers and skillful means).
11. Attained from the 9th ground By generating those method and wisdom,
dharmas uncommon to hearers and so forth, the method for ripening sentient
beings—the four individual correct knowledges.
12. The 10th grounder possesses the achieving of the sequence of others’
welfare, because he is a bodhisattva who attains equality with a buddha,
spontaneously accomplishing others’ welfare with the characteristic of
setting in the paths of the three vehicles in accordance with trainees’
mentalities, by means of
a. Ulterior intention toward causing them to enter and so forth [ulterior
intention means interpretable meaning]
b. By means of the definitive meaning
13. In that 10th grounder: there is no sign of striving as long as samsara
exists, and the culminated exalted wisdom of others’ welfare arises
spontaneously. The support of that achieving of this tenth-grounder is
called “lineage.”
Note for 1-6:
- This dharmata is the support of the mundane partial concordances with
definite discrimination, i.e. the four levels of the path of preparation.
- The reason is because it is the dharmata of those which will be enhanced
more and more through observing and meditating on it.
- This reason should be applied to the other points. As in no 5 & 6 there
is no reason stated but the same reason should be applied.
- The dharmatas of the path of seeing and path of meditation are mentioned
in points 5 and 6. [The path of meditation here is not referring to the
path of meditation of the 7th ground and below. It refers to the general
path of meditation.]
Notes for 7-8
- By the force of generating the uninterrupted paths of path of seeing and
the path of meditation, the exhaustion of the seeds that are the
corresponding objects of abandonment occurs simultaneously.
-As we approach the uninterrupted path, two things are occurring
simultaneously:
 -the approach to the generation of the antidote (the uninterrupted path)
and
- the approach to the cessation of the discordant class (the seeds that are
the corresponding objects of abandonment occur).
- An example: when dharma forbearance of true sufferings of the Mahayana
path of seeing (an uninterrupted path) is generated, the direct objects to
be damaged - the seeds to be abandoned by the path of seeing -are ceased.
- When this uninterrupted path is generated, the seeds to be abandoned by
the path of seeing are ceased.
- The approach to the generation of the uninterrupted path and the approach
to the cessation of the seeds that are the objects to be abandoned are
simultaneous.
- Through the force of the uninterrupted path, there is this abandonment.
Due to this abandonment, the object of abandonment is not suitable to be
generated from then on.
- The start of that path in which a true cessation has been attained is
called a liberated path.
- The object of abandonment can no longer be generated by way of the
imprint of the antidote i.e. because of the uninterrupted path.
- The liberated path is generated by the uninterrupted path.
- At the time of the uninterrupted path, the corresponding object of
abandonment does not exist.
- This is not because an analytical cessation has been attained as at the
time of the uninterrupted path. An analytical cessation has not been
generated.
-  There are analytical cessations and non-analytical cessations.
- Analytical cessations are “final states of cessation of obstructions upon
analysis of the nature of phenomena, which are such that those obstructions
will never return.
- Non-analytical cessations are temporary absences of afflictions and so
forth due to the incompleteness of necessary conditions, upon the
aggregation of which the afflictions will return.
- This is similar to the fact that on the uninterrupted path of the end of
the continuum of a sentient being of the 10th ground, there is not even a
mere particle of subtle stains of negative states.
- This means that the subtle latencies of the conception of true existence
that are knowledge obscurations are not present. However, this does not
mean they have been exhaustively abandoned. This is because the liberated
path has not been attained.
- Various doubts are expressed, in which it is asserted that there should
be contact between the antidote and the object of abandonment. This is not
correct.

So how does the uninterrupted path abandon the objects of abandonment?
- The meaning of having caused damage to the objects of abandonment on the
uninterrupted path:
  Through having familiarized with the antidotal class,
1. When one is approaching the uninterrupted path, there is simultaneous
approach to the generation of the antidote and approach to the cessation of
the seeds that are the objects of abandonment
2. When one attains the uninterrupted path, there is simultaneous
generation of the antidote and cessation of those seeds
- From this point on, it is unsuitable for the objects of abandonment to be
generated.

-Q&A: Have afflictions entered the nature of the mind (whether the mind is
in the nature of afflictions).
- The reasons that afflictions have not entered the nature of the mind are:
- E.g. if attachment has entered the nature of the mind, then the mind is
in the nature of attachment.
Whenever the mind is manifest, attachment should be manifest. But when
anger manifests strongly, attachment is not manifest. This is one reason
for saying that attachment has not entered the nature of the mind.
- Upon contemplating the faults of the afflictions and coming to see those
faults, you engage antidotes to abandon them. You will see that the
afflictions become weaker.
While we see the afflictions becoming weaker, it is not the case that the
mind becomes weaker. Rather, the mind becomes stronger. When afflictions
become weaker, our mind becomes more and more powerful. Our mind
experiences more freedom. This is why we say that afflictions have not
entered the nature of the mind.
-Ignorance that is the conception of true existence cannot be increased
infinitely because there is a powerful antidote to it. Upon applying the
powerful antidote, ignorance becomes extinguished.
- If afflictions have entered the nature of the mind, there is no way to
achieve liberation or enlightenment.
- The afflictions have not entered the nature of the mind so it’s a matter
of time that they will become separated from the mind. The afflictions are
adventitious.

Definitive and interpretable meaning sutras for the Svatantrika‐Madhyamika
system.
Definitive meaning sutras: a sutra is definitive if it takes emptiness as
its main explicit subject matter and is literally acceptable.
- Examples of definitive meaning sutras are the three Perfection of Wisdom
sutras: the extensive, medium, and brief. - There are sutras that take
emptiness as their main subject matter but are not literally acceptable
e.g. Heart Sutra.
- To the Autonomy School, Heart Sutra is not literally acceptable because
of the phrase, “Avalokiteshvara beheld those five aggregates also as empty
of inherent existence.” Svatantrika assert that phenomena do exist
inherently.
- A literally acceptable statement would be: “Avalokiteshvara beheld those
five aggregates also as empty of inherent existence ultimately.”
Interpretable meaning sutra has two possibilities:
• Sutras that indicate conventional truths as their main subject matter or
• Sutras those are not literally acceptable.
- Example of a sutra that indicates conventional truths as its main
explicit subject matter and is literally acceptable is a sutra that teaches
that compounded phenomena are impermanent.
- Example of a sutra that is interpretable in meaning that does not
indicate conventional truths as its main explicit subject matter, and is
not literally acceptable is the Heart Sutra.
-  There are four types of interpretative sutras that were taught with an
ulterior intention:
   1) Ulterior intention with respect to the characters;
   2) Ulterior intention regarding causing to enter;
   3) Ulterior intention regarding  antidote,  which  has  four  bearers  of
      intention;
   4) Ulterior intention regarding conversion (transformation).
- A sutra bearing intention is posited from the point of view of whether
the sutra has an intention [means the sutra contains some kind of
intention]
- A sutra ulterior intention is posited from the point of view of the
purpose [means the sutra contains some kind of purpose or need for
expressing the sutra in a certain way]
- (1) Ulterior intention with respect to the characters is the teaching in
the Sutra Unraveling the Thought regarding whether the three natures have
the attribute of being established or not established as truly existent.
– (2) Ulterior intention regarding causing to enter refers to an intention
regarding causing someone to enter into the Buddhist tenets, or views.
Example is the teaching that a self of persons exists for the sake of non-
Buddhist schools and some Buddhist schools
- (3) Ulterior intention regarding antidote, which has four bearers of
intention:
   (3a) the intention of the 3 samenesses;
   (3b) the intention regarding others’ welfare;
   (3c) the intention regarding other time;
   (3d) the intention regarding the mentality of persons.
- (3a) The three samenesses are:
   (1) all buddhas have the same causes: the collections of the two
accumulations
   (2) all buddhas are the same in having attained the resultant truth body
   (3) all buddhas are the same in their exalted activities to enact the
welfare of sentient beings.
-With the intention of these 3 samenesses, the Buddha taught “I, at that
time, was the Buddha Vipashvin.”
- (3b) The intention regarding others’ welfare is such as in the teaching
given to King Ajatasatru ‘The father and the mother are to be killed.’” It
means that karma and afflictions are to be abandoned.
- (3c) The intention regarding other time is such as that in the teaching
in which it has been taught that one will be reborn in Sukhavati [Amitabha
Buddha’s pure land].
   -  By simply making prayers to be reborn there as an antidote for those
who are lazy.
   -  There are some lazy people who are not able to practice anything
other than making prayers. When such people hear this teaching, they find
it wonderful and will engage in such prayers.
   - In fact, by merely making prayers, one will not be reborn in Sukhavati
in the next life. This intention is called “regarding other time” means
that one will be reborn in Sukhavati in another time, not in the next life.

- (3d) The intention regarding the mentality of persons is such as that in
the teaching that deprecates generosity and praises ethics as an antidote
to complacency with merely generosity.
   - For a person who is complacent with practicing merely generosity, in
dependence on the mentality of this person, the teaching that deprecates
generosity and praises the practice of ethics is given in order to
encourage this person to practice ethics.
   - If someone is complacent with practicing merely ethics, in dependence
on the mentality of this person, a teaching that deprecates ethics but
praises generosity is given. This is a type of skilful means.
    - If someone is just interested in practicing ethics, one can praise
generosity to them.
    - If someone is just interested in practicing generosity, one can
praise ethics to make them develop interest in it.
- (4) The ulterior intention regarding conversion says, “Know the essence
in that lacking essence.” which converts poor syllables that are widely
renowned into those which reveal an unrenowned profound meaning.
 - Examples are
    -  “know the essence of the training of wisdom by knowing that the four
wrong conceptions of cleanliness, happiness, permanence, and self lack
essence.”
    - “know the essence of the training in ethics in immorality that lacks
essence”
    - “know the essence of the training in concentration in distraction
that lacks essence.”
  -This teaching is able to convert that which lacks essence into that
having essence. For example, afflictions do not have essence. Regardless of
how many afflictions we consider, they have no correct essence. The essence
is contained in the training in ethics.
  - Likewise, regardless of how many distractions we consider, there is no
essence in them. The training in concentration and wisdom has essence.
Based on this teaching, by engaging in the three trainings of ethics,
concentration, and wisdom, one will attain enlightenment.
- The 13 kinds of achievings have different functions, e.g. the
uninterrupted paths have different functions from the liberated paths.
However, these 13 are not of different entities.
-Bodhisattvas are divided into 13 due to the 13 occasions of the qualities
of the achievings.
- For example, when we say “uninterrupted paths,” this includes the
uninterrupted path of the path of seeing and the uninterrupted path of the
path of meditation. Similarly when we talk about the liberated paths, the
liberated paths of the path of seeing and mediation are included. In this
way, the 13 kinds of achievings have different functions, but are not of
different entities.
- Someone says:
1. Only the dharmadhatu of sentient beings  is  the  object  of  observation
that is the cause that will transform into realizing the aryas’ qualities.
2. The bodhisattvas who bear that dharmadhatu are bearers  of  the  Mahayana
lineage.
3. The dharmata of sentient beings is the lineage  abiding  in  the  nature,
the source of the qualities of the unsurpassable buddhas.
  (This person thinks that:
    - This dharmadhatu that is the lineage abides in all sentient beings,
therefore all sentient beings abide in the lineage of buddhas
    - This dharmadhatu abides in general in persons who are all 3 types of
lineage-bearers; hearer, solitary realizer and bodhisattva. Therefore it is
not correct to say that it abides only in bodhisattvas [only bodhisattvas
bear the buddha lineage.])
- The essence of this assertion is that the 3 kinds of lineage are
indivisible in dharmadhatu. Therefore it is not suitable to differentiate
the lineages of the 3 vehicles. Thus everyone on the learning paths,
regardless of what lineage they are, abide in the lineage of the path of
the occasion of Mahayana.
- The consequence: It follows that not only bodhisattvas are bearers of the
lineage of buddhas.
- The Ornament generally posits 3 vehicles in terms of faculty - from the
point of view of 3 dissimilar main objects of cultivation.
  - The best view in the great vehicle, view of the Middles Way, correlated
with Mahayana
  - The middling view in the middling vehicle, the view of the Mind-Only,
correlated to solitary realizers
  - The last view in the small vehicle, the view of the selflessness of
persons, correlated with the hearers.
- Although that is the presentation, in the actual realization, it is not
definite that hearers and solitary realizers do not realize suchness, or
emptiness of true existence.
- Arya Vimuktisena also asserts that there are hearers and solitary
realizers who realize the selflessness of phenomena, i.e. emptiness of true
existence.
- In fact, we find that, among all three types of lineage-bearers, there
are those who realize emptiness. It is not the case that only those of the
Mahayana lineage realize emptiness and there are no hearers and solitary
realizers who realize emptiness.
- From the point of view of the Mahayana, we would say that all Mahayana
aryas are pervaded by having realized emptiness.
- From the point of view of the Hinayana, there are hearer aryas who have
realized emptiness, however all hearer aryas are not pervaded by having
realized emptiness.
- From the point of view of solitary realizers, there are solitary
realizers who have realized emptiness, but there is no pervasion that all
solitary realizer aryas have realized emptiness.
- The lineage abiding in the nature that is the support of the achievings.
This includes the lineage abiding in the nature that is the support of the
achievings of the hearers and solitary realizers.
- By observing this support, hearers and solitary realizers are able to
develop the aryas’ qualities. Thus this dharmadhatu is the cause of the
aryas’ qualities i.e. by observing dharmadhatu, the aryas’ qualities arise.

[Aryas includes hearer, solitary realizer, and Mahayana aryas. This
indicates that there are hearers and solitary realizers who realize
emptiness.]
- Someone says: If dharmadhatu were the lineage, then all sentient beings
would abide in the lineage because, in general, dharmadhatu abides in all.
[This person thinks that the lineage refers to the lineage of the occasion
of the path. This is not true, because although all sentient beings have
the lineage, they do not all have the lineage of the occasion of the path.]
- Our reply: The fact that dharmata is present does not mean that one
abides in the lineage of the occasion of the path.
   One needs to observe the dharmata and meditate on it by way of the path
so that it becomes the special cause of aryas’ qualities. So before it
becomes the special cause of aryas’ qualities, it is not known as the
lineage of the occasion of the path.
- Someone says: Since dharmadhatu has no divisions, it is inappropriate for
the lineages of the 3 vehicles to be different.
- Our reply: Although dharmadhatu has no divisions in entity, there are
divisions of the paths. Because of that, the lineages of hearers, of
solitary realizers, etc., can be expressed, by way of different divisions
of the path. In other words, the divisions are not in terms of the
dharmadhatu itself, but in terms of the path that observes it.
Observing dharmata:  Support = object of observation (i.e. dharmadhatu)
                                   Supported = observer, i.e. the
achieving, or practice that observes dharmata
- The observers of dharmata can also be hearers and solitary realizers. The
achievings exist even in the hearers’ and solitary realizers’ vehicles.
-In order to observe dharmata, it must be established in the perspective of
the awareness.
-Without severing true existence (without refuting it) in the perspective
of the awareness, emptiness of true existence will not be established in
the perspective of the awareness.
- Therefore in order to observe dharmata, one must sever true existence in
the perspective of the awareness so that emptiness of true existence will
be established in the perspective of the awareness.
- Someone says: Whether someone is a vessel or non-vessel of Mahayana
dharma is inappropriate because all 13 divisions are based upon vessels for
the Mahayana dharma; all are based on the Mahayana achievings.
- Our reply: In Vimuktisena’s Illuminating the Twenty Thousand, there is no
fault of a ridiculous consequence. Basically we say that the 13 divisions
are made from the point of view of the 13 divisions of the achievings [the
paths] so there is no fault.
- The presentation of the hearers’ path according to the Autonomy school is
made in terms of the lack of a self-sufficient, substantially existent
person. According to the Autonomy school, this is the subtle selflessness
of persons while it is the coarse selflessness of persons according to the
Consequence school.
- According to the Consequence school, the three vehicles do not differ in
terms of whether or not emptiness is realized. All three vehicles realize
emptiness.
- Middle Way Consequentialists: all aryas necessarily realize emptiness.
 - Middle Way Autonomists: not all aryas realize emptiness, but there are
some hearers and solitary realizers who realize emptiness.
- There are two types of hearers who realize emptiness:
 1. those who realize the emptiness of true existence
 2. those who do not realize the emptiness of true existence
-  Most hearers and solitary realizers have not realized emptiness.
Realizing selflessness ripens the continuum for the realization of
emptiness, similar to how the Cittamatra view is presented as a way to
ripen trainees for the Madhyamika view.
 - By starting with the common realization of selflessness, one’s continuum
becomes ripened for the profound view of emptiness. One will then proceed
to become a vessel for the view of emptiness. It is for that reason that
that path i.e. the common realization of selflessness is frequently taught.

- For those trainees who are not vessels of the profound, one teach them
selflessness.
- For those who are vessels of the profound, both selflessness and
emptiness are taught.
- The thusness that is together with stains is the buddha lineage. This
means that the dharmata of the mind that is together with stains is the
buddha lineage.
Thusness that is dharmadhatu is observed by those of different levels of
accumulation and faculty (hearers, solitary realizers, bodhisattvas) in
order to realize their respective arya qualities.
 - Dharmadhatu = object of observation that is the cause
 - Three persons = lineage-bearers abiding in their respective lineages
 - Dharmata of the three persons = lineages of the three vehicles
- Therefore, although all three observe the same thusness, the difference
in terms of their faculties and accumulations gives rise to their
dissimilar realizations.
- They are not differentiated by way of differences in observing subtle and
coarse selflessness.
-Analogy: Cay pots are likened to dharmata, and their contents are likened
to the different qualities based on that dharmata.
- Containers such as clay pots: supports made from the same clay and baked
in the same ovens
- The clay pot contain (are the supports for) different contents: honey,
molasses and yogurt (the “supported” substances)
- Although the pots are exactly the same, due to different contents they
are imputed with different names.
- Likewise, although dharmata, the support, is the same since the supported
(the hearer, solitary realizer, and Mahayana vehicles) are different. The
support is given different names, i.e. the hearers’ lineage, solitary
realizers’ lineage, and Mahayana lineage.
- Similarly, different supported qualities - the different paths that are
objects to be realized and attained included within the three vehicles- are
indicated to have “different supports.”
- Someone say: If the pots are the same, it is contradictory that they are
pots of dissimilar contents is a wrong conception. Through such an
assertion, one will also have wrong conceptions regarding the grounds and
paths.
