Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/Personal notes/Personal notes- Appln in Complete Aspects -Topic 6,7,8,9,10,11.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:11.777870
================================================================================


Topic 6 MAHAYANA PARTIAL CONCORDANCE WITH LIBERATION EXPLICITLY INDICATED
IN THIS CONTEXT
-Definition: A clear realization of the  doctrine  in  the  continuum  of  a
bodhisattva skilled in achieving an EKAA in his continuum.
-Boundary: Exists only on the Mahayana PoA.
Characteristics of the path as a generality
- The 4 types of characteristics -knowledge characteristics,  distinguishing
characteristics, functional characteristics, and entitiness  characteristics
-will only occur in those who have  the  roots  of  virtue  of  the  partial
concordance  with  liberation.  Therefore  the  partial   concordance   with
liberation is explained now.
4.32  No signs, skilled in perfectly accomplishing
            Generosity and so forth;
            On this realizing all aspects,
            The partial concordance with liberation is asserted.
-The partial concordance with liberation is the beginning  of  the  path  of
attaining enlightenment over 3 countless eons. To attain enlightenment,  one
needs to gather the accumulations over 3 countless eons.  The  beginning  of
this gathering of the accumulations  begins  with  the  partial  concordance
with liberation; it does not exist prior to  the  partial  concordance  with
liberation.
- The partial concordance with liberation that is the beginning of the  path
of attaining enlightenment over three countless eons is asserted to  be  the
clear realization of the doctrine in  the  continuum  of  a  person  who  is
skilled in perfectly accomplishing  in  his  continuum  those  ranging  from
generosity and so forth through  to  the  EKAA  conjoined  with  the  wisdom
realizing that there are no signs ultimately. ‘Conjoined  with’-  means  the
intended trainees of OFCR that is pervaded by realizing emptiness.
- Just by eliminating superimpositions by  hearing  and  thinking  regarding
all types of clear realizations that  are  the  21  sets  of  uncontaminated
exalted wisdom will not cause one to be  in  the  partial  concordance  with
liberation. On top  of  eliminating  the  superimpositions  by  hearing  and
thinking, one needs to produce an experience. Only after  one  has  produced
this experience is one considered to have entered  the  partial  concordance
with liberation. From then onwards, one is known to have
1. initiated the beginning of the  path  of  attaining  enlightenment  over
   three countless eons,
2. entered the Mahayana path, and
3.  produced  in  the  continuum  a  Mahayana  partial   concordance   with
   liberation.
- The criterion of having produced the experience  of  great  compassion  is
through  observing  all  sentient  beings,  one  spontaneously  engages   in
compassion bearing the aspect of desiring them to be utterly  released  from
suffering. In other words, one produces this wish that  sentient  beings  be
free from suffering, like the compassion a mother would have  for  her  only
child. If one can produce such an experience,  one  has  the  experience  of
great compassion. If one can produce an experience  of  compassion  of  this
degree of intensity with  respect  to  all  sentient  beings,  then  one  is
considered to have elicited the experience of great compassion.
- If one is able to produce a spontaneous, effortless  experience,  one  has
elicited experience with respect to that particular path. If  a  path  needs
to be created with effort (i.e.  if  it  is  contrived)  then  one  has  not
elicited the experience and if it is uncontrived, then one has elicited  the
experience with respect to that path.
- When we view phenomena with the mental consciousness, if they appear  like
a reflection of a face in a mirror, such that if one were to  blow  on  this
physical reflection in the mirror, the reflection would vanish, then one  is
said to have elicited the experience of the meditation of emptiness  with  a
wisdom arisen from contemplation.
-In general, it is said that if you realize that the reflection  of  a  face
in a mirror is not established truly in the way  that  it  appears  [in  the
perspective of an eye consciousness], this  does  not  mean  that  you  have
realized emptiness. However, if  you  realize  that  phenomena  are  like  a
reflection of  a  face  in  a  mirror  in  the  perspective  of  the  mental
consciousness,  it  is  said  that  you  have  elicited  the  experience  of
emptiness.
- If you realize that the reflection of the face  in  the  mirror  does  not
exist truly as it appears in the perspective of an eye  consciousness,  then
of course you have not realized emptiness. But if you are  able  to  realize
this in terms of the way things appear to a mental  consciousness,  then  it
is said that you have realized emptiness.
- The difference arises because true existence does not appear to the  sense
consciousnesses, in particular to the eye consciousness, but it does  appear
to mental consciousness. So the object of negation with respect to  the  eye
consciousness is coarse/gross. (The realization  with  respect  to  the  eye
consciousness would be easier to attain. E.g.  you  can  try  to  touch  the
mirror and see if there is a face, and you realize that it  does  not  exist
truly as a face, although it appears as a face.) The reflection  of  a  face
in a mirror points to the meaning of emptiness. The reflection of a face  in
a mirror points to the meaning of a falsity that is renowned in the world.
-As one meditates on emptiness, the appearance  of  true  existence  becomes
weaker and weaker.
-A fully qualified special insight observing emptiness exists only from  the
Mahayana heat level of the PoP.
-A bodhisattva  should  conjoin  all  clear  realizations  with  the  wisdom
realizing emptiness. A clear realization in  a  bodhisattva’s  continuum  is
not necessarily conjoined  with  the  wisdom  realizing  emptiness,  because
there are bodhisattvas who have not realized emptiness. However, if a  clear
realization in a bodhisattva’s continuum is not conjoined  with  the  wisdom
realizing emptiness, this is a fault.
The uncommon Mahayana going for refuge
[Skill in Faith]   4.33a     Faith observing the buddhas and so forth
- The difference between a Buddhist and a non-Buddhist  is  whether  or  not
there is refuge. If one goes for refuge to the Buddha, Dharma,  and  Sangha,
one is a Buddhist; otherwise, one is not a Buddhist.
-One who, due to fearing the sufferings of the three lower realms, goes  for
refuge to the Three Jewels out of conviction that the Three Jewels have  the
power to protect one from this fear, is a person of small scope.
-One who has fear of suffering of cyclic existence in general  and  has  the
conviction that the Three Jewels can protect him  from  such  a  fear  is  a
person of middle scope.
- One who does not just fear the suffering of cyclic existence but goes  for
refuge to the Three Jewels for the sake of all sentient beings is  a  person
of great scope.
- A Mahayana person is pervaded by  being  a  person  of  the  great  scope;
however, a person of the great scope is not pervaded  by  being  a  Mahayana
person.  E.g.  prior  to  generating   bodhicitta,   one   generates   great
compassion. A person who has generated great compassion but  not  bodhicitta
is a person of the great scope but not a Mahayana person. From the point  of
having generated bodhicitta, one is a Mahayana person as well  as  a  person
of the great scope.
- From among the various types of faith, the faith that  is  generated  from
understanding is the best kind of faith. It is important that we  strive  to
generate this kind of stable faith. If we do not  make  effort  to  generate
the faith that is generated from understanding,  we  will  just  have  blind
faith, which is not stable.
- Beings of the small and middle scopes generate faith in  their  respective
modes and then practice the instructions of the Three Jewels. Beings of  the
great scope, besides  observing  the  objects  of  faith  and  putting  into
practice the instructions of the Three  Jewels,  also  seek  to  become  the
Three Jewels.
- In general, beings of all three scopes go for refuge to the Buddha  Jewel,
the Dharma Jewel, and the Sangha Jewel.
- Those of the great scope take refuge in the Dharma Jewel  and  the  Sangha
Jewel in a specific way:
  - when they go for refuge to the Sangha Jewel, they go for refuge  to  the
Sangha Jewel of Mahayana aryas;
  - when they go for refuge to the Dharma Jewel, they go for refuge  to  the
Dharma in the continua of Mahayana aryas.
- When Mahayana refuge is granted and one goes  for  refuge  to  the  Sangha
Jewel, one goes for refuge to the irreversible bodhisattva aryas.
- It is possible to go for refuge to someone who  is  of  lower  realization
than oneself. E.g. the person can be a bestower of vows, so even though  the
person is of lower realization, one can go for refuge to this person.
[Skill in Mindfulness]  4.33b     A mindfulness, the excellent attitude;
- The Mahayana generated mind is the entrance to the Mahayana.  If  one  has
this generated mind, one is a Mahayana person. If one does not have it,  one
is not a Mahayana person.
[Skill  in  joyous  effort]   4.33c    Joyous  effort  in  the  objects   of
utilization, generosity and so forth;
- After having generated bodhicitta, one needs to initiate joyous effort  to
train in the deeds. If one does not initiate  joyous  effort  in  the  deeds
after having  generated  the  mind  of  enlightenment,  then  this  mind  of
enlightenment is simply a noble thought. There is no  way  one  will  attain
enlightenment
Training in the perfection of concentration
[Skill   in   Calm-abiding]     4.33d      Non-conceptualizing    meditative
stabilization, and
-With respect to common calm abiding
  - having observed any  non-conceptualized  image,  such  as  that  of  the
exalted body of the Tathagata,
  - having familiarized with it in dependence  on  the  9  steps  of  mental
abidings,
one practices until
(i) one engages in it  without  exertion  without  need  to  rely  upon  the
antidotes to laxity and excitement, and  (ii)  the  bliss  of  physical  and
mental pliancy has been produced.
-Uncommon concentration refers to meditative stabilization such as  the  Sky
Treasury  that  does  not  conceptualize.  Another   example   of   uncommon
concentration is the perfection of concentration that  is  attained  on  the
fifth ground.
- Non-conceptualized image - If we  want  to  cultivate  calm  abiding  with
respect to a buddha image, at the start we can look at a buddha  image  with
our eyes. Afterwards, one uses the mental  consciousness  to  focus  single-
pointedly on the image. This buddha image dawns to the mental  consciousness
and one holds it single-pointedly. This appearance of the  buddha  is  known
as a reflection, or image, of the buddha.
- At this point of cultivating calm  abiding,  holding  this  image  single-
pointedly with the mental consciousness,  one  does  not  perform  analysis.
This is the meaning of “non-conceptual” in this context. Since one does  not
undertake analysis, this image is said to be non-conceptual.
- When one uses the mental consciousness to form this image,  the  image  is
not a buddha that is self-characterized. It  is  an  image  of  the  buddha.
[“Self-characterized” is a reference to the impermanent form  of  a  buddha,
which is not necessarily cognized by a thought consciousness  since  it  may
be realized by direct perceivers.]
- When the mind is placed on this appearance that dawns to the  mind,  there
is no analysis, and hence no conceptuality. This is what  we  mean  by  non-
conceptual image or non-conceptualized image.  If one,  while  holding  this
appearance, analyzes, then the image will be known as a “conceptual image.”
-There are definitely non-Buddhists who practice and achieve  calm  abiding.
Therefore, calm abiding can be said to  be  common  to  Buddhists  and  non-
Buddhists.
-There are  Buddhist  practitioners  of  calm  abiding  who  cultivate  calm
abiding for the sake of attaining a rebirth in the form or  formless  realms
but this calm abiding cultivation is not unique to Buddhists  as  there  are
non-Buddhists who cultivate calm abiding for the sake of taking  rebirth  in
the form and formless realms.
-Calm  abiding  that  is  unique  to  Buddhists  is  calm  abiding  that  is
cultivated in the entity of a path
-Calm abiding that is unique to the Mahayanists  is  calm  abiding  that  is
conjoined with bodhicitta. Included within meditative stabilization that  is
unique to Buddhists is the alternating meditation. This practice is  one  in
which one alternate uncontaminated mind and contaminated mind.
- Perfection of concentration that is attained on the 5th ground
Training in the perfection of wisdom
[Skill in Wisdom]   4.34ab   The wisdom that knows
                             Phenomena in all ways and the five types.
- In dependence on having attained a fully qualified calm abiding, one  will
be skilled in
  (i) the wisdom that knows the objects of  knowledge,  phenomena  that  are
the modes and varieties, in all ways and
  (ii) the 5 types of objects.
- the special insight observing varieties exists even from the PoA
- the special insight observing modes is attained from  the  heat  level  of
the PoP
-Know that it is attained once one is able to induce the  bliss  of  pliancy
through analysis with the wisdom that individually investigates the  meaning
of emptiness.
- Special insight needs to be cultivated  from  within  the  state  of  calm
abiding.
- When one has attained calm abiding,  one  abides  on  the  object  without
laxity and excitement.
When one tries to cultivate special insight  by  performing  analysis,  this
causes laxity and excitement to arise. So  one  must  train  until  one  can
induce the bliss of pliancy of the body and mind through analysis  and  once
one is able to attain this  bliss  of  pliancy,  one  has  attained  special
insight.
4.34cd      Complete enlightenment is asserted to be
            Easy to realize by the sharp, but difficult to  realize  by  the
dull.
- There are two types  of  intended  trainees  of  the  Ornament  for  Clear
Realization:
  -those of sharp faculty (followers of Dharma) and
  -those of dull faculty (followers of faith)
- Those of sharp faculty will easily realize and attain enlightenment.
-  Those  of  dull  faculty  will  realize  and  attain  enlightenment  with
difficulty.
- The followers of faith are those of dull faculty who generate faith  upon,
for example, hearing the words of the expression of worship
- The followers of Dharma, the sharp  faculty  trainees,  are  followers  of
reasoning who do not immediately generate faith upon hearing  the  words  of
the expression of worship; rather, they undertake analysis and  upon  seeing
that there is no damage, they then generate faith.
- The faith of the dull-faculty trainees is said to be great  faith  -  such
followers of faith generate very strong faith when hearing the words of  the
expression of worship.
- The faith of the sharp faculty trainees is said to be  irreversible  faith
as the followers of Dharma only generate faith  after  undertaking  analysis
and seeing that there is no fault, or  damage.  Before  this,  they  do  not
generate faith, but when they see that there  is  no  fault,  they  generate
faith. Such a faith is an  irreversible  faith  because  it  arises  due  to
having analyzed and seen that there is no fault.
- The distinction in being dull or sharp in faculty lies in whether  or  not
they have completed a fully qualified wisdom due to these two factors:
  1. the degree of the force of their faith and
  2. the strength of joyous effort observing all the stages of the  Mahayana
path.
Distinctions in skill with regard to the five objects
- Bodhisattvas who are intended trainees of the OFCR are skilled in these  5
objects:
  1. faith observing all of the  Mahayana  paths  and  their  results,  the
     buddhas and so forth;
  2. joyous effort that is enthusiastic about generosity and so forth;
  3. mindfulness included within the generated mind, the perfect attitude;
  4. the meditative stabilization that does not conceptualize with  respect
     to all phenomena; and
  5. the full knowing exactly of all aspects  of  all  phenomena  that  are
     modes and varieties and so forth; this refers to special insight  that
     knows modes and varieties.
-Both types of trainees (sharp faculty and dull faculty)  of  the  OFCR  are
skilled in the 5 objects, faith and so forth, but this does  not  mean  that
the two types  of  trainees  will  attain  enlightenment  with  equal  ease,
because attaining enlightenment is easy  for  those  of  sharp  faculty  and
difficult for those of dull faculty.
- Great faith and so forth is the great vehicle, while  small  and  middling
faiths are the small and  middling  vehicles  (refers  to  the  vehicles  of
hearers and solitary realizers respectively).
- Explicitly indicated of those of great faith, those of sharp faculty  will
attain enlightenment easily, whereas  those  of  dull  faculty  will  attain
enlightenment with great difficulty.
- Implicit to that is that those of middling faith and so forth will  attain
and realize the enlightenment of solitary  realizers,  and  those  of  small
faith and so forth will realize and attain the enlightenment of hearers.
- Great scope takes  refuge  in  one’s  own  future  buddhahood.  Small  and
middling scopes do not go for refuge to their future buddhahood.
- An emanation body is a buddha and is a Buddha Jewel.
- Sharp faculty bodhisattvas would analyze the aspects  of  the  3EKs.  When
they find no faults with these  aspects  of  the  3EKs  then  they  generate
faith. This explanation comes in the context of bodhisattvas who have  heard
the words of the expression of worship of the OFCR.

Topic  7  MAHAYANA  PARTIAL   CONCORDANCE   WITH   DEFINITE   DISCRIMINATION
EXPLICITLY INDICATED IN THIS CONTEXT
Definition: A clear realization of the meaning explicitly indicated in  this
context mainly qualified by the quality of method.
Boundary: Exists only on the Mahayana PoP.
-If one has generated a partial concordance with liberation  (PoA),  next  a
partial concordance with definite discrimination (PoP) will arise. From  the
partial concordance with liberation, the partial concordance  with  definite
discrimination, the various grounds, and the buddha ground  will  eventually
arise.
- There are 4 levels of the PoP:
  - heat
  - peak
  - forbearance
  - SMQ
[Heat level of PoP]
4.35  Here, that the objects of observation of the heat levels
            Are all sentient beings is praised.
            The types, equal mind toward those
            And so forth, are explained to be ten.
- The bodhisattvas generate ten types of minds observing sentient beings.
|Transformed into heat observes sentient beings...                               |
|with five        |1.The mind of equality cultivating equanimity observing all   |
|aspects:         |sentient beings, stops prejudice due to grasping and aversion |
|                 |i.e.the mind viewing those sentient beings as equal through   |
|                 |observing them                                                |
|                 |2.Love that bears the aspect of affection toward all          |
|                 |3.Long-term benefit                                           |
|                 |4.The absence of anger due to a deluded mind                  |
|                 |5.Non-harmfulness due to being non-injurious                  |
|and five other   |6.The mind of father and mother towards elderly men and women |
|aspects:         |                                                              |
|                 |7.The mind of brother and sister towards peers                |
|                 |8.The mind of son and daughter towards the juvenile           |
|                 |9.The mind of mutually agreeable friend and trustworthy       |
|                 |companion                                                     |
|                 |10.The mind of paternal relatives and maternal kinsmen        |


- These indicate
  (i) the cultivation of love bearing  the  aspect  of  affection  prior  to
cultivating compassion;
  (ii)  recognizing  all  sentient  beings  as  having  been  one’s  mother,
remembering their kindness, and wanting to reciprocate, as its causes; and
 (iii) the cultivation of equanimity prior to the three.
[Peak Level]
4.36  Through oneself turning away from negativities and
            Abiding in generosity and so forth,
            Setting others in them,
            Expressing praise, and concordance:
4.37a Transformed-into-peak.…
- Transformed-into-peak observes all sentient beings. There are:
- (i) two aspects:
1. oneself turning away from non-virtue and  causing  others  to  turn  away
from non-virtue
2. oneself engaging in virtue and causing others to engage in virtue.
- (ii) the two types:
1. praising others who have engaged similarly without being urged
2. rejoicing when they have done that
-We should express praise for those who have engaged in  turning  away  from
negativities and abiding in generosity and so  forth  without  being  urged,
and we rejoice when others engage without being urged.
[Forbearance Level]
4.37ab      … Likewise, the forbearance level is
                 Oneself, those bearing the supports who are others  knowing
the truths.
- Forbearance level observes all sentient beings because  it  observes  them
by way of oneself, having abided in knowing the four truths,  placing  those
bearing the supports who are other sentient beings in that.
[SMQ Level]
4.37cd      The supreme mundane quality level is to be understood  similarly

            By way of acting to ripen sentient beings and so forth.
- The SMQ level observes sentient beings because  it  is  to  be  understood
that it observes them by way of acting  to  ripen  and  acting  to  liberate
sentient beings and so forth.
- the word “likewise” in Forbearance level and “to be understood  similarly”
in SMQ level means that whatever was applied on the peak level  should  also
be applied to these two levels.
- Differences between the peak level and the forbearance level, and  between
the peak level and SMQ level
  - At the peak level,  it  mentions  turning  away  from  negativities  and
engaging in virtues and causing others to do so.
  - For forbearance, one abides in knowing the four noble truths and  causes
others to know them.
  -At SMQ, one abiding in oneself ripening and  liberating  sentient  beings
and causing others to also ripen and liberate sentient beings.
- Although there  is  this  similarity  of  oneself  abiding  in  a  certain
activity and then causing  others  to  also  abide  in  that  activity,  the
activities are different for each level.
- The description of the heat level also applies to the other three  levels.
For example, it is that the heat level as  observing  sentient  beings  with
those 10 aspects, and then the peak level with its 4 aspects, and so  forth.
It is for us to contemplate the reasons for the  aspects  being  posited  in
that manner. Although they are posited to have their respective aspects,  it
does not mean that other aspects are not utilized on  those  levels.  It  is
just a matter of division. In fact, all levels observe all aspects.
- Our own system's presentation of the purposes of the eight chapters.
own system - The 8 chapters explain the EKAA, KP, KB, AICA,  PA,SA,  IA  and
the resultant truth body (the exalted wisdom truth body).
- In  the  1st  chapter,  the  EKAA  was  explained  in  order  to  generate
enthusiasm in the trainees for the result.
- In the 2nd chapter, the KP was explained for the  sake  of  attaining  the
EKAA.
- In the 3rd chapter, the KB was  explained  in  order  to  make  known  the
discordant classes to the KP.
- In the 4th chapter, the AICA is explained in order to understand that  one
cultivates the aspects of the 3EKs in order to gain control over them.
- In the 5th chapter, PA is explained to make known that one cultivates  the
aspects of the 3EKs having gained control.
-In the 6th chapter, SA is explained to make known that one  cultivates  the
aspects of the 3EKs in order to gain stability over them.
-In the 7th chapter, IA is  explained  in  order  to  make  known  that  one
cultivates the aspects of the 3EKs having gained stability over them.
-In the 8th chapter, the resultant truth body is explained in order to  make
known the final result.
-Someone says:
- the aspects of the EKAA are cultivated only on the occasions  of  the  PoA
and the PoP
- the aspects of the KP are cultivated only from the 1st through to the 6th
grounds;
- the aspects of the KB are cultivated only on the 7th ground
- the AICA is cultivated only on the 8th ground;
- the PA is cultivated only from the 9th ground through to the first part
of the 10th ground;
- the SA is cultivated only on the later part of the 10th ground, excluding
the end of the continuum;
- the IA is cultivated only at the end of the continuum of a sentient
being.
- the exalted wisdom truth body exists only on the buddha ground.
-Our system - the point of view is incorrect. The way  the  boundaries  have
been posited by the other systems is refuted by our system.
- Why is it that we talk about six  clear  realizations  here,  rather  than
eight? Because there is little doubt with respect to the last  2  of  the  8
clear realizations, so they have not been explained here.
- Q&A on Refuge:
 (3) for the great scope, the causes of refuge are compassion  and  fear  of
falling into solitary nirvana, plus faith in the Three Jewels
- For the small scope being, the causes of refuge are fear of the  suffering
of the lower realms, and faith that the  Three  Jewels  have  the  power  to
protect one from these sufferings.
- For the  middle  scope,  renunciation  and  faith  in  the  Three  Jewels;
usually, we explicitly posit fear of the sufferings of samsara  in  general,
and faith that the Three Jewels have the ability to protect  one  from  that
suffering.
- For the great scope, the causes of  refuge  are  compassion  and  fear  of
falling into solitary  nirvana.Usually  we  explicitly  posit  fear  of  the
sufferings of all sentient beings, so that is  not  just  fear  of  our  own
suffering, and faith that the Three Jewels are able to  protect  from  these
sufferings.
- From Maitreya’s Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras, the object of refuge  of
hearers is the Sangha Jewel, the object of refuge of solitary  realizers  is
the Dharma Jewel, and the object of refuge of the Mahayanists is the  Buddha
Jewel.  The purpose for correlating the  Three  Jewels  as  the  objects  of
refuge of these 3 persons is because prior to entering the path,  there  are
3 types of dissimilar interests, after having entered the path there  are  3
types of  dissimilar  functions,  and  eventually,  there  are  3  types  of
dissimilar results. What do we mean by dissimilar interests, functions,  and
results?
-Hearers, before entering the path, enjoy the company of an  assembly,  that
is, they like being in the company of others. After entering the path,  they
like to practice in the company of others. Then, in  the  last  life  before
attaining the state of foe-destroyer, they depend on the instructions  of  a
teacher.
- The solitary realizers, before entering the path, like  to  remain  alone.
After entering the path, they also enjoy solitude,  and  in  the  last  life
before attaining the state of foe-destroyer,  they  do  not  depend  on  the
instructions of a teacher.
-The bodhisattvas,  before  entering  the  path,  have  vast  and  extensive
interests, wishing to attain enlightenment for  the  sake  of  all  sentient
beings. After entering the path, they cultivate the path with the  intention
to benefit all sentient beings,  and  when  they  attain  the  result,  they
attain it for other’s welfare.
- Assertions of Guru Suvarnadvipa that the aspects of the EKAA and so  forth
are cultivated on all 3 paths – the PoP, PoS and  PoM–   refutes  the  wrong
assertions concerning the sequence of the 6 clear realizations that:
  - the aspects of the EKAA are cultivated only on the path of  accumulation
    and the PoP
  - the aspects of the KP are cultivated only on the 1st six grounds
  - the aspects of the KB are cultivated only on the 7th ground,
  - the AICA is cultivated only on the 8th ground,
  - the PA is cultivated only on the 9th and the first part of the 10th
  - the SA is cultivated only on the later part of the 10th ground.
Our system:
- On the PoP, the manifest conception of true existence is abandoned
- On the PoS, the seeds of the acquired conception  of  true  existence  are
abandoned
- On the PoM, the seeds, along with the latencies of the  innate  conception
of true existence are abandoned
- With respect to the 1st three  of  the  eight  clear  realizations,  their
aspects are cultivated on all 3 paths.
- the aspects of the 3EKs are cultivated on all the 3 paths – PoP,  PoS  and
PoM – not just on the PoA and PoP.
- the 3Eks are also cultivated on the PoA but they are cultivated  by  means
of only calm abiding. On the PoP, one has attained special insight.  If  the
3EKs are not cultivated on the PoA, how could  one  attain  special  insight
cultivating  them  on  the  PoP?   From  the  point  of  view  of  principal
cultivation, we posit the PoP, PoS and PoM.
- The applications- AICA, PA and SA cultivate the aspects  of  the  3EKs  on
all 3 paths. They are cultivated for various purposes:
   -to gain control over the aspects
   -to attain stability, and
   - there is also the cultivation having gained control over the aspects.
- That which cultivates the aspects of the 3EKs is the applications. We  can
posit the 4 applications  as  being  like  the  agents  that  cultivate  the
aspects of the 3EKs.
-  The  outline  is  called  “rejecting  contradictions”  means   that   the
troublemakers accuse our system  of  contradictions,  and  we  reject  these
accusations that there are contradictions in our system.
- Our system explains why the troublemaker has not  understood  the  meaning
of the passage from the Great Commentary by stating that  each  of  the  two
thorough confusions is abandoned on each of the 10 grounds,  but  the  seeds
of the two:
  - the thorough confusion regarding the state of the subtle secrets, and
   -  the  thorough  confusion  that  hinder  the  actions  of   the   great
clairvoyances
are the corresponding objects of abandonment of the 10th ground.
- This is the reason given for why the troublemaker has not  understood  the
meaning.
- The two thorough confusions are two types of confusion, or ignorance:
   1. for the thorough confusion regarding the state of subtle  secrets,  we
      can posit: through observing paths and results of hearers and solitary
      realizers, adhering to them as truly existent  objects  to  be  turned
      away from;
   2. for the thorough confusion that  hinders  the  actions  of  the  great
      clairvoyances, we can posit: having observed the  Mahayana  paths  and
      results, adhering to them as truly existent objects to be engaged in.
- Our system continues,
  - This explanation of abandoning the seeds  on  the  10th  ground  is  the
exhaustive abandonment (complete abandonment), but there is abandoning  even
before the 10th ground.
  - In fact, the abandonment of the two thorough confusions begins from  the
1st ground, and upon  attaining  the  10th  ground,  they  are  exhaustively
abandoned. They are abandoned in stages, and finally, on  the  10th  ground,
they are completely or exhaustively abandoned. Therefore, it is not  correct
to explain that the PA is only an exalted wisdom of the pure grounds.
-Someone says:  On  PoP,  the  manifest  conception  of  true  existence  is
abandoned, and on the PoS and PoM, only the seeds of the conception of  true
existence are abandoned. [He  is  asking  “Haven’t  the  majority  of  these
conceptions already been abandoned on the PoP? If so, why are  they  posited
as the objects of abandonment of the peak application of the PoS and  PoM?”]

Our response: Only the seeds are abandoned on the occasions  of  the  PA  of
the PoS and the PA of the PoM. Therefore, when we consider the PoP, we  must
say that the manifest conceptions of true  existence  have  been  abandoned,
but we would not say the conception of true existence has been  exhaustively
abandoned.
- On the various levels of the PoP, the manifest conceptions are  abandoned,
but  this  is  not  an  abandonment  such  that  the  conceptions  are   not
appropriate to be produced again.
- The PA of the PoS and  of  the  PoM  act  to  destroy  also  the  manifest
conceptualizations  by  means  of  having  abandoned  the   seeds   of   the
conceptions. Further, they are sequentially abandoned by the PA  of  the  10
grounds, and the seeds of the last two thorough confusions are abandoned  on
the occasions of the 10th ground.
- the conceptualizations of the apprehendeds and the apprehenders have  been
indicated through having been distinguished by the  objects  of  observation
and aspects.
-“The  “excellent  finality”  is  said  with  respect  to  the   mere   peak
application; explaining it as solely an exalted wisdom of  the  10th  ground
is inaccurate. ” So “the excellent finality” does  not  only  refer  to  the
exalted wisdom of the 10th ground. Remember that when  we  spoke  about  the
PA, there are 4 types:
- the PA of the PoP
-the PA of the PoS
-the PA of the PoM
-the uninterrupted PA
Q: If it is a basis of characterization of something, does it have to be  an
instance or particularity of that object?
A: No. For example, that which is able to perform a function is a  basis  of
characterization   of   functioning    thing,    but    it    is    not    a
particularity/instance, of functioning thing. This is because that which  is
able to perform a function and functioning thing are mutually inclusive.
- For example, we posit functioning thing as a generality, and a vase is  an
instance of functioning thing.
     - A vase is an instance of functioning thing
     - Functioning thing is a generality of a vase.
     - In this case, functioning thing and a vase have  a  relationship  of
       generality and instance.
-In fact, there are 5  reasons  for  saying  that  functioning  thing  is  a
generality with respect to a vase:
   1. a vase is a functioning thing
   2. a vase and functioning thing are related in one essence, i.e. have the
      relationship of being of one essence
   3. vase, while being of one essence with functioning thing, is  different
      from functioning thing
   4. if there is no functioning thing, there will be no vase
   5. there are many instances of not being a vase, but being a  functioning
      thing
In general, any pair of generality and its instance need  to  satisfy  these
five reasons.
Q: Is it possible for a property-possessor  to  be  a  generality,  and  its
property to be an instance of the generality?
A: Property-possessor does not have to  be  a  generality.  There  are  many
examples of property-possessors which are not generalities, e.g. a vase  and
a pillar; or a permanent phenomenon and a functioning thing.
Q: Can we say that an omniscient mind that knows all objects is a  property-
possessor and a generality, and that an omniscient mind knowing a  table  is
both a property and an instance of that?
A: No, you cannot say that the omniscient mind knowing table is an  instance
of the omniscient mind  knowing  all  objects,  because  they  are  mutually
inclusive.
Of course, we are  not  saying  that  omniscient  mind  knowing  pillar  and
omniscient mind are one. They are not one, but they are mutually  inclusive.
When you talk about omniscient mind, you can talk about an  omniscient  mind
that is a main mind, and an omniscient mind that is  a  mental  factor,  but
what they realize is exactly the same. A main mind that is  omniscient  mind
knows all phenomena. A mental factor that is an omniscient mind  also  knows
all phenomena. So you cannot say that one is  a  generality  and  one  is  a
particularity.   In terms of isolates, the omniscient mind  realizing  table
and omniscient mind realizing  all  objects  are  different,  but  they  are
mutually inclusive, so you cannot say that one is a generality and one is  a
particularity.

Topic 8  BODHISATTVA SANGHA WHO HAS ATTAINED A SIGN OF IRREVERSIBILITY
- The irreversible persons are of 3 types:
   1. A bodhisattva sangha who possesses a sign of  irreversibility  of  the
      PoP
   2. A bodhisattva sangha who possesses a sign of  irreversibility  of  the
      PoS
   3. A bodhisattva sangha who possesses a sign of  irreversibility  of  the
      PoM
- If one is an irreversible bodhisattva, one is  not  pervaded  by  being  a
bodhisattva who has attained, or possesses, a sign of irreversibility.
- A person who is irreversible from unsurpassable enlightenment  is  someone
of indefinite lineage. However, beginning from  the  Mahayana  PoA  onwards,
they will not proceed to another path even slightly and,  since  it  is  not
possible for them to degenerate from the Mahayana generated mind, they  will
definitely attain unsurpassable enlightenment.
- Someone on the PoA may be irreversible, but this person has  not  attained
a sign of irreversibility.
- It is possible to be irreversible even when one is on the small  level  of
the Mahayana PoA e.g. a dull faculty bodhisattva, it is possible  that  this
bodhisattva does not attain a sign of irreversibility until he  attains  the
8th ground.
- From the middling level of the PoA through to the 7th ground, this  person
is  an  irreversible  bodhisattva,  but  has  not   attained   a   sign   of
irreversibility.
- Maitreya’s Ornament for the Great Vehicle Sutras stated the  4  attributes
of one who has awakened the Mahayana lineage: One who, prior to  cultivating
the applications:
         1. possesses great compassion
         2. possesses vast patience observing sentient beings
         3. possesses belief in the extensive Mahayana Dharma and
         4. the practice of extensive virtue such as generosity
- This person who possesses the Mahayana  lineage  in  this  manner  is  not
posited as having attained a sign of irreversibility.
- Sharp faculty attains a sign of irreversibility from  the  heat  level  of
the PoP
- Middling faculty attains a sign of irreversibility from the PoS
- Dull faculty attains a sign of irreversibility on the 8th ground  of  PoM.

- The meaning of irreversibility is that:
  (i) from the point of view of attitude, one has destroyed the  opportunity
for the production  of  a  manifest  attitude  seeking  liberation  for  the
welfare of oneself alone, and
 (ii) from the  point  of  view  of  application,  one  possesses  a  stable
realization of special method and wisdom.
The mode of inference from the signs
- Conventions of the body and speech are signs for  inferring  that  persons
possessing them are irreversible.
  -For special conventions of speech  that  reveal  the  complete  class  of
Mahayana paths such as emptiness.
  -For special conventions of the body that cannot bear  the  sufferings  of
sentient beings, the body hairs standing on end and tears  coming  to  their
eyes.
-From the sign of possessing those special method  and  wisdom,  one  infers
that complete enlightenment is suitable to arise  due  to  having  destroyed
the  opportunity  for  the  production  of  the  manifest  attitude  seeking
liberation  for  oneself  alone.  Such  a  person   is   irreversible   from
unsurpassable, complete enlightenment.
- In general for the special  conventions  of  speech,  we  would  say  that
depending on the level of realizations of the explainer, the listener  would
receive different levels of benefit, or even harm.
- The signs - the body hairs standing on end and tears coming to their  eyes
– means someone who contemplates the suffering of sentient beings  sincerely
from the  bottom  of  the  heart,  thinking  how  sentient  beings,  due  to
accumulating  karma,  are  tormented   by   suffering,   such   that   tears
uncontrollably come to his eyes and the hairs stand on end.
4.38  Those bodhisattvas abiding
            Beginning from the branches of definite discrimination,
            On the paths of seeing and meditation
            Are the assemblies of the irreversible here.
- There are three types of signs of irreversibility:
  - signs of irreversibility of the PoP
  - signs of irreversibility of the PoS
  - signs of irreversibility of the PoM
4.39  By way of the description of the twenty types of signs,
            Such as having turned away from forms and so forth,
            The characteristics of irreversibility
            Of those abiding on the branches of definite discrimination  are
these. {148}
- A sign of irreversibility of  one  on  the  PoP  is  a  correct  sign  for
inferring that a bodhisattva on the PoP who  possesses  it  is  irreversible
from unsurpassable, complete enlightenment.
    [Heat Level]
    4.40   (1)Having turned away from forms and so forth,
             (2)Extinguished doubt and (3)the non-freedoms,
             (4)Oneself abiding in virtue and
             Placing others in it,
    4.41   (5)Generosity and so forth bearing the support of others,
             (6)Without  a  qualm  even  concerning  the  meaning  of   the
                profound,
             (7)Loving body and so forth, (8) not being accompanied by
             The five types of obscurations,
    4.42   (9)Having destroyed all dormancies,
             (10)Mindfulness and introspection,
             (11)Clean clothes and so forth,
    [Peak Level]
             (12)Micro-organisms do not occur in the body,
    4.43   (13)Not having a crooked mind,(14) training,
             Adopting,(15) not having miserliness and so forth,
             (16)Progressing toward the truth of dharmata,
             (17)Seeking hell for the welfare of sentient beings;
    [Forbearance Level]
    4.44   (18)Others cannot lead one and
             (19)Those who teach other paths,
             Realizing the maras as “maras,”
          [SMQ Level]
             (20)Activities that please the buddhas:
    4.45   By way of those twenty signs
             Irreversible from complete enlightenment
             Of those abiding on the heat, the peak, the forbearance,
             As well as the supreme mundane quality.
|Signs of irreversibility of sharp faculty bodhisattvas on the path of preparation |
|The subject- a sharp|1.Averting phenomena, forms and so forth, due to lack of     |
|faculty bodhisattvas|entitiness                                                   |
|abiding on the heat |                                                             |
|level - is          |                                                             |
|irreversible from   |                                                             |
|unsurpassable       |                                                             |
|enlightenment,      |                                                             |
|because he has      |                                                             |
|attained the signs  |                                                             |
|of …                |                                                             |
|(11)                |                                                             |
|                    |                                                             |
|                    |                                                             |
|                    |                                                             |
|                    |                                                             |
|                    |                                                             |
|                    |                                                             |
|                    |                                                             |
|                    |2.Extinguishing doubt through having attained faith due to   |
|                    |having understood                                            |
|                    |3.Due to having fulfilled prayers one extinguishes the 8     |
|                    |states of non-freedom                                        |
|                    |4.Connection  of oneself and  others to virtuous  qualities  |
|                    |through compassion                                           |
|                    |5.Generosity and so forth thoroughly dedicated as objects of |
|                    |other sentient beings through exchanging self and others     |
|                    |6.Not having qualms regarding even the profound meaning      |
|                    |through having correctly realized phenomena                  |
|                    |7.Loving actions of body, speech, and mind due to having     |
|                    |engaged in benefiting others                                 |
|                    |8. Not being associated with the five obscurations           |
|                    |9.Destroying all dormancies of ignorance and so forth due to |
|                    |having cultivated the antidotes                              |
|                    |10.Possessing    mindfulness    and    introspection         |
|                    |through    constant meditative equipoise                     |
|                    |11.Clean utilization of clothing and so forth through        |
|                    |hygienic behavior                                            |
|The subject- a sharp|12.Posesses non-arising of the 80,000 types of               |
|faculty bodhisattvas|micro-organisms in the body through the roots of virtue      |
|abiding on the peak |superior to that serve as a cause for non-abiding nirvana,   |
|level –             |which are superior to those of bodhisattvas of middling      |
|(6)                 |faculty abiding on the peak of the world and those           |
|                    |below.[“world” means that such a person is worldly. A person |
|                    |on the PoP is on a mundane path, not a supramundane path.    |
|                    |                                                             |
|                    |                                                             |
|                    |                                                             |
|                    |13.Possesses the absence of a crooked mind that is an        |
|                    |attention to one’s welfare motivated by deceit and           |
|                    |dissimilation through pure bodhisattva’s behavior, roots of  |
|                    |virtue [this bodhisattva does not have deceit and            |
|                    |dissimulation, or a crooked mind e.g. trying to hide one’s   |
|                    |faults, or pretending that one does not have faults.]        |
|                    |14.Possesses correctly adopting the excellent qualities of   |
|                    |training- wearing rags taken from the rubbish dump and so    |
|                    |forth -through disregard for gain and honor and so forth - by|
|                    |especially relying upon the antidotes to attachment to gain  |
|                    |and honor, such as food and clothing                         |
|                    |15.Possesses the lack of miserliness, immorality, and the    |
|                    |like contrary to those six perfections through practicing the|
|                    |special deeds of the six perfections, generosity and so forth|
|                    |16.Progresses to possess the yoga of the perfection of       |
|                    |wisdom, that which does not contradict dharmata due to       |
|                    |emptiness of true existence through correctly gathering all  |
|                    |phenomena in the emptiness of true existence with a wisdom   |
|                    |arisen from meditation realizing emptiness                   |
|                    |17. Desires hell for others’ welfare through having taken all|
|                    |migratory sentient beings as one’s own, like an only child,  |
|                    |due to having especially familiarized with equalizing self   |
|                    |and others and exchange of self and others                   |
|The subject- a sharp|18.Insusceptibility  to   being  led   by  others  through   |
|faculty bodhisattvas|the  nature  of conviction in the realization                |
|abiding on the      |                                                             |
|forbearance level - |                                                             |
|is irreversible from|                                                             |
|unsurpassable       |                                                             |
|enlightenment,      |                                                             |
|because he has      |                                                             |
|attained the signs  |                                                             |
|of …                |                                                             |
|(2)                 |                                                             |
|                    |                                                             |
|                    |19.Through skill in knowing the methods of buddhahood,       |
|                    |realizing that the maras who teach a fabricated counterfeit  |
|                    |path are maras                                               |
|The subject- a sharp|20. The pleasing of the buddhas in all activities through    |
|faculty bodhisattvas|purity of the three spheres                                  |
|abiding on the SMQ  |                                                             |
|level - is          |                                                             |
|irreversible from   |                                                             |
|unsurpassable       |                                                             |
|enlightenment,      |                                                             |
|because he has      |                                                             |
|attained the signs  |                                                             |
|of … (1)            |                                                             |


There are 20 signs of irreversibility of one on the PoP
- 11 of one abiding on the heat level
- 6 of one abiding on the peak level
- 2 of one abiding on the forbearance level; and
- 1 of one abiding on the SMQ level.
- The 11 signs of a bodhisattva abiding on the heat level:
1. The sign of averting some manifest adherence to forms and  so  forth,  as
  truly existent. The sign [or reason]  corresponding  to  this  is  due  to
  having realized that all phenomena lack entitiness ultimately.
2. The sign of extinguishing  manifest  doubt  as  to  whether  or  not  the
  correct objects of refuge are those Three Jewels through  having  attained
  faith in the Three Jewels due to having understood them by  the  force  of
  the wisdom arisen from meditation that observes emptiness
3. The sign of extinguishment of the 8 states of non-freedom due  to  having
  fulfilled prayers to be reborn according to one’s wishes by the  force  of
  compassion
4. The sign of possessing connection  of  oneself  and  others  to  virtuous
  qualities  due  to  being  a  bodhisattva  who  is  disheartened   through
  compassion that has been attained by the force of experience
5. The sign of possessing generosity and so forth  thoroughly  dedicated  to
  other sentient beings due to practicing generosity and  so  forth  through
  exchanging self and others
6. The sign of not having qualms  regarding  the  profound  meaning  through
  having correctly realized the mode of abidance of phenomena with a  wisdom
  arisen from meditation
7. The sign of possessing  actions  of  body,  speech,  and  mind  that  are
  motivated by a loving attitude due to having engaged in benefiting  others
  through the attitude that wishes all sentient beings to possess  happiness
  not degenerating
8. The sign of not being associated with the five obscurations such  as  the
  aspiration for the desire realm due to having attained the fulfillment  of
  the applications that strive resolutely for others’ welfare
9. The sign of possessing the destruction of all  dormancies  of  ignorance,
  bad views, and so forth due to having cultivated the antidotes to those by
  the force of a wisdom arisen from meditation realizing emptiness
10. The sign of possessing mindfulness and  introspection  in  all  behavior
  through constant meditative equipoise by means of the mind never  becoming
  distracted by an erroneous object at any time The sign of being clean  due
  to excellent utilization of  dwelling,  clothing,  and  so  forth  through
  familiarization with non-erroneous hygienic behavior
-Sign 3:The 8 states of non-freedom, namely, birth
      (a) birth with wrong views deprecating actions and their results,
      (b-d) birth in the hells, as a hungry  ghost,  as  an  animal  by  the
force of karma;
      (e) birth not hearing a buddha’s words, and
      (f) birth in a remote land where there is no movement of the  4  types
of retinue [bikkshus (fully  ordained  monks),  bikkshunis  (fully  ordained
nuns), upasakas (laymen with the lay vows), and upasikas (laywomen with  the
lay vows)]
Remote land refers to a place where the Dharma is not present
      (g) birth with incomplete faculties in  which  the  mental  power  and
tongue sense power are defective, with the properties of  being  stupid  and
mute, and
      (h) as a long-life god, one who is absorbed in Without Discrimination
- while it is possible for a dull faculty bodhisattva on  the  PoP  to  have
averted some manifest adherence to phenomena as truly existent,  it  is  not
possible for a dull faculty bodhisattva on the  PoP  to  have  attained  the
sign of averting manifest adherence to phenomena, forms  and  so  forth,  as
truly existent.
- A sign of irreversibility is a correct sign for inferring that the  person
who possesses it is irreversible from complete enlightenment.
-  Sign  4:  “possessing  connection  of  oneself  and  others  to  virtuous
qualities due to being a bodhisattva who is disheartened through  compassion
that has been attained by the force of experience…” the meaning is that  the
bodhisattva sees the many types of  suffering  tormenting  sentient  beings,
and as a result there is sadness, or disillusionment, and compassion in  the
mind of the bodhisattva. A bodhisattva can see that sentient  beings,  while
desiring happiness, create the causes of suffering, and suffer as a  result.
A bodhisattva has the experience of being  sad  or  disheartened,  but  this
does not harm the bodhisattva’s practice. In fact causes him/her to be  even
more courageous.
-The kind of great compassion that is described in this context  is  a  kind
of compassion  that  has  the  ability  to  help  others.  We  already  have
compassion but without having generated great compassion -   beings  already
have some compassion but this is often limited to one’s  friends,  children,
relatives, and so on -the people  on  one’s  side.  When  seeing  that  such
people are suffering, one can become disheartened and  generate  compassion.
However, this compassion that is generated is  not  based  on  very  correct
reasons, and such disheartenment can actually  cause  harm  and  has  little
capacity to help others.
- In contrast, a bodhisattva’s compassion is based on  correct  reasons  and
extends to all beings, regardless of whether they  help  or  harm  one,  and
thus has the capacity to benefit others.
- Ordinary compassion, which is  not  based  on  correct  reasons,  is  very
limited, e.g. for one’s father, mother, etc. As  soon  as  the  other  party
harms us, this compassion evaporates. For example, one  has  compassion  for
one’s mother, but when she harms us, we start  fighting  with  her  and  our
compassion disappears. With  such  limited  compassion,  someone  who  is  a
friend may harm us, and then he becomes an enemy.

Signs of irreversibility of one on the path of seeing
4.46  The sixteen instants of the forbearances and
            Knowledges with respect to the path of seeing,
            Should be known as the characteristics
            Of the irreversible bodhisattvas.
- The subject - the  special  method  and  wisdom  included  within  the  16
instants of the forbearances and knowledges with respect to the PoS  in  the
continua of middling faculty bodhisattvas and  the  special  conventions  of
body and speech which  are  induced  by  them  -  should  be  known  as  the
characteristics of those very irreversible bodhisattvas,  because  they  are
the correct proof of that.
-the forbearances and knowledges are meditative equipoise.
-the special conventions of body and speech are induced by the  forbearances
and knowledges. They arise during subsequent attainment and  are  the  signs
of irreversibility.
- “Special convention of body or speech” means special behavior of  body  or
speech.
-  when  we  say  that  sharp  faculty  bodhisattvas  attain   a   sign   of
irreversibility on the heat level of the PoP, this does not  mean  the  sign
of irreversibility is attained upon attaining the  heat  level  of  the  PoP
because the heat level begins with meditative equipoise.
- During subsequent attainment (after meditative equipoise), there  are  the
special conventions of body and speech induced by meditative  equipoise.  It
is during subsequent attainment that a sign of irreversibility is  attained,
not during meditative equipoise.
-  Sharp faculty bodhisattva attains a sign of irreversibility on  the  PoP.
When this bodhisattva moves on and attains the PoS, this  is  a  bodhisattva
on the PoS who has attained a sign of irreversibility. However he is  not  a
bodhisattva who has attained a sign of irreversibility of one  on  the  PoS.
In other words,  this  person  on  the  PoS  has  not  attained  a  sign  of
irreversibility of one on the PoS, although he is one on  the  PoS  and  has
attained a sign of irreversibility. This is  because  this  person  has  not
attained a sign of irreversibility that is a special convention of  body  or
speech induced by the liberated path of the PoS.
- When we talk about a sign of irreversibility of the PoS,  this  is  to  be
attained  by  a  middling  faculty  bodhisattva.  If  it  is   a   sign   of
irreversibility of the PoS, it must be  a  special  convention  of  body  or
speech in the continuum of a middling faculty bodhisattva.
[The aspects of true sufferings]
4.47  (1)Having turned away from the discrimination of forms and so forth,
            (2)Stable mind, (3)having turned away from
            Lesser vehicles, (4)having thoroughly exhausted the link
            Of the concentrations and so forth,
[The aspects of true origins]
4.48  (5)Lightness of body and mind,
            (6)Being skilled in means with respect to utilizing desires,
            (7)Always chaste conduct,
            (8)Pure livelihood,
[The aspects of true sufferings]
4.49  (9)Individually ceased the abidance
            Of involvement and subsequent involvement with
            The aggregates and so forth, (10)those that obstruct,
            (11)The accumulations, (12)the  battle  of  the  powers  and  so
forth,
[The aspects of true sufferings]
4.50  (13)Miserliness and so forth,
            (14)Not observing the Dharma, a mere atom,
            (15)Abiding on the three grounds
            Certain of one’s own ground, and
4.51  (16)Forsaking life for the sake of the Dharma:
            Such sixteen instants
            Are the signs of irreversibility
            Of an intelligent one abiding on the path of seeing.
- The three modes of a correct sign:
      1.the property of subject,
      2.the forward pervasion,
      3.the reverse pervasion.
All three are necessary to have a correct sign.
- A correct sign must be complete in the three modes. A  correct  sign  must
be a sign in which many faults have been eliminated.
- In order to be a correct sign, the faults of being an indeterminate  sign,
a contradictory sign, and a non-established  sign  must  be  eliminated.  In
that way, the three modes can be complete.
- E.g. a correct sign that proves that sound is impermanent.
- Let us consider the sign: an object of hearing. “The subject – sound -  is
impermanent because it is an object of hearing.”
- If one has ascertained that sound is an object  of  hearing  and  that  an
object of hearing  is  impermanent,  it  is  impossible  that  one  has  not
ascertained that sound is impermanent. We call this an indeterminate sign.
- “The subject – sound - is impermanent because it is sound.”  It is  not  a
correct sign because the sign is non-established .
- In general, the subject and the sign must be different. If  they  are  not
different, the sign is non-established.
- “The subject – sound - is impermanent because it is permanent.” This is  a
contradictory sign. In  order  to  have  a  correct  sign,  that  it  is  an
indeterminate sign, contradictory sign, and  non-established  sign  must  be
eliminated. A correct sign must be correct in the three modes.
-A correct sign is “product”: “The subject – sound - is impermanent  because
it is a product.” “Product” is a correct sign  for  proving  that  sound  is
impermanent because it is complete in the three modes.
- Product is all three modes: the  property  of  the  subject,  the  forward
pervasion, and the reverse pervasion.
-With respect to the property of the subject, there  is  a  person  who  has
ascertained that sound is a product, and has also ascertained that if it  is
a product it is pervaded by being impermanent. But this person has  a  doubt
as to whether sound is impermanent.
- So we say that product is the property of the subject in  the  proof  that
sound is impermanent.
- the forward pervasion: product is the forward  pervasion  because  product
exists only in the predicate of the probandum,
- “impermanent,” in the proof of sound as impermanent.
- product is the reverse pervasion because product does  not  exist  in  the
discordant class in the proof of sound as impermanent.
- When we say discordant class, or dissimilar class, in the proof  of  sound
as impermanent, this refers to  the  discordant  class  of  impermanent.  In
other words, this discordant class is “permanent.”

Aspects of the instants of true sufferings
The subject - a middling faculty bodhisattva abiding on the PoS –
1.possesses having turned away from the seeds of  the  acquired  conceptions
of phenomena such as  forms  as  truly  existent,  through  having  directly
realized  the  emptiness  of  existence  by  way  of  their  own   character
ultimately
2.possesses  stability  of  the   ultimate   and   conventional   minds   of
unsurpassable enlightenment, through having been blessed by buddhas  and  so
forth to not degenerate from those two minds.
3.possesses having turned the mind away from the  vehicles  of  the  hearers
and solitary  realizers,  because  he  has  destroyed  the  opportunity  for
producing an awareness seeking liberation for  the  sake  of  oneself  alone
through having accomplished the special Mahayana Dharma
4. has perfectly and completely exhausted the link of potential that is  the
cause for birth in the form realms and so forth through the  force  of  that
karma,  even  through  he  has  attained  the  concentrations  and  formless
absorptions, because he has exhausted it  through  the  strength  of  finely
discerning the mode of abidance of phenomena with a yogic direct  perceiver.
[This means that even though a bodhisattva has attained  the  concentrations
and formless absorptions, it does not become a  cause  for  rebirth  in  the
form realms and so forth. The reason is because he has finely discerned  the
mode of abidance of phenomena with a yogic direct perceiver.]
-  Ultimate  mind  of  enlightenment  (ultimate  bodhicitta)  -  is  a  mind
realizing the mode of abidance of complete enlightenment. In fact, it is  an
exalted knower of a Mahayana arya in which dualistic  appearances  regarding
the mode of abidance of complete enlightenment have vanished.
- in the expression “ultimate mind of enlightenment,” when  you  talk  about
“ultimate” and “enlightenment,” they refer to  complete  enlightenment.  The
object realized by ultimate bodhicitta is  the  mode  of  abidance,  or  the
emptiness of true existence, of complete enlightenment.
- It has to directly realize emptiness. It has to directly realize the  mode
of abidance of complete enlightenment; and it has to exist in the  continuum
of a Mahayana arya.
- conventional mind of enlightenment : it is a mind that aspires  to  attain
conventional enlightenment
- ultimate mind of enlightenment: it is a mind that  realizes  the  mode  of
abidance of ultimate enlightenment..
- the forbearances and  knowledges  of  true  sufferings  are  instances  of
meditative equipoise.
-  the  signs  of  irreversibility  refer  to  the  special  conventions  of
body/mind induced by meditative equipoise, not to the meditative  equipoises
themselves.
- if we practice the methods for calm abiding with great  effort,  and  then
we attain calm abiding. We then go on to attain special insight and on  that
basis we  eventually  achieve  an  actual  concentration.  This  process  of
achieving an actual concentration is not easy. It is  difficult  because  it
involves pacifying the very coarse desire realm mind. However if we  do  not
transform this meditative stabilization  that  we  have  attained  into  the
entity  of  a  path  -  renunciation,  bodhicitta,  or  the  realization  of
emptiness -then it becomes a cause for  rebirth  in  the  form  or  formless
realms. In that case, it is as though we are  deliberately  cultivating  the
cause to be reborn in samsara, in the form and  formaless  realms.  This  is
something we must be careful about, because once we attain a  concentration,
it is very enjoyable, because of having the bliss of body and mind.
-Bodhisattvas who have stability of  ultimate  and  conventional  bodhicitta
having been blessed by the buddhas and so forth.
- Do not think that  the  buddhas  do  not  bless  those  who  do  not  have
stability in ultimate and conventional bodhicitta.  Buddhas  bless  everyone
without prejudice. Whether or not we receive the blessings  depends  on  our
mind. If we practice properly the teachings of the buddha, we  will  receive
the blessings.
Occasionally we  receive  “bits”  of  blessings  due  to  certain  types  of
conceptualizations in our minds such as  receiving  blessing  from  lama  by
thinking: “this holy lama is blessing me.” and as the result  we  feel  very
happy as it seems that we have received some  blessing.  But  this  kind  of
blessing is very unstable, because  our  mind  is  unstable.  This  kind  of
blessing can vanish very quickly.
-The real blessings come from  properly  practicing  the  teachings  of  the
Buddha. It is said that all the buddhas are present in the vicinity of  each
sentient being.

Aspects of the instants of true origins
The subject - a middling faculty bodhisattva abiding on the POS:
5. possesses a light body and mind, the special bliss  of  pliancy,  because
he is distinguished by having separated from the seeds  of  non-virtue,  the
objects of abandonment of the PoS
6. possesses  utilization  of  desires  without  strong  adherence  that  is
craving for  the  objects  of  desire  even  though  he  abides  within  the
household, because he abides in that  way  through  the  force  of  skillful
means in subduing sentient beings. [a bodhisattva, even if he abides  within
a houseful, utilizes the various  objects  of  desire,  but  does  not  have
craving for them.]
7.possesses always chaste conduct,  because  he  abides  in  chaste  conduct
through directly having seen the shortcomings of objects that  are  included
within the attributes of the desire realm.[  The  objects  included  in  the
attributes of the desire realm refer to forms, sounds,  odors,  tastes,  and
tangible objects in the desire realm.
-The shortcomings of objects such as food and clothing included in the  form
of the desire realm: these objects are such  that  when  you  utilize  them,
they do not provide satisfaction.
- Chaste conduct in this context refers  to  ethics,  or  ethical  behavior.
Here ethics is the intention to guard against misdeeds]
8. possesses perfectly pure necessities of life, because  he  has  abandoned
all wrong livelihoods by the nature of an excellent being who  is  empowered
with respect to not forgetting the mind  of  enlightenment.[“perfectly  pure
necessities of life” refers to the causes of such necessities of life  being
pure  i.e.  these  necessities  of  life  are  not  acquired  through  wrong
livelihood.]
Q&A: If someone is of definite lineage, even from the  small  level  of  the
Mahayana PoA, there is no degeneration. If one  is  of  indefinite  lineage,
there is no degeneration from the middling level of  the  Mahayana  PoA  but
while they are on the small level of the PoA, it is possible to  degenerate,
but there is no pervasion. For those who do not degenerate  from  the  small
level, one does not degenerate from the Mahayana generated mind.

Aspects of the instants of true cessations
The subject—that middling faculty bodhisattva abiding on the PoS:
9. possesses having individually ceased the  abidance  of  involvement  that
initially  adheres  to  true  existence  and  subsequent  involvement   that
subsequently adheres to true  existence  with  respect  to  the  aggregates,
sources, and constituents, in that way taught in sutra, “do not be  involved
or subsequently involved,” through abiding in the realization  of  emptiness
of all phenomena with direct cognition
10.possesses having individually ceased the adherence to true  existence  in
that way as above, with respect to phenomena that obstruct  the  realization
by  the  dharma  knowledge  with  respect  to   true   cessations,   through
eliminating the discordant classes that are the seeds  to  be  abandoned  by
the dharma forbearance with respect to true cessations
11. possesses  having  ceased  initial  and  subsequent  adherence  to  true
existence  as  above,  with  respect  to  generosity  and  so   forth,   the
collections of enlightenment, through  merely  fully  knowing  directly  the
faults of conceptualizations that adhere to  apprehendeds  and  apprehenders
as truly existent
12. possesses  having  individually  ceased  the  abidance  of  involvement,
initial adherence to  true  existence,  and  subsequent  involvement,  later
adherence to true existence as above, with respect to
      (i) the powers, eye and so  forth  that  are  indicated  by  the  term
“village;”
      (ii) the support of the powers indicated by the term “city;”
     (iii) the objects of the powers that are indicated by the term  “town;”

      (iv) the adherence to the objects  and  object-possessors,  the  being
who is the primary consciousness  and  so  forth,  as  truly  existent,  the
objects of abandonment; and
      (v) the battle of the objects of  abandonment  and  the  antidotes  in
which those [objects  and  object-possessors]  are  realized  to  lack  true
existence,  through  having  abandoned  the  seeds  (of  adherence  to   the
apprehendeds and apprehenders as truly existent)  included  within  acquired
objects to be abandoned
Explanation:
-#9. Remember that when we posit these signs of  irreversibility,  they  are
not posited on the occasions of meditative equipoise themselves, but on  the
occasion of subsequent attainment
-  “Involvement  that  initially  adheres  to  true  existence”  refers   to
adherence to true existence prior to the meditative equipoise  of  the  PoS.
During meditative equipoise itself, there is no manifest adherence  to  true
existence, because meditative equipoise is supposed to be the antidote.
-“Subsequent  involvement  that  subsequently  adheres  to  true  existence”
refers to adherence to true existence during subsequent attainment  of  PoS.
After the meditative equipoise of the PoS, there is  subsequent  attainment,
so “subsequent involvement” refers  to  adherence  to  true  existence  that
occurs during subsequent attainment of PoS.
- This  explanation  of  having  ceased  the  abidance  of  involvement  and
subsequent involvement is to be applied to  the  subsequent  points  but  to
different objects. However the ceasing of the abidance  of  involvement  and
subsequent involvement with respect to the objects is similar.
- For point  9,  we  talk  about  stopping,  or  ceasing,  the  abidance  of
involvement and subsequent  involvement  with  respect  to  the  aggregates,
sources, and constituents. The objects  are  the  aggregates,  sources,  and
constituents.
- For point 10, the objects are phenomena  that  obstruct  the  realization.
This refers to the discordant classes. -  For  point  11,  the  objects  are
generosity and so forth, the collections of enlightenment.
- For point 12, the objects are apprehendeds and apprehenders  [the  powers,
the support of the powers, etc.]. In that way, the  objects  are  different,
but the ceasing of the abidance of involvement  and  subsequent  involvement
with respect to the objects is similar. Here it explicitly  it  talks  about
stopping strong adherence, and mentions these various  terms—village,  city,
town, and so forth—so it  means  that  we  should  not  strongly  adhere  to
expressions and various terms. We should not have grasping with  respect  to
names. For practitioners, among  the  attachments  to  food,  clothing,  and
reputation, the one that is the most difficult to abandon is  attachment  to
reputation. “Not to have strong adherence to name” means to not have  strong
adherence to reputation. We should not have attachment  to  people  speaking
nicely to us; if we have attachment to that, we will have problems,  because
we cannot always have people speaking nicely to  us!  It  is  not  important
that people talk nicely to us; the important thing is for  us  not  to  make
mistakes from our side.

Aspects of the instants of true paths
 The subject—a middling faculty bodhisattva abiding on the PoS
13. possesses  having  individually  ceased  the  abidance  of  involvement,
initial adherence to  true  existence,  and  subsequent  involvement,  later
adherence to true existence, with respect to  miserliness,  immorality,  and
so forth [which includes the  discordant  classes  of  the  rest  of  the  6
perfections.], the objects  of  abandonment,  through  having  attained  and
realized special generosity  and  so  forth  in  which  the  stains  of  the
tightfistedness of miserliness, immorality -even in dreams -  and  so  forth
have been abandoned.
14.  possesses  not  observing  even  a  mere  particle  of  the  Dharma  of
realization,  the  paths,  and  the  result,  enlightenment,  as  ultimately
existent, through directly realizing all phenomena included  within  entity,
cause, and result being empty of  true  existence,  the  entitiness  of  the
three doors of liberation
15. possesses abiding with certainty (in which one has separated from  doubt
regarding one’s 3 grounds attained by oneself of the nature of the  3EKs  of
all where one is abiding) exactly as they are, even  through  maras  and  so
forth  may  cast  doubts,  through  having  attained   conviction   in   the
realizations of the EKs attained by oneself
16. will not have the slightest miserliness  or  suffering  with  regard  to
forsaking life for the purpose of the qualities of the EKAA  and  so  forth,
through directly realizing the mode of abidance of  phenomena  and  striving
for omniscience unequivocally.
Explanation:
-#13. With respect to these objects, miserliness, immorality, and so  forth,
the bodhisattva  has  ceased  the  abidance  of  involvement  (i.e.  initial
adherence to true existence) and also  subsequent  involvement  (i.e.  later
adherence to true existence)
  -  The  discordant  classes  of  all  6  perfections   are:   miserliness,
immorality,  anger  (the  discordant  class  of  patience),  laziness   (the
discordant class of joyous  effort),  distractedness,  or  distraction  (the
discordant class of concentration), and  corrupted  wisdom  (the  discordant
class of wisdom).
-“special generosity and so forth” refers to the rest of the 6  perfections.

- “even in dreams - and so forth” – here so forth refers to  the  discordant
classes of the  other  4  perfections:  anger,  laziness,  distraction,  and
corrupted wisdom.
- better presentation: the stains  of  the  tightfistedness  of  miserliness
have been abandoned, the stains of  immorality  have  been  abandoned  -they
have been abandoned even in dreams-  and  the  stains  of  anger,  laziness,
distraction, and corrupted wisdom have been abandoned.
- all objects of abandonment are stains.
-#14. “realizing all phenomena included within  entity,  cause,  and  result
being empty of true existence.” - This is the entitiness of the three  doors
of liberation. In other words, the entity is  realized  as  being  empty  of
true existence. One also pacifies the signs that are truly existent  causes,
and one does not wish for truly existent results. These are the three  doors
of liberation: the doors of emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness.
-#15. “possesses abiding with certainty (in which  one  has  separated  from
doubt regarding one’s three grounds attained by oneself  of  the  nature  of
the 3EKs of all where one is abiding) exactly as they are” Here the 3EKs  of
all: the EKAA, KP and KB. Due to  having  single-pointedly  ascertained  the
reasonings establishing the 3EKs, one abides with certainty.
-“regarding one’s three grounds”  means  one  attains  conviction  in  one’s
grounds. “three” refers to the 3EKs.  The  “grounds”  here  means  the  path
where the bodhisattva is abiding on. In  this  case,  for  example,  it  can
refer to the first ground; basically, it  means  the  path,  i.e.  whichever
path the bodhisattva is abiding on.
- To elaborate the meaning: through having single-pointedly ascertained  the
reasonings establishing the three exalted knowers,  one  attains  conviction
in one’s grounds attained by oneself of the nature of  the  3EKs  all  where
one is abiding, exactly as they are, and abides with certainty in which  one
has separated from doubt regarding the 3EKs.
-  there  are  reasonings  establishing  the  3EKs-  this   middling-faculty
bodhisattva  abiding  on   the   PoS   single-pointedly   ascertains   these
reasonings. As a result of that, he attains conviction with respect  to  his
own grounds where he is abiding, and therefore the bodhisattva  abides  with
certainty in which he has separated from doubt regarding the 3EKs.
-#16. From the 1st ground onwards, a bodhisattva does not experience  bodily
suffering. As a result, even if his limbs  are  chopped  off,  there  is  no
suffering. The bodhisattva from the 1st ground onwards  has  no  miserliness
or suffering with regard to forsaking his life. Before  the  1st  ground,  a
bodhisattva is not supposed to forsake his life.
- Someone says: In that way, these instants of forbearances  and  knowledges
are the characteristics of irreversibility of a bodhisattva abiding  on  the
PoS. Are these  instants  of  forbearances  and  knowledges  not  meditative
equipoise?
-Our response: Indeed, the forbearances and knowledges are  only  meditative
equipoise.
-Someone  says:  How  are  they   correct   effect   signs   for   inferring
irreversibility in the perspective of the awareness of other persons?  [This
person then wonders how these signs of irreversibility are  posited  as  the
special conventions of body and speech that occur  during  the  occasion  of
subsequent attainment.]
-Here we talk about the 16  instants  of  forbearances  and  knowledges  and
these 16 instants come about through division by way of isolates.  In  fact,
the uninterrupted path of the PoS is simply one instant, and  the  liberated
path of the PoS is similarly just one instant, but through division  by  way
of isolates, we end up with 8 forbearances and 8 knowledges.
Our response: The reason for imputing the special conventions  of  body  and
speech by  the  names  “forbearances”  and  “knowledges”  is  because  these
special  conventions  of  body  and  speech  arise  in  dependence  on   the
forbearances and knowledges
- when these instants of forbearances and  knowledges  that  are  meditative
equipoise which are included within  the  16  aspects  have  been  correctly
attained during meditative equipoise,  since  the  pure  mundane  subsequent
attainment bearing the aspect of not strongly adhering to  apprehendeds  and
apprehenders as truly existent even  though  apprehendeds  and  apprehenders
appear dualistically is included within the mind of  subsequent  attainment.
This meditative equipoise and subsequent attainment are not  discordant.  In
dependence on meditative equipoise, the conventions of body and  speech  are
attained during subsequent attainment,  and  these  conventions  are  really
results concordant with meditative equipoise.
 - The purpose for imputing the special conventions of body  and  speech  of
one on the PoS with the name ‘meditative equipoise’ because it is  in  order
to make known that the conventions of body and  speech  of  yogis  who  have
attained a ground are only concordant with these realizations of  meditative
equipoise at all times with the exception from the  point  of  view  of  the
purpose of taming sentient beings.
-It is only for the purpose of taming sentient beings that  the  conventions
of body and speech arise during subsequent attainment. If there is  no  need
to tame sentient beings, then these conventions of  body  and  speech  would
not be generated during subsequent attainment.
- In other words, these special conventions of body and  speech  that  occur
during subsequent attainment are just for the  purpose  of  taming  sentient
beings. If there were no need  to  tame  sentient  beings,  then  subsequent
attainment would be concordant with meditative equipoise.
- There are different modes  of  concordance  of  meditative  equipoise  and
subsequent attainment:
- for the result - concordance is concordance in terms of the result
- for the purpose - the concordance is in terms of realizations
-For the result, the special conventions of body and speech  due  to  having
turned away from discrimination that is the strong adherence  of  forms  and
so forth, the results  concordant  with  meditative  equipoise  itself,  are
generated.  Here,  the  mode  of  concordance  is  that  during   meditative
equipoise, there is turning away from  discrimination  that  is  the  strong
adherence to forms, etc., and  during  subsequent  attainment,  there  is  a
concordant result. In that way we say  that  there  is  concordance  between
meditative equipoise and subsequent attainment.
-For the purpose, when  there  is  a  purpose  of  taming  sentient  beings,
subsequent attainment  is  not  concordant  with  meditative  equipoise.  If
instead  there  is  no  need  to  tame  sentient  beings,  then   subsequent
attainment would be concordant with meditative equipoise
- The signs of irreversibility  of  the  PoS  are  correlated  with  the  16
instants of the forbearances and knowledges. If one were to think  that  the
signs of irreversibility of the PoS are the 16 instants,  then  there  would
be damage to fact, because these signs  of  irreversibility  are  not  these
instants of meditative equipoise.

Signs of irreversibility of one abiding on the path of meditation
- After having explained the signs of irreversibility of one abiding on  the
PoS, it is appropriate to explain the signs of  irreversibility  of  one  on
the PoM. However, it will not be  done  immediately,  because  in  order  to
understand the basis of distinction, one  needs  to  first  understand  what
this distinctive feature is. Therefore, the distinctive feature of  the  PoM
is first explained.
4.52  With respect to the path of meditation, profound,
            Profound emptiness and so forth.
            The profound is freedom from the extremes
            Of superimposition and deprecation.
-  Emptiness  is  profound  because  it  is  free  from  the   extremes   of
superimposition and deprecation.
- Extreme of superimposition refers to holding that form exists ultimately
- Extreme of deprecation means that form does not  exist  at  all:  if  form
does not exist ultimately, then it does not exist at all.
- So emptiness is profound because it is free from these two extremes.
-Emptiness of form is free from the extreme of superimposition in  emptiness
and so forth because form does not exist  ultimately  in  emptiness  and  so
forth.
- Emptiness of  form  is  free  from  the  extreme  of  deprecation  because
emptiness and so forth are not an other,  a  different  object,  that  is  a
different entity than form.
- The Mahayana PoM is profound because of possessing the direct  realization
of the profound. In other words, because it directly realizes the  profound,
the Mahayana PoM is profound. If thusness is profound,  the  exalted  wisdom
realizing thusness is even more profound.
- Form does not exist ultimately, but this does not mean it does not  exist.
The fact that form does not exist ultimately does not mean that its lack  of
ultimate existence is a different entity from form.
- In the Heart Sutra, “Form is emptiness, emptiness is form.”
-“form is emptiness” means form is empty of true existence.
- “emptiness is form” means that emptiness is not a  different  entity  from
form.
- Here, we are establishing that the emptiness  of  form  is  profound,  not
that form is profound. The reason why the emptiness of form is  profound  is
because it is free from the extremes of superimposition and deprecation.
4.53   That  which  repeatedly  contemplates,   assesses,   and   definitely
investigates
            That on the branches of definite discrimination,
            The path of seeing, and the path of meditation itself
            Is the path of meditation.
- The subject - the PoM of a Mahayana arya  -engages  continuously,  because
it  is  a  subsequent  clear  realization  which  repeatedly   contemplates,
assesses, and definitely investigates the aspects  of  the  3EKs  that  have
been previously  seen  by  PoP,  PoS  and  PoM  itself.  This  includes  all
meditative equipoise  and  subsequent  attainment;  it  acts  to  repeatedly
familiarize with that very meaning that has been previously realized by  the
earlier paths.
- At the beginning, we have a  wisdom  arisen  from  hearing.  After  having
heard the  meaning,  one  contemplates  the  meaning.  Principally,  we  are
talking about the meaning of emptiness - one  contemplates  the  meaning  of
emptiness and then meditates on it.
- In terms of  the  paths,  at  the  beginning  on  the  PoA,  one  observes
emptiness with calm abiding. On the PoP, one  observes  emptiness  with  the
union of calm abiding and special insight.  On  the  PoS,  there  is  a  new
direct perception of emptiness. Emptiness that has been  directly  perceived
is repeatedly familiarized with on the PoM.
- The PoM being “continuous” means there is the process of  hearing  at  the
beginning. In dependence on this, there is contemplation of the meaning.  In
dependence  on  this,  there  is  meditation.  This  process   takes   place
continuously over a long period of time.
- As  ordinary  beings,  we  also  engage  in  hearing,  contemplation,  and
meditation. This process that is described in the context of the  PoM  is  a
very long, continuous process.

Divisions of the path of meditation
    4.54   That, because of being a continuity,
             Through the small, the middling, and the great
             Being divided into the small of the small and so forth,
             Is asserted to be of nine types by way of aspects.
-There are 9 types of PoM with respect to the small
- There are 9 types with respect to the middling
- There are 9 types with respect to the great.
- The subject - the PoM of a Mahayana arya - arises as a continuity  because
sequentially 9 types of the PoM arise as a continuity on  the  9  levels—the
desire realm and so forth.
[-Here, there is discussion of the 9 levels:
      1 x desire realm,
      4 x concentrations of the form realm
      4 x formless realms.
- If we were to consider these  9  levels,  we  would  have  81  objects  of
abandonment, because each of the 9 levels of the objects of abandonment  are
associated with these 9 levels, the desire realm and so forth.
- There are many divisions by way of isolates, but actually we do not  posit
81 uninterrupted paths.
-On the 1st ground of the PoM, there is an uninterrupted path that  abandons
the coarse of the great-great object of abandonment, mainly  the  conception
of true existence. This uninterrupted path serves as the direct antidote  to
the coarse great-great conceptions of true existence of all  9  levels:  the
desire realm, first concentration, etc. These conceptions of true  existence
with respect to the desire realm, the first  concentration,  and  so  forth,
are all abandoned by this one uninterrupted path.
- If we talk about the isolates of the uninterrupted path  of  the  PoM,  we
can posit 90.
- In order to correspond to the  10  grounds,  there  are  10  uninterrupted
paths, which can each be divided into 9 levels- the desire realm, etc. -  so
by way of isolates, there are 90 uninterrupted paths of the PoM.
- If we condense these, we end up with 10 uninterrupted paths  of  the  PoM.
This is similar to our discussion of the PoS being composed of 16  instants.
By  way  of  isolates,  there  are  16  instants  (8  forbearances   and   8
knowledges), but in actuality there is one  forbearance,  the  uninterrupted
path, and one knowledge, the liberated path.]
- because conventionally there are 9 due to the divisions  of  antidotes  to
the conceptualizations that  adhere  to  apprehendeds  and  apprehenders  as
truly existent by means  of  types,  even  though  there  are  no  divisions
ultimately, since they are the nature  that  is  of  the  characteristic  of
emptiness ultimately.
- because of the different divisions by  way  of  instances  of  the  great,
middling,  and  small  of  each  of   the   great,   middling,   and   small
conceptualizations that adhere to apprehendeds  and  apprehenders  as  truly
existent
- because of the different divisions by  way  of  instances  of  the  small,
middling, and great of each of the small,  middling,  and  great  PoM  of  a
Mahayana arya, the antidotes to those also in that way.
- It follows that there is  no  fault  that  the  mode  of  correlating  the
divisions of the  great,  middling,  and  small  antidotes  and  objects  of
abandonment that has  been  explained  is  incorrect,  because  through  the
analogy “very great darkness is dispelled by small  illumination  while  the
small is dispelled by the great,” it is correct that the  great  objects  of
abandonment of the PoM are  destroyed  by  the  small  PoM,  and  the  small
objects of abandonment of the PoM are destroyed by the great PoM.
-  Positing  by  way  of  divisions  of  the  antidotes  to  the   knowledge
obscurations here has a purpose, because, in concordance  with  what  occurs
in  the  system  of  the  great  trailblazers,  “the  afflictions   of   the
bodhisattvas are conceptualizations,” they  are  posited  in  terms  of  the
antidotes to the main objects of abandonment.
- “Afflictions” has the significance of one needing to make effort  for  the
sake of abandoning them.
- The PoM is divided into the small, middling, and great and each  of  these
are sub-divided into small,  middling,  and  great.   The  reason  for  this
division is that there are 9 corresponding objects of abandonment.
- There are 9 levels of objects of abandonment and 9 levels of the PoM.
- There are 10 grounds: there are 10 uninterrupted  paths  and  9  liberated
paths,  because  the  liberated  path   that   corresponds   to   the   last
uninterrupted path is not the PoM. It is the buddha ground.
- The PoM begins on the last instant of the 1st  ground  -  prior  to  that,
there is no PoM. This last instant of the 1st  ground  is  an  uninterrupted
path. Likewise, the last instant of  the  2nd  ground  is  an  uninterrupted
path. The same goes for the 3rd, 4th, 5th, and so on, through the 10th;  the
last instants of these grounds are uninterrupted  paths.  The  uninterrupted
path at the end of the  10th  ground  is  the  end  of  a  sentient  being’s
continuum.
- For the liberated paths, the 2nd ground begins with a liberated path,  and
the same goes for the 3rd through the 10th grounds. However, there are  only
9 liberated paths of the PoM because the liberated  path  arising  from  the
10th uninterrupted path is actually the buddha ground.
-Because there are 10 uninterrupted paths, we need to  posit  10  levels  of
objects of abandonment.
- As there is a presentation of 9 levels  of  the  PoM  corresponding  to  9
levels of objects of abandonment. It is a problem if  we  try  to  correlate
this presentation with the 10 grounds and we  need  to  find  10  levels  of
object of abandonment.
- We correlate the 10 grounds with the 9 levels of  objects  of  abandonment
by dividing the great-great objects  of  abandonment  into  the  coarse  and
subtle. The coarse great-great object of abandonment is correlated with  the
1st ground, and the subtle with the 2nd ground.
- As there are 10 levels of objects  of  abandonment  through  dividing  the
great-great into coarse and subtle, then there should be 10  levels  of  the
PoM.
- To correspond with 10 levels of objects of abandonment, we must create  10
levels of the  PoM.  How  do  we  get  these?  The  great-great  objects  of
abandonment have to be abandoned by the small-small PoM.
- It is only the small-small PoM that is divided into coarse and subtle.  It
is divided to correspond to the coarse and  subtle  great-great  objects  of
abandonment.
- The difference between “great” object  of  abandonment  and  a  “middling”
object of abandonment is from the point of view of the  subtlety;  not  from
the point of view of ease of abandonment.
- When applied to the object of  abandonment,  “great”  means  coarser,  and
“middling” means subtler. A “small” object of abandonment is even subtler.
- A “great object of abandonment” means the object of abandonment is  coarse
and is more manifest. This means it is easier to abandon than, for  example,
a middling object of abandonment,  which  is  subtler;  a  small  object  of
abandonment is even more difficult to abandon.
- When we talk about a PoM abandoning a great object  of  abandonment,  this
PoM should be a small  PoM  because  the  great  object  of  abandonment  is
coarser and easier to abandon.
- Aa small PoM refers to the ability of the PoM being small. A middling  PoM
refers to a PoM that has greater ability than the small one. The “great  PoM
has an even greater ability.
- Analogy to explain the correlation between the objects of abandonment  and
the antidotes.
 - If the stains/dirt on a piece of cloth are gross, all we may need  to  do
is to shake it in order to remove the dust on it.
  - If the stains are more subtle, it may be necessary to soak it  in  water
to remove the stains.
  - If the stains are extremely subtle, we may have to use detergent or  put
it into the washing machine.
- Thus different amounts of effort are required to remove the stains.
- In the text, the analogy of darkness and illumination is used.
  - If there is a dark room, to dispel the darkness, we just  need  a  small
light.
  - If the room is not dark, we need great illumination.
- Someone say: It is not correct to say the Mahayana PoM is definitely of  9
divisions because in terms of results, many results have been taught in  the
Perfection of Wisdom sutras, where it is taught that it produces  countless,
inestimable, and immeasurable merit.. Since the results are so  great,  then
the causes must be very great, so how can you say there are definitely  just
9 types of the PoM?
- Our system: We talks about collecting the  various  accumulations  over  3
countless eons.
   - The accumulation of the 1st countless eon is on the PoM and PoP.
   - The accumulation of the 2nd countless eon takes place on the  7  impure
grounds (the 1st seven grounds)
   - The accumulation of the 3rd countless eon takes place  on  the  last  3
grounds - the 3 pure grounds.
- A bodhisattva generates bodhicitta to benefit  infinite  sentient  beings.
After generating this, the bodhisattva engages in  training  in  the  deeds.
The aim of a bodhisattva is to enact the welfare of sentient beings.  If  he
does not have extensive accumulations, there is no way to enact the  welfare
of sentient beings. One is not even able to fulfill one’s own welfare.
- There are two types: accumulation of merit  and  accumulation  of  exalted
wisdom.
-  The  accumulation  of  merit  can  include  making  prostrations,  making
offerings, doing circumambulations, practicing generosity, patience, etc.
- The accumulation of exalted wisdom involves a lot of  time.  For  example,
one needs to train in the dexterity of meditative stabilization.
- The way how an uninterrupted path of the PoM is generated  -  one  gathers
accumulations  and  eventually,  when  the   amount   of   accumulation   is
sufficient, one is able to generate the 1st uninterrupted path of the PoM.
- Once this uninterrupted path of the PoM is generated, there is no need  to
abide in it for a long time. It is the antidote to  the  coarse  great-great
conception of true existence.
- In the next instant, one arises into the  liberated  path,  the  state  in
which the objects of abandonment have been abandoned. There is  no  need  to
abide long in this liberated path, so the bodhisattva  arises  quickly  into
subsequent attainment.
- Subsequent  attainment  last  a  very,  very  long  time,  because  during
subsequent attainment, there are  many  activities  of  accumulating  merit,
training  in  meditative  stabilization,  etc.  From  time  to   time,   the
bodhisattva enters into meditative equipoise, and eventually, when there  is
enough accumulation  to  generate  the  next  uninterrupted  path,  he  will
eventually generate the uninterrupted path that is the  direct  antidote  to
the next level of the objects of abandonment.
-How does a bodhisattva know when he has accumulated  sufficient  merit  and
wisdom to know when to enter this uninterrupted path? The way a  bodhisattva
gathers accumulations is not the way in which we gather them. A  bodhisattva
has  many  excellent  qualities,  such  as  meditative   stabilization   and
clairvoyances. When the “quota” of the accumulation is met, the  bodhisattva
knows, and there is no doubt, no lack of  clarity.  For  bodhisattvas,  when
they have reached a certain amount of accumulation,  they  have  signs  that
this amount has been reached.
4.55  [Objection] The teachings on countless and so forth
            Cannot bear up ultimately;
            [Reply]The Subduer asserted those to be
            The concordant cause that is kindness conventionally.
- Someone say: Since countless merits and so forth are produced, the  causes
must be many. Since there are many  results,  there  must  be  many  causes.
Therefore, it is not correct to say that there are only 9 PoM. The  division
of the PoM as 9 is therefore not definite.
- Two points of view: the reply from the point of view of the ultimate,  and
the reply from the point of view of the conventional.
- Reply from  the  point  of  view  of  the  ultimate:  the  reason  is  not
established but  relative  to  the  conventional,  it  is  tenable  to  have
countless merit being produced from the 9 divisions of the  PoM.  In  short,
relative to the conventional, it is tenable/feasible, but  relative  to  the
ultimate, it is untenable.
-Our system- it is  necessary  to  accumulate  countless,  inestimable,  and
immeasurable merit. This is necessary in  order  to  enact  the  welfare  of
others.  Since  other  sentient  beings  are  countless  in  number,  it  is
necessary to accumulate  countless,  inestimable,  and  immeasurable  merit.
This PoM being definite in number as 9 is really not so relevant in view  of
how much merit one needs to accumulate in order  to  enact  the  welfare  of
others. Basically, our system says that without countless, inestimable,  and
immeasurable merit, there is no way to enact others’ welfare; therefore,  it
is necessary to create such a great amount of merit.
“…is a result concordant with the cause of realizing the dharmadhatu of  the
nature of great non-observable compassion is  asserted  by  the  Tathagata.”
The “dharmadhatu of the nature of great non-observable compassion refers  to
the emptiness of true existence of great  non-observable  compassion.  Great
non-observable compassion is great compassion that  is  conjoined  with  the
wisdom directly realizing the emptiness of true existence.
The reply that the reason is not established relative to the ultimate
- Small of the small PoM begins  with  an  uninterrupted  path  of  the  1st
ground, then moves on, and continues in the next instant  as  the  liberated
path of the 2nd ground. After that, there are other  different  instants  of
subsequent attainment and so forth that are included  within  the  small  of
the small PoM.
- In the span of the small of the small PoM, a bodhisattva meditates on  the
meaning of emptiness, trains in the dexterity of  meditative  stabilization,
etc. Although there are many different kinds  of  activities  and  different
periods in which different activities are done, we do not  count  the  small
of the small PoM as many small of the small PoM.
- From the point of view of isolates, there are different divisions  of  the
small of the small PoM. For example, we can talk  about  the  small  of  the
small PoM of this evening, of tomorrow morning, etc.
- Someone says: The teachings on the result, countless merit and  so  forth,
cannot bear up ultimately. Hence they are incorrect.
- Our system responds:  The  reason  is  not  established  relative  to  the
ultimate. Relative to the ultimate, it is untenable i.e.  we  say  that  the
reason is  not  established  relative  to  the  ultimate.  Relative  to  the
conventional, it is tenable to  have  countless  merit  and  so  forth,  the
result.
- So in response to that objection, we say “there is no pervasion,” or  “the
pervasion is not established.”
The  reply  that  the  pervasion  is  not  established   relative   to   the
conventional
- It is explained in the sutra that  each  PoM  produces  infinite  results.
These infinite results are explained for the sake  of  generating  faith  in
the  trainees.  According  to  the  sutra  system,  one  gathers   the   two
accumulations:
- For one countless great eon during the occasions of the PoA and PoP.
-For another countless great eon on the occasions of the 7 impure grounds,
-For another one countless great eon on the 3 pure grounds.
- The purpose of accumulating such merit and  exalted  wisdom  is  to  enact
others’ welfare.
- Conventionally, there is an accumulator of merit and exalted  wisdom,  but
ultimately  there  is  no  accumulator,  or  no  person  who  gathers  these
accumulations.
- A bodhisattva needs to gather  the  accumulations  of  merit  and  exalted
wisdom of 3 countless great eons. During this period of  3  countless  great
eons, the bodhisattva continuously gathers the  accumulation  of  merit  and
exalted wisdom. In fact, there is no time during which a bodhisattva is  not
accumulating either merit or exalted wisdom.
- To anticipate the qualms of  such  beings  of  inferior  intelligence  who
think that familiarization of  the  PoM  cannot  be  brought  to  perfection
because it is empty of true existence.
-Qualms of beings of inferior intelligence: These beings:
 (i) hold that generation of a result and the emptiness  of  true  existence
are contradictory
 (ii) have not understood the meaning of emptiness and dependent-arising.
-Our system -  the  generation  of  a  result  and  the  emptiness  of  true
existence are not contradictory, and  emptiness  and  dependent-arising  are
compatible.
- In the CMWS, phenomena are said to be merely imputed  by  conception.  You
should not misunderstand this to mean that you can just impute any thing  in
any way. Look at this watch. If I impute this watch as water,  is  that  all
right? Although phenomena are said to be merely imputed  by  conception,  it
does not mean that any phenomenon can be imputed in any way.

4.56   [Objection]  It  is  inappropriate  for  properties  that   are   not
expressible
            To diminish and increase.
            What is diminished and what is attained
            By way of the path called “meditation”?
-Qualm of beings of inferior intelligence: The path of meditation  does  not
exist ultimately, therefore what object of abandonment  is  diminished,  and
what antidote is attained? It follows that there is none, because  the  path
of meditation does not exist ultimately.
- Beings of inferior intelligence think that it  is  inappropriate  for  the
discordant class to be separated from and  the  antidotes  to  be  produced,
because of the emptiness of true existence.
- The reason given: It follows that there is pervasion, because the  PoM  is
not expressible as  that  itself,  other,  both  (meaning  that  itself  and
other), and  neither  (neither  itself  nor  other)  correctly.  It  is  not
expressible as these 4 possibilities correctly so meditation does not  exist
as that to be brought to perfection. If I  say  it,  there  is  a  fault  of
repetition!
4.57  [Reply]Exactly just as enlightenment,
            This accomplishes the desired aims.
            Enlightenment is the characteristic of thusness;
            Also that is asserted to be the characteristic of that.
- If someone were to say to  our  system,  “It  follows  that  increase  and
decrease are unsuitable ultimately,” then our system would  reply  “accept,”
because indeed, ultimately there is no increase or decrease.
- Our system says: It follows that there is no pervasion  that  the  objects
of abandonment and the antidotes are untenable if increase and  decrease  do
not exist ultimately. This means that there is no pervasion relative to  the
conventional.
- Reason- because exactly just  as  the  uncontaminated  exalted  wisdom  of
unsurpassable   enlightenment   enacts   the   welfare   of   the   trainees
conventionally, even though increase and decrease do not  exist  ultimately.
Similarly, this Mahayana PoM accomplishes the  desired  aims,  damaging  the
objects of abandonment and so forth  conventionally,  even  though  increase
and decrease do not exist ultimately. In this  reason  above,  enlightenment
is used as an analogy to understand the path of meditation.
- there is no fault that enlightenment  and  the  PoM  are  not  similar  as
analogy and meaning, because
 (1) they are similar in enacting the special welfare conventionally,
 (2) just as enlightenment bears the characteristic of thusness,  also  that
PoM  is  asserted  to  bear  the  characteristic  of  that  thusness.   Both
enlightenment and the PoM bear the characteristic  of  thusness,  i.e.  both
enlightenment and the PoM are empty of true existence.
Q&A: In relation to the signs of irreversibility of one on the PoM:
1.on the PoA the bodhisattva  hears,  contemplates,  and  meditates  on  the
meaning of emptiness from the point of view of calm abiding
2.on the PoP, he does so from the point of view of calm abiding and  special
insight
3.on the PoS, he directly realizes emptiness
4.on the PoM, he repeatedly familiarizes with this realization
-Regardless a person definite in the Mahayana lineage or  a  person  who  is
not definite in the Mahayana lineage, the following sequence is definite:
(1) one observes emptiness by way of calm abiding
(2) observes emptiness by way of special insight
(3) directly and newly realizes emptiness
(4) repeatedly familiarizes with the realization.
- It is not possible for a sharp faculty bodhisattva to  attain  a  sign  of
irreversibility of the PoS. A sign  of  irreversibility  of  the  PoS  is  a
convention of body or speech of a middling faculty bodhisattva.
-a sharp faculty bodhisattva, upon attaining the  subsequent  attainment  of
the PoS, attains all 16-having turned away from the seeds  of  the  acquired
conceptions  of  phenomena,  possessing  stability  of  the   ultimate   and
conventional minds of unsurpassable enlightenment, and so forth - but we  do
not say that the sharp faculty bodhisattva has attained any of the signs  of
irreversibility of the PoS.
Proving the analogy
Here we are looking at this analogy and  meaning,  under  the  outline  “The
pervasion is not established conventionally.”
- The analogy refers to enlightenment.
- The meaning to be understood through the analogy  refers  to  bodhisattvas
on the PoM.
-  The  desired  aims  of  trainees  are  enacted  conventionally.  Although
enlightenment does not exist ultimately, it is able  to  enact  the  desired
aims of trainees conventionally.
- There are different types of trainees: ordinary  beings  with  pure  karma
through to bodhisattva aryas.
- With respect to ordinary beings with pure  karma,  the  supreme  emanation
body enacts their welfare.
- For bodhisattva aryas, the complete enjoyment body enacts their welfare.
- The complete enjoyment body of a Buddha is a coarse form body that can  be
perceived by bodhisattva aryas. Sentient beings who are not at the level  of
bodhisattva aryas cannot perceive enjoyment bodies.
- To benefit sentient beings of lower levels, there  are  supreme  emanation
bodies. This type of body can be perceived  by  ordinary  beings  with  pure
karma. It is a type of form body accessible to more sentient beings.
- In order to benefit more sentient  beings,  the  buddhas  display  supreme
emanation bodies that are coarser than complete enjoyment bodies.
- In order to benefit  sentient  beings  who  do  not  have  pure  karma  to
perceive supreme emanation bodies, the buddhas display a form body  that  is
even coarser, and there is a teaching that says that one’s guru is  actually
Vajradhara. Gurus are  of  various  types;  for  example,  the  teacher  who
explains the Dharma can be taken as one’s guru. The buddhas need to  display
these coarser form bodies in the form of teachers  of  Dharma  in  order  to
benefit the trainees. If they show themselves  in  subtler  forms,  trainees
may not have the karma to perceive them.
- The truth  body  is  the  actual  empowering  condition  of  the  complete
enjoyment body.
- The complete enjoyment body is the empowering condition of  the  emanation
body.
- When one attains buddhahood, the four bodies are attained  simultaneously,
but this statement seems to say
      -  the  truth  body  is  the  empowering  condition  of  the  complete
enjoyment body, and
      - the complete enjoyment body  is  the  empowering  condition  of  the
emanation body.
- How does the truth body serve as the empowering condition of the  complete
enjoyment body, if  the  two  are  attained  simultaneously  when  a  person
attains buddhahood?
- You can interpret this to mean: the exalted wisdom truth body  in  another
person’s  continuum  serves  as  the  actual  empowering  condition  of  the
complete enjoyment body in one’s continuum. We are talking  about  different
continua.
-  The  complete  enjoyment  body  in  one’s  continuum  can  serve  as  the
empowering condition of the supreme emanation body in  the  same  continuum.
[Editor’s note:  It  seems  that  Geshe-la  is  saying  that,  although  the
complete enjoyment body and the emanation body are attained  simultaneously,
the supreme emanation body is not  necessarily  attained  simultaneous  with
the complete enjoyment body.]
- Mahayana PoM, even though  it  does  not  exist  ultimately,  can  perform
various activities, such as destroying stains by means  of  separating  from
adventitious stains conventionally. It can abandon objects  of  abandonment,
even though it does not exist ultimately. Of course, ultimately there is  no
abandonment of the objects of abandonment, the destruction  of  stains,  but
conventionally there are such activities.
-  Someone  says:  it  follows  that  there  is  no  decrease  and  increase
ultimately.
- Our reply: We accept.
-  In the previous presentation, we say that there are 9  divisions  of  the
PoM that serve as antidotes to the various  objects  of  abandonment.  Qualm
then arises.
-Someone says: Even if it is not ultimately existent,  it  is  not  suitable
for the PoM to enact purposes conventionally.
      4.58ab     Enlightenment is not
                 By a former mind, nor by a later one.
- The subject - the conventional and ultimate minds of  enlightenment  -  it
follows that they are not suitable to generate enlightenment, because it  is
not suitable that enlightenment is generated by a former, by  a  later  one,
nor by many former and later ones arising together or arising serially.
− Question: How do the conventional  and  ultimate  minds  of  enlightenment
generate enlightenment?
- Three circumstances are described here.
1. Enlightenment is  “not  generated  by  a  former  or  by  a  later  one”:
Enlightenment is not produced by just a single former or later  conventional
or ultimate mind of enlightenment, since a single instant  of  the  mind  of
enlightenment cannot produce enlightenment.
2. Enlightenment is not produced by many minds arising together, the  reason
being  the  sutra  citation:  “Sentient  beings  are  separate  continua  of
consciousness.”
3. Enlightenment is not generated by many former and later instants  of  the
mind of enlightenment serially: as soon as a later mind arises,  the  former
mind has disintegrated. A former and later instant  of  mind  are  thus  not
related, and are not able to generate enlightenment.
- Someone says:  Therefore, how is the function of generating  enlightenment
by means of having  generated  the  mind  to  which  the  special  purposes,
enlightenment and others’ welfare, appear performed?”
- Someone from the past tries to counteract the 3rd circumstance says:  That
enlightenment is not produced by many instants serially, because as soon  as
a later one arises, the former one disintegrates.
-Our system:
  - With respect to the 1st circumstance  that  says  enlightenment  is  not
produced by a single former  or  later  conventional  or  ultimate  mind  of
enlightenment. Our system agrees that enlightenment is  not  produced  by  a
single instant of the mind of enlightenment.
  -  With respect to the 2nd circumstance that  says  enlightenment  is  not
generated by many minds arising together. Our system  says  it  is  possible
for many conventional and ultimate minds of enlightenment to arise  together
because an arya bodhisattva can have the conventional and ultimate minds  of
enlightenment together. Of course they are not manifest at the same  time  -
if the conventional mind of enlightenment is manifest, the ultimate  is  not
manifest, and vice versa. Although they don't  manifest  together,  they  do
exist together.
-  With respect to the 3rd circumstance, that says enlightenment  cannot  be
generated by many former and later minds serially.  Our  system  says  these
former and later minds arising serially  is  possible,  because  we  have  a
former instant of the mind of enlightenment transforming into the entity  of
the second instant of the mind of enlightenment, and the second  instant  is
actually more powerful. Therefore there are these former and later  instants
arising serially, the later being more powerful than the former.
- Our system - solely with  the  conventional  mind  of  enlightenment,  one
cannot attain enlightenment. Likewise, solely  with  the  ultimate  mind  of
enlightenment, one cannot attain  enlightenment.  It  is  only  through  the
union of the conventional and ultimate minds of enlightenment that  one  can
attain enlightenment.
- This is because  through  the  conventional  mind  of  enlightenment,  one
gathers the accumulation of merit, but one cannot  gather  the  accumulation
of exalted wisdom.
- Through the ultimate mind of enlightenment, one gathers  the  accumulation
of exalted wisdom, but not the accumulation of merit.
- Therefore, through the union of the conventional  and  ultimate  minds  of
enlightenment, one is able to gather the union of the accumulation of  merit
and the accumulation  of  exalted  wisdom.   In  this  way  one  can  attain
enlightenment.
- Note that prior to the first  ground,  a  bodhisattva  does  not  have  an
ultimate mind of enlightenment, but can have the realization  of  emptiness.
Through the conventional mind of enlightenment  and  the  ultimate  mind  of
enlightenment  accompanying  and  assisting  each  other,  one  will  attain
enlightenment.
-Q&A: When we talk about different instants  of  the  mind,  these  instants
belong to a single continuum. When we talk  about  the  different  instants,
for example the 1st and the 2nd instants, they are different  instants,  but
they do not belong to distinct continua, so  we  can  talk  about  different
instants of a single continuum.
- For example, consider our body in the morning; there  is  a  body  in  the
morning and we have a body now. The body in the morning does not exist  now,
however its continuity exists as this body in the evening. In this  way  the
various instants are generated.
- We would not say that two instants contact each other.  However,  although
they do not contact each other, this does not  mean  that  the  2nd  instant
does not arise from the 1st instant. Without contacting each other,  we  can
say that the 2nd instant arises from the 1st instant.
- It is said that within the duration of the snap of a finger, there are  65
parts; we call the one of these 65 parts: the shortest instant in  which  an
action is completed.
- It is difficult to conceive of this tiny period of time. As an example  to
explain the shortest instant in which an action is completed:  if  you  have
65 pieces of paper, and a very sharp knife cuts through them, it seems  that
they are all cut at the same time, but without the pieces above  being  cut,
there is no way for those below to be cut. The cutting of the 65  pieces  of
paper has to occur serially, so the time it takes to cut a single  piece  of
paper is the shortest instant in which an action is completed.
- Momentariness means that from moment to moment, there  is  disintegration.
We would  say  that  production,  abiding,  and  disintegration  take  place
simultaneously.
- An arya can perceive these processes directly. On a subtle level,  we  say
that at the time  of  production,  there  is  abidance  and  disintegration.
However, from a coarse point of view, we would say that first there  is  the
activity of production, and after  production,  there  is  the  activity  of
abidance, after which there is the activity of disintegration.
4.58cd      Through the mode of the analogy of an oil lamp,
            The eight aspects of profound dharmata.
- “Therefore, how is the function of generating enlightenment  by  means  of
having generated the mind to which the special purposes,  enlightenment  and
others’ welfare, appear performed?”
- “It follows that there is no fault that, due  to  many  former  and  later
instants  of  the  Mahayana  generated  mind  arising  sequentially,   their
results, the 3 exalted bodies, would not be generated.”
- We do not commit the fault that due to many former and later  instants  of
the Mahayana generated mind arising sequentially, the 3 exalted bodies  will
not be generated by using the analogy of an oil lamp to understand this:  if
we have an oil lamp, and there are various instants of  the  oil  lamp,  the
result is that the wick with oil  will  be  completely  burnt.  Due  to  the
former and later instants of the oil lamp becoming powerful, eventually  the
wick with oil is completely burned. Likewise, due to many former  and  later
instants of the Mahayana generated mind arising sequentially, the results  -
the 3 exalted bodies -will be generated.
- Here we see the process of attaining enlightenment due  to  many  instants
of the Mahayana generated mind.
-The generation of the Mahayana generated mind is not easy at all. In  order
to attain it, one has train, starting from the small scope of  the  path  to
enlightenment. Through  a  long  process,  one  eventually  arrives  at  the
realization of the uncontrived generated mind, or bodhicitta.  Eventually  a
bodhisattva can conjoin this generated mind with  ultimate  bodhicitta  i.e.
after generating conventional bodhicitta,  in  time  it  is  conjoined  with
ultimate bodhicitta. This takes place over a long period of time and is  the
result of continuous effort.
-It is not the case that enlightenment  can  be  produced  through  sporadic
effort: one day generating bodhicitta, forgetting about it for  a  few  days
such that it becomes non-existent, and then trying to generate it again.
- Using the analogy of an oil lamp - this is a lamp that  was  used  in  the
past, in which a wick is partly immersed in oil and lit. When this  wick  is
lit, there is the 1st instant of the oil lamp. In  dependence  on  this  1st
instant, the 2nd instant is produced, which produces the 3rd  etc.  In  this
way, the wick is burnt in reliance on the various instants- without the  1st
instant; there  is  no  2nd  instant,  etc.  There  is  no  burning  without
reliance. There is burning with reliance. Without the  2nd  instant  of  the
oil lamp, with merely the 1st instant, the wick cannot  be  burnt.  The  2nd
instant definitely relies on the 1st instant. In this way there  is  burning
of the wick.
- The 2nd instant arises  in  reliance  on  the  1st  instant.  If  it  were
possible for the 2nd instant to arise without relying on  the  1st  instant,
then either it would always exist, or it would always not exist.
-  “…the cause, the flame, and the result, the wick”  -  Here  you  need  to
understand that the result is the burning  of  the  wick.  Before  the  wick
meets the flame, there is no burning, but upon  contact  of  the  flame  and
wick, there is burning of the wick. Due to contact  between  the  flame  and
wick, instant after instant the wick becomes more burnt.
- It then says, “You asserted the sign. If you accept that, then,  since  it
follows that there would be that fault and so forth due to elimination by  a
direct valid cognizer, it follows that without the 1st instant  of  it,  the
characteristic of cause, what  acts  to  burn,  and  the  characteristic  of
result, what is burned, would not exist, because without the 1st instant  of
it, it would not arise even conventionally.”
- “Elimination by a direct valid cognizer” means that we can  see  with  our
eyes that a wick  that  is  partially  immersed  in  oil,  when  lit,  burns
gradually.
- However, what acts to burn and what is burned exist, since, at  that  time
when the special ability of the flame and core has been produced in the  2nd
instant, although the 1st instant  has  disintegrated  without  a  cause  of
disintegration arisen later, the cause,  the  flame,  and  the  result,  the
wick, are respectively  observed  by  valid  cognition  as  a  result  being
produced and a cause disintegrating simultaneously.
- That follows, because there is a 2nd  instant  and  so  forth  of  special
ability possessing culmination created by that former instant having  relied
on the 1st instant bearing the  distinction  of  contact  between  both  the
flame and the wick.
- That follows, because what is burned and what acts to burn are tenable  at
any time, through the reality of dependent arising of  the  nature  of  just
this appearing  conditionality  that  is  not  created  by  others  such  as
Ishvara, by the strength of being related  as  cause  and  result  agreeably
solely without investigation by a reasoning analyzing the ultimate.
- “that is not created by others such as Ishvara,” is a refutation  of,  for
example, things being created by Ishvara first having an idea. For  example,
some schools say the world/universe is created  due  to  Ishvara  having  an
idea; this is refuted by our system. “that is not created by others such  as
Ishvara,” is a refutation of, for example, things being created  by  Ishvara
first having an idea. For example, some schools say  the  world/universe  is
created due to Ishvara having an idea; this is refuted by our system.
- When the 2nd instant of the lamp  is  established,  the  1st  instant  has
disintegrated.  This  disintegration  of  the   1st   instant   is   not   a
disintegration due to a cause of disintegration that arises later.  As  soon
as the 1st instant is established,  it  is  established  in  the  entity  of
disintegration.
- In general, we say that any functioning thing disintegrates not due to  an
external cause. As soon  as  a  functioning  thing  is  established,  it  is
established in the entity of disintegration.
- In this analogy, the 1st instant of the lamp being able to burn  the  wick
is reliant on the 2nd instant of the lamp. Likewise, the 2nd instant of  the
lamp being able to burn the wick relies on the  1st  instant  of  the  lamp.
Thus, there is  burning  of  the  wick  in  reliance  on  former  and  later
instants. There is no burning of the wick without reliance.
- Likewise, in dependence on the  1st  instant  of  the  Mahayana  generated
mind, the 2nd instant of the  Mahayana  generated  mind  is  able  to  cause
enlightenment. Without the 1st instant, the 2nd instant cannot  be  a  cause
of enlightenment.
- Likewise, the 1st instant of the Mahayana generated mind being a cause  of
enlightenment relies on the 2nd instant of the Mahayana generated  mind.  In
this way,  enlightenment  is  produced  in  reliance  on  former  and  later
instants of the Mahayana generated mind.
- In the analogy, the 2nd instant of the lamp is more powerful than the  1st
instant with respect to the burning of the wick. Likewise, the  2nd  instant
of the mind of enlightenment is  more  powerful  than  the  1st  instant  in
generating enlightenment.
- When we talk about the minds of enlightenment producing enlightenment,  we
are not talking about having a 1st instant of  the  mind  of  enlightenment,
and then enlightenment being produced in the 2nd instant. It is through  the
process of many instants of the mind of enlightenment that enlightenment  is
produced. Just as we say that the attainment of  enlightenment  begins  with
the generation of the 1st instant of the mind of enlightenment, followed  by
the 2nd instant, etc., we would say that  the  wick  with  oil  being  burnt
begins with the 1st instant of the wick being burnt.
- It is through understanding the 8 types  of  profound  dharmata  that  one
will attain enlightenment.
-Question:  In order to describe the characteristics that are signs  of  the
irreversible bodhisattvas abiding on the PoM, with respect to which  objects
do the 8 types of profundities exist?
4.59  Profundities with respect to production, cessation,
            Thusness, objects of knowledge,
            Knowledge, activity, non-duality,
            And skill in means.
- The 8 profundities:
   1. Profound production
   2. Profound cessation
   3. Profound thusness
   4. Profound objects of knowledge
   5. Profound knowledge
   6. Profound activity
   7. Profound non-duality
   8. Profound skill in means
The subject—the 8th ground bodhisattva:
(1) understands profound production, emptiness of  true  existence  that  is
the meaning of  the  term  “dependent-arising,”  because  he  possesses  the
understanding that  “Enlightenment  is  not  attained  by  former  or  later
instants of the generated mind singly, and also not  through  non-entitiness
conventionally, yet  the  very  superior  meaning  to  be  realized  through
meditation, enlightenment, will be generated.”
(2) understands profound cessation, because he has directly understood  that
the  two  truths  are  not  contradictory,  that  “All  things  are  without
entitiness by way  of  nature  since  their  merely  having  arisen  at  the
beginning, but still cease conventionally.”
(3) understanding profound thusness, because he has understood the  profound
mode of realizing thusness, that “Although one is familiar with thusness  on
all occasions of the learners’ paths,  one  does  not  actualize  it  at  an
improper time.”
(4) understanding profound objects of knowledge,  because  he  has  directly
understood “subsequently  accomplishing  many  aspects,  generosity  and  so
forth, with respect to all phenomena,  although  they  are  not  established
ultimately by way of the nature of thusness.”
(5) possesses profound knowledge, because he has  directly  understood  that
“If all phenomena were to exist ultimately  by  way  of  the  entitiness  of
thusness ultimately, such would be  observable,  but  they  are  never  seen
ultimately; mere non-seeing of suchness is seeing suchness.”
(6) possesses profound activity, because he  has  directly  understood  that
“non-activity [ultimately] with respect to all phenomena by way of  dharmata
that is the emptiness of true existence is  activity  with  respect  to  the
meaning of the mode of abidance.”
(7) possesses the  realization  of  profound  non-duality,  because  he  has
directly understood “accomplishing  all  paths  as  the  entitiness  lacking
duality ultimately.”
(8) possesses profound skill in means, because he  has  directly  understood
and familiarized with “One thoroughly completes  all  collections  of  merit
and exalted wisdom, but one will not attain the result of that,  buddhahood,
ultimately.”
1. Profound production: Previously we explained that  enlightenment  is  not
   generated by a former or a later instant of the  generated  mind  singly,
   meaning that enlightenment is not  generated  by  each  former  or  later
   instant of the generated mind alone. It is  also  not  generated  by  the
   collection of former and later instants of the  generated  mind,  because
   former  and  later  instants  of  the  generated  mind   do   not   abide
   simultaneously. However, without relying on former and later instants  of
   the  generated  mind,  enlightenment  cannot  be   generated.   Moreover,
   enlightenment   is   not   generated   ultimately;   it   is    generated
   conventionally.  Through  understanding  these  points,  one  understands
   profound production.
2. Profound cessation: Things do not exist ultimately; however,  they  still
   disintegrate from moment to  moment  [conventionally].  By  understanding
   this, one understands profound cessation.
3. Profound thusness:  “Although  one  is  familiar  with  thusness  on  all
   occasions of the learners’  paths,  one  does  not  actualize  it  at  an
   improper time.” One does not actualize  thusness  at  an  improper  time,
   because it is actualized only  upon  attaining  buddhahood.  “Actualizing
   thusness” here refers to actualizing thusness in a manner of not  arising
   from it again. Through understanding that thusness is not  actualized  at
   an  improper  time,  one  understands  the  profound  mode  of  realizing
   thusness.
4. Profound objects of  knowledge:  Although  all  phenomena  do  not  exist
   ultimately, the 6 perfections: generosity and so forth  are  subsequently
   accomplished. Through realizing that phenomena do not  exist  ultimately,
   one is able to engage in the practice of the 6 perfections in a very pure
   way. In this way, one possesses the understanding of profound objects  of
   knowledge. Because of having directly understood that, although phenomena
   do not exist ultimately, one subsequently accomplishes generosity and  so
   forth purely, one possesses the  understanding  of  profound  objects  of
   knowledge.
5. Profound knowledge: “If all phenomena were to exist ultimately by way  of
   the entitiness of thusness ultimately, such would be observable but  they
   are  never  seen  ultimately;  mere  non-seeing  of  suchness  is  seeing
   suchness.” “mere non-seeing  of  suchness  is  seeing  suchness”—suchness
   means emptiness, but it seems that the  first  “suchness”  is  redundant,
   because usually we just say, “Non-seeing  is  seeing  suchness.”  Through
   understanding this, one possesses profound knowledge.
6. Profound activity: “non-activity  with  respect  to  all  phenomena…”  It
   would be appropriate to add the qualification  “ultimately,”  i.e.  “non-
   activity (or lack of activity) ultimately with respect to  all  phenomena
   by way of dharmata that is the emptiness of true  existence  is  activity
   with respect to the meaning of the mode of abidance.”
7. Profound non-duality: “accomplishing all paths as the entitiness  lacking
   duality ultimately.” In this context, “duality” refers to the  two  -that
   which  accomplishes,  and  the  object  of  accomplishment.  That   which
   accomplishes and the object of accomplishment do not exist ultimately. In
   that way, one accomplishes all paths. Through having directly  understood
   that one  accomplishes  all  paths  as  the  entitiness  lacking  duality
   ultimately, one possesses the realization of profound non-duality.
8. Profound skill in means: “One thoroughly  completes  all  collections  of
   merit and exalted wisdom,” i.e. one thoroughly completes all  collections
   of merit and exalted wisdom conventionally, “but one will not attain  the
   result  of  that,  buddhahood,  ultimately.”  Through   having   directly
   understood this and familiarized with it, one will possess  the  profound
   skill in means. Profound skill in means refers to having  profound  skill
   in the means of accomplishing, or actualizing,  the  result.  This  comes
   about through  understanding  that  the  results  and  the  causes  exist
   conventionally, but not ultimately. Likewise, one  gathers  accumulations
   of merit and exalted wisdom conventionally, but not ultimately.  In  this
   way, one is skilled in actualizing the result.
Topic 9: APPLICATION OF THE EQUALITY OF CYCLIC EXISTENCE AND PEACE
Cause of the truth body: the application of  equality  of  cyclic  existence
and peace
- After having explained the signs of irreversibility of  those  abiding  on
the 8th ground  and  above,  the  application  of  the  equality  of  cyclic
existence and peace  is  explained.  The  reason  is  that  those  who  have
attained the signs of  irreversibility  make  effort  in  order  to  quickly
attain buddhahood.
-From Haribhadra’s Great Commentary, discussing the meaning  of  a  no-more-
learner: Now, the  learners  who  have  been  taught  in  the  passage  ‘The
characteristics of non-learning sangha shall be indicated’ are  on  the  7th
ground and those below.”
- “Learners” here refers  to  those  on  the  7th  ground  and  below.  Upon
attaining the 8th  ground,  a  bodhisattva  is  called  a  “no-more-learner”
because upon attaining the 8th  ground,  a  bodhisattva  has  completed  the
special corpus of the path to achieve the three  exalted  bodies,  and  does
not need to learn other paths.
-“Other paths” refers to the 7th ground and below. For that  reason,  he  is
called a “no-more-learner”.
- Although the bodhisattva has completed the special corpus of the  path  to
achieve the three exalted bodies, the  bodhisattva  has  not  completed  the
corpus of the path to achieve the three exalted bodies.
- This means that upon attaining the  8th  ground,  a  bodhisattva  has  not
completed the corpus of the path to achieve the three  exalted  bodies,  but
has completed the special corpus of the path to achieve  the  three  exalted
bodies.
- The “special corpus of the path to achieve the three  exalted  bodies”  is
precisely the application of the equality of cyclic existence and peace.
4.60ab      Because phenomena are like a dream,
            Not conceptualizing cyclic existence and peace.
- The 8th ground bodhisattva has directly  realized  that  cyclic  existence
and peace lack true  existence,  and  by  means  of  this  realization,  has
exhaustively destroyed the opportunity for generating a  manifest  adherence
to true existence, even during the occasion of subsequent attainment.
4.60cd      The response to arguments such as “karma does not exist”
            Is just that which has been explained.
-If all phenomena are not established ultimately, there  is  no  fault  that
actions and results cannot be posited. Such arguments that  say  that  karma
does not exist and so  forth  can  be  rejected.  How  do  we  reject  those
arguments? They are rejected in the following 4 ways in the outlines  below:

 1. Rejecting the consequence that it follows that accumulating  karma  even
during daytime is infeasible
 2. Rejecting the consequence that it follows that a path  of  action  in  a
dream is complete
 3. Rejecting contradiction with scripture
 4. Rejecting the ridiculous consequence
- 1. Rejecting the consequence that it follows that accumulating karma  even
during daytime is infeasible
-Argument by Sariputra: It follows that  accumulating  karma  of  virtue  or
negativity even during daytime would  be  infeasible,  because  actions  and
results are not established ultimately, for example, just as in the case  of
a dream. [It is not that Sariputra had a doubt. He acted  as  if  he  had  a
doubt for the sake of taking care of trainees who hold that the  two  truths
are contradictory.]
- Reply by Subhuti:
  - Accept –  if  relative  to  the  ultimate,  you  say  “it  follows  that
accumulating karma of virtue or negativity ultimately  even  during  daytime
is infeasible.
  - No pervasion – if relative to the  conventional,  you  say  “it  follows
that accumulating karma of virtue or negativity conventionally  even  during
daytime would be infeasible.
- 2. Rejecting the consequence that it follows that a path of  action  in  a
dream is complete
- In this section, there is a discussion of whether karma is accumulated  in
a dream, whether virtue or non-virtue created in a dream becomes a  complete
path of action, and so forth.
- Subhuti says: regardless of whether one  has  killed  during  the  day  or
killed in a dream, if afterwards one has forceful adherence,  saying,  “That
person has been killed by me. The killing of that  person  by  me  was  well
done,” then those two - having killed during the day and having killed in  a
dream - would be similar in having become paths of actions. Sariputra,  what
do you have to say about that?
- Sariputra says: Well, if that is the case, then killing an  object  to  be
killed, giving an object to be given, and so forth  in  a  dream,  would  be
complete paths of  actions,  because  the  waking  state  and  a  dream  are
similar. If you accept that, then if a monk were to dream that he  killed  a
man, it follows that this fully ordained monk would lose his vows.
- Subhuti says: What you have said is  not  correct.  It  follows  that  the
repudiation by you, Sariputra, is also not a correct repudiation.
   - Your earlier reply to that  “then  killing  an  object  to  be  killed,
giving an object to be given, and so forth in a  dream,  would  be  complete
paths of actions, because the waking state  and  a  dream  are  similar”  is
‘Accept.’” Why? Because the difference between the waking state and a  dream
is just the degree in the strength of karma.
   -If nourished by forceful adherence, even the  karma  of  a  dream  would
become a complete path of action. The vows of a fully  ordained  monk  would
not be given up due to dreaming that he killed a  man  in  a  dream  because
that is presented from the point of view of a  training  stipulated  by  the
Buddha.
  - An example is given: the arisal of a downfall of  unchaste  conduct.  In
relation to a fully-ordained monk, if he engages in  unchaste  conduct,  but
before a downfall actually arises, if he produces a mind of concealment,  he
is not posited as a fully-ordained monk. If, however, he does not produce  a
mind of concealment, he is posited as a fully-ordained monk who is a  person
who has relinquished a training regarding a punishable action.
  - In other words, if he does not produce a  mind  of  concealment,  he  is
still a fully-ordained monk, but will have to receive some punishment,  such
as sweeping the grounds of monasteries for some years or months.
- In general, when we talk about a complete path  of  action,  four  factors
need to be complete:
   1. Basis
   2. Thought
   3. Preparation
   4. Conclusion
For example - the path of action of killing a human being:
1. The basis is a person who is of a different continuum  from  oneself;  in
   the case of killing a human being, it is  a  human  being  who  is  of  a
   different continuum from oneself.
2.  The  thought  is  divided  into  two:  discrimination  and   motivation.
   Discrimination refers to the discrimination  determining,  “This  is  the
   person I will kill.” The motivation refers to the desire to kill.
3. The preparation is of various types. Let us take an example: you want  to
   kill someone in Pomaia. You have the motivation and desire,  thinking  “I
   want to kill this person.” You walk down the road to  Pomaia:  even  this
   action of walking along the road constitutes the preparation. This is the
   preparation for the killing, but is not the actual preparation: it is the
   preparation of the preparation. An  example  of  the  actual  preparation
   would be stabbing the person, i.e. you insert a knife into the person.
4. Through the condition of this actual preparation of stabbing the  person,
   if the person stops breathing and the killer thinks “It is done,” this is
   the conclusion. In this way,  the  path  of  action  of  killing  becomes
   complete. This person that one wants to kill must die  before  one  does.
   This is necessary for the path of action to become complete.
-  Consider a slightly different situation.  One  has  the  basis,  and  the
discrimination:“I am going to kill that person”—and the motivation  to  kill
that basis. One begins walking to  Pomaia,  but  half  way  to  Pomaia,  one
thinks “I should not kill this person,” then generates  a  mind  of  regret,
and does not carry on with the preparation. In such  a  case,  the  path  of
action is, of course, not complete. However, because of the presence of  the
basis, the discrimination, the motivation, and a part  of  the  preparation,
negativity is definitely accumulated.
- If this path of action of killing becomes complete, and if the  killer  is
a fully-ordained monk or nun, a defeat is committed.  If  the  killer  is  a
novice monk or nun, a similitude of a defeat is committed. If the killer  is
a layperson without vows, a complete path of action is accumulated.
3. Rejecting contradiction with scripture
-Argument by Shariputra: If there is the accumulating of karma in  both  the
waking state and a dream, then it would contradict what has been  taught  in
sutra: “They are devoid of all karma and intentions.”
-  Reply  by  Subhuti::  Sariputra,  it  follows  that  it  would  also  not
contradict that, because what has been taught in sutra says that  karma  and
intentions  do  not  exist  ultimately,  but   karma   and   results   exist
conventionally.
4. Rejecting the ridiculous consequence
Sariputra says: It follows  that  the  cultivation  of  the  performance  of
generosity through to wisdom by a bodhisattva in a dream  would  become  the
complete two accumulations if the roots of virtue are further  dedicated  to
complete enlightenment, because there are complete  paths  of  action  in  a
dream. If you accept that, then there would  be  a  ridiculous  consequence,
because a path of action in a dream  is  not  even  established  as  a  real
conventionality.
- Our system: It is possible to accumulate virtue in a dream.  For  example,
regret is a  changeable  mental  factor.  This  means  that  whether  regret
becomes a cause of virtue or non-virtue depends on the  circumstances,  e.g.
if one regrets non-virtue, that is virtuous; if one regrets virtue, that  is
non-virtuous.
   - Sleep becoming virtue or non-virtue depends on  the  circumstances.  If
one falls asleep with a virtuous mind, sleep becomes virtuous. If one  falls
asleep with a non-virtuous mind,  it  becomes  non-virtuous.  Here,  we  are
mainly talking about bodhisattvas on the 8th ground. Such  bodhisattvas  are
definitely  able  to  accumulate  virtue   while   sleeping   or   dreaming.
Bodhisattvas can accumulate great merit, e.g. by performing sleep yoga,  the
yoga of arising or waking from sleep, etc.
- If we have dreams in which we quarrel with someone and even  kill  him  or
her, according to our system, negativity is created, but a complete path  of
action of killing is not created.
- If one dreams that one kills an enemy,  and  after  waking  up,  rejoices,
thinking, “I had a  great  dream;  I  killed  my  enemy,”  then  definitely,
negativity is created. The degree  of  the  negativity  depends  on  various
factors -was one very angry in the dream, what was  the  strength  of  one’s
harmful intent, etc. Although this negativity  is  created,  it  is  not  as
heavy as a complete path of action.
- An exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise of an 8th ground bodhisattva  is
an application of equality of cyclic existence and peace, because, since  it
does not conceptualize samsara and nirvana as different, it  is  a  yoga  of
the pure grounds that realizes with direct cognition that they  are  similar
in being empty of true existence.
- It realizes that cyclic existence and peace are empty of  true  existence,
because the discordant, samsara, and the antidote, the completely  pure  are
realized as
      (i) not existing ultimately and
      (ii) being merely like dreams, due to being  entities  that  are  mere
appearing images conventionally.
-  Upon  attaining  the  8th  ground,  during  the  subsequent   attainment,
regardless of what objects of knowledge  that  are  varieties  appear,  they
appear like a reflection of a face in  the  mirror.  Objects  that  are  not
illusory appearances, like the appearances on  some  occasions  on  the  7th
ground and below, do not appear even slightly. Even though one may not  have
abandoned exhaustively the seeds of the conceptions of true  existence,  due
to having  destroyed  the  opportunity  for  manifest  conceptions  of  true
existence  to  be  produced,  one  is  presented  as  “having  attained  the
application of equality of cyclic existence and peace.”
- On the 8th ground, during  meditative  equipoise,  there  is  no  manifest
conception of true existence. Even during subsequent  attainment,  there  is
no manifest conception of true existence,  because  one  has  destroyed  the
opportunity for the manifest conception of true existence  to  be  produced.
Whatever appears, appears as illusory.
- On some occasions of the 7th ground and below, when  things  appear,  they
may not appear as illusions. However, upon attaining the  8th  ground,  then
whatever appears, appears as illusion.
- A dream is a falsity that is renowned in the world. It is well known  that
a dream is a falsity.
- Someone says: According  to  your  system  phenomena  are  empty  of  true
existence like a dream.  If  that  is  the  case  there  would  not  be  the
collection of karma even when we are not asleep.  Since  all  phenomena  are
like a dream, according to your system, it means there is no  collection  of
karma, even when we are not asleep.
- Regardless of what kind of argument there is that disputes about  the  two
truths being contradictory, the reply to that argument is characterized  and
known by the following explanation:
  1. Reply that the pervasion is indefinite
  2. Reply that the example is not established
- The Sutra Followers and the Followers of the Great  Exposition  have  very
different ways of presenting the two truths.
- According to the Sautrantikas (SS), ultimate truth and  functioning  thing
are mutually inclusive. They also say that conventional truth and  permanent
phenomenon are mutually inclusive.
- Great Exposition (GES) school posits a conventional truth  is  that  which
is observed to be a phenomenon that is  destroyed  when  it  is  smashed  or
divided by the awareness apprehending it; for example, a vase or a pillar.
- GES posits an ultimate truth is that which is observed to be a  phenomenon
that is not destroyed when  it  is  smashed  or  divided  by  the  awareness
apprehending it.
Q&A: What does it mean to say it is not destroyed  when  it  is  smashed?  A
partless particle, a partless  moment  of  consciousness,  and  uncompounded
phenomena cannot be smashed.
- According to Jetsun Chokyi Gyaltsen’s Presentation of Tenets:
  -the definition of a conventional truth is  a  phenomenon  which  is  such
that, if it were broken or mentally  separated  into  parts,  the  awareness
apprehending it would be cancelled;
  -the definition of an ultimate truth is a phenomenon which is  such  that,
if  it  were  broken  or  mentally  separated  into  parts,  the   awareness
apprehending it would not be cancelled
- Examples of ultimate truth are:
   - a directionally partless particle, or a particle that is partless  from
the point of view of direction
   - a consciousness that is partless from the point of view of time
   - any uncompounded phenomenon.
- The GES posits partless particles, but the other schools,  SS,  and  above
do not.
- SS and GES, propounders of  external objects, assert that it follows  that
ultimately, that is, in the  perspective  of  apprehension  of  an  ultimate
awareness, an unmistaken sense consciousness,  the  killing  of  someone  by
anyone does not appear as parts, part-possessor,  and  continuity-possessor,
and the parts and  part-possessor  of  the  virtuous  path  of  action,  not
killing, also do not appear.
- In the perspective of a sense consciousness, these  actions,  for  example
the killing of someone by anyone, do not  appear  as  parts,  part-possessor
and continuity-possessor.
  - If it appeared as a continuity-possessor, this would imply that  in  the
2nd instant, the 1st instant has not disintegrated and in the  3rd  instant,
the 2nd has not disintegrated and in  that  way,  this  continuity-possessor
appears. However,  because  this  momentary  disintegration  occurs,  it  is
asserted that the killing does not appear as a continuity-possessor.  If  it
appeared as a  continuity-possessor,  this  would  mean  that  there  is  no
momentariness, in the sense that in the 2nd instant,  the  1st  instant  has
not disintegrated, etc., so  killing  appears  as  a  continuity,  or  as  a
continuity-possessor. If the  continuity-possessor  appears,  then  all  the
instants would appear, so the infinitesimal instants would appear, but  this
is not the case, because it is asserted  that  these  instants  disintegrate
without a cause arisen later, due to momentariness in which  things  do  not
remain for a second period.
- In the perspective of apprehension of  that,  the  robbing  of  anyone  by
someone does not exist, and not robbing  also  does  not,  because,  in  the
perspective of apprehension of that, they do not appear as parts  and  part-
possessor. That follows
     (i) because, in the  perspective  of  apprehension  of  that,  although
infinitesimal final instants and minute particles appear, they  disintegrate
without a cause arisen later, due to momentariness in which  things  do  not
remain for a second period. [This is saying that there are very,  very  tiny
instants and very minute particles; in the 2nd instant, the 1st instant  has
already  disintegrated,  so  these  small  instants  and   small   particles
disintegrate without a cause arisen later.]
   (ii) Because it occurs even in our own tenets means that this appears  in
the tenets of the SS & GES. “The diverse worlds are  produced  from  karma.”
This is because, by having asserted that the  outer  and  inner  environment
and the inhabitants are produced from common and uncommon karma, ceasing  of
life occurs through the force of exhausting the  karma  that  propels  life.
Hence, it is because part-possessors that are common and uncommon  karma  as
well as their results  are  also  not  established  in  the  perspective  of
apprehension of an unmistaken awareness.
     - The “unmistaken awareness” refers to a sense consciousness.
     - the common and uncommon karma and their results are  not  established
in the perspective of a sense consciousness. If  they  were  established  in
the perspective of a sense consciousness, they would  be  external  objects,
but they are  not  external  objects,  because  according  to  this  system,
external objects do not depend on inner consciousness.  An  external  object
is like a mass that does not depend on inner consciousness.
    - Common and uncommon karma and their results are not external  objects,
because they depend on inner consciousness.  In  the  SS  and  GES  systems,
external objects are asserted.
-  In  the  perspective  of  an  ultimate  awareness-  an  unmistaken  sense
consciousness -killing, not killing, and so forth, do not appear,  but  they
are objects of conventional awarenesses.
- the property that is generated by the killing: by means of  realizing  the
object to be killed, the killer, and so forth  as  objects  of  conventional
awarenesses,  killing  and   so   forth   are   presented   by   themselves.
[“themselves” refers to SS & GES who do present the killing, the  object  to
be killed, the killer, etc., in that way..
-Our system: The pervasion that it does not exist conventionally if it  does
not exist ultimately is indefinite
- According to SS & GES, the  killing,  object  of  killing,  etc.,  do  not
appear to an unmistaken sense consciousness. This  statement  to  mean  that
killing  and  so  forth  does  not  appear  as  parts,  part-possessor,  and
continuity-possessor.
-Dharmakirti’s Commentary to the Compendium of  Valid  Cognition  -  if  the
parts,  the  part-possessor,  and  the  continuity-possessor  appear  to   a
consciousness, then it follows  that  subtle  impermanence  appears  to  the
consciousness.
- Vasubandhu’s Treasury of Knowledge: “The diverse worlds are produced  from
karma” It talks about how the outer and inner  environment  and  inhabitants
are produced from common and uncommon karma, and the ceasing of life  occurs
through the force of the exhaustion of the karma that propels  life.  If  we
assert that in the perspective of the apprehension of an ultimate  awareness
- an unmistaken sense consciousness - killing  and  so  forth  appear,  this
would imply that killing, etc, are established ultimately.  If  killing  and
so forth are established ultimately, this means they  do  not  rely  on  the
exhaustion of karma that projects life, and this presentation  of  karma  is
contradicted.
- According to the MWS, if killing and so forth appear  in  the  perspective
of an apprehension of an ultimate  awareness,  then  killing  and  so  forth
would be established ultimately and thus would not be dependent on karma.
- From the point of view of SS & GES, the diverse worlds are  produced  from
karma. Because killing, etc., are produced from karma, they  do  not  appear
in the perspective of an ultimate awareness.
- From the point of view of SS & GES, in the perspective of an  apprehension
of an ultimate awareness, karma does not  exist,  but  conventionally  karma
exists.
- Likewise, in our system, we have the presentation of  karma  not  existing
ultimately but existing conventionally.  Understand  that  when  our  system
presents the systems of SS & GES, it is done based upon their tenets.
- Although the properties -the object to be  killed,  the  killing,  and  so
forth -do  not  exist  in  the  perspective  of  a  reasoning  consciousness
analyzing finality that comprehends ultimate truths, like dreams, it is  not
that they do not exist as objects of valid cognizers of conventionalities.
- Therefore, even though the object to be killed, the killing, and so  forth
do not exist ultimately, to the childish who have  not  realized  emptiness,
those who have  not  weakened  all  erroneous  bonds,  the  presentation  of
actions and results through adhering to  the  objects  of  comprehension  of
valid cognizers of conventionalities [the properties and  so  forth  of  the
objects concordant with those, the object to be  killed,  the  killing,  the
object to be given, the giving, and so forth] as the object  to  be  killed,
the killing, and so forth is correct.
- That reply of indefinite pervasion relative to the conventional  and  that
reply of acceptance relative to the ultimate in the aforesaid and  so  forth
that the two  truths  are  not  contradictory  have  been  taught  in  other
positions  in  this  small  commentary  [Haribhadra’s  Clear  Meaning],  the
Perfection of Wisdom sutras, and the treatises of the Protector Nagarjuna.
- The reply given here is not a reply that accords with the position of  the
MOS.
- The infinite responses that the two truths are  not  contradictory  should
be understood from the sutras and the extensive explanations  given  by  the
trailblazers.
- To summarize, “It follows that there is  no  pervasion  that  accumulating
karma even during the daytime would be infeasible  if  actions  and  results
are not truly existent, because,  just  as  actions  and  results  exist  as
objects of conventional awarenesses even though the three  circles  are  not
complete in the perspective of an ultimate awareness in  your  system,  that
of SS &GES, likewise also for us, the MWS, actions and results are  asserted
to be objects of conventional valid cognizers even though they do not  exist
in the perspective of that which comprehends the ultimate.”
- In dependence on these words of the commentary, propounding that “The  two
hearer schools are pervaded by asserting that, if it is a gross  object  and
a continuity, then it is empty of true existence,”  is  only  erroneous.  In
that case, one would be asserting all three circles if that  earlier  debate
itself were to counter itself.
- MWS assert that the three circles  do  not  exist  truly.  If  the  hearer
schools, SS & GES, were to say that objects do not exist truly to  us,  this
would not be a correct repudiation, since the three  circles  (according  to
MWS) do not exist truly. So  we  say  that  “a  skilled  SS  &  GES—who  (i)
explicitly repudiates his own root assertion by  himself  and  (ii)  asserts
that itself to be a correct repudiation of MWS—is impossible. So  we  should
not engage in deprecation by making the above assertion.
- Our system, MWS system: actions and results are  asserted  as  objects  of
conventional valid cognizers, even though they do not exist  ultimately.  In
other words, even though they do not exist in the perspective of that  which
comprehends the ultimate, they are asserted conventionally.
- We say that if an object  is  investigated  and  analyzed,  it  cannot  be
found, but if it is not investigated and analyzed, it can be found.
- We say that if one investigates and analyzes an object,  one  cannot  find
it; but this does not mean that the object does not exist.
- For example a person: if we investigate what a person is,  analyze,  etc.,
and we look among the aggregates; the consciousnesses, etc. and try to  find
the person, we cannot find the person among the aggregates,  but  this  does
not mean that the person does not exist. There is a person  imputed  on  the
bases of imputation, the aggregates.
- In the AMWS, the basis of characterization  of  a  person  is  the  mental
consciousness. That is the final basis of characterization.
-Different schools have different ways of positing a  person.  Some  schools
posit a person as the continuity or continuum of the  aggregates.  They  say
that if the aggregates are young, then we say that the person is  young;  if
the aggregates are old, we say the person is old. If they are aggregates  of
an adult, we say the person is an adult; if the aggregates are thin/fat,  we
say that the person is thin/fat, etc. They say that therefore the person  is
posited as the continuity of the aggregates.
- The AMWS says this is not correct. The continuum of the aggregates  cannot
be posited as the final basis of characterization of a person  because  when
a  person  dies,   only   the   consciousness,   specifically   the   mental
consciousness,  continues.  AMWS  say  that  we  should  posit  the   mental
consciousness as the final basis of characterization of the person.
- In the earlier argument between Sariputra and Subhuti, it  was  said  that
in a dream, karma is not accumulated. It was said that phenomena are like  a
dream, because they do not exist truly. This  argument  involves  saying  it
follows that there is no accumulation  of  karma  in  the  daytime,  because
there is no accumulation of  karma  in  a  dream.  So  since  you  say  that
phenomena  do  not  exist  truly,  like  a  dream,  then  even  in   daytime
accumulation of karma is unfeasible.
- Our system:  The  example  is  not  established.  We  say  that  there  is
accumulation of karma, even during dreams. Karma accumulated  during  dreams
differs in strength from karma accumulated during the day,  but  it  is  not
that karma is not accumulated in dreams at all.
- SS & GES would also say that there is accumulation of karma in dreams,  so
if one nourishes the karma by intense strong adherence, it would  definitely
yield results.
- Our system: samsara and nirvana are established as equal  in  being  empty
of true existence.





























Topic 10:   APPLICATION OF PURE LAND
Cause of the enjoyment body: the application of pure land
- Here the reason for explaining the application  of  pure  land  after  the
application of equality of cyclic existence and peace is given.
- Due to meditating on the equality of cyclic existence and peace, one  will
attain buddhahood. Therefore, after the application of  equality  of  cyclic
existence and peace, the application of pure land will be explained.
4.61  Through establishing them,
            The world of sentient beings, and likewise
            The impure world of the environment as pure,
            The pure buddha land.
The 8th ground bodhisattva has attained the application of pure buddha  land
where he will attain  buddhahood,  because-through  having  accumulated  the
roots of virtue that establish the impure world of sentient beings as  pure,
and likewise the impure world of the environment  as  pure-he  has  attained
the application of pure land.
-In the application of pure land, this involves  purifying  one’s  mind.  If
one’s mind is pure, one will have a pure buddha land. If one’s mind  is  not
pure, one will not have a pure buddha land.
-  Here  we  are  talking  about  bodhisattvas  who  accumulate  merit   and
eventually attain the state of full enlightenment.We are not  talking  about
bodhisattvas who accumulate merit in isolation without having  any  kind  of
relationships with other sentient beings.
- In fact, even before a bodhisattva generates  the  mind  of  enlightenment
(bodhicitta), he would have  karmic  connections  with  different  kinds  of
sentient beings. After generating bodhicitta, again there are  relationships
with different kinds of sentient beings.
-  A  bodhisattva,  with  his  body,  speech,  and  mind,  would   establish
relationships with various sentient beings. As a  bodhisattva  is  purifying
his  mind,  simultaneously  relationships  are  established  with   sentient
beings,  and  the  mind  to  benefit  others  also  becomes  more  and  more
developed. As the mind  becomes  purer  and  purer,  the  companions  around
oneself and the retinue also become purer and purer.
-  Through  the  establishment  of  relationships  with  different  sentient
beings, when one  becomes  a  buddha,  these  sentient  beings  will  become
trainees who abide in one’s buddha land.
-When  a  bodhisattva  is  establishing  karmic  connections  with  sentient
beings, it can be positive or negative connections.
-  Positive  connection  -  Dharma  connections,  through  meeting  sentient
beings, one can  make  prayers  such  as  “in  the  future,  may  we  attain
buddhahood together,” or “if I  were  to  become  enlightened  before  these
other sentient beings, may I be able to help and lead them to the  state  of
enlightenment by teaching him the Dharma.”
- Negative connection -  a  sentient  being  harming  the  bodhisattva.  The
bodhisattva then has the opportunity to practice  patience,  and  can  think
“This person who is  trying  to  harm  me  is  actually  benefitting  me  by
providing me with the opportunity to develop my mind, to  practice  patience
and so forth.In the future, may this person be reborn in my retinue and  may
I help this person attain enlightenment.”
- Upon attaining the 8th ground,  one  possesses  the  application  of  pure
buddha land. In dependence on having been preceded  by  extensive  roots  of
virtue that purify the land, regarding the two types of  buddha  lands,  the
objects to be purified, the purity of the land  -through  the  instances  of
the worlds of sentient beings and the environment respectively,
  (i) by means of generating  the  possession  of  the  resources  that  are
enjoyments of gods, as the antidotes to the land of  the  inhabitants  which
is impure due to hunger and thirst and so forth, and
  (ii) by means of generating purities, golden grounds and so forth, as  the
antidotes to the land of the environment which is impure due to  stones  and
thorns and so forth
-is the possession of the application of pure land.
- Bodhisattvas to fulfill the 3 conditions before  actualizing  the  perfect
end –
   1. Having fully completed prayers
   2. Having fully ripened sentient beings
   3. Having fully purified the buddha land
-One of these conditions involves purifying one’s pure land. Making  prayers
to be able to help the trainees in one’s  pure  land.  It  is  through  this
practice that one’s buddha land will eventually be established.

Topic 11: APPLICATION OF SKILLFUL MEANS
Cause of the emanation body: the application of skillful means
- The reason for explaining the  application  of  skilful  means  after  the
application of pure land. One establishes one’s pure land in order to  enact
the welfare of sentient beings. When one  enacts  the  welfare  of  sentient
beings, one does not do it in a haphazard  manner,  but  one  does  it  with
skillful means.

4.62  Objects, this bearer of the application
            Transcended the enemies,
            Not abiding, according to force,
            Characteristics not in common,
4.63  Not grasping, not observing,
            Signs, extinguishment of wishes,
            The signs of that, and immeasurable,
            Are the ten types of skillful means.
- There are 10 divisions of the application of skillful means.
- The application of the pure grounds that directly knows  the  proper  time
regarding benefiting sentient beings and the  improper  time  regarding  not
benefiting sentient beings with respect  to  actualizing  the  10  types  of
objects of the perfection of wisdom,  the  3  doors  of  liberation  and  so
forth, is the application of skillful means:
(1) The exalted wisdom of the 10th ground has  transcended  the  maras,  the
maras of the son of the gods and  so  forth,  because  of  having  correctly
crossed beyond obstructing phenomena, the  potential  to  be  obstructed  by
maras and so forth, through the force of yoga.
- There are four types of maras:
   1. The mara of the aggregates
   2. The mara of the afflictions
   3. The mara of the lord of death
   4. The mara of the son of the gods
  -What dies? The mara of the aggregates: the five appropriated  aggregates.

  -Through what does  one  die?  The  mara  of  the  afflictions:  the  root
afflictions and the secondary afflictions of the three realms.
  -What is death? The mara of the lord of  death:  that  which  stops  one’s
life power beyond one’s control.
  - That which hinders one from transcending death is the mara  of  the  son
of the gods (devaputra): the Lord of Ecstasy.
  -Due to hindering the attainment of the state of nirvana, they are  called
“maras.”
- Among these, the mara of the afflictions is the worst. Due to the mara  of
the afflictions, one comes under the harm of the other three 3 of maras.  If
one does not have afflictions, the other 3 types of maras will not  be  able
to harm one.
- The mara of the son of the  gods,  the  Lord  of  Ecstasy  harms  sentient
beings by shooting arrows at them.
- Hinayanists transcending the mara of the son of the  gods  upon  attaining
the PoS and transcending the mara of  the  afflictions  upon  attaining  the
state of foe-destroyer.
-Those who are liberated from both factors (the factors  of  the  afflictive
obscurations and the obscurations to absorption) transcend the mara  of  the
lord of death because of having attained control over the  blessing  of  the
compositional factors of life. Upon  attaining  nirvana  without  remainder,
they transcend the mara of the aggregates. Of course, the  other  two  maras
-the mara of the son of the gods and the mara of the afflictions -have  also
been transcended.
-Mahayanists transcend the mara of the son of  the  gods  upon  attaining  a
sign of irreversibility, and upon attaining the 8th  ground  they  transcend
the coarse form  of  the  three  other  maras.  Mahayanists  ends  with  the
destruction of all the four maras without exception  occurs  upon  attaining
buddhahood.
-The exalted wisdom of the 10th ground having transcended  the  maras-  this
means that on the 10th ground, one has transcended the coarse forms  of  the
maras. In fact, on the 3 pure grounds -8th,9th and  10th  grounds  -one  has
transcended the coarse forms of the four maras.
- Why then does the paragraph say “the destruction of  all  the  four  maras
without exception occurs upon attaining buddhahood?”
-  When  a  Hinayanist  attains  nirvana  without  remainder,   the   coarse
aggregates are left behind, and they attain a body of the nature of mind,  a
mental body, which is an aggregate that is not left behind.
- A bodhisattva arya similarly has a mental body, a body of  the  nature  of
mind, which is not transcended until the bodhisattva attains buddhahood.
- In fact,  we  say  that  the  mental  body  arises  through  depending  on
uncontaminated  karma  and  subtle  exertion  by  way   of   the   knowledge
obscurations.
- “subtle exertion by way of the knowledge obscurations” means that one  has
no afflictions, and has to arise in this  mental  body.  Since  one  has  no
afflictions, one has to depend on the knowledge obscurations  [in  order  to
obtain a mental body]. A mental body is an uncontaminated body and since  it
is an uncontaminated body, it cannot arise from  contaminated  causes,  i.e.
from afflictions.
(2) The exalted wisdom of the  10th  ground  possesses  the  application  of
abiding conventionally  without  abiding  ultimately  with  respect  to  all
phenomena, because of having meditated upon the equality  of  all  phenomena
in being empty of true existence.
(3) It possesses  the  application  of  being  propelled  by  the  force  of
previous prayers for others’ welfare, because  of  having  accomplished  the
prayer: “May I enact others’ welfare spontaneously!”
(4) It possesses the application that is not  in  common  with  hearers  and
solitary realizers, because  of  having  familiarized  very  much  with  all
difficult activities that enact others’ welfare.
(5)It  possesses  the  absence  of  apprehending  any  phenomenon  as  truly
existent, because of being distinguished by the purity  that  is  free  from
the apprehending of positive qualities (of the grounds and paths  that  have
been familiarized with) as truly existent.
(6) It possesses the application that does not observe the entities  of  the
self of persons and of  phenomena  as  truly  existent,  because  of  having
familiarized with the emptiness door of liberation for many countless  eons.
(7) It possesses the application that realizes that signs  that  are  causes
do not exist truly, because of having  familiarized  with  the  signlessness
door of liberation for many countless eons.
(8)It possesses the application that realizes that  wishes  for  results  do
not exist truly, because of having familiarized with the  wishlessness  door
of liberation for many countless eons.
(9)  It  possesses  skill  in  the  means  of  the  sign  of  oneself  being
irreversible, because of possessing  the  special  conventions  that  enable
others to understand that oneself is irreversible, due to  having  expressed
the qualities of irreversibility that are concordant with the attainment  of
special signs of irreversibility with  respect  to  having  been  previously
questioned by others based upon one’s irreversibility.
(10) It possesses skill in the means of immeasurable  realizations,  because
of knowing all objects that are methods for educing  answers  to  questions,
due to having been made skilled in the 5 subjects of knowledge,  and  having
directly familiarized with the mode of abidance for many countless eons.
  - “educing” means producing, drawing out, or eliciting i.e. being able  to
provide answers in this context.
  - The 5 subjects of knowledge are:
   1. The knowledge of crafts: this means making things
   2. The knowledge of medicine
   3. The knowledge of sounds: this  can  refer  to  many  things,  such  as
      hearing a sound and knowing its significance, knowing the language  of
      birds, etc., i.e. knowing different kinds of sounds. This is a kind of
      knowledge common to Buddhists and non-Buddhists.
   4. The knowledge of reasons
   5. The knowledge  of  inner  subjects:  for  example,  the  knowledge  of
      realizations.

- The 4th chapter is completed.


