Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/Personal notes/Personal notes- Appln in Complete Aspects -Topic 5.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:11.647993
================================================================================


YOGA OF THE PATH PERFECTION OF WISDOM
The characteristics of the applications
- Definition: A bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined with the union of calm  abiding
and special insight that is the method for attaining a resultant  perfection
of wisdom, its object of attainment.
- Boundary: Exists from the Mahayana PoA through the end  of  the  continuum
of a sentient being.
Stating the systems of past acaryas
- According to our system, there are four types of characteristics:
    1. Knowledge characteristics
    2. Distinguishing characteristics,
    3. Functional characteristics
    4. Entitiness characteristics
-  There  are  various  types  of   knowledge   characteristics;   knowledge
characteristics of a KB, knowledge characteristics of a  KP,  and  knowledge
characteristics of a EKAA.
- Distinguishing characteristics, we see how the Mahayana  applications  are
distinguished  compared  to  the  applications  of  hearers   and   solitary
realizers.
- Functional characteristics, we look at the functions of the applications.
- Entitiness characteristics,  we  look  at  the  various  entities  of  the
applications.
|Characteristics of the applications                  |
|1. Knowledge characteristics             |48         |
|    - Characteristics of the applications|           |
|of                                       |           |
|        - knower of bases                |16         |
|        - knower of paths                |16         |
|        - exalted knower of all aspects  |16         |
|2. Distinguishing characteristic         |16         |
|3. Functional characteristics            |11         |
|4. Entitiness characteristics            |16         |
|Total                                    |91         |


-Qualm:  A  past  acarya  of  other  system   asserted:   There   are   four
characteristics of the applications:
      - the characterization;
      - the basis of characterization,
      - the object of characterization, and
      - the characteristic.
- Examples-Fire arisen from hay which is the basis of characterization,
- Two types of attributes that are the characteristics:
      1. the entity attribute, which is the tangible object, heat, and
      2. the functional attribute, which is that which burns
- The object of characterization: that which is suitable to be  affixed  the
convention ‘fire’
- The characterization: it is the valid cognition  which  affirms  (realize)
the three- the characteristic,  the  object  of  characterization,  and  the
basis of characterization.
- The expression “entity attribute”  is  not  the  same  as  the  entitiness
characteristic.  These  expressions  “entity  attribute”   and   “functional
attribute”  are  used  by  this  “other  system.”  In  our  system,  we  use
“entitiness characteristic” and “functional characteristic.”
- The explanation provided by other systems of previous acaryas is  not  the
same as our own system’s presentation.
- According to our system:
 -knowledge characteristic is not a knowledge characteristic
 -distinguishing characteristic is not a distinguishing characteristic
 -functional characteristic is not a functional characteristic
 -entitiness characteristic is not an entitiness characteristic.
So what are they? They are objects of characterization.
-  To  put  it  simply:  knowledge  characteristic  is   not   a   knowledge
characteristic; knowledge characteristic is an object  of  characterization.
However, if it is a knowledge characteristic, it  is  pervaded  by  being  a
characteristic. In brief,  characteristic  is  not  a  characteristic.  Why?
Because it is an  object  of  characterization.  Why  is  it  an  object  of
characterization? Because it has characteristics.
-  Our system:
   -if it  is  a  knowledge  characteristic,  it  is  pervaded  by  being  a
characteristic
   -if it is a distinguishing characteristic, it  is  pervaded  by  being  a
characteristic
   -if it is  a  functional  characteristic,  it  is  pervaded  by  being  a
characteristic
   -if it is an  entitiness  characteristic,  it  is  pervaded  by  being  a
characteristic.
However, they have their individual modes of characterization.
-  The  previous  acarya  takes  the  20  applications  as  the   bases   of
characterization. Further,
   - they are not factors of the KB since they  are  uncommon  factors  that
act to accomplish the truth body, and
   - they are also  not  factors  of  the  EKAA  since  they  exist  on  the
occasions of learners.
   - they can only be either factors of  the  actual  KP  or  factors  of  a
similitude of the KP.
   - If they are factors of only the KP, what is  the  reason  for  dividing
them into applications of the 3EKs.
Response
- “The distinguishing characteristics and the functional characteristics  do
not characterize the object of characterization as an AICA.
- The distinguishing  characteristics  and  the  functional  characteristics
characterize the object of characterization as an  application  that  is  an
uncommon cause of the truth body.
- The application that is an uncommon cause of the truth body  is  indicated
by the 16 entitiness characteristics.
- The  characteristics  of  the  applications  characterize  the  object  of
characterization as an application that is an uncommon cause  of  the  truth
body. It is characterized by the collection of:
  - (i) the  distinguishing  characteristics  that  act  to  accomplish  the
fulfillment of one’s welfare and
   -(ii)  the  functional  characteristics  that  act  to   accomplish   the
fulfillment of others’ welfare
- the 16 distinguishing characteristics and
- the 11 functional characteristics
  -These 18 are the applications of the KB
  -The 18 by way of the divisions just as above are the applications of  the
KP
  -The 18 by way of divisions of the 3 just as above  are  the  applications
of an EKAA
  -These seem to correspond to the knowledge characteristics.
- The awareness that ascertains:
  - (a) the three -the characteristic, the object of  characterization,  and
the basis of characterization and
  - (b) the characteristic with respect to the basis of characterization  is
called the “characterization.
- It exists either as a wisdom of hearing and contemplation prior to  having
engaged in the applications or as a knower subsequent to the applications.
- Difference between our system and the system of previous acaryas
  -  the  awareness  that  realizes  the  characteristic,  the   object   of
characterization,  and  the  basis  of  characterization  is   called   “the
characterization.”
 - Our  system  presents  the  relationship  as  follows:  a  characteristic
characterizes the object of characterization.
-According  to  the  Acarya  Haribhadra’s  commentary,  both  the  bases  of
characterization and the objects of characterization are  indicated  by  the
16 entitiness characteristics. The characteristics of  the  applications  of
the 3EKs are indicated by the 3 sets of 16 aspects of knowledge.
- In our system, there is an explanation of the mode of characterization.
- In the system of the previous acaryas, this mode  of  characterization  is
not explained. Instead, they explain  the  characterization,  which  is  the
realization   of   the   three:   the   characteristic,   the   object    of
characterization, and the basis of characterization.

Positing our own system
- The bases of  characterization  are  the  16  yogas  that  are  devoid  of
afflictions, signs, and so forth.
Objects of characterization
- The objects of characterization can be discussed in terms of either:
      - the generality : the characteristics of  the  applications  are  the
yogas of the path perfection of wisdom
      - the instances (particularities): the applications of the 3 EKs,  the
applications that are superior to the applications of hearers  and  solitary
realizers and the applications of the 3 EKs possessing the special  function
of accomplishing others’ welfare are objects of characterization
Characteristics
The characteristics are:
  1. the knowers that are in the entities of the applications,
  2. the distinctions, and
  3. the functions.
- In our system, there are 5 divisions:
   1. Bases of characterization
   2. Objects of characterization
   3. Characteristics
   4. Modes of characterization
   5. Boundaries
-The  bases  of  characterization:  the  16  yogas  that   are   devoid   of
afflictions, signs, and so forth.
- A basis of characterization is the basis upon which one knows  the  object
of characterization in dependence on the characteristics.  E.g.  is  a  gold
vase a basis of characterization of vase?
- A gold vase is not a basis of characterization of vase  because  a  person
who knows gold vase is pervaded by knowing vase.
- What do we mean by a  basis  of  characterization?  We  sometimes  try  to
explain a point, and the other person cannot  understand,  so  we  state  an
example. That example is the basis  of  characterization  that  enables  the
other party to understand the point we are trying to make.
- What would you posit as a basis of characterization of a vase? A  bulbous,
flat-bottomed water-holder is the characteristic, or definition, of vase.
- A gold  bulbous-bellied,  flat-bottomed  water  holder  is  the  basis  of
characterization. It is characterized as  being  a  vase  because  it  is  a
bulbous-bellied, flat-bottomed water holder.
- If you are asked to posit a functioning thing, you could  say  that  which
is able to perform a  function.   That  is  actually  the  definition  of  a
functioning thing.
- The objects of characterization:
   1. The applications of the 3 EKs
   2. The applications that are superior to the applications of hearers  and
      solitary realizers
   3. The applications of the three exalted knowers possessing  the  special
      function of accomplishing others’ welfare
- The 1st type of objects of characterization is  the  applications  of  the
3EKs and this can be divided into 3:
   1. The applications of a KB in the continuum of a bodhisattva
   2. The applications of a KP
   3. The applications of an EKAA
-The 3 types of characteristics that are terminologically divided:
   1. knowledge characteristics
   2. distinguishing characteristics
   3. functional characteristics
- Under this outline,  the  4th  type  of  characteristics,  the  entitiness
characteristics, has not been mentioned.  Under  this  section,  it  is  not
explicit, but  at  the  end  we  will  see  the  entitiness  characteristics
explained explicitly.
- The modes of characterization:
   - Mode of characterization of the generality
   - Mode of characterization of the instances
- “generality” refers to the yoga of the path perfection of wisdom
- “instances” are the particular applications,  such  as  the  bodhisattva’s
applications of a KB, the applications of  a  KP,  the  applications  of  an
EKAA, and so forth.
Mode of characterization of the generality
- The bases of characterization  -  the  16  bodhisattvas’  yogas  that  are
devoid of afflictions, signs, marks and discordant classes and  antidotes  -
are characterized as the yogas of the  path  perfection  of  wisdom  because
they are bodhisattvas’ exalted wisdoms conjoined with a  complete  class  of
special  method  and  wisdom,  such  as  great  compassion  and  the  wisdom
realizing emptiness.
- However if it is one of the 16 bodhisattva’s  yogas  that  are  devoid  of
afflictions, signs, and so forth, it is  not  pervaded  by  being  conjoined
with a complete class  of  special  method  and  wisdom  because  there  are
bodhisattvas who have not realized emptiness.  So  this  statement  is  made
from the principal point of view for those bodhisattvas  who  have  realized
emptiness.
Mode of characterization of the instances
-The  bases  of  characterization  -  the  bodhisattvas’  yogas  that   have
abandoned the four [afflictions, signs, marks  and  discordant  classes  and
antidotes], and that bear the aspect of observing any of the aspects of  the
KB, knowing the arisal of a tathagata and so  forth  -are  characterized  as
the bodhisattvas’ applications of the KB,  because  they  are  bodhisattvas’
exalted wisdoms bearing  any  of  the  aspects,  knowing  the  arisal  of  a
tathagata and so forth.
- The bodhisattvas’ yogas that have abandoned the four which are:
   1. the afflictions,
   2. signs,
   3. marks, and
   4. discordant classes and antidotes.
- “Afflictions” refers to afflictions such as attachment.
- “Signs” refers to signs of  afflictions,  such  as  adoption  of  negative
bodily states. It includes states of body, speech, and mind.
- “Marks” refers to marks of afflictions - improper attention  to  a  person
as happiness, etc.
- “Discordant classes  and  antidotes”  refers  to  adhering  to  discordant
classes and antidotes as truly existent.
- “Knowing the arisal of a tathagata and so forth” refers to the  arisal  of
the 10 strengths of a tathagata, etc., in dependence  on  the  bodhisattva’s
applications of the KB. These bases of  characterization  are  characterized
as the bodhisattvas’ applications of the KB because they  are  bodhisattvas’
exalted wisdoms bearing  any  of  the  aspects,  knowing  the  arisal  of  a
tathagata and so forth.
- The bases of characterization - the bodhisattvas’  applications  that  are
distinguished by the accomplishment of the difficult task of  the  armor  of
others’ welfare, and so forth, and bear the aspect of observing any  of  the
aspects of a KP, emptiness, signlessness, and so forth -  are  characterized
as the applications  of  the  KP  because  they  are  bodhisattvas’  exalted
wisdoms  distinguished  by  any  of  the  aspects  of  knowledge  of  a  KP,
emptiness, signlessness, and so forth.
- The bases of characterization - the 7  bodhisattvas’  yogas  that  observe
the  attributes  included  within  bases  and  paths  and  so  forth  -  are
characterized  as  the  applications  of   an   EKAA,   because   they   are
bodhisattvas’ exalted wisdoms bearing the aspect of  observing  any  of  the
aspects of an EKAA, the abiding in happiness of  the  present  life  of  the
tathagatas and so forth.
-  Those  are  the  ways  in  which  the  applications  of  the   3EKs   are
characterized by the 3 sets of 16 knowledge characteristics.
- The mode of characterization of the  distinguishing  characteristics:  the
bases of characterization - the 16 yogas of entitiness -  are  characterized
as the applications that are superior to the  applications  of  hearers  and
solitary  realizers  because  they   are   bodhisattvas’   exalted   wisdoms
distinguished by the inconceivable and so forth.
- Boundaries - from the Mahayana path of accumulation through the end  of  a
sentient being’s continuum. These do not exist on the buddha ground.
- Here are the boundaries of the characteristics of  the  applications:  the
knowledge  characteristics,   distinguishing   characteristics,   functional
characteristics, and entitiness characteristics. We can also say  that  they
are the boundaries of the yoga of the path perfection of wisdom.
-  For  the  applications  of  the  3EKs  we   can   posit   the   knowledge
characteristics,  the   functional   characteristics,   the   distinguishing
characteristics, and the entitiness characteristics because  they  were  all
referred to as “bodhisattva’s exalted knowers” and the like.
4.13  That which characterizes is made known
            To be a characteristic. Moreover, those are of three types:
            The knowledge, distinguishing, and functional.
             That  which  is  an   entitiness   is   also   an   object   of
characterization.
- The purpose for explaining the characteristics of the yogas  of  the  path
perfection of wisdom is to make known  that  that  the  characterizer  is  a
characteristic.
- The purpose for explaining the 16 entitiness characteristics  is  to  make
known  the  entitiness  of   an   application   is   both   an   object   of
characterization and a basis  of  characterization.  The  entitiness  of  an
application is not actually a characteristic,  although  we  say  entitiness
characteristic. It is only terminologically a characteristic.
Q: Wk 29 pg 8 [pg 350] “…hence, in that  case,  if  a  bodhisattva  has  not
cultivated all the aspects of a knower of bases without exception  by  means
of the applications, then he would not generate in his continuum  the  clear
realizations that are to be passed through having  been  viewed  by  knowing
and seeing.” Does this mean  that  a  bodhisattva  does  experience  the  27
aspects of a KB but chooses not to abide  there  for  the  sake  of  others’
welfare? How is that possible without abandoning the afflictions?
A: A bodhisattva arya does experience the  27  aspects  of  a  KB.  This  is
possible despite the fact that a bodhisattva does not take  the  afflictions
as his main objects of abandonment but  he  does  abandon  the  afflictions.
There is no contradiction.
Q: Wk 33 pg 15 [pg  377]  “Although  bodhisattvas  have  not  abandoned  the
afflictions, they do not generate even the slightest fault of  afflictions.”
How do bodhisattvas not generate the faults of afflictions, when  they  have
not abandoned them?
A: Even if bodhisattvas have not abandoned  the  afflictions,  they  do  not
generate the faults of the afflictions because  their  minds  are  so  well-
trained. Even if afflictions manifest, they do not generate  the  faults  of
afflictions.
4.14  (1) The arisal of a tathagata;
            (2) The world without disintegration, the nature;
            (3) The mental activities of sentient beings;
            (4) Withdrawn and directed outwards;
4.15  (5) The aspect of inexhaustible;
            (6‐8) Together with attachment and so forth; (9) vast;
            (10) That has become great; (11) immeasurable;
            (12) Consciousnesses are without indication;
4.16  (13) Consciousnesses are not to be viewed;
            (14) Knower, that called “fluctuating and so forth”;
            Knowing also those that are other than them
            (15) As the aspect of thusness;
4.17  That known as “the Subduer teaches
            (16) The realization of thusness to others”;
            The knowledge characteristics
            In the context of a knower of all are included.
- The 16 characteristics are complete in the 4  stanzas  of  the  root  text
above.
- Knowledge characteristics included within the exalted knower of all
1. The arisal of a tathagata
2. The world is without disintegration
3. The mental activities of sentient beings
4. Minds withdrawn and minds distracted
5. The aspect of inexhaustible minds
6. Minds together with attachment and free from attachment
7. Minds together with aversion and free from aversion
8. Minds together with ignorance and free from ignorance
9. The extensive mind
10. The mind that has become great
11. The immeasurable mind
12. The mind cannot be indicated
13. The mind cannot be viewed
14. Fluctuating minds and so forth
15. Fluctuating and so forth bearing the aspect of thusness
16. The realization of thusness by the Tathagata is taught to others and  is
imputed
- These are the knowledge characteristics  included  within  the  knower  of
all.
- The bases of characterization - the 4 bodhisattvas’ yogas that are  devoid
of afflictions, signs, and so forth - are characterized as the  applications
of the knower of all in the continuum of a bodhisattva by the  16  instances
that are the  aspects  of  knowledge  which  are  in  the  entities  of  the
applications.
-1.A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom knowing  the  arisal  of  a  tathagata  in
dependence on a perfection of wisdom that is an application of the KB.
-2.A  bodhisattva’s  exalted  wisdom  conjoined  with  the  exalted   wisdom
realizing that the world is without disintegration ultimately.
-3. A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom knowing the  many  mental  activities  of
sentient beings
-4.  A  bodhisattva’s  exalted  wisdom  knowing  minds  withdrawn  into  the
selflessness of persons, and minds  distracted  from  that  selflessness  of
persons
-5. A bodhisattva’s exalted  wisdom  knowing  the  aspect  of  inexhaustible
minds like space
-6. A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom knowing minds  together  with  attachment
and minds free from attachment
-7. A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom knowing minds together with aversion  and
minds free from aversion
-8. Abodhisattva’s exalted wisdom knowing minds together with ignorance  and
minds free from ignorance.
-9. The extensive mode of abidance of the mind
-10.The mind that has  become  great  due  to  appearing  like  an  illusion
conventionally
-11.The immeasurable mind since supports that are  individually  ascertained
ultimately do not exist
-12. The mind cannot be indicated, saying “The sense consciousness is  this”

-13. The mind cannot be viewed by the 5 eyes
-14. The views of the  (i) fluctuating, and so forth
                       (ii) drawing together
                       (iii) spreading out
                       (iv) drawing in of minds, arise in dependence on  the
basis of mistakes, the aggregates.
-15. A bodhisattva’s  exalted  wisdom  conjoined  with  the  exalted  wisdom
bearing the aspect of thusness, the  emptiness  of  true  existence  of  the
fluctuating minds and so forth.
-16. A bodhisattva’s  exalted  wisdom  realizing  that  the  realization  of
thusness by the Tathagata is taught to others as he had  understood  it  and
is imputed
- A bodhisattva’s exalted  wisdom  knowing  selflessness  of  persons  is  a
characteristic of the application of the KB  bearing  such  aspects  in  the
continuum of a bodhisattva, because  it  is  an  uncommon  characterizer  of
that.
- If the characteristics bear the aspect of emptiness,  then  they  are  not
aspects of a knower of bases.
- If the characteristic contains the  qualification  “ultimately,”  then  we
have to say it  is  “a  bodhisattva’s  exalted  wisdom  conjoined  with  the
exalted  wisdom  realizing  that  the  world   is   without   disintegration
ultimately”.
- If we do not have this qualification, this  bodhisattva’s  exalted  wisdom
would be  a  realization  of  emptiness,  which  is  inappropriate  in  this
context, because a characteristic of the applications of a  KB  should  bear
the aspects of a KB.
- “a bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom conjoined with…” is not necessarily  a  KB
because you can have such an exalted wisdom on the PoA and PoP. However,  we
say that this exalted wisdom bears the aspect of a KB, it does not  have  to
be a KB. In other words,  we  can  talk  about  this  bodhisattva’s  exalted
wisdom being a bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom realizing  the  selflessness  of
persons, impermanence, suffering, etc.
-We would not say that the  exalted  wisdom  realizing  that  the  world  is
without disintegration ultimately is a characteristic of an  application  of
a KB, but we would say that the bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom conjoined  with
that realization is a knowledge characteristic of an application of a KB.
- ‘Regarding the explanation of the characteristics bearing  the  aspect  of
emptiness in this context, that very path with which they are  conjoined  is
indicated; know that the characterizers of the applications  of  the  knower
of bases bear the aspects of  a  knower  of  bases”  means  that  there  are
bodhisattva’s exalted wisdoms realizing  selflessness,  impermanence,  etc.;
they  are  conjoined  with  the  characteristics  bearing  the   aspect   of
emptiness, e.g.  the  exalted  wisdom  conjoined  with  the  exalted  wisdom
realizing that the world is without disintegration ultimately. This path  is
indicated. There is a path conjoined  with  something  realizing  emptiness,
and it is that path which is indicated.
-Rephrase #11. A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom  conjoined  with  the  exalted
wisdom knowing that the mind cannot be measured ultimately,  since  supports
that are individually ascertained ultimately do not exist.
- 12. A bodhisattva’s exalted  wisdom  conjoined  with  the  exalted  wisdom
knowing that the mind cannot be  indicated  ultimately,  saying  ‘The  sense
consciousness is this.’”
- 13. A bodhisattva’s exalted  wisdom  conjoined  with  the  exalted  wisdom
knowing that ultimately the mind cannot be viewed by the 5 eyes.
- Some non-Buddhist sages summarized 62 bad views  into  14  sections  posed
questions to the Buddha. As they were not suitable as vessels  for  teaching
the selflessness of persons, the Buddha did not reply  to  their  questions,
so the views expressed in their questions are known as  the  14  unspecified
views.
(1-4) The 1st four based upon the past limit are the views of  the  self  of
persons and the world as permanent, impermanent, both, and neither.
(5-8) The 2nd four based upon the future limit are the views  of  possession
of a limit, non-possession of a limit, both, and neither.
(9-12) The 3rd four based upon nirvana are the views that a liberated  self,
after dying, will arise, will not arise, both and neither.
(13-14) The 4th two based upon the body and life are the view  of  the  body
and life as one substance and the view of them as different substances.
Explanation:
- the views of the self of persons and the world as permanent,  impermanent,
both, and neither: These are  views  of  non-Buddhist  sages  who  developed
clairvoyance through meditative stabilization and  able  to  see  many  past
lives, and could see that the god Brahma existed for a very long  time,  and
thus they concluded that the self of persons is permanent. They also  viewed
the world as having been formed a long time ago, and since it still  exists,
they concluded that it is permanent. At the same time, they could  see  that
the world is undergoing disintegration, and  concluded  that  the  world  is
also impermanent. There is also  the  view  that  the  self  of  persons  is
impermanent; they could see that certain gods  exist  in  a  permanent  way,
until those gods meet with  their  companions,  and  when  they  have  these
companions, they die after some time, and so they concluded that these  gods
are impermanent, and thus that the self  of  persons  is  impermanent.  Thus
there are different kinds of  combinations:  some  hold  that  the  self  of
persons is permanent, some hold that it is impermanent, some  hold  that  it
is both, and some hold that it is neither. The  same  goes  for  the  world:
some hold that the world is permanent, some that  it  is  impermanent,  some
that it is both, and some that it is neither.
- the views of possession of a limit, non-possession of a limit,  both,  and
neither: possession of a limit, meaning a limit of  the  world.  Those  with
clairvoyance conclude that the world has a limit, has no  limit,  has  both,
or has neither. They look in a “horizontal way,” i.e. at  the  horizon,  and
see that there is a limit, so they conclude that there is a  limit.  Others,
when they look “vertically,” see that it  doesn’t  have  a  limit,  so  they
conclude that it has no limit.
-  the views that a liberated  self,  after  dying,  will  arise,  will  not
arise, both, and neither: mean that the tathagata, after dying,  will  arise
ultimately,  will  not  arise  ultimately,  both  ultimately,  and   neither
ultimately.
-  the view of the body and life as one substance and the view  of  them  as
different substances: viewing body and life as one substance is the view  of
the Vaisheshikas, and viewing them as different substances is  the  view  of
the Samkyas.
Q&A:A final concentration can be a 1st,  2nd,  3rd,  or  4th  concentration.
However, any of these 4 concentrations need not be  a  final  concentration.
In order to attain a final concentration, one needs to  train  in  dexterity
of meditative stabilization. When one is very well trained in  dexterity  of
meditative stabilization, one can generate a final concentration that  is  a
1st, 2nd, 3rd, or 4th concentration.

Characteristics of the applications of the knower of paths
4.18  (1) Emptiness; (2) along with the signless;
            (3) The thorough abandonment of wishing;
            (4) Without production; (5-11) without cessation and so forth;
            (12) The reality is undisturbed;
4.19  (13) Not composed; (14) not conceptualized;
            (15) Classified; and (16) without characteristics:
            These are asserted to be knowledge characteristics
            In the context of a knower of paths.
Knowledge characteristics included within the knower of paths
1. The empty
2. Signs do not exist
3. Wishes do not exist
4. Production does not exist
5. Cessation does not exist
6. The thoroughly afflicted does not exist
7. The completely pure does not exist
8. Things do not exist
9. Entitiness
10. A support does not exist
11. The characteristic of space
12. Completely undisturbed dharmata
13. Not composed
14. Not conceptualized
15. Classified
16. Without characteristics
-1.A  bodhisattva’s  exalted  wisdom  knowing  in  dependence  on  the  path
perfection of wisdom the emptiness of a truly existent entity
-2.A  bodhisattva’s  exalted  wisdom  knowing  that  signs  that  are  truly
existent causes do not exist.
-3.A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom knowing that  wishes  for  truly  existent
results do not exist.
-4.A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom realizing that production does  not  exist
ultimately.
-5.A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom realizing that cessation  does  not  exist
ultimately.
-6.A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom realizing that the  thoroughly  afflicted,
such as grasping, does not exist ultimately.
-7.A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom realizing that the completely  pure,  such
as faith, does not exist ultimately.
-8.A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom realizing that things that are objects  of
abandonment do not exist ultimately.
-9.A  bodhisattva’s  exalted  wisdom  realizing  entitiness  that   is   not
established by way of its nature ultimately.
-10.A  bodhisattva’s  exalted  wisdom  realizing  that  a  support  that  is
established ultimately does not exist.
-11.The nature of thusness, the characteristic of  space.  A  mere  negation
that is a negation of obstructive contact.  According  to  the  Vaibhashikas
(GES), space is a functioning thing. It is able to perform  a  function.  At
the same time, it is permanent. So according to  them,  it  is  a  permanent
functioning thing. Space performs the function of enabling movement  to  and
fro. Just as space is free from obstructive contact, thusness is  also  free
from obstructive contact.
-12.A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom knowing  undisturbed  dharmata  since  it
does not transform into something else.
-13.A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom knowing not composed by first  having  an
idea- this refers to, for example, the world not being composed by  a  human
or god by first having an idea.
-14.A  bodhisattva’s  exalted  wisdom  knowing  the  definitions   and   the
divisions  of  the  bases  of  characterization  not  existing  truly,   not
conceptualized.
-15. Classified  here  refers  to  the  fact  that  a  tathagata  knows  all
phenomena as they are. A tathagata teaches definitions  and  divisions,  and
we have a bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom knowing that a tathagata teaches  the
definitions and divisions.
-16.A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom knowing those  characteristics  are  also
without characteristics ultimately.



Characteristics of the applications of the exalted knower of all aspects
4.20  Abiding in dependence on
            (1) The quality of thusness; (2) to be respected;
            (3) Higher; (4) pleased; and
            (5) Making offerings to him; (6) a doer does not exist;
4.21  (7) That which is an exalted knower engaging all;
            (8) Teaching not seeing;
            (9) The world is an aspect of emptiness;
            (10) Describing; (11) making known; (12) making direct;
4.22  (13-14) Teaching the inconceivable and the pacification;
            (15) Stopping the world and (16) discrimination:
            These are explained saying “The knowledge characteristics
            In the mode of an exalted knower of all aspects.”
Knowledge characteristics included within the exalted knower of all aspects
1. Abiding having depended upon the qualities of the state of tathagata
2. To be respected
3. To be taken as higher
4. To be pleased
5. Made offerings
6. A doer does not exist
7. Goes to all
8. Teaching the meaning not seen
9. The aspect of the emptiness of the world
10. Describing the emptiness of the world
11. Making known the emptiness of the world
12. Making [the disciples] directly see the emptiness of the world
13. Showing as not conceivable
14. Showing the pacification
15. Stopping the world
16. Stopping discrimination
-1.A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom abiding in the happiness  of  the  present
life having depended upon the  qualities  of  the  state  of  tathagata.  If
bodhisattvas abide in the happiness of the body  and  mind  of  the  present
life, then they can enact others’ welfare. Hearers  and  solitary  realizers
also cultivate these paths, but they do so simply to  attain  the  happiness
of [future] rebirths.
- If a bodhisattva abides in the happiness  of  the  present  life,  he  can
enact others’ welfare. If he does not abide in the happiness of the  present
life, he cannot enact  others’  welfare.  If  one  does  not  abide  in  the
happiness of the body and mind, i.e.  if  one  is  physically  and  mentally
unwell, then how can one enact others’ welfare? One cannot even enact  one’s
own welfare! Bodhisattvas,  as  well  as  hearers  and  solitary  realizers,
cultivate  these  paths  in  order  to  experience  happiness,  which  means
happiness feelings. These paths of abiding happily in the present  life  are
for the sake of experiencing happiness of the body and mind, i.e.  feelings.
Through such cultivation, there is no unhappiness in the mind or  discomfort
in the body.
- The definition of a path of abiding happily in this  present  life  is  an
exalted knower not polluted by coarse afflictions  in  the  continuum  of  a
person who has attained a liberation. “In the continuum of a person who  has
attained a liberation” means in the continuum of a person who  has  attained
any of the five liberations. Such a person who has attained any of the  five
liberations  has  an  exalted  knower  that  is  not  polluted   by   coarse
afflictions.
-Bodhisattvas do not cultivate these formless liberations for  the  sake  of
being reborn in the formless realms because formless realms are  not  places
for subduing sentient beings. The desire  realm  is  said  to  be  the  best
location for subduing sentient beings. The desire realm support is  said  to
be the best support for practicing and teaching the Dharma,  because  desire
realm beings are not distracted  by  excessive  happiness  or  tormented  by
excessive suffering.
- Branch of equanimity feeling for the 4th concentration and the 4  formless
absorptions. Because of having highly  developed  meditative  stabilization,
someone  who  has  attained  the  4th  concentration  does  not   experience
discomfort  of  the  body  and   mind.   If,   in   the   lower   meditative
stabilizations, there is the sense of well-being of the body  and  mind,  in
the 4th concentration and above this sense  of  well-being  should  be  even
more enhanced, so there is no discomfort of the body and mind.
- For ordinary beings who have  not  entered  a  path,  the  motivation  for
training in meditative stabilization is because they are  dissatisfied  with
the level that they are  at.  Ordinary  beings  in  the  desire  realm  feel
dissatisfied with the state of the desire realm and want to attain  the  1st
concentration, which is more peaceful. A person can  train  in  the  various
preparations and attain the 1st concentration,  but  after  some  time  this
person may become  tired  and  dissatisfied  with  that  state  of  the  1st
concentration and aim for the 2nd concentration; when the 2nd  concentration
is attained, again this person  may  feel  tired  and  strive  for  the  3rd
concentration,  and  so  forth.  Even  after  they  have  attained  the  3rd
concentration,  they  are  not  satisfied  because  they  realize  that  the
happiness of the 3rd concentration is not perfect happiness, and  they  then
strive to  attain  the  equanimity  feeling  that  is  present  in  the  4th
concentration.  However,  bodhisattvas  train  in  the  various  levels   of
meditative stabilization not because of being tired with the present  level.

-2.A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom knowing that the spiritual guide is to  be
respected
-3.A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom knowing that the spiritual guide is to  be
taken as higher without transgressing his words
-4.A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom knowing that the spiritual guide is to  be
pleased through gain and honor
-5.A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom knowing that the spiritual guide is to  be
made offerings to with flowers --6.A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom knowing  a
doer does not exist ultimately
-7.A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom knowing the exalted wisdom  that  goes  to
all objects of knowledge
-8.A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom teaching suchness, the  meaning  not  seen
anywhere ultimately
-9.A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom knowing the aspect  of  the  emptiness  of
the world
-10.A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom describing the emptiness of the world  to
trainees
-11.A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom making known the emptiness of  the  world
with a mundane wisdom arisen from meditation
-12.A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom  making  the  trainees  see  with  direct
cognition the emptiness of the world
-13.A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom knowing the showing of  the  dharmata  of
phenomena as not conceivable by the minds of the dialecticians
-14.A   bodhisattva’s   exalted   wisdom   showing   the   pacification   of
elaborations, the ultimate
-15.A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom stopping the establishment of  the  world
in suchness
-16.A bodhisattva’s exalted wisdom stopping discrimination  of  the  objects
to be adopted and the objects to be  discarded  as  existing  ultimately  in
this and other worlds
-Through the 9 interceding stanzas [4.14 – 4.22] the 3 sets of 16  knowledge
characteristics  of  the  applications  of  the   3EKs   were   individually
described. Next, the mode in which the applications of the KP  and  an  EKAA
are superior to the applications of hearers and solitary realizers  will  be
indicated.
4.23  Through the distinctions of the inconceivable and so forth,
            By way of the sixteen instants,
             The  possessors  of  objects  of  utilization  of  the  truths,
superior,
            The distinguishing characteristics are explained.
-The applications of the KB in the  continua  of  bodhisattvas  are  greatly
superior to those of hearers and solitary realizers, but the  way  in  which
the bodhisattvas’ applications of the KB are superior to  those  of  hearers
and solitary realizers  has  not  been  shown  here.  This  is  because  the
applications of the KB also exist in hearers and solitary realizers.
-The applications of the KP do not exist in hearers and solitary  realizers.

-The applications of the KP are the bodhisattva’s  applications  of  the  KP
because these applications of the KP do not exist in  hearers  and  solitary
realizers. In contrast, the applications of the KB exist in bodhisattvas  as
well as in hearers and solitary realizers.
- Boundaries of the distinguishing characteristics: from the PoA through  to
the end of the continuum of a sentient being.
- These distinguishing characteristics are correlated with the  16  instants
of knowledges and forbearances of the  PoS.  Although  they  are  correlated
with the PoS, this does not mean that the distinguishing characteristics  do
not exist before the path of seeing i.e. they do not only exist on the  PoS.
Of course, the forbearances and knowledges do not exist before the  PoS  but
the characteristics do exist before the PoS.
- These  distinguishing  characteristics  are  explained  for  the  sake  of
indicating that the applications of the KP and of the EKAA are  superior  to
the applications of hearers and solitary realizers,  so  they  should  exist
from the PoA.
4.24  (1) The inconceivable; (2) unequalled;
            (3‐4) Perfectly transcending comprehension and enumeration;
            (5) Incorporating all aryas; (6) that which is known
            By the wise; (7) knowing the uncommon;
4.25  (8) Knowing quickly; (9) not decreasing and increasing;
            (10) Accomplishing; (11) perfectly accomplishing;
            (12) Observing along with (13) support;
            (14) All; (15) complete upholding;
4.26  (16) Not relishing the taste;
            Through knowing the nature of the sixteen distinctions,
            The paths are paths of distinction
            Because they are superior to others.
- The paths that are included within the applications of  the  KP  and  EKAA
are paths of distinction because they are superior to  the  other  paths  of
hearers and  solitary  realizers  through  knowing  the  nature  of  the  16
distinctions.
- The applications of the KP and an EKAA that cultivate the  two  -  the  KP
and so forth of bodhisattvas, buddhas, and so  forth  -  are  the  bases  of
characterization, applications superior to the lesser paths of  hearers  and
so forth, in being paths of distinction.
- Distinguishing characteristics
• 4 object-possessors of true sufferings:
1. The inconceivable due to the strength of wisdom, well taken  care  of  by
the perfect complete buddhas and so forth
2. Unequaled
3. Transcends comprehension
4. Transcends enumeration
• 4 object-possessors of true origins:
5. Incorporating all arya persons
6. Those that are to be known by the wise beings
7. Thoroughly knowing the things that are not the objects of utility of  the
hearers and so forth
8. Knowing very quickly the manifest knowledge  that  relies  on  one’s  own
system
• 4 object-possessors of true cessations:
9. The entity of no decrease and no increase of  all  phenomena  based  upon
the conventional and ultimate truths
10. Strongly accomplish the six  perfections  of  generosity  and  so  forth
through purity of the three spheres
11. Correctly achieve merit and exalted wisdom practiced over many  eons  by
way of correct application
12. Observing all phenomena without conceptualizing
• 4 object-possessors of true paths:
13. The support of bodhisattvas, the entitiness of dharmadhatu
14. The collection of causes that fully complete the perfections  of  prayer
and so forth
15. Being taken care of by the method of a spiritual guide
16. Not relishing strong adherence
- The  4  object-possessors  of  true  sufferings  are  the  4  instants  of
forbearances and knowledges:
(1) understanding the  inconceivable  dharmata  of  sufferings  due  to  the
strength of wisdom, well taken care of by the spiritual guides, the  perfect
complete buddhas, bodhisattvas and so forth, the empowering conditions
(2) realizing that dharmata is unequaled due  to  the  absence  of  anything
alike.(One realizes it is unparalleled)
(3) realizing that dharmata perfectly transcends comprehension  by  a  valid
cognizer of conventionalities
(4)  realizing  that  dharmata  perfectly  transcends  enumeration   through
counting.
- The 4 object-possessors of true origins:
(5)  incorporating  all  excellent  qualities  of  all  arya  persons   (The
excellent qualities here are the  excellent  qualities  of  realization  and
abandonment. This  refers  to  the  distinguishing  characteristics  of  the
applications of the KP and of the EKAA  incorporating  all  the  classes  of
excellent qualities of  all  arya  persons.  Mahayana  aryas  cultivate  the
realizations of selflessness of  persons,  non-duality,  and  emptiness.  In
that way, they come to realize all the realizations of all arya persons  and
abandon their respective discordant classes. Although they do not  take  the
objects of abandonment of hearers  and  solitary  realizers  as  their  main
objects of abandonment, they do abandon them. In  that  way,  they  come  to
incorporate all the classes of excellent qualities of all arya persons.)
(6) knowing those that are to be known by  the  wise  beings  who  know  the
modes and varieties
(7) thoroughly knowing the  vast  and  profound  things  that  are  not  the
objects of utility of the hearers and so forth. (The etymology  of  “hearer”
is: those who hear teachings from their teachers and try to  put  them  into
practice. There are some parts that they can practise, and some  parts  that
they cannot practice, and even the  parts  that  they  can't  practise  they
cause others to hear. Bodhisattva on the PoP being taken care of by a  tutor
who is a supreme emanation body, whereas those on the Hinayana  PoP  lack  a
tutor who is a supreme emanation body. “Vast and profound  things  that  are
not the objects of utility of the  hearers  and  so  forth  means  that  the
supreme emanation body does take care of  hearers  and  solitary  realizers,
but the supreme emanation body does not serve as a tutor  to  them,  because
hearers and solitary realizers are not suitable vessels.)
(8) knowing very quickly the manifest knowledge that  relies  on  one’s  own
system, the Mahayana.  This  means  one  attains  non-abiding  nirvana  very
quickly.
- The 4 object-possessors of cessations:
(9) realizing the entity of no decrease and no increase  ultimately  of  all
phenomena based upon the conventional and ultimate truths
(10) strongly accomplish the six perfections of generosity and so forth
through purity of the three spheres, the object of generosity, the act of
generosity, and so forth being free from existing ultimately. (The three
spheres are the object, the act, and the recipient of the act of
generosity; they are free from existing ultimately. “Strongly accomplishing
the six perfections of generosity etc. being free from existing ultimately”
means through the absence of adherence to true existence with respect to
the object, the act, and the recipient of the act of generosity.)
(11) correctly achieve merit and exalted wisdom practiced over many eons by
way of respectful continuous correct application. (This means by way of
respectful continuous correct application one collects the accumulation of
merit and exalted wisdom over many eons)
(12) the exalted wisdom  observing  all  phenomena  without  conceptualizing
that is conjoined with  method.  (Conjoined  with  method  refers  to  being
conjoined with special method of great compassion or bodhicitta.)
-The 4 object-possessors of paths:
(13) possessing  the  lineage,  the  support  of  bodhisattvas’  paths,  the
entitiness of dharmadhatu
(14) possessing the  collection  of  causes  that  fully  complete  the  ten
perfections of prayer and so forth
(15) being taken care of by the method of a spiritual guide who reveals  the
complete path
(16) not relishing strong adherence to any phenomenon of samsara or  nirvana
as truly existent.
- These 4 characterize the four forbearances and knowledges with respect  to
the Mahayana path as being superior  to  the  applications  of  hearers  and
solitary realizers.
-The  reason  for  not  explicitly  indicating  the  paths  that  are  those
applications of hearers and solitary realizers here because by  way  of  the
characteristics of being  produced  along  with  strong  adherence  to  true
existence and so forth, which are separated from the distinctions that  have
been explained.

Functional characteristics
4.27  (1) Benefit; (2) happiness; (3) protection;
            (4) A refuge for human beings;
            (5) Abode; (6) friend; (7) island;
            (8) Known as “a leader”;
4.28  (9) Spontaneously accomplishing; (10) not actualizing
            The result of the three vehicles;
            (11) The last, the deed of support;
There are 11 functional characteristics.
• 3 functions of the KB
1. Future benefit (placing sentient beings in liberation)
2. The happiness of this life
3. The non‐ripened state that is without suffering (‘protection’  refers  to
protection from the sufferings of samsara.)
• 7 functions of the KP
4. The perpetual benefit
5. The opposite of the cause of suffering. ‘abode’ refers to  a  state  that
is opposite to the cause of suffering.
6. Realizing the equality of samsara and nirvana [a friend  places  sentient
beings in realizing the equality of samsara and nirvana.]
7. The entity of the support that realizes one’s own and others’ welfare
8. Accomplishing others’ welfare
9. Spontaneously engaging in the welfare of sentient beings
10. These aforesaid exactly according to  the  time,  “not  manifesting  the
result of definite emergence of the  three  vehicles”  (One  actualizes  the
perfect end at a proper time, not at an  improper  time.  This  is  done  in
order to benefit others. If one actualizes the perfect  end  at  the  proper
time, one can benefit others. If one actualizes it at an improper time,  one
will be unable to benefit others.)
• One deed that is supported on the EKAA
11. The revealing of all phenomena by an EKAA. (The EKAA teaches the  Dharma
in accordance with the mentality of the respective trainees.)

Entitiness characteristics
- What are the  entitinesses  of  the  bases  of  characterization  and  the
objects of characterization  of  those  functions  of  the  3EKs  that  were
explained by the functional characteristics in the previous section?
4.29  Devoid of afflictions; signs; marks;
            The discordant classes and {115}
            Antidotes; difficult; definite;
            Objects of intent; not observed;
4.30  Stopping adherence;
            That known as “observing”;
            Discordance; without obstruction;
            No basis; not progressing; no production;
4.31  Thusness not observed;
            The natures that are the sixteen entitinesses,
              Because   they   are    characterized    like    objects    of
characterization,
            Are asserted to be the fourth type of characteristics.
• Entitinesses of the applications of the KB
1. The afflictions, attachment and so forth
2. Their signs, adoption of negative bodily states
3. Their marks, improper attention and so forth
4. Attachment and non‐attachment and so forth
• Entitinesses of the applications of the KP
5. Hardship for sentient beings, who do  not  exist  ultimately,  to  attain
nirvana
6. Certainty unequivocally with  the  characteristic  of  not  falling  into
other vehicles
7. The objects of intent that are the supreme  objects  to  be  accomplished
over a long time
8. Phenomena that are the object of cultivation and the cultivator  are  not
observed
9. Stopping all strong adherence to things
• Entitinesses of the applications of the EKAA
10. Observing the attributes of things that are included within the  KB  and
the KP
11.  Discordant  through  teaching  what  is  the  reverse  of  apprehension
established in the world and so forth
12. Knowing that form and so forth are without obstruction
13. No basis due to not observing objects of knowledge and knowers
14. No going due to thusness
15. No production due to the lack of entitiness of forms and so forth
16. Not observing thusness, the entity of  the  three,  things,  non-things,
and so forth
- 4 entitinesses of the applications of the KB  that  are  being  devoid  of
some afflictive obscurations of the applications of the knower of all.  They
are the applications:
(1) abandoning the afflictions, attachment, aversion, and ignorance
(2) abandoning their signs, adoption of negative bodily states.  This  means
the signs of attachment,  aversion,  and  ignorance,  and  these  signs  are
adoption of negative bodily states. Can  also  include  negative  states  of
speech and mind.
(3) abandoning their marks that are the causes, improper  attention  and  so
forth. This mean abandoning the marks of  these  negative  states,  and  the
marks are their causes. Improper attention and  so  forth  refer  to,  e.g.,
improper attention to the aggregates as clean, as happiness,  as  permanent,
and as being a self.
(4) distinguished by emptiness of conceptualizations of the  objects  to  be
adopted and objects to be discarded -the discordant classes, attachment  and
so forth, and the antidotes, non-attachment and so forth. This involves  the
realization of the emptiness of true existence  of  the  discordant  classes
and antidotes; one abandons adherence to discordant  classes  and  antidotes
as being truly existent.
-5 entitinesses of the KP
1. ‘The application that undergoes hardship for  infinite  sentient  beings,
  who do not exist ultimately, to attain nirvana conventionally’  refers  to
  an application that undergoes hardship, regardless of how much  there  is,
  for infinite sentient beings, in order to place them in nirvana.  Sentient
  beings do not exist ultimately, and nirvana  does  not  exist  ultimately.
  Although nirvana does not exist ultimately, it exists conventionally.
2. ‘The application that accomplishes the certainty of attaining  buddhahood
  unequivocally with the characteristic of not falling into other  vehicles’
  - bodhisattva needs to be certain  of  not  falling  into  other  vehicles
  because if a bodhisattva falls  into  other  vehicles,  he  will  be  very
  distant from buddhahood and from accomplishing  the  welfare  of  sentient
  beings. So, without falling into other vehicles, the  bodhisattva  attains
  the certainty of attaining buddhahood.
3. ‘The application that accomplishes the  three  great  objects  of  intent
  that are the supreme objects to be accomplished over a long time’- objects
  of intent: great heroic mind, great abandonment, and great realization.
4.  ‘The  application  that  realizes  phenomena  that  are  the  object  of
  cultivation and the cultivator are not observed as existing ultimately’
5. ‘Stopping all strong adherence to truly existent things’

- 7 entitinesses of the EKAA
1. The application realizing observing paths and bases,  the  attributes  of
  things that are included as objects within the KB and KP - this refers  to
  observing aspects of paths and bases as lacking true existence.
2.  The  application  realizing  discordant  with   the   childish   through
  teaching(realizing) what is the reverse of apprehension established in the
  world and so forth, adhering to things as truly existent, adhering to non-
  things as truly existent, and  so  forth  -“childish”  refers  to  worldly
  beings, e.g. beings who have not realized emptiness. The  childish  adhere
  to things, non-things, etc., as truly existent.  This  is  an  application
  that teaches the reverse of that and, as a result, is discordant with  the
  childish.
3. The application realizing or knowing that forms and so forth are  without
  obstruction by exalted wisdom. Forms and so forth are without  obstruction
  by exalted wisdom, or without obstruction due to exalted wisdom.
4. The application realizing no truly existent basis of mistake due  to  not
  observing objects of knowledge and knowers as existing ultimately.
5. The application realizing no going anywhere ultimately due  to  thusness,
  the emptiness of true existence.
6. The application realizing no production ultimately due  to  the  lack  of
  entitiness of forms and so forth ultimately.
7. The application realizing not  observing  thusness,  the  entity  of  the
  three –
      (1) things and non-things;
      (2) both;
      (3) neither
as existing ultimately.
Enumeration of the characteristic
Knowledge characteristics    48
Distinguishing characteristics    16
Functional characteristics   11
Entitiness characteristics   16
                 Total       91

