Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/Personal notes/Personal notes- Appln in Complete Aspects -Topic 2,3,4.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:11.708530
================================================================================


PRINCIPAL APPLICATION EXPLICITLY INDICATED IN THIS CONTEXT
Identifying the special applications that actually  destroy  the  conception
of true existence
The supports who collect the roots of virtue
- Earlier on we discussed the 173 aspects of the 3 EKs which  are  explained
for the sake of cultivation, and are to be  cultivated  by  being  conjoined
with the special applications.
- Now we are looking at the persons who undertake this  cultivation  of  the
173 aspects by way of being conjoined with the special applications.
- Before the special applications are explained,  we  need  to  explain  the
persons  who  undertake  these  applications  because   persons   who   have
accumulated  roots  of  virtue,  and  so  forth,  will  be   successful   in
cultivating these. Thus before the special applications  are  explained,  we
need to identify  the  supports,  the  persons,  who  will  cultivate  these
applications.
- The applications belong to the accumulation  of  exalted  wisdom,  and  in
order for the cultivation of these  applications  to  proceed  well,  it  is
important to have the accumulation of merit as a backing support.
- In a similar way, we can think  of  our  studies  as  an  accumulation  of
exalted wisdom. We are doing these studies in order to increase  our  wisdom
and excellent qualities. For our studies to be successful, it  is  important
to have the accumulation of merit as a backing support. If  we  lack  merit,
we will encounter obstacles due to the negativities being forceful. We  need
to see how we can accumulate merit to help our studies.
    4.6           Those who have acted exceptionally towards buddhas,
      Have planted roots of virtue with regard to them,
      And have been under the protection of spiritual guides
      Are vessels for listening to these.
    4.7           Because they have served buddhas, questioned, and
      The conduct of generosity, ethics, and so forth,
      The vessels who take, hold, and so forth
      Are asserted to be excellent beings.
- Bodhisattvas on the PoA are vessels for listening to  these  3  Perfection
of Wisdom Sutras of the Mahayana, because
  i. they have acted exceptionally towards numberless buddhas in  the  past,
such as honoring them
 ii. they have planted roots of virtue, such as offering alms,  with  regard
to them, and
iii. they have been under the protection of Mahayana spiritual guides.
- Those bodhisattvas on the PoA who possess the characteristics  which  will
be explained below:-
  - (1) Have generally planted roots of virtue initially,  offering  temples
and so forth, with respect to the buddhas who have arisen in  the  past  and
present and trained in  them  higher  and  higher  because  of  having  been
blessed by the spiritual guides,  they  are  accepted  by  the  buddhas  and
bodhisattvas as the very vessels:
  1.  to  listen  to  the  scriptures  of   these   Mothers   bearing   the
     characteristics of the aspects included within the 173 knower-aspects.


  2. to hold in mind the words of these scriptures
  3. to not forget the meaning and
  4. to pay proper attention to acting to complete the achievings (4)  have
     practiced the ten perfections,  generosity  and  so  forth  by  having
     practiced the meanings that have been questioned,  because  of  having
     been blessed by the spiritual guides.
  - (2) Have pleased the past tathagatas by honoring them with body  and  so
forth, because of having been blessed by the spiritual guides,
  - (3) Have fully questioned past buddhas regarding the meanings that  they
have doubts about, because of having been blessed by the  spiritual  guides,
and
  - (4) Have practiced the ten  perfections,  generosity  and  so  forth  by
having practiced the meanings that have been questioned, because  of  having
been blessed by the spiritual guides.
- By having taken the supports who  collect  the  roots  of  virtue  as  the
principal objects to be explained, the supports  who  act  to  complete  the
achievings have also been indicated.
- Bodhisattvas on the PoA having planted roots of virtue,  offering  temples
and so forth, with respect to the buddhas who have arisen in  the  past  and
present and trained in  them  higher  and  higher  because  of  having  been
blessed by the spiritual guides. In fact bodhisattvas have planted roots  of
virtue even before entering the path. The roots of virtue  in  this  context
are those that they have planted since they have entered the path.
- Important for us to accumulate roots of virtue and  we  should  take  care
not to generate anger or wrong views that can destroy such roots of  virtue.
We create very heavy negativity if we generate anger toward a bodhisattva.
- If you have generated bodhicitta, you are able to know who are  the  other
bodhisattvas on the same level as yourself and those on  lower  levels,  but
you are not able to know who are the bodhisattvas on a higher level.
The actual applications
- Having shown the persons who cultivate the applications, we need  to  know
what applications they cultivate, so  the  entities  and  divisions  of  the
applications are explained next.
- There are 20 applications altogether.
Entities of the applications themselves
    4.8    Because of not abiding in forms and so forth;
             Because of stopping the application to that;
             Because the thusnesses of those are profound;
             Because those are difficult to fathom;
    4.9a   Because those are immeasurable;
- The entities of the applications are of 5 applications:
 1. The application of not abiding in forms and so forth: this refers to the
    application of not abiding in the true existence of forms and so  forth,
    and this means realizing that forms and  so  forth  are  empty  of  true
    existence.
 2. The application of stopping the application: this is an  application  of
    stopping adherence to true existence.
 3. The application of the profound:  this  refers  to  the  application  of
    dharmata being profound.
 4. The  application  of  the  difficult  to  fathom:  this  refers  to  the
    application of the dharmata being difficult to fathom.
 5. The application of the immeasurable: this refers to the  application  of
    dharmata being immeasurable.
- All these are related to emptiness, or dharmata. These 5 applications  are
divided into the remaining applications by way of occasion and time
      The last paragraph says: “As explained above,  a  wisdom  arisen  from
meditation observing emptiness does not exist prior to  the  heat  level  of
the path of preparation.”
- For someone definite in the  Mahayana  lineage,  the  wisdom  arisen  from
meditation observing emptiness does not exist before the heat level of  PoP.

- On the PoA we can have  repeated  analysis  of  emptiness  and  being  set
single-pointedly on emptiness  while  being  in  equipoise  based  on  fully
qualified calm abiding.
- Principally we are concerned with the PoP but the PoA is also included  in
the discussion here.
- The difference between the 1st & 2nd applications: we  can  interpret  the
2nd one as being  a  stronger  application,  in  that  even  after  one  has
realized emptiness, it is  possible  for  adherence  to  true  existence  to
occur, so this application stops this adherence.
Divisions by way of the persons who are the supports
- There are 8 divisions by way of the cultivators of the applications.
   4.9b     Because of being difficult to realize  over  a  long  time  with
        great hardship
6. The application of realizing over a long  time  with  great  hardship  is
   posited on the path of accumulation
- Here we are looking at those who generate great fear due to not  attaining
a  clear  appearance  regarding  dharmata  particularly  those  dull-faculty
bodhisattvas on the PoA.
- There are  2  types  of  intended  trainees  of  the  Ornament  for  Clear
Realization: sharp- faculty and dull- faculty:
      - Those of sharp faculty are pervaded  by  having  realized  emptiness
before generating bodhicitta.
      - Those of dull faculty are of two types:
           a.  most  of  these  dull-  faculty  bodhisattvas  have  realized
emptiness before generating bodhicitta and
           b.  the  other  class  of  dull-  faculty  bodhisattvas  has  not
realized emptiness before generating bodhicitta - When compare to those  who
are called sharp-faculty, those dull-faculty bodhisattvas who have  realized
emptiness before generating bodhicitta have weaker mental strength.  Due  to
having weaker mental strength, they generate fear.
- The sharp-faculty bodhisattvas  do  not  generate  fear  with  respect  to
emptiness while the  dull-  faculty  ones  generate  fear  with  respect  to
emptiness.
- Dull- faculty bodhisattvas, due to their weaker mental strength,  need  to
persevere over a long time to increase their mental strength  so  that  they
do not generate fear with respect to emptiness. This is why in this  context
we talk about the application of realizing  over  a  long  time  with  great
hardship.
- In terms of the supports in whom great fear does not arise, there are:
(a) the applications possessing one’s own welfare
(b) the applications possessing others’ welfare
- (a) there are 6 applications possessing one’s own welfare:
      4.9cd Prediction; irreversibility;
                         Definite emergence; being without hindrances;
      4.10a Close to enlightenment; quickly;

   7. The application of receiving prediction
   8. The application of irreversibility
   9. The application of definite emergence
  10. The application of being without hindrances
  11. The application of being close to enlightenment
  12. The application of quickly attaining enlightenment
These 6 applications are posited on the path of preparation through  to  the
7th ground.
7. “Due to having attained a clear  appearance  regarding  dharmata  on  the
   occasion of the heat level one will quickly be predicted by the  buddhas.
   This clear appearance regarding dharmata  is  a  clear  appearance  of  a
   wisdom arisen from meditation. Due to having attained this  on  the  heat
   level of PoP, one will receive a prediction from the  buddhas,  therefore
   there is the application of receiving prediction.
8. “On the occasion of the peak level, due  to  having  attained  a  special
   realization from the heat level and ripened one’s roots of virtue,  there
   is the application of irreversibility.” When  one  moves  from  the  heat
   level to the peak level, one has a more distinguished realization, so  on
   the peak level, one has a special realization.
9. “Due to having attained a stable realization of method and wisdom on  the
   occasion of the forbearance  level,  passing  beyond  the  hindrances  of
   hearers, solitary realizers, and so forth.”  “Hindrances”  refer  to  the
   attention of  hearers  and  solitary  realizers,  namely  the  aspiration
   seeking  liberation  for  oneself  alone.  On  this  forbearance   level,
   bodhisattvas have passed  beyond  these  hindrances,  and  there  is  the
   application of  definite  emergence.  Although,  before  the  forbearance
   level, a bodhisattva does not have this attention, or aspiration, seeking
   his liberation alone, there is a confidence, or certainty, attained  when
   one attains the forbearance level,  such  that  this  aspiration  seeking
   one’s own liberation alone will not be generated.
10. “Due to having seen the quick entry into the  ocean  of  dharmadhatu  on
   the occasion of the SMQ,  there  is  the  application  of  being  without
   hindrances.” “Ocean  of  dharmadhatu”  refers  to  the  path  of  seeing.
   Hindrances are the objects of abandonment of the path of seeing. Even  on
   the occasion of the SMQ level, the coarse objects of abandonment  of  the
   path of seeing do not manifest. For that reason, we  say  “being  without
   hindrances;” thus on the supreme mundane  quality  level,  there  is  the
   application of being without hindrances.
11. “Accomplishing well in one’s continuum the ability  to  be  suitable  to
   produce uncontaminated qualities, the causes of omniscience, there is the
   application of being close to enlightenment”: this application  of  being
   close to enlightenment is posited on the Mahayana path of seeing.
12. “And quickly issuing forth the  result,  there  is  the  application  of
   quickly attaining enlightenment”: this application of  quickly  attaining
   enlightenment is posited from the 2nd through to 7th grounds.
- (b) there is 1 application possessing others’ welfare:
13. Application of others’ welfare - the bodhisattva  turns  the  wheels  of
Dharma for others’ welfare out of compassion. In the turning of  the  wheels
of Dharma, it is said “I practice  the  perfection  of  generosity;  I  also
correctly set others in  the  practice  of  generosity.”  This  is  just  an
example; the other practices, such as the perfection  of  ethics,  are  also
included. Boundary: 8th ground
Divisions by way of the applications that are the methods for completion
The 4 applications that are the methods for completing  cultivation  in  the
Mothers are as follows:
4.10bcd     …Because no increase and no decrease;
            Not seeing dharma, non-dharma, and so forth;
            Not seeing inconceivable forms and so forth;
4.11ab      Not conceptualizing forms and so forth,
            Their marks and entities;
14. The application realizing that there is  no  increase  and  no  decrease
   ultimately: although conventionally faults are  decreased  and  excellent
   qualities are increased, ultimately there is no  increase  and  decrease.
   Therefore we have an application realizing that there is no increase  and
   no decrease ultimately. Boundary: 8th ground.
15.  The  application  of  not  seeing  dharma,  non-dharma,  and  so  forth
   ultimately:  conventionally  we  can  talk  about  the   wholesome,   the
   unwholesome, etc., but ultimately there  is  no  wholesome,  unwholesome,
   etc.  Therefore,  the  application  of  not  seeing  the  wholesome,  the
   unwholesome, and so forth as dharma, non-dharma, and so forth ultimately.
   Not seeing the wholesome, the unwholesome, and so forth as  dharma,  non-
   dharma, and so forth ultimately is seeing.  There  is  the  saying:  “Not
   seeing is excellent seeing.” Boundary: 8th ground.
16. The  application  of  not  seeing  inconceivable  forms  and  so  forth:
   “Inconceivable” means that which cannot be  conceived  by  the  minds  of
   logicians,  or  dialecticians.  Forms  and  so  forth  in   general   are
   conceivable. The reason for being referred to as “inconceivable forms and
   so forth” is because  the  natures  of  forms  and  so  forth  cannot  be
   conceived by the minds of dialecticians. Therefore, we say, “Not clinging
   to the aspects of inconceivable forms and so forth as truly  existent  is
   the application of not seeing inconceivable forms  and  so  forth.”  “Not
   clinging to the aspects of inconceivable forms  and  so  forth  as  truly
   existent” means not adhering to forms,  etc.,  as  truly  existent.  This
   application involves  not  adhering  to  forms  and  so  forth  as  truly
   existent. Boundary: 8th ground.
17. The application of not conceptualizing the  bases  of  characterization,
   forms and so forth, their marks, that which is suitable to be a form  and
   so forth, and the entities of their objects of characterization as  truly
   existent. Boundary: 8th ground.
Those posited by way of the result
4.11cd      Bestowing the precious result;
That is purity; … {62}
18. The application of bestowing the precious result: Boundary: 9th  ground.
   The results are the 1st, stream-enterer, and the last, the  unsurpassable
   complete enlightenment. On the 9th ground, it is said that  one  can  see
   these results.
19. The application of purity: Boundary: 10th ground. On  the  10th  ground,
   one is about to attain Buddhahood and beyond  10th  is  only  the  Buddha
   ground. The application eliminating faults is called the “application  of
   purity.” The word “application” is used means that one is not enlightened
   yet, so on the 10th ground there is this application eliminating  faults,
   which is known as the “application of purity.”
That posited by way of time
4.11d … being along with boundaries;
20. The application of  being  along  with  boundaries  -  bodhisattvas  act
quickly.

- The 20 applications are:
     1. The application of not abiding in forms and so forth
     2. The application of stopping the application
     3. The application of the profound
     4. The application of the difficult to fathom
     5. The application of the immeasurable
     6. The application of realizing over a long time with great hardship
     7. The application of receiving prediction
     8. The application of irreversibility
     9. The application of definite emergence
    10. The application of being without hindrances
    11. The application of being close to enlightenment
    12. The application of quickly attaining enlightenment
    13. The application of others’ welfare
    14. The application of no increase and no decrease
    15. The application of not seeing dharma, non-dharma and so forth
    16. The application of not seeing inconceivable forms and so forth
    17. The application of not conceptualizing forms and  so  forth,  their
        marks, and their entities
    18. The application of bestowing the precious result
    19. The application of purity
    20. The application of being along with boundaries
 - These 20 applications are mainly posited  from  the  heat  level  of  the
   Mahayana PoP through to the end of the continuum of a sentient being.
 - In Seventy Topics, we only find 19 applications.
 - The 6th of the 20 listed here is posited on the PoA. It has  to  do  with
   the bodhisattva who  realizes  dharmata  over  a  long  time  with  great
   hardship It is the first among the divisions by way of  the  persons  who
   are the supports. You will not  find  this  6th  application  in  Seventy
   Topics. This 6th  application is the one that involves  the  dull-faculty
   bodhisattva who realizes the meaning of the Mothers with  great  hardship
   over a long time.
The five actual applications
- The 5 applications of:
(1) not abiding in the ground of forms and so forth,
(2) not applying,
(3) the profound,
(4) the difficult to fathom, and
(5) the immeasurable,
  - respectively, realizing in that way:
(1) not abiding in forms and so forth through lack of entitiness,
(2) merely not applying with respect to those is applying,
(3-5) due  to  forms  and  so  forth  themselves  being  the  entitiness  of
thusness, profound, difficult to fathom, immeasurable.

The 5 applications are:
1) The exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise of a bodhisattva  on  the  PoP
   is called the application of not abiding in forms and so forth ultimately
   because it is an application realizing not abiding in forms and so  forth
   ultimately through lack of entitiness.
2) The exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise of a bodhisattva  on  the  PoP
   is called the application of not applying, stopping adherence to  object-
   possessors as truly existent because it is  a  bodhisattva’s  application
   applying with respect to the meaning of the mode of  abidance  by  merely
   not applying with respect to those forms and so forth ultimately.
3) The exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise of a bodhisattva  on  the  PoP
   is called the application of “the profound because it is a  bodhisattva’s
   application realizing in that way, due to forms and so  forth  themselves
   being the entitiness of thusness, the dharmatas of bases are profound.
4) The exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise of a bodhisattva  on  the  PoP
   is called the application of the difficult to  fathom  because  it  is  a
   bodhisattva’s application realizing the dharmatas of paths are  difficult
   to fathom.
5) The exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise of a bodhisattva  on  the  PoP
   is  called  the  application  of  “the  immeasurable  because  it  is   a
   bodhisattva’s  application  realizing  the  dharmatas  of   aspects   are
   immeasurable.

Q&A:
A  concentration  or  absorption  in  the  continuum  of  an  arya  is   not
necessarily a supramundane path. In the 20 sangha, we went  through  various
modes of traversing the path. We spoke of a person who, after attaining  the
result  of  stream-enterer,  relies  upon  a  path  having  the  aspect   of
coarseness and peace to abandon the afflictions of the  desire  realm.  This
person can abandon up to the 9th level of desire realm afflictions  using  a
path bearing the aspect of coarseness and peace. Here there is an  arya  who
uses a mundane path to abandon  the  afflictions;  such  a  path  is  not  a
supramundane  path.  Another  example:  there  are  hearer  aryas  who  have
attained an actual concentration; they perform alternating  meditations  for
the sake of creating the cause to attain a rebirth in  one  of  the  5  pure
places of aryas in the 4th concentration of the form realm. Such a  path  is
not a supramundane path; it is a mundane  path.  If  it  is  a  supramundane
path, it should not become a cause for  taking  rebirth  in  samsara.  These
alternating  meditations  involve   alternating   between   a   contaminated
meditative stabilization and an uncontaminated meditative stabilization.
      So what do we mean by, for  example,  a  concentration  being  in  the
entity of a supramundane path? Let  us  put  it  this  way:  let’s  say  one
generates a supramundane path in dependence on a first  concentration;  this
supramundane path is said to be in the entity of  the  first  concentration.
We can talk about a  leaper  non-returner;  this  person  attains  the  16th
instant of the path of seeing in dependence on an actual concentration.  The
9 levels of afflictions of the desire realm  are  abandoned  upon  attaining
the 16th instant, which is a liberated path. This liberated path is  in  the
entity of an actual concentration.

- The 15 types of applications:
(6) attaining manifest complete enlightenment through great hardship over  a
long time,
(7) receiving a predication,
(8) irreversibility,
(9) definite emergence,
(10) being without hindrances,
(11) being close to perfect manifest complete enlightenment,
(12) attaining manifest complete enlightenment quickly,
(13) others’ welfare,
(14) no increase or decrease,
(15) not observing dharma, non-dharma, and so forth,
(16) ceasing the aspects of inconceivable forms and so forth,
(17) not conceptualizing things that are forms and so forth,
(18) bestowing the precious result,
(19) purity,
(20) with regard to the boundaries,
- which respectively possess the accomplishment of those called:
(6) fear regarding the perfection of wisdom,
(7) lack of fear,
(8) correctly upholds,
(9) abandons hindering phenomena,
(10) always cultivates the Dharma,
(11) the very support of new uncontaminated qualities,
(12) manifestly achieves the resultant truth body,
(13) thoroughly turns the wheel of Dharma,
(14) sees neither increase nor decrease,
(15) does not observe the constituents of desire,
(16) does not cling to the aspects of inconceivable forms and so forth,
(17) does not conceptualize forms, their marks, and their entitinesses,
(18) sees the first result,
(19) pure forms,
(20) not discard manifestly striving for years.
-  The  application  of  a  dull-faculty  bodhisattva  abiding  on  the  PoA
respectively is an  application  in  the  continuum  of  one  (6)  attaining
manifest complete enlightenment through great  hardship  over  a  long  time
because it is an application in the continuum of a beginner  in  whom  great
manifest fear regarding the perfection of wisdom that is  a  realization  of
the meaning of the mode of abidance occurs.
- The heat level of the Mahayana PoP is the application of (7)  receiving  a
predication,  because  it  is  an  application  that  is  distinguished   by
possessing lack of fear regarding the Mothers.
- The peak level of Mahayana PoP is the application of (8)  irreversibility,
because it is an application that correctly upholds hearing of  the  Mothers
and so forth due to being superior to the heat level.
- The forbearance level of the  Mahayana  PoP  is  the  application  of  (9)
definite emergence, because it  is  an  achieving  that  abandons  hindering
phenomena such  as  the  attention  adopted  by  the  hearers  and  solitary
realizers  for  the  sake  of  oneself  alone,  due  to  having  attained  a
forbearance that is unafraid of emptiness and so forth.
- The SMQ level of  the  PoP  is  the  application  of  (10)  being  without
hindrances,  because  it  is  the  4th  partial  concordance  with  definite
discrimination that always cultivates  the  Dharma  due  to  acting  as  the
direct cause of the PoS.
- The Mahayana PoS is  the  application  of  (11)  being  close  to  perfect
complete enlightenment, because it  is  an  application  that  is  the  very
support of new uncontaminated qualities of the Mahayana paths.
- The exalted wisdoms of the 2nd ground through to the 7th  ground  are  the
applications of (12)  attaining  manifest  complete  enlightenment  quickly,
because they are applications that manifestly achieve  the  resultant  truth
body quickly.
- The exalted wisdoms of the  8th  ground  are  the  applications  of   (13)
others’ welfare, because they are applications  of  the  pure  grounds  that
thoroughly turn the wheel of  Dharma  for  others’  welfare  due  to  having
attained the ability to turn the wheel of  Dharma  for  all  three  lineage-
bearers.
- The exalted wisdoms of the 8th ground are  the  applications  of  (14)  no
increase or decrease, because they are  applications  of  the  pure  grounds
that see neither increase nor decrease as existing ultimately.
- The exalted wisdoms of the 8th ground are the  applications  of  (15)  not
observing dharma, non-dharma, and so forth as existing  ultimately,  because
they are applications of the pure grounds that do not observe any  phenomena
as the constituents of desire as existing ultimately.
- The exalted wisdoms of the  8th  ground  are  the  applications  of   (16)
ceasing the aspects of inconceivable forms and so  forth  because  they  are
applications of the pure grounds  that  do  not  cling  to  the  aspects  of
inconceivable forms and so forth as truly existent.
- The exalted wisdoms of the 8th ground are the  applications  of  (17)  not
conceptualizing the things that are forms and so  forth,  because  they  are
applications of the pure grounds that do  not  conceptualize  the  bases  of
characterization, forms, their marks, and the entitinesses of their  objects
of characterization as truly existent.
- The exalted wisdom  of  the  ninth  ground  is  the  application  of  (18)
bestowing the precious result, because it is a  yoga  of  the  pure  grounds
that sees the  first  result  of  stream-enterer  through  to  unsurpassable
enlightenment.
- The exalted wisdom of the tenth ground is the application of (19)  purity,
because it is a yoga of the pure grounds that cultivates pure forms  through
to an exalted knower of all aspects.
- A bodhisattva’s yoga that cultivates the  Mothers  quickly  is  called  an
application  (20)  with  regard  to  the  boundaries,  because  it   is   an
application  that  does  not  discard  manifestly  striving  in  cultivation
through delineation of time into days, months, and years.

Excellent qualities of Mahayana applications
The reason explaining the excellent  qualities  of  the  applications  after
having explained the  applications  are  that  if  one  sees  the  excellent
qualities of the application, one will be delighted to engage in them.
4.12ab      The fourteen types of excellent qualities:
            Overcoming the might of maras and so forth.
Through  the  force  of  cultivating  the  applications,  the  14  types  of
excellent qualities, overcoming the might of maras and so forth  through  to
definite attainment will arise.
There are 14 excellent qualities.
  1. Excellent quality of overcoming the might of maras
  2. Excellent quality of the buddhas paying attention and knowing
  3. Excellent quality of being directly perceived by the buddhas
  4. Excellent quality of being close to perfect complete enlightenment
  5. Excellent quality of the great purpose, and so forth
  6. Excellent quality of the place having been analyzed
  7. Excellent quality of completing all uncontaminated excellent qualities
  8. Excellent quality of being a propounder being
  9. Excellent quality of not being separated (by discordant classes.)
 10. Excellent quality of producing roots of virtue that are not in common
 11. Excellent quality of accomplishment  of  the  meaning  of  the  promise
     exactly
 12. Excellent quality of full upholding of the extensive result
 13. Excellent quality of accomplishment of the welfare of sentient beings
 14. Excellent quality of definite attainment
- The boundaries of these excellent qualities  are  from  the  Mahayana  PoA
through the buddha ground.
-(1) In  those  bodhisattvas  who  take  delight  in  cultivating  the  non-
erroneous applications the excellent quality of   overcoming  the  might  of
maras, without being harmed by hindrances with respect  to  cultivating  the
applications, will arise, because they  are  blessed  by  the  buddhas  with
respect to cultivating the applications in that way.
-In general,  buddhas  bless  everybody.  Here  the  bodhisattvas  who  take
delight in cultivating the non-erroneous applications  are  blessed  by  the
buddhas. Due to properly  practicing  the  applications,  they  receive  the
blessings of the buddhas.  The  buddhas  do  not  have  prejudice  regarding
blessing sentient beings. It is not the case that they bless  Buddhists  and
do not bless non-Buddhists. They have equal compassion and  kindness  toward
all sentient beings. Although there  is  no  difference  from  the  Buddha's
side, from the side of sentient beings there is a  difference  in  terms  of
receiving the blessings; some have faith, some do not, so as a result  there
is a difference in receiving the blessings. Those who properly practice  the
buddhas’ instructions are able to receive the blessings, and they cannot  be
harmed by maras. The actual  maras  reside  in  our  continua.  By  properly
practicing the teaching of the buddhas, the maras cannot  harm  us,  because
the buddhas’ instructions directly oppose the maras.
- (2,3,4) The exalted minds of the buddhas paying attention to  and  knowing
the cultivation of the applications will arise, because  the  exalted  minds
of the buddhas pay (2) attention to  the  cultivation  of  the  applications
presently. In dependence on being (3) directly  perceived  by  the  buddhas,
the  applications  become  special,   because   the   cultivation   of   the
applications is seen by exalted wisdom presently. They will (4) become  very
close to perfect complete enlightenment, because they  become  close  to  it
presently.
- (5) The excellent qualities –
      - the great purpose of not being separated from the buddhas,
      - the great benefit of being reborn in the happy migrations,
      - the great result through becoming a buddha,
      - the great fruition through engaging in others’ welfare,
and so forth (great benefit, great result, and great fruition)  will  arise,
because  they  have  attained  the  great   benefit   of   cultivating   the
applications presently.
With regard to these four greatnesses:
- great purpose refers to not being separated from the buddhas,
- great benefit means being reborn in the happy migrations,
- great result means becoming a buddha, and
- great fruition means engaging in others’ welfare.
- (6) The benefit of the place having  been  analyzed,  such  as  the  place
where they will be reborn having been  predicted  by  the  tathagatas,  will
arise, because they have attained the enactment of  the  activities  of  the
buddhas, such as teaching the Mothers to others.
-(7) The benefit of completing all uncontaminated excellent  qualities  will
arise, because they have attained the  full  completion  of  some  antidotal
qualities included within the path perfection of wisdom presently.
-(8) They will attain the state  of  a  propounder  being  who  teaches  the
Mothers to others, because they  have  attained  the  expression  of  speech
regarding the  exalted  knower  of  all  aspects  by  the  buddhas  to  them
presently.
- (9) They will attain the state of not being separated from omniscience  by
discordant classes, the maras and so  forth,  because  the  buddhas   assist
them with respect to the cultivation of the applications presently.
- (10) They will produce roots  of  virtue  not  in  common  with  those  of
hearers  and  solitary  realizers,  such   as   setting   many   beings   in
unsurpassable enlightenment, because  they   have  generated  extensive  joy
with respect to the cultivation of the applications presently.
-(11) They will attain the accomplishment of the meaning of the  promise  to
achieve others’ welfare exactly, because the buddhas  rejoice in  the  words
of the promise of that cultivation of the Mothers presently.
-(12) They will attain the full upholding of the extensive  result  that  is
greater virtue in other lifetimes, because they  have  attained  the  strong
desire for the profound Mahayana Dharma presently.
-(13) They will  attain  the  accomplishment  of  the  welfare  of  sentient
beings, such as giving away all  possessions  in  other  lifetimes,  because
they have attained the enactment of the welfare of sentient beings, such  as
setting many creatures in enlightenment presently.
-The excellent quality called (14) definite attainment  of  the  Mothers  in
other  lifetimes  will  arise,  because  they  will  attain  the   excellent
qualities called finding the complete words and meanings of  the  perfection
of wisdom in this life.

FAULTS OF THE APPLICATIONS
Hindrances to cultivating the applications
-The reason for why the hindrances,  or  faults,  are  explained  after  the
excellent  qualities  have  been  explained.  In  order  for  the  excellent
qualities of the applications to arise, we need to avoid the faults.  If  we
can avoid them, then the excellent qualities will arise, so the  faults  are
explained at this point.
-Definition of a fault with respect to an application: a mara’s action  that
interferes  with  either  the  production,  abidance  or  completion  of  an
application.
4.12cd      The faults are to be definitely understood as six
              Along with four sets of ten.

There are altogether 46 faults .
- 20 adverse conditions contradictory to the  applications  that  are  based
upon oneself
- 2 from the point of view of confidence:
(1) producing ascertainment regarding the words and meanings of the  Mothers
will be attained over a long time with great hardship and
(2) excessively quick confidence quickly producing an ascertainment  without
decisive analysis.
-3 from the point of view of adopting negative states:
(3) adopting negative states of the body,  such  as  questioning  about  the
Mothers while yawning and stretching,
(4) adopting negative states of the mind,  such  as  questioning  about  the
Mothers out of attachment, and
(5) performing recitations that have been generated inappropriately  and  so
forth, such as performing  recitations  through  having  been  motivated  by
[craving for] gain, honor, and the like.
- 7 causes for degenerating from the Mahayana:
(6) holding reasons for turning away from the Mothers,
(7) strong adherence to  the  causes  of  omniscience  and  degeneration  of
faith,
(8) degeneration of relishing the taste of the sublime Mothers,
(9) degeneration of always upholding the Mothers,  the  supreme  vehicle  in
all ways, seeking omniscience from the lesser scriptural baskets, and
(10) degeneration of the constant object of  intent,  having  discarded  the
Mothers  that  have  been  found,  seeking  omniscience  from   the   lesser
scriptural baskets;
(11) degeneration of the relation of cause and effect,  desiring  to  attain
omniscience through having  practiced  merely  the  meaning  of  the  lesser
scriptural baskets,
(12) degeneration from the causes of  the  three  exalted  bodies  of  which
there is no higher, holding that the  two—Mahayana  scriptural  baskets  and
those [lesser scriptural baskets]—are similar,

Explanation:
-1. “producing  ascertainment  regarding  the  words  and  meanings  of  the
Mothers will be attained over a long time with great  hardship”  means  that
one takes a lot of effort and a  long  time  to  understand  the  words  and
meanings of the Mothers.
-2.  “excessively  quick  confidence  quickly  producing  an   ascertainment
without decisive  analysis”  means  that  one  produces  confidence  in  the
Mothers very quickly.
-3. “adopting negative states of the body, such  as  questioning  about  the
Mothers while yawning and stretching” means that when one  is  working  with
the Mothers, the Perfection of Wisdom sutras,  one  does  not  do  so  in  a
respectful way. One should do so in a  respectful  way.  Some  people,  when
they work with the Sutras, wear a mask over the mouth.  It  is  possible  to
produce pollution with the mouth, so it is good to bless  the  speech  using
the method of reciting the Sanskrit vowels and consonants and the mantra  of
dependent arising.
-4. “adopting negative states of the mind, such  as  questioning  about  the
Mothers out of attachment” has to do with negative states of mind  which  is
attachment. For e.g. a person has attachment for another person and  out  of
attachment, this person asks the other person  about  the  Mothers.  So  the
attachment is to the person, and not to the Mothers.  In general, it is  not
good to ask questions out of attachment, especially questions regarding  the
scriptures, because the Perfection of Wisdom  scriptures  are  meant  to  be
antidotes to attachment, not conditions for generating it!
-5. If one performs recitations through having  been  motivated  by  craving
for gain, honor, and the like, this is  inappropriate.  Regarding  this,  in
countries where Buddhism is prevalent, there is a practice of offering  alms
to monks or nuns. This can  be  a  cause  of  a  corrupted  motivation.  One
practices and looks very holy, hoping that one will receive more  offerings.
For e.g. a monk gets up late in the morning and is lazy when he  is  in  his
homeland. But when he travel and stay in someone’s home, he may get up  very
early, make offerings, and so forth.  This  is  actually  a  form  of  wrong
livelihood. This is  one  of  the  five  wrong  livelihoods.  It  is  called
hypocrisy and is a great negativity. If an ordained person  were  to  behave
in this  hypocritical  manner  to  impress  the  householder,  and  actually
receives an offering, the ordained person would create  a  huge  negativity.
From the side of the donor, virtue is created, but this  is  small  compared
to the negativity created by the ordained person.  If  the  ordained  person
takes the offering and offers it to the monastery, this is not good.  If  an
ordained person  were  to  receive  offerings  due  to  behaving  in  a  way
motivated by craving, gain, honor, etc, then negativity is created.
-6. “holding reasons for turning away from the Mothers” mean,  for  example,
someone may study the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras  but  arrive  at  a  wrong
conclusion as to what the sutras are trying to teach, thus  they  engage  in
erroneous ways of thinking, such as thinking that emptiness means utter non-
existence. They think that the sutras teach utter  non-existence,  and  that
therefore the Mahayana does not exist, and as a result, they turn away  from
the Mothers. Some people do misunderstand the teaching of  emptiness  taught
in the Perfection of Wisdom  Sutras  and  thus  fall  into  the  extreme  of
annihilation, or severance, thinking they can do whatever  they  want.  This
is a complete  misunderstanding.  In  fact,  if  one  understands  emptiness
correctly, one will be very careful in whatever one does.
-7. “strong adherence to the  causes  of  omniscience  and  degeneration  of
faith.” For  the  causes  of  omniscience,  we  can  posit  bodhicitta,  the
realization of emptiness, etc. Here we can have a person who  has  adherence
to the causes of omniscience as truly existent. They have the conception  of
true existence and they assert  true  existence.  As  a  result,  his  faith
toward the causes of omniscience would degenerate. In general,  someone  who
has the conception of true existence in his continuum does  not  necessarily
hold that phenomena exist truly. In  order  to  hold  that  phenomena  exist
truly, such a person must assert that phenomena exist truly. For example,  a
person who has realized emptiness may have the conception of true  existence
in their continuum, but they would  not  hold,  or  assert,  that  phenomena
exist truly.
-8. “degeneration of relishing  the  taste  of  the  sublime  Mothers.”  The
“taste of the sublime Mothers” is the actual  meaning  of  the  Mothers,  so
this point refers to  degenerating  relishing  the  actual  meaning  of  the
Mothers. One’s experience of the  actual  meaning  of  the  sublime  Mothers
degenerates.
-9. “degeneration of always upholding the Mothers, the  supreme  vehicle  in
all ways, seeking omniscience from the lesser  scriptural  baskets.”  Indeed
the Mahayana is based upon the Hinayana. If someone  simply  relies  on  the
Hinayana scriptural baskets to attain the state of omniscience, and  ignores
the Mahayana teachings, this is a fault. This fault refers  to  someone  who
seeks omniscience from just the Hinayana teachings.
-10. “degeneration of the constant object of intent,  having  discarded  the
Mothers  that  have  been  found,  seeking  omniscience  from   the   lesser
scriptural baskets.” Here, there is someone who has found the Perfection  of
Wisdom, but ignores that, and tries to find omniscience by  relying  on  the
Hinayana scriptural baskets.
-11. “degeneration of the relation of cause and effect, desiring  to  attain
omniscience through having  practiced  merely  the  meaning  of  the  lesser
scriptural  baskets.”  Here,  the  effect  is  omniscience;  the  cause   of
omniscience is the meaning of the Mahayana scriptural baskets. They  have  a
cause and  effect  relationship.  If  one,  through  practicing  merely  the
meaning of the Hinayana baskets, desires to attain omniscience,  this  is  a
degeneration of the relation between cause and effect, the  cause  referring
to the meaning of the Mahayana scriptural baskets, and the effect  referring
to omniscience.
-12. “degeneration from the causes of the  three  exalted  bodies  of  which
there is no higher, holding that the two - Mahayana scriptural  baskets  and
those - are similar.” Here there is someone who  thinks  that  the  Mahayana
and  Hinayana  scriptural  baskets  are  similar.  The  Mahayana  scriptural
baskets are superior to those of the Hinayana, so if someone says  they  are
the same, they “degenerate from the causes of the three exalted bodies.”
- Although Mahayana is superior  to  the  Hinayana  scriptural  basket,  one
should not think that the Hinayana scriptural baskets  are  meaningless;  if
one thinks like that, this is a huge negativity; it becomes  the  negativity
of abandoning the Dharma. It is very important  not  to  look  down  on  the
Hinayana scriptural baskets. The teachings on the four noble truths  in  the
Hinayana scriptural baskets are  the  foundation  for  the  Mahayana;  using
these teachings on the four noble  truths  as  the  basis,  one  supplements
one’s practice with elements that are found in the  Mahayana  teachings.  If
on top of this one practices tantra, then  one  supplements  one’s  practice
with elements found in the tantra teachings.
- In terms of practice, we must hold what has been taught in the  Vinaya  as
the foundation; regardless of whether we are lay or  ordained,  the  ethical
practices of the Vinaya should be taken as  the  basis.  With  that  as  the
basis,  one  practices  the   perfection   vehicle,   practicing   the   six
perfections, etc  and  one  can  go  on  to  practice  the  tantra  vehicle,
practicing the two stages: generation and completion. If  one  can  practice
in this way, using the various vehicles in this manner, then one’s  practice
becomes ideal. Without the training in ethics, the  training  in  meditative
stabilization or concentration will not  turn  out  well;  and  without  the
training in meditative stabilization, the training in wisdom will  not  turn
out well.
-the 8 causes of being distracted from the Mahayana:
(13) the arising of  a  confidence  that  conceptualizes  objects  that  are
attributes of the desire realm-forms, sounds, and so forth -in many ways,
(14) strong adherence to the mere writing of the Mothers in letters  as  the
Mothers,
(15) strong adherence to dependently arising non-things as  the  meaning  of
the mode of abidance,
(16) strong adherence to letters as the Mothers,
(17) strong adherence to non-letters as the Mothers,
(18) paying attention to places and so forth out  of  desire  relishing  the
taste of places,
(19) relishing the taste of gain, honor, and verses of praise, and
(20) seeking skillful means through incorrect paths,  the  words  taught  by
the maras;
Explanation
- (13) “The arising of a confidence that  conceptualizes  objects  that  are
attributes of the desire realm -forms, sounds, and so forth-in  many  ways.”
The attributes of the desire realm are forms,  sounds,  odors,  tastes,  and
objects of touch. Here there is a person who, due to  conceptualizing  these
objects, thinks that he  knows  them  really  well,  and  gives  rise  to  a
confidence. This confidence is actually a cause  of  being  distracted  from
the Mahayana.
-(14) “strong adherence to the mere writing of the  Mothers  in  letters  as
the Mothers.” When we say “the extensive perfection of  wisdom,”  this  does
not refer to a text. However, when the Eight Thousand Stanza  Perfection  of
Wisdom is set down in letters, we  have  a  text.  But  the  Eight  Thousand
Stanza Perfection of Wisdom itself is not a text. If  one  thinks  that  the
letters in the text are  the  Mothers,  this  is  actually  a  mistake.  For
example, the Eight Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom is said  to  be  the
speech  of  Shakyamuni  Buddha.  Here,  “Mothers”  actually  refers  to  the
Perfection of Wisdom Sutras.
-(15) “strong adherence to dependently arising non-things as the meaning  of
the mode of abidance.” Things that are  dependent  arisings  exist.  If  one
were to think of dependent arisings as non-things, this would be a  mistake.

-(16) “strong adherence to letters as the  Mothers.”  The  Mothers  are  not
letters. Although the letters of the Perfection of  Wisdom  Sutras  are  not
the Mothers, in dependence on these letters we are able  to  understand  the
meaning of the Mothers.
-(17) “strong adherence to non-letters as the Mothers.” Here, there  may  be
someone who thinks: “OK, so letters are  not  the  Mothers,  therefore  non-
letters are the Mothers.”
-(18) “paying attention to places and so forth out of desire  relishing  the
taste of places.” If one has attachment for one’s homeland, or the city  one
came from and as a result, one becomes distracted from  the  Mahayana.  This
can harm one’s Dharma practice. For example, if we think  about  home  while
we are studying, it is a distraction that prevents us from studying.
-(19) “relishing the taste of gain, honor, and verses  of  praise.”  If  one
has attachment for gain, honor, and verses of praise, this will  harm  one’s
practice. In general, it is said that we have attachment for  three  things:
food, clothing, and reputation and  from  among  the  attachments  to  food,
clothing and reputation, the attachment to reputation is very  difficult  to
abandon. It is possible that a meditator gives up  good  food  and  clothing
and stays for years in meditation. Even though this  person  does  not  have
attachment for food and clothing, at the bottom of his heart he  may  think,
“Maybe the people in the village think I’m a great meditator.”
-(20) “seeking skillful means through incorrect paths, the words  taught  by
the maras.” This is to caution us against improper teachers. There are  many
people who explain the Dharma, in the past as well as  in  the  present.  We
have to carefully check whether such  people  are  qualified  teachers.  The
Buddha himself taught that we must examine  his  teachings  before  adopting
them. Whenever we hear  teachings,  we  should  take  time  to  check  their
validity, and after confirming that there is no damage by  valid  cognition,
we can adopt the teachings. Improper teachers, here it says “maras”  existed
in the past, e.g. during the time of Shakyamuni Buddha, and  also  nowadays.
This is something we have to be very careful about, because if  we  were  to
follow improper teachers, we would suffer a great loss.

Twenty-three incomplete concordant conditions based upon either  oneself  or
others
(I) Those based upon the master
Here we have incomplete  concordant  conditions  based  on  the  master.  In
general, in a master-student  relationship,  the  master  should  have  more
excellent qualities than the  student.  Otherwise  it  is  difficult  for  a
student with more qualities to rely properly on a teacher. If  one  is  able
to protect one’s mind, there is no harm in relying  on  a  teacher  who  has
fewer excellent qualities than oneself, but this is very difficult to do.  A
teacher needs  to  have  various  qualifications  in  according  to  Vinaya,
according to the perfection or sutra system, and  according  to  tantra.  We
should look for fully-qualified teachers who at least  have  more  qualities
than we do. We should check that they have more  compassion,  kindness,  and
enthusiasm for teaching. We should not  find  a  teacher  who  becomes  very
discouraged with teaching. It is difficult to know  the  inner  realizations
of a teacher, but at  least  we  should  try  to  find  one  that  has  more
excellent qualities than we have.
- Through being strongly  related  in  either  way  -if  the  listeners  are
related with the former and the explainers with the latter respectively,  or
even if they  are  related  having  reversed  that  -since  faults  will  be
incurred, the 3rd set of 10 are:
(21) degeneration through the listener having  greater  aspiration  for  the
Mothers and the explainer having indolence,
(22) degeneration through difference in aspired places due to  the  listener
desiring to listen at this place but the explainer desiring  to  explain  at
another,
(23) degeneration  through  the  listener  having  small  yearning  and  the
explainer having yearning that is not small,
(24) the listener possessing the qualities of  training  and  the  explainer
not possessing them,
(25) the listener possessing virtuous characteristics, faith and  so  forth,
and the explainer possessing non-virtuous ones,
(26) the listener giving  away  all  possessions  and  the  explainer  being
miserly regarding those,
(27)  the  listener  being  generous  with  wealth  and  the  explainer  not
accepting that,
(28) the listener understanding through terse statements and  the  explainer
understanding through elaborate ones,
(29) the listener clearly knowing the Dharma that are  the  twelve  branches
of scriptures, the sutras and  so  forth,  and  the  explainer  not  clearly
knowing them, and
(30) the listener possessing the  six  perfections  and  the  explainer  not
possessing them
(31)  the  listener  being  skilled  in  suchness,  the  means  for   attain
buddhahood, and the explainer in incorrect means,
(32) the listener attaining the dharani  (retention)  of  non-forgetfulness,
and the explainer not attaining it,
(33) the listener desiring to write the  letters  of  the  Mothers  and  the
explainer not desiring to write the letters,
(34) the listener being separated from  the  five  obscurations,  aspiration
for the desire realm and so forth
- Explanation
(21) “degeneration through the listener having greater  aspiration  for  the
Mothers and the explainer having indolence” – means that  the  listener  has
greater aspiration for the Mothers than the explainer.
(22) “degeneration through difference in aspired places due to the  listener
desiring to listen at this place but the explainer desiring  to  explain  at
another.” The listener wants to listen  to  the  explanation  at  a  certain
location, but the explainer wants to explain it somewhere else. In  general,
it is important for the teacher  and  student  to  be  concordant  in  their
views.
(23) “degeneration through  the  listener  having  small  yearning  and  the
explainer having yearning that is not small.”  Here  the  listener  is  very
contented but the explainer  is  not.  In  general,  the  attitudes  of  the
listener and explainer are important as the attitudes to be  concordant.  It
is not only important to be careful when we  choose  our  teachers,  but  we
should also be careful when we choose our companions. If  we  have  negative
friends, there is the danger of becoming like them.
(27) “the  listener  being  generous  with  wealth  and  the  explainer  not
accepting that” means the student wants to give  something  to  the  teacher
but the teacher doesn’t want to accept it.
(28) “the listener understanding through terse statements and the  explainer
understanding through elaborate ones.” Here it seems  that  the  student  is
very intelligent and can understand through few words, but the explainer  is
not  very  clever,  and  needs  many  words  and  elaborate  statements   to
understand the same points.
- it is very important for the teacher  and  student  to  be  concordant  in
terms of views. If they are not concordant in  their  views  and  attitudes,
then even if the teacher has high realizations, it  would  be  difficult  to
benefit the student. It is difficult for the teacher and  student  to  agree
on everything, but there should at least be some common ground.
 (34) The five obscurations are:
   1. aspiration for the desire realm
   2. excitement and regret
   3. harmful intent (ill-will)
   4. lethargy and sleep
   5. doubt

(II) Those based upon oneself
(35) due to hearing disparagement regarding the  hells  and  so  forth,  the
mind turning away regarding going to bad migrations for others’ welfare,
(36) due to hearing commendations regarding [the realms of] the gods and  so
forth, craving them, and the mind  being  happy  regarding  going  to  happy
migrations
- these do not rely on the master and the student getting together, so  they
are mentioned separately;

Explanation
(35)“due to hearing disparagement regarding the hells and  so  forth…”-  one
hears descriptions of suffering in the hell  realms,  hungry  ghost  realms,
and animal realms and becomes discouraged, and  the  mind  turns  away  from
going to the bad migrations for others’ welfare. In  this  context,  we  are
looking at hindrances with respect  to  applications  of  a  bodhisattva.  A
bodhisattva should not be discouraged with respect  to  being  born  in  the
lower realms for others’ welfare. In fact, bodhisattvas make prayers  to  be
reborn in the lower realms in order to  benefit  others.  If  a  bodhisattva
were to hear explanations of the lower realms and become  discouraged  about
going there for others’ welfare, this would be a fault.
- A great scope person is able to generate the attitude “I will  go  to  the
lower realms  for  others’  sake.”  without  regret  and  in  this  way  the
bodhisattva’s  applications  become  complete.  So  if  one  were  to   have
discouragement about going to the lower realms to benefit  sentient  beings,
there is no way for the bodhisattva’s applications to become complete.
(36) “due to hearing commendations regarding the realms of the gods  and  so
forth, craving them, and the mind  being  happy  regarding  going  to  happy
migrations…” One hears praises of the realms  of  gods  and  so  forth,  and
generates craving; the mind becomes happy about going to happy  rebirths  or
migrations.

(III) Those based upon both
- The main point  is  that  the  listener  and  the  explainer  need  to  be
concordant in terms of their views. If they are divergent  in  their  views,
it is very difficult for them to have a good  relationship.  Of  course,  it
would be difficult for them to agree on  everything,  but  there  should  be
some common ground in general.
-Through being related in either way-the explainers  are  related  with  the
former and the listeners with the latter respectively,  or  the  reverse  of
that-since faults will also be incurred, they  should  be  applied  also  by
reversing them.
(37) degeneration due to the explainer being  joyful  in  solitude  and  the
listener taking delight in company;
(38) the explainer not giving  an  opportunity  to  follow  others  and  the
listener desiring to associate with others
(39) the explainer desiring only a few material belongings and the  listener
not desiring to give them; and
(40) the explainer desiring to go where there will  be  hindrances  to  life
and the listener desiring to go where there will not be hindrances to  life;

- Similarly, through being strongly related  in  either  way,  since  faults
will be incurred.
(41) the explainer going where there is famine and the  listener  not  going
there;
(42) the explainer going where there is trouble from bandits  and  so  forth
and the listener not going there; (43) the  explainer  being  happy  due  to
householders who give alms looking again and again at him and  the  listener
being mentally unhappy.

(IV) Three adverse conditions based upon others
(44) application of separation by  the  maras,  the  maras  causing  a  rift
between the Dharma and the person, by coming  to  him  in  the  guise  of  a
trainee-in-virtue and saying, “The Mothers  occur  in  my  sutra  scriptural
basket, they do not occur in the extensive, medium, and brief Perfection  of
Wisdom Sutras,”
(45) establishing the  counterfeit  Mothers,  teaching  that  meditating  on
ugliness and the like is meditating on the meaning of the mode of  abidance,
and
(46) generation of joy towards an improper teacher,  the  object  of  faith,
producing faith in the maras (who have come in  the  guise  of  buddhas)  as
buddhas.
- There are two types of maras: outer and inner. The main one  to  be  aware
of is the inner mara. Of course, due to outer circumstances, the inner  mara
has the opportunity to manifest. Sometimes due to circumstances,  the  outer
maras manifest, and as a result of that,  the  inner  maras  also  increase.
However, the main thing is the inner maras. If  we  can  control  the  inner
maras, the outer maras do not have such influence over us. Due to the  inner
maras, we have been experiencing suffering  since  beginningless  time.  The
outer maras are not always present; they only occur occasionally.
- If the master and the student were to get together by way  of  being  free
from these faults which have been explained, the proper way of relying  upon
a spiritual guide, the root of the path, would  occur.  Hence,  the  way  to
rely upon a spiritual  guide  is  also  indicated  by  implication.  Indeed,
having thought that the extensive explanation would be easy  to  understand,
Maitreya did not include it in the explicit indication  of  the  root  text.
This has been taught by the Acarya.
- We have to be very careful with respect to the way we rely on a  spiritual
guide. The way in which we learn about the Dharma is through  relying  on  a
spiritual  guide.  Without  relying  on  a  spiritual  guide,  it  would  be
difficult for us to learn the Dharma. For this reason, it is said  that  the
teacher, the spiritual guide, is the root of the path.
We have to be very careful when we rely on a spiritual guide, because if  we
make a mistake in this relationship, it is easy for non-faith to arise,  and
if non-faith arises, we create a lot of negativity. We really need to  check
our attitudes; it depends very much on whether we know  how  to  rely  on  a
spiritual guide.
-This time, we have obtained a precious  human  rebirth  -a  human  body-and
have met the Dharma. We have met very precious teachings that reveal  to  us
how to attain the state of full enlightenment  in  one  life  in  this  very
body. If we cannot attain buddhahood in this life, we have  the  opportunity
to attain the state of liberation, or  foe-destroyer;  at  the  minimum,  we
should be able to prevent a bad rebirth, such as  a  hell  rebirth,  in  the
next life. If, having been reborn as  a  human  being  and  having  met  the
Dharma, we continue creating the causes to be reborn  in  the  hell  realms,
this is really a huge shame. If, in our next life, we were to be  reborn  in
the hell realms, the very fact that we have obtained a human  body  and  met
the teachings of the buddha would not been of benefit at  all.  In  general,
it  is  important  to  contemplate  the  possibility   of   attaining   full
enlightenment and liberation. However, we should also try to ensure that  at
least we will not be reborn in the hell realms  in  the  next  life.  If  we
cannot  even  ensure  this,  what  chance  is  there  for   us   to   attain
enlightenment or liberation?
- It is said that among all practices, the practice of patience is  supreme.
We practice with the goal of attaining happiness. In particular,  we  should
be able to practice patience toward our own  teacher.  The  teacher  is  the
embodiment of kindness. The teacher knows the  Dharma  and  teaches  us  the
Dharma for the sake of our happiness. If we cannot see our teacher as  being
kind to us and as being a  friend  to  us,  there  is  hardly  a  chance  to
practice patience with regard to other people.
- Thus  there  are  23  states  of  adverse  conditions  and  23  incomplete
concordant conditions. In that way, those are the 46 faults.

