Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/Personal notes/Personal notes- Path of Seeing.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:11.787514
================================================================================


THE MAHAYANA PATH OF SEEING
The bodily support and mind support for newly generating the  Mahayana  path
of seeing
- Bodily support:
  - Human excluding those of the northern  continent  Unpleasant  Sound  and
hermaphrodites and neuters
  - Six types of desire realm gods
 - There are four main human continents. The humans (men  &  women)  on  the
   three continents,  excluding  Unpleasant  Sound  and  hermaphrodites  and
   neuters, are able to newly generate the Mahayana path of seeing.
 - Humans on Unpleasant Sound unable to generate the path  of  seeing  newly
   because they have the obscurations to meditative absorption. Their  minds
   are very distracted.
 - Hermaphrodites and neuters are unable to generate the  Mahayana  path  of
   seeing because they have very strong jealousy. Hermaphrodites  are  those
   with both female and male signs (sexual organs), while neuters are  those
   who have neither. Although hermaphrodites have both signs  but  they  are
   unable to use them. They have strong jealousy.
 - Within the desire realm, the affliction that causes the most suffering is
   attachment.
 -  Among  the  various  types  of  attachment,  the  attachment  to  sexual
   intercourse causes great suffering.
 - Mahayana path of seeing is not generated on  the  support  of  the  upper
   realms because ordinary beings in the form and formless realms have  weak
   despondency with regard to the three realms.  There  is  great  happiness
   there.
 - There are also foe-destroyers and aryas in the form and  formless  realms
   and cannot be said to have weak despondency  with  regard  to  the  three
   realms. E.g. arya bodhisattvas in Akanishta (Not Low). It is not the case
   that they newly generate the Mahayana path of seeing on  the  support  of
   Akanishtha. They have generated the Mahayana path of seeing and then they
   migrate to Akanishta.
- Mind support - an actual concentration is necessary.
 - The path of meditation is supported on a desire realm  mind  and  on  the
Peak of Existence.
 - The path of seeing has to be supported on an actual concentration.
  - On the path of seeing, the bodhisattva trains in dexterity  with  regard
    to meditative stabilization.
  - In the process of this training in dexterity, the bodhisattva  manifests
    different kinds of minds, for example a bodhisattva can manifest a  mind
    of meditative stabilization and then  manifest  a  mind  of  the  desire
    realm, and then again manifest a mind of meditative  stabilization,  and
    so forth.
  - Through dexterity in this process, a bodhisattva can generate  the  path
    of meditation supported on a desire realm mind.
- In the Sutra on  the  Ten  Grounds,  it  explains  that  one  attains  the
concentrations and clairvoyances on the occasion of  the  3rd  ground.  This
does not mean that  one  does  not  have  concentrations  and  clairvoyances
before the 3rd  ground.  This  indicates  an  attainment  by  the  force  of
meditative equipoise, an uncommon attribute.
-A bodhisattva on the occasion of the path of preparation  already  has  the
actual 4th concentration bearing the aspect of peace and coarseness.
- A bodhisattva generates the Mahayana path of seeing on the support  of  an
actual concentration.
- Bodhisattvas do not use the desire realm mind to newly generate  the  path
of seeing because although they are very  well  trained  in  dexterity  with
regard to meditative stabilization, they do  not  train  in  generating  the
Mahayana path of seeing newly on the support of a desire realm mind.
- A bodhisattva would not use a preparation of an  actual  concentration  to
generate the Mahayana path of seeing newly because it is more  difficult  to
rely  on  a  preparation.  As  they  have   already   attained   an   actual
concentration, so they would use an actual concentration.
- Although bodhisattvas do not generate the Mahayana path  of  seeing  newly
using the support of a preparation of a concentration, it is  not  the  case
that they are not able to do so.
- If it is possible for a bodhisattva to generate  a  supramundane  path  in
dependence on an easier path, why would they do so in dependence on  a  more
difficult path?  Therefore,  bodhisattvas  generate  the  Mahayana  path  of
seeing supported on an actual concentration.
-The entity of the path of  seeing  is  that  concomitant  with  wisdom  and
meditative stabilization, occurring immediately after the SMQ level  of  the
path of preparation, newly realizing emptiness free of  elaboration  by  way
of direct cognition, through observing the 16 attributes of the  four  noble
truths, and conjoined with all types of deeds, generosity and so forth.
-  Definition  of  a  mere  Mahayana  path  of  seeing:  a  Mahayana   clear
realization of the truth that is conjoined with a  Mahayana  exalted  wisdom
newly realizing emptiness by way of direct cognition  in  the  continuum  of
the one possessing it.
 - “Mere” Mahayana path  of  seeing  means  the  general  Mahayana  path  of
seeing, not the uncommon one.
 - The uncommon Mahayana path of seeing  is  the  path  of  seeing  that  is
concomitant with wisdom and meditative stabilization, occurring  immediately
after the SMQ of the path of preparation. This is the uninterrupted path  of
the path of seeing.
- “newly” in the definition is problematic: The uninterrupted  path  of  the
path of seeing is the first instant of the path of seeing, after  which  one
arises into the liberated path, and this is no  longer  the  first  instant.
When one arises into subsequent attainment, which is even later.
- The exalted wisdoms of the Mahayana path of seeing are divided into  three
main categories:
   1. Exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise
   2. Exalted wisdom of subsequent attainment
   3. Exalted wisdom that is neither  meditative  equipoise  nor  subsequent
      attainment
- Example of a Mahayana path of seeing that is neither meditative  equipoise
nor subsequent attainment:
- The direct realization  of  emptiness  in  the  continuum  of  someone  in
  subsequent attainment of the path of seeing.
-  The  knower  of  bases  in  the  continuum  of  someone  on  either   the
  uninterrupted path or liberated path of the Mahayana path of seeing.
- The exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise can be subdivided into three:
   1. Exalted wisdom that is an uninterrupted path
   2. Exalted wisdom that is a liberated path
   3.  Exalted  wisdom  of  meditative  equipoise   that   is   neither   an
      uninterrupted path nor a liberated path
- Example of an exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise that  is  neither  an
uninterrupted path nor a liberated path:
 - When one is on an uninterrupted path, one  will  pass  to  the  liberated
path.
 - From the liberated path, one arises in subsequent attainment.
 - When one again enters meditative  equipoise,  that  meditative  equipoise
will be an example of meditative equipoise that is neither an  uninterrupted
path nor a liberated path.
- The uninterrupted path can be divided into the 8 forbearances
- The liberated path into the 8 knowledges.
- These 8 divisions of the uninterrupted path and the  8  divisions  of  the
  liberated path are divisions by way of isolates.
- The 8 forbearances are one entity in being the uninterrupted path
- The 8 knowledges are one entity in being the liberated path.
- There are a total of 16; they are not different entities.
- The 8 forbearances are one entity, and the 8 knowledges are one entity.
- Among the 8 forbearances, they are related to the four noble truths.  They
  can be also related to the desire realm and upper realms: 4 are related to
  the desire realm,  4  to  the  upper  realms,  and  likewise  with  the  8
  knowledges.

Someone says: The dharmatas of the four noble truths are realized by way  of
direct cognition with a single mind in one instant.  In  this  one  instant,
sufferings are known, origins are abandoned, cessations are  actualized  and
paths are cultivated.
- However, there are 16 instants of clear  realization  from  the  point  of
view of the sequential elimination of the errors with  respect  to  each  of
the four noble truths.  Therefore,  the  presentations  of  approachers  and
abiders are correct.
Our system: Your opinion is  not  correct.  The  reason  is  that:  if  true
cessations were actualized at the time of newly realizing  the  dharmata  of
true sufferings, then it follows that true cessations would not need  to  be
preceded by true paths. According to you,  in  one  instant  sufferings  are
known, origins are abandoned,  cessations  are  actualized,  and  paths  are
cultivated, in which  case  there  would  be  someone  who  actualizes  true
cessations without being preceded by actualizing true paths.
- Then it follows that the  uninterrupted  path  and  liberated  path  of  a
specific basis would arise simultaneously.

Someone says: True cessations will be realized in the future.
Our system: The classification of  one or 16 instants would  be  meaningless
with respect to the earlier and the later. If you  talk  about  earlier  and
later, you are talking about two instants. In that case, the  classification
of one instant would be meaningless, and the classification of  16  instants
would also be meaningless.

Someone says: An uninterrupted path and a liberated  path  are  produced  in
one instant, not sequentially.
Our system: This is not right because Acarya  Haribhadra  asserts  that  the
forbearances and knowledges are produced sequentially.
- If it were like that, then there are many kinds of afflictions  [erroneous
superimpositions] that are to be abandoned by the path of seeing: there  are
afflictions with respect to true sufferings, true origins, etc.
- Although the direct antidotes, the 8 forbearances, are  one  instant,  and
the 8 knowledges in which the objects of  abandonment  have  been  abandoned
are one instant, the path of seeing is explained to be 16  instants  by  way
of isolates.
- In that way, the forbearances and knowledges  are  produced  sequentially;
the 8 forbearances are one instant,  and  the  8  knowledges  are  also  one
instant. Therefore, it is taught that “The presentation of  approachers  and
abiders is correct.”

Someone says: Although the 16 attributes, impermanence  and  so  forth,  are
realized, all the 16 instants only arise sequentially.  From  the  point  of
view  of  abandoning  superimpositions,   the   16   instants   only   arise
sequentially.

-  Furthermore,  the  ability  to  dispel   superimpositions   is   attained
sequentially by way of one session of  meditative  equipoise.  This  happens
during a single session.
Our system: This is not correct by  way  of  reasoning.  It  should  not  be
interpreted to mean that a valid  cognizer  that  induces  the  ascertaining
consciousnesses only arises sequentially.
- E.g. an ordinary being sees a certain  place  with  direct  cognition  and
then afterwards thinks “I have seen this  place”.  Thus  one  generates  the
ascertainments sequentially.
- This valid cognizer that induces  the  ascertaining  consciousnesses  does
not arise sequentially. It arises in one instant. However, the  ascertaining
consciousnesses generated during subsequent attainment arise sequentially.
-  These  16  dissimilar  valid  cognizers  do  not  need  to  be   produced
sequentially. In fact, they are produced in one instant. The valid  cognizer
of an ordinary being is able to dispel one obscuration at a time.
- For someone on the path of seeing, these 16 valid cognizers arise  in  one
instant and are able to dispel their respective obscurations.
- The difference between ordinary beings  and  aryas:  In  ordinary  beings,
there is a consciousness to which an object appears but is not  ascertained.
However, for aryas a consciousness to which an object  appears  but  is  not
ascertained is not possible.
- Aryas are superior as in aryas,  when  the  aspects  become  clearer,  the
consciousnesses also become free from mistaken  reasons.  This  is  not  the
case for ordinary beings. For ordinary beings, it can be the case  that  the
aspects become clearer, but their consciousnesses do not  become  free  from
mistaken reasons.
- In ordinary beings,  the  object  can  appear  clearly,  but  may  not  be
ascertained. Although the  object  appears  clearly,  it  is  not  that  the
consciousness becomes free from mistaken reasons.
- For aryas, this does not happen, because whatever appears is  ascertained.


- One first realizes the dharmata  of  the  four  noble  truths  during  the
uninterrupted path.
- Uninterrupted  path  abandons  the  seeds  that  are  the  objects  to  be
abandoned by the path of seeing of all four noble truths.
- The uninterrupted path that is the dharma forbearance of  true  sufferings
itself is generated in the entity of the 8 forbearances.
- Then when one, without arising from that meditative equipoise, goes on  to
attain a true cessation that is free from adventitious stains and  generates
a liberated path, then one generates the 8 knowledges.
-The 4  dharma  forbearances  (differentiated  by  way  of  isolates)  which
realize the dharmata of the four noble truths
-The  4  subsequent  forbearances  which  realize  those   object-possessors
(dharma forbearances) as empty of true existence
-The 8 knowledges exist in a manner of one entity and different isolates.
-The 4 dharma forbearances and the 4 subsequent forbearances is  one  entity
and different isolates.
-The uninterrupted path is the 8 forbearances, which are of one  entity.  In
dependence on that, one attains a liberated path.  This  liberated  path  is
the 8 knowledges, which are of one entity.
-Hence the clear realization of truth of  a  single  session  of  meditative
equipoise is generated in the  nature  of  16  instants  of  knowledges  and
forbearances in one instant.
- We do not assert in this context  that  the  subsequent  forbearances  are
generated subsequent to having generated the dharma forbearances.
- When we say that the path of seeing is one instant,  this  does  not  mean
that the path of seeing lasts only the shortest  limit  of  time.  It  means
that the meditative equipoise on emptiness is one session.
- During  this  meditative  equipoise,  the  ability  to  practice  the  six
perfections in their entirety within each  of  the  six  perfections  exists
without degeneration. Otherwise, one would not be able to destroy the  seeds
that are knowledge obscurations.
- At the time of the  subsequent  knowledge  of  true  origins  (during  the
liberated path) there is no manifest meditation on the  four  immeasurables,
love and so forth.
- However, because love and so forth, the four immeasurables, exist  without
degeneration, this person does not have the fault of falling into  cessation
(extreme of solitary peace).
- If one has great compassion,  one  will  not  fall  into  the  extreme  of
solitary peace. Great compassion is what mainly stops a person falling  into
the extreme of solitary peace.
- Acarya Haribhadra and Nagarjuna (Sixty Stanzas of  Reasoning)  agree  with
respect to the way of positing  the  number  of  instants  of  the  path  of
seeing: 8 forbearances and are of one entity & 8 knowledges and are  of  one
entity.
-  However   Haribhadra  posits  a   self-cognizer.   Nagarjuna,   being   a
Prasangika, does not assert a self-cognizer.
- Someone says: We do not assert that when  one  realizes  the  dharmata  of
true sufferings, one also realizes the dharmata of true origins.
- Our system - Is it the case that when one realizes the  dharmata  of  true
sufferings, one realizes the dharmata of  true  origins?  No,  there  is  no
pervasion. This is because a  person  who  realizes  the  dharmata  of  true
sufferings does not necessarily realize the dharmata of true origins.
- However, a person who directly realizes the dharmata  of  true  sufferings
also directly realizes the dharmata of true origins. [If we do not  add  the
qualification directly, there is  a  fault  in  saying  that  a  person  who
realizes the dharmata of  true  sufferings  is  pervaded  by  realizing  the
dharmata of true origins.]
- To assert ‘an object of hearing’ is a  correct  sign  in  the  proof  that
sound is impermanent.
- In the proof that sound is impermanent, the sign “an  object  of  hearing”
is incorrect.
- This is not a correct sign in this proof  because  having  understood  the
relationship between sound and an object of hearing, if one were to  realize
that an object of hearing is impermanent, one is pervaded by realizing  that
sound is impermanent.
- At the time of  being  set  in  meditative  equipoise  on  emptiness,  the
Mahayana generated  mind  and  so  forth  are  present,  but  they  are  not
manifest. They exist in a non-manifest, or dormant, way.

- Two types of path of seeing:
 1. The path of seeing that acts to pass through,  which  directly  realizes
dharmata.
 2. The path of  seeing  that  is  to  be  passed  through,  which  directly
realizes the 16 aspects, impermanence and so forth.
Someone says: Are these two simultaneous or sequential?
- If these two are simultaneous, then when a single mind realizes  both  the
16 aspects and dharmata, an exalted knower of modes and  an  exalted  knower
of varieties would be a single entity on  a  learners’  path.  This  is  not
possible.
- If the two minds existing simultaneously and they are manifest,  then  the
two are actually a single mind directly realizing 16 aspects  and  emptiness
by direct cognition.
- On the occasion of meditative equipoise,  only  one  single  mind  can  be
manifest. So if you have both of these minds, then they  must  be  a  single
mind directly realizing both the 16 aspects and emptiness. Therefore, it  is
incorrect that  an  exalted  knower  of  modes  and  an  exalted  knower  of
varieties would exist as a single entity because on  a  learners’  path,  an
exalted knower of modes and an exalted knower of varieties cannot  exist  as
a single entity.
- The other possibility is to say that the clear realization of dharmata  is
an  explicit  realization  while  the  clear  realization  of  the   sixteen
attributes is an implicit realization. This possibility  is  also  incorrect
because otherwise we can say the same about the path of preparation.
- If these two are sequential; if the path of seeing that is  to  be  passed
through  [the  path  of  seeing   directly   realizing   the   16   aspects,
impermanence, and so forth] is generated first,  then  a  bodhisattva  would
need to sequentially abandon the seeds of the acquired afflictions that  are
the two obscurations.
- This is because if the path of seeing that is to be passed through  [which
directly realizes the 16 attributes] is  realized  first  and  the  path  of
seeing that acts to pass  through  [which  directly  realizes  dharmata]  is
generated later, then the objects to be abandoned  by  the  path  of  seeing
that are afflictive obscurations would be abandoned first, and  the  objects
to be abandoned by the path of seeing that are knowledge obscurations  would
be abandoned later.
- If they are generated in the opposite order  to  that  i.e.  the  path  of
seeing that acts to pass through is generated first, and then  the  path  of
seeing that is to be passed through is generated later,  then  after  having
generated the path of seeing that acts to pass through, one  would  have  to
subsequently generate a path of seeing that newly realizes the  selflessness
of persons. This would incur the fault of endlessness.
- [Suppose it is as this person  says:  first  one  generates  the  path  of
seeing realizing emptiness, then subsequently  one  generates  the  path  of
seeing realizing the selflessness of persons. If this were the case for  the
path of seeing, the same would apply to the path  of  meditation.  We  would
have to posit this kind of  sequential  realization  for  each  of  the  ten
grounds. This pattern would have to be replicated for each of  the  grounds:
first an uninterrupted path, then a liberated path  for  the  first  ground,
then for the second  ground,  etc.  You  would  have  all  these  sequential
realizations. There is no end because in this  way  you  would  never  reach
buddhahood. You would just go round and round.]
Our system: There is no fault, because, although that path  of  seeing  that
acts to pass through realizes with direct cognition that the 16 aspects  are
free from elaboration, it does not realize the 16 aspects.
- After  the  uninterrupted  path  and  liberated  path,  during  subsequent
attainment, a manifest path of seeing that is to  be  passed  through  which
directly realizes the sixteen aspects is generated.
- A bodhisattva on the path  of  seeing  passes  through  the  uninterrupted
path, then the liberated path, and then enters the subsequent attainment  of
the path of seeing.
- During subsequent attainment, there can be many  occasions  of  meditative
equipoise, training in dexterity regarding meditative  stabilization,  as  a
result of which the mind realizing emptiness becomes more powerful.
-  Also  during  subsequent   attainment,   a   bodhisattva   collects   the
accumulation of merit, which is the support for his realizations.
- Eventually, when the accumulation of merit is sufficient, the  bodhisattva
enters meditative equipoise.
- At the start of this session he has not generated the direct  antidote  to
the innate afflictions that are knowledge obscurations, but in that  session
he is able to generate a mind powerful enough to act as the direct  antidote
to the innate afflictions that are knowledge obscurations.  At  that  point,
he enters the path of meditation.
- All the moments before generating  that  direct  antidote  to  the  innate
afflictions that are knowledge obscurations are included within the path  of
seeing. There can be many instances of this.
- At  the  time  of  entering  the  path  of  meditation,  he  generates  an
uninterrupted path, which is the 2nd of the two uninterrupted paths  of  the
first ground. This is the last instant of the first ground.

This path of seeing is a  knower  of  paths  is  explained  by  way  of  the
benefits and four types of instants of the forbearances and knowledges  with
respect to the true sufferings and origins and true cessations and paths.
- The path of seeing has benefits, such as  ripening  sentient  beings  life
after life, in this life and other lives.
- There are three types of knower of paths:
   1. Knower of paths knowing hearers’ paths
   2. Knower of paths knowing solitary realizers’ paths
   3. Knower of paths knowing bodhisattvas’ paths
- A bodhisattva should know all three types of paths for the sake of  taking
care of three types of lineage-bearers.
- In addition, bodhisattvas take care of sentient beings who do  not  belong
to any of these three lineages. By ripening these beings,  they  become  one
of these types of lineage-bearers. Not only does the path of seeing  possess
benefit, it possesses great benefit.

How should one meditate on the aspects of the four noble truths?
-  The  first  four  instants  are  dharma  forbearance,  dharma  knowledge,
subsequent  forbearance  and  subsequent  knowledge  with  regard  to   true
sufferings.
- By meditating on the aspects on the occasion of the path  of  preparation,
one generates the path of seeing and one also attains these benefits  during
subsequent attainment. The 16 instants are characterized  and  indicated  by
them.
- Although these aspects are to be meditated on during the occasion  of  the
path of preparation, these excellent qualities must definitely be  possessed
on the occasions of the 16 instants of the path of seeing.
For each of the four noble truths, the  presentation  is  in  the  following
order:
    - dharma forbearance (uninterrupted paths)
    - dharma knowledge (liberated paths)
    - subsequent forbearance (uninterrupted paths)
    - subsequent knowledge (liberated paths)

The aspects of true sufferings
Syllogism [the subject, the predicate, and the sign, or reason]:

- The subject - the exalted wisdom of dharma forbearance of true  sufferings
that directly realizes that
  (i) the thusness of true sufferings and
  (ii) the exalted wisdom that is its object-possessor are  not  established
as the support and the supported ultimately
  -is the aspect of the dharma forbearance of true sufferings,
-because it is an exalted wisdom  of  dharma  forbearance  that  acts  as  a
direct antidote to the seeds that are corresponding objects  of  abandonment
of dharma forbearance.

-The subject—the exalted wisdom of dharma knowledge of true sufferings  that
directly realizes that
  - through the entitiness of dharmadhatu, the emptiness of  true  existence
ultimately with respect to forms and so  forth,  its  object-possessor,  the
Perfection of Wisdom is just great
  - is the aspect of dharma knowledge of true sufferings,
-because it is an exalted wisdom of dharma knowledge that has abandoned  the
seeds  that  are  the  corresponding  objects  of  abandonment   of   dharma
forbearance.
[With regard to the reason, since dharma knowledge is a liberated  path,  we
do not say it is a “direct antidote” as “direct antidote”  applies  only  to
an uninterrupted path]

-  The  subject-the  exalted  wisdom  of  subsequent  forbearance  of   true
sufferings that directly realizes that similarly,
- a valid cognizer that comprehends those sufferings  ultimately  just  does
not exist
- is the aspect of subsequent forbearance,
-because it is an exalted wisdom of subsequent forbearance that  acts  as  a
direct  antidote  to  the  seeds  that  are  the  corresponding  objects  of
abandonment of subsequent forbearance.
[The reason is similar to the first one, because subsequent  forbearance  is
an uninterrupted path, which is a direct antidote.]

-  The  subject-  the  exalted  wisdom  of  subsequent  knowledge  of   true
sufferings that directly realizes that, like the former,
- through space just  lacking  measure,  those  sufferings  lacking  measure
ultimately
- is the aspect of subsequent knowledge,
because it is an exalted wisdom of subsequent knowledge that  has  abandoned
the seeds that are the corresponding objects of  abandonment  of  subsequent
forbearance.
[Subsequent knowledge that is a liberated path]
[Forbearances -acts as a direct antidote in the  reason.  Knowledges  -  has
abandoned the seeds is the reason.]

The aspects of true origins
-The subject - the exalted wisdom of  dharma  forbearance  of  true  origins
that directly realizes that
 - the non-existence of the very extremes  of  permanence  and  annihilation
and so forth through the very  non-existence  of  entitiness  ultimately  in
forms and so forth included within contaminated causes
 - is the aspect of dharma forbearance of true origins
 -because it is an exalted wisdom of  dharma  forbearance  that  acts  as  a
direct antidote to the seeds that are corresponding objects  of  abandonment
of dharma forbearance.

-The subject - the exalted wisdom of dharma knowledge of true  origins  that
directly realizes that
 - through the entitiness  of  dharmadhatu,  the  definite  apprehension  of
forms and so forth as the nature of the state of  tathagata,  the  emptiness
of true existence, of a yogi who abides  in  the  Perfection  of  Wisdom  of
dharma knowledge of true origins,
 -is the aspect of the dharma knowledge of true origins,
 - because it is an exalted wisdom of dharma knowledge  that  has  abandoned
the seeds that are  the  corresponding  objects  of  abandonment  of  dharma
forbearance.

-The subject - the exalted wisdom of subsequent forbearance of true  origins
that, similarly,
 - abiding in that continuity of the Perfection of Wisdom, meditates on  all
phenomena as neither adopted nor discarded ultimately and so forth;
 - is the aspect of that subsequent forbearance of true origins.
 -because it is an exalted wisdom of subsequent forbearance that acts  as  a
direct  antidote  to  the  seeds  that  are  the  corresponding  objects  of
abandonment of subsequent forbearance.

-The subject -the exalted wisdom of subsequent  knowledge  of  true  origins
that
 -by meditating on the four immeasurables of preliminary belief  as  lacking
entitiness ultimately, possesses the excellent qualities  of  meditation  in
that way,
 - is the aspect of that subsequent knowledge of true origins.
 - because it  is  an  exalted  wisdom  of  subsequent  knowledge  that  has
abandoned the seeds that are the corresponding  objects  of  abandonment  of
subsequent forbearance.

- Due to possessing the excellent qualities of  the  four  immeasurables  on
the occasion of subsequent  knowledge  [during  meditative  equipoise],  the
fault of  falling  into  cessation  is  immediately  blocked.  Although  one
realizes cessations, there is no fault of falling into cessations.
-  During subsequent knowledge (which is  meditative  equipoise),  emptiness
is realized and there is possession  of  excellent  qualities  at  the  same
time. There is no contradiction.
- The bodhisattva does  not  meditate  on  the  four  immeasurables  in  the
following ways:
   - During meditative equipoise, the four immeasurables are  not  meditated
on manifestly and they are also not meditated on during  certain  times,  or
sections, of meditative equipoise.
   - Nor meditated on by dividing  meditative  equipoise  into  earlier  and
later intervals i.e. it is not a case of dividing meditative equipoise  into
different parts and then meditating in-between those parts.

The aspects of true cessations
- The subject - The exalted wisdom of dharma forbearance of true  cessations
that directly realizes that
 -the primordial entity of forms and so forth is  just  empty  of  only  the
nature of  true  existence  from  the  beginning  [an  exalted  wisdom  that
directly realizes the emptiness of true existence]
 - is the aspect of that dharma forbearance of true cessations
 -because it is an exalted wisdom of  dharma  forbearance  that  acts  as  a
direct antidote to the seeds that are corresponding objects  of  abandonment
of dharma forbearance.

- The subject - The exalted wisdom of dharma knowledge  of  true  cessations
that
 - bears the benefit of attaining the state of tathagata, the result of  the
roots of virtue which equals dharmadhatu
 - is the aspect of the dharma knowledge of true cessations
 - because it is an exalted wisdom of dharma knowledge  that  has  abandoned
the seeds that are  the  corresponding  objects  of  abandonment  of  dharma
forbearance.

- The subject - The exalted wisdom of the  subsequent  forbearance  of  true
cessations which
  - possesses the excellent quality of the antidotes of the completely  pure
class being gathered in all ways within the Perfection of Wisdom
  - is the aspect of subsequent forbearance of true cessations
  - because it is an exalted wisdom of subsequent forbearance that  acts  as
a direct antidote to  the  seeds  that  are  the  corresponding  objects  of
abandonment of subsequent forbearance.

-  The  subject-  The  exalted  wisdom  of  subsequent  knowledge  of   true
cessations
 - by that subsequent knowledge of true cessations itself,  which  possesses
the excellent quality of strongly pacifying outer and inner harms.
 - is the aspects of the subsequent knowledge of true cessations
 - because it  is  an  exalted  wisdom  of  subsequent  knowledge  that  has
abandoned the seeds that are the corresponding  objects  of  abandonment  of
subsequent forbearance.

[In the 1st aspect, the explicit words talk about the direct realization  of
emptiness, while the explicit words in the  2nd,  3rd  and  4th  talk  about
possessing certain excellent qualities. Does this mean  that  the  2nd,  3rd
and 4th do not realize emptiness? That  is  not  true.  In  fact,  all  four
exalted wisdoms realize emptiness]
- It is not that  through  proving  emptiness  by  way  of  reasoning,  true
existence disappears. In fact, all phenomena are  empty  of  true  existence
from the beginning.
- Likewise, when we prove that something is impermanent, it is not  that  it
becomes impermanent through our proving its  impermanence.  We  are  proving
that something that is impermanent is impermanent.
- The purpose of applying various reasonings is in order to  understand  the
nature of phenomena. If  we  do  not  understand  the  nature  of  phenomena
correctly, we would  engage  in  various  kinds  of  erroneous  conceptions,
through which we create karma.  By  creating  karma,  we  circle  in  cyclic
existence.

The aspects of true paths
- The subject - The exalted wisdom of dharma forbearance with regard to  the
path
- that pacifies strong adherence to forms and so forth  and  to  nirvana  as
truly existent by only meditating on the lack of entitiness ultimately
 - is the aspect of that dharma forbearance with regard to the path
 -because it is an exalted wisdom of  dharma  forbearance  that  acts  as  a
direct antidote to the seeds that are corresponding objects  of  abandonment
of dharma forbearance.

- The subject - That very exalted wisdom of dharma knowledge with regard  to
the path
- that bears the benefit of being  guarded,  protected  and  hidden  by  the
buddhas from the three obstacles bearing the nature of action of  the  gods,
evolutes of the elements and sickness upon that  exalted  wisdom  of  dharma
knowledge engaging in wisdom and skillful means
 - is the aspect dharma knowledge with regard to the path
 - because it is an exalted wisdom of dharma knowledge  that  has  abandoned
the seeds that are  the  corresponding  objects  of  abandonment  of  dharma
forbearance.

- The subject - The exalted wisdom of subsequent forbearance that bears  the
excellent quality that
  -  by  strongly  desiring  buddhahood,  having  oneself  abided   in   the
perfections, the cause of the exalted knower  of  all  aspects,  oneself  to
abandon killing and so forth, places others in that itself
 - is the aspect of subsequent forbearance with regard to its path
 - because it is an exalted wisdom of subsequent forbearance that acts as  a
direct  antidote  to  the  seeds  that  are  the  corresponding  objects  of
abandonment of subsequent forbearance.

- The subject - the exalted wisdom of subsequent knowledge  with  regard  to
the path that
-  possesses  the  excellent  quality  of  dedicating  to  perfect  complete
enlightenment by the desire to make the virtues of generosity and  so  forth
inexhaustible
 - is the aspect of subsequent knowledge with regard to its path,
 - because it is an exalted wisdom of subsequent knowledge  with  regard  to
the path that is the entity of a  liberated  path  in  which  one  has  been
directly liberated from the seeds that are the objects to  be  abandoned  by
the path of seeing of paths.

- Those like that are the instants of a knower of paths. Not only are  these
types of aspects meditated on during meditative equipoise, they should  also
be meditated on during subsequent attainment. They should also be  similarly
meditated on during the path of preparation.
- Someone says: The aspects of the knowledges and forbearances of  the  path
of seeing have not been indicated  here.  They  are  indicated  in  the  4th
chapter in the context of  the  173  aspects.  The  aspects  have  not  been
indicated here. Instead, the benefits  that  will  arise  during  subsequent
attainment have been explicitly indicated.
Our system - the aspects have been indicated here. It is not that they  have
only been indicated in the context of the 173 aspects in the 4th chapter.
Q&A: It is not possible for a Mahayana path of seeing be  generated  on  the
basis of a desire realm mind.  Even  if  we  are  not  talking  about  newly
generating the Mahayana path of seeing, it is not possible. In  general,  it
cannot be generated on the basis of a desire realm mind.  Even  someone  who
has previously entered the Hinayana path cannot generate the  Mahayana  path
of seeing on the basis of a desire realm mind.
