Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/Personal notes/Personal notes- Peak Application PoS 1,2,3,4,5.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:11.595169
================================================================================


Peak application: the effect that is control
- The PA  is  explained  after  having  explained  the  AICA.  After  having
attained the AICA, which is practiced for the sake of gaining  control  over
the aspects of the 3EKs, one will attain control over  the  aspects  of  the
3EKs. Therefore, the PA is explained next.

Topic 1 PEAK APPLICATION OF THE HEAT
5.1         Viewing all phenomena as being like dreams
            Even in a dream and so forth,
            The twelve types of signs of the application
            That has gone to the peak are asserted.
-On the occasion of the PA of the heat level,  one  has  12  signs  of  this
application. These 12 signs are,  for  example,  viewing  all  phenomena  as
being like dreams, even in a dream. The condition for attaining  such  signs
is a powerful union of calm abiding and special insight.
-This  union  of  calm  abiding  and  special  insight   is   a   meditative
stabilization that is a union of calm abiding and special insight  observing
emptiness.
-This means that  before  this,  one  must  have  attained  a  calm  abiding
observing emptiness,  and  prior  to  this,  one  must  have  attained  calm
abiding. One also needs to have realized emptiness.
- We do not have calm abiding because we have serious distractions, or  very
strong scattering of the mind.
- The problem is that we will not be able to perform virtue that is of  good
quality. The virtue we perform becomes mixed with afflictions,  non-virtues,
and sometimes degenerates into something that is unspecified.  That  is  the
problem with the distracted, scattered mind.
- Sometimes our virtues  are  also  mixed  with  sleep,  anger,  attachment,
pride, jealousy, miserliness,  harmful  intent,  covetousness,  wrong  view,
etc. Thus it is very important to cultivate calm abiding.
- The practice of calm abiding can be divided into  two  parts:  the  actual
sessions and the intervals (or breaks) between the sessions.
- During the sessions, one is careful to watch the mind and place it on  the
object of observation.
-During the breaks, one should also be very careful and watch the mind,  and
not just relax and let the mind run wild. If one simply lets the mind go  in
whatever direction it wants during the breaks, then even though one is  very
careful during the actual sessions, there is no  way  one  can  attain  calm
abiding in this manner.
- The 12 types are the special signs on the occasion of having attained  the
clear realization of the peak.
- A bodhisattva abiding on the heat level of the PoP:
(1) due to having a very strong union of calm abiding  and  special  insight
observing emptiness during waking time, even on the occasion of dreams,  one
is able to view all  phenomena  as  being  like  dreams  with  a  meditative
stabilization.[“even in a dream”- means that when one is awake,  one  has  a
certain kind of behavior and one  is  able  to  display  the  same  kind  of
behavior even in a dream.]
(2) not generating a mind of joy towards  the  grounds  of  hearers  and  so
forth, even in a dream, due to the force of  having  familiarized  with  the
Mahayana generated mind. [In fact, a bodhisattva  will  know  the  paths  of
hearers and solitary  realizers.  He  also  generates  these  paths  in  his
continuum. Not only that; a bodhisattva,  upon  attaining  the  1st  ground,
attains  the  complete  class  of  realizations  of  hearers  and   solitary
realizers. When it says that a bodhisattva will not generate a mind  of  joy
towards the grounds  of  hearers  and  so  forth,  a  bodhisattva  does  not
generate a mind of joy towards  entering  the  grounds  of  hearers  and  so
forth.]
(3) he has attained the PA because he has attained the signs of the peak  of
seeing  tathagatas  surrounded  by  retinues  consisting  of   hundreds   of
thousands of trainees and teaching the Dharma and so forth even in a  dream,
through the force of having ripened the Mahayana roots of virtue to  not  be
deprived of seeing the buddhas
(4) observing in  a  dream  emanations  of  the  miraculous  powers  of  the
buddhas: levitating into space and then teaching the Dharma and so forth
(5) generating the mind of teaching the Dharma even in  a  dream,  thinking,
“Upon wakening, I shall teach sentient beings that all  phenomena  are  like
dreams”
(6) due to having previously seen sentient beings of the hells and so  forth
on the occasions of being awake and of a dream, recollecting to abandon  bad
migrations, thinking, “May even the names of bad migrations not exist in  my
buddha land”
(7) accomplishing the blessings of the truth that pacify burning cities  and
so forth when dreaming and awake. [This means that if a city is on fire,  by
a bodhisattva reciting words of truth, the fire will become  pacified  [will
die out.]
(8) accomplishing words of truth that annihilate non-humans,  yaksas  (harm-
giving spirits), and so forth by expressing the power of the  truth  when  a
man or a woman is seized by them on  the  occasion  of  being  awake.  [This
means that when someone is harmed by, for example, some type  of  non-human,
the bodhisattva accomplishes words of truth that frees them from the harm.]
(9) being without pride and relying on a spiritual guide who  outshines  the
actions  of  antagonistic  maras  through  one’s  clairvoyance  knowing  the
actions of maras
(10) training in the perfection of wisdom for others’ welfare in  all  types
of meditative equipoise and subsequent attainment
(11) not having adherence to any phenomenon as truly  existent  through  the
force of having realized emptiness with a wisdom arisen from meditation
(12) becoming close to a  buddha’s  enlightenment  due  to  abiding  on  the
faultlessness of a bodhisattva and so forth.
Topic 2  PEAK APPLICATION OF THE PEAK
5.2         The virtues of however many beings there are
            In Jambudvipa making offerings to the buddhas and so forth;
            Through analogies made in many ways,
            There are the natures of the sixteen increases.
- A bodhisattva on the PA of the peak has attained the  natures  of  the  16
increases in merit.
- Through analogies, it  is  said  that  the  bodhisattva’s  merit  is  even
greater than  the  virtue  of  sentient  beings  in  the  billionfold  world
systems, the beings in Jambudvipa and  so  forth  making  offerings  to  the
buddhas and so forth.
-When a bodhisattva creates virtue  conjoined  with  bodhicitta,  the  merit
created is limitless, the  reason  being  that  he  has  the  motivation  to
benefit all sentient beings,  and  all  sentient  beings  are  countless  in
number. Therefore the actions created while being conjoined with  bodhicitta
are of limitless merit.
- When  we  talk  about  the  “sentient  beings  in  the  billionfold  world
systems,” this is finite. A world system consists of  a  system  with  Mount
Meru and the four human continents, so the  billionfold  world  systems  are
finite, and the number of sentient beings in those world systems is  finite,
but all sentient beings are infinite in number.
- The entitinesses of the 16 occasions of having  attained  the  PA  of  the
peak are the increases in merit, due to the  attainment  of  superiority  of
each latter one over the former one.
-A bodhisattva who has attained the PA of the peak possesses an increase  in
merit because:-
—the following 8 types of merit that are mainly external due to  relying  on
other persons.
(1) he possesses  merit  greatly  exceeding  that  of  making  offerings  to
tathagatas by however many sentient beings  there  are  in  the  billionfold
world systems, Jambudvipa and so forth.
(2) he possesses  taking  to  mind  to  the  perfection  of  wisdom  through
possessing the two applications, merit  superior  to  that  1st  one.  [This
bodhisattva takes to mind the  perfection  of  wisdom  through  a  union  of
method and wisdom, i.e. through wisdom  being  conjoined  with  method,  and
method being conjoined with wisdom.]
(3) he  possesses  having  attained  forbearance  regarding  emptiness,  the
unproduced  phenomenon,  superior   to   that   2nd   one.[The   “unproduced
phenomenon” is emptiness.]
(4) through the strength of the PA, he realizes that  causal  and  resultant
phenomena -that which is to attain enlightenment  and  that  which  acts  to
attain enlightenment -are not observed as ultimately existent,  superior  to
that [former one].
(5) having attained great superiority over the attainment of the 10  virtues
and so forth, and the concentrations and formless  absorptions  of  sentient
beings in Jambudvipa
(6) respectfully and without causing harm, all classes  of  gods  come  near
before one who strives in the perfection of wisdom  of  the  peak.  [If  one
were to engage in the study and practice of the Dharma purely, one would  be
protected by the gods of the virtuous class.]
(7) outshining all maras through the force of the perfection  of  wisdom  of
the peak
(8) respecting other bodhisattvas, beings who have entered the same  vehicle
as himself, as if they are the Teacher, and abiding in similar trainings
- the following are 8 other types of merit that are mainly internal.
(9) through skill in the means of the two accumulations in  all  ways,  pure
trainings by way of the wisdom realizing dharmata with a wisdom arisen  from
meditation.
(10) he has attained transformation into a bearer of buddha lineage  through
the force of the perfection of wisdom of the peak
(11) he has attained  the  generated  mind  that  is  concomitant  with  the
applications and so forth, the cause of attaining the resultant buddhahood
(12) he has attained the excellent quality of not producing miserliness  and
so forth, minds that are discordant classes of  the  perfection  of  wisdom,
through the force of the perfection of wisdom of the peak
(13) he  has  attained  not  producing  a  mind  of  realization  possessing
manifest acquired conceptions of forms  and  so  forth  as  truly  existent,
through the force of the peak
(14) he has attained knowing how  to  practice  through  including  all  the
perfections within the perfection of wisdom
(15) he has attained all fulfillments of the classes of realizations of  the
3 vehicles through the wisdom arisen from meditation
(16) he has  attained  becoming  close  to  perfect  complete  enlightenment
through the force of the perfection of wisdom of the peak.
Topic 3  PEAK APPLICATION OF THE FORBEARANCE
- The reason for explaining the PA of forbearance after the PA  of  peak  is
given: through increases in merit in that way explained in  the  section  on
PA of peak, one has attained a stable realization of method and wisdom.
5.3         Unsurpassable thorough completion
            Of the qualities of the three exalted knowers of all and
            The thorough non-forsaking of the welfare of sentient beings
            Is called the “stability.”
- The forbearance level of the Mahayana PoP -there is a reason  for  calling
it the “stability” in sutra,  because  it  is  a  partial  concordance  with
definite discrimination that
(i) has  attained  unsurpassable  thorough  completion  of  the  classes  of
realizations  that  are  qualities  of  the  3EKs  of  all  included  within
realizations, one’s own welfare
(ii) has attained the thorough non-forsaking  of  the  welfare  of  sentient
beings through compassion, others’ welfare
- The thorough completion of the classes of realizations that are  qualities
of the 3EKs of all is actually attained on the 1st ground. This  means  that
the forbearance  level  of  the  PoP  has  attained  unsurpassable  thorough
completion of the  similitude  of  the  classes  of  realizations  that  are
qualities of the 3EKs included within  realizations.  Here  we  are  talking
about the PA of forbearance so one has not yet attained the 1st ground.  One
has completed the  similitude  of  the  classes  of  realizations  that  are
qualities of the 3EKs but one has not attained  the  unsurpassable  thorough
completion of the classes of realizations that are qualities of the 3EKs  of
all.
- It is incorrect to assert that one attains the 8th ground  through  merely
having attained the complete classes of realizations of  the  3EKs  and  the
completion of the classes of realizations is attained from the 9th ground.
- Our system- The complete classes of realizations of the 3EKs are  attained
on the 1st ground.
-The forbearance  level  of  the  Mahayana  PoP  is  the  peak  of  definite
stability,  because  it  is  the  3rd  partial  concordance  with   definite
discrimination that has attained special method and wisdom.
-It  has  attained  special  stable  method  because  it  has  attained  the
characteristic of thorough non-forsaking of the welfare of sentient  beings,
even  on  the  occasion  of  realizing  the  non-conceptualizing  meditative
equipoise by way of being conjoined with the  entity  of  actualizing  great
compassion, which observes sentient beings, through the strength of  perfect
skill in means that accomplishes others’ welfare in that way.
    -During meditative equipoise, great compassion is not manifest,  but  it
is through the force of great compassion that  one  enters  into  meditative
equipoise. For this reason, the passage says “meditative equipoise,  by  way
of being conjoined with the entity of actualizing great compassion.”
    - Through meditative equipoise being conjoined  with  great  compassion,
the wisdom realizing emptiness benefits, or assists, great  compassion,  and
great compassion benefits, or assists, the wisdom realizing emptiness.
   -When one realizes emptiness, one realizes the possibility of  liberation
and enlightenment, and the possibility of becoming free from the  two  types
of obscurations. One knows it is possible to abandon them.
   -Although this is the case,  one  also  sees  that  sentient  beings  are
unaware of this method  and  they  accumulate  karma  to  circle  in  cyclic
existence through the force of afflictions. Seeing that sentient beings,  as
a result, are tormented by suffering, one’s  compassion  becomes  especially
strong. In this way, the realization of emptiness benefits compassion.
  -When  one  cultivates  compassion,  one  sees  how  sentient  beings  are
tormented by suffering and under the control of  afflictions.  One  examines
how sentient beings can become free from suffering, and one sees that to  be
free from suffering, they need to be free  from  the  principal  affliction,
ignorance.  Therefore,  one  realizes  the  need  to  cultivate  the  wisdom
realizing emptiness to counteract ignorance. One then becomes  motivated  to
cultivate the wisdom realizing emptiness to benefit others and  to  be  able
to attain enlightenment. In that way, the practice  of  compassion  benefits
the cultivation of the realization of emptiness.
-It  has  attained  special  stable  wisdom  because  it  has  attained  the
unsurpassable thorough completion of the classes of  realizations  that  are
the 30 topics of the 3EKs of all, the EKAA and so forth. [The 30 topics  are
from the 1st three chapters -10 for the EKAA, 11 for the KP, and 9  for  the
KB.
Topic 4:  PEAK APPLICATION OF THE SUPREME MUNDANE QUALITY
- The reason for explaining the PA of SMQ after the PA of  forbearance:  the
realization of method and wisdom have been made stable by the  peak  of  the
forbearance, and on SMQ, there is the characteristic of  method  and  wisdom
that becomes definitely stable. This is the always abiding mind.
5.4         Through analogies made of the four continents and
            A thousand, a million, and the billion world systems,
            The meditative stabilization is
            Proclaimed by immense merit.
- Although there is so much earth in the four continents and  so  forth  and
water in these billionfold  world  systems,  the  amount  of  earth  can  be
measured with a scale, and the amount  of  water  can  be  measured  with  a
strand of hair. It is said that the merit of rejoicing  in  the  virtues  of
the four types of bodhisattvas is far greater than that. In comparison,  the
merit of a bodhisattva on the SMQ level is even greater than that.
- The amount of particles of earth in the four continents and so  forth  and
the billionfold world systems can be determined with weighing scales
- The amount of water in those world systems  can  be  determined  with  the
number of drops that are taken up with the tip of a strand of hair
- Compare to that, the merit of rejoicing in the virtues of the 4  types  of
bodhisattvas is greater and it is far more superior
- Compare to that, the merit of the SMQ level is even greater and  far  more
superior than the merit of rejoicing in  the  virtues  of  the  4  types  of
bodhisattvas.
- Rejoicing in the virtues of the 4 types of  bodhisattvas  can  take  place
very quickly, in the time it takes to snap one’s fingers. You do not need  a
countless great eon.
- But in order to attain the SMQ level of the Mahayana PoP,  one  needs  one
countless great eon. The bodhisattva on the SMQ level has been  accumulating
merit for one countless great  eon.  During  this  period,  the  bodhisattva
accumulates  many  merits,  including  rejoicing  in  the  merits  of  other
bodhisattvas. Therefore you can see that the merit of  the  SMQ  is  greater
than that of rejoicing in the virtues of the 4 types of bodhisattvas.
- If one is of lower realization, and rejoices in a  bodhisattva  of  higher
level offering a stick of incense, for example, one gets half the  merit  of
offering a stick of incense, not half the merit of what the bodhisattva  has
accumulated in a countless great eon.
- The 4 types of bodhisattvas are:
   1. one who actually generates the first mind of enlightenment: this is  a
      bodhisattva on the PoA or PoP.
   2. one who has engaged in deeds: the bodhisattvas on the first 7 grounds;
   3. one who is irreversible: bodhisattvas on the 3 pure grounds (8th,  9th
      & 10th);
   4. one who  is  obstructed  by  one  rebirth:  10th  ground  bodhisattvas
      obstructed by one rebirth.
These 4 types of bodhisattvas includes all bodhisattvas  from  the  path  of
accumulation through the 10th  ground.
Topic 5  PEAK APPLICATION OF THE PATH OF SEEING
- After having explained the PA of the PoP, now the PA of the  PoS  will  be
explained.
-  There  are  4  types  of  discordant  classes  and  their   corresponding
antidotes.
5.5         The conceptualizations of apprehendeds
            With respect to engagement and turning away
            Are to be individually known as the natures of nine,
            As the natures not as the objects are.
- The first the two types of conceptions of apprehendeds are:
1. Conceptualizations of  apprehendeds  with  respect  to  engagement.  E.g.
   through observing the bodhisattvas’ true  paths,  adherence  to  them  as
   truly existent objects of engagement.
2. Conceptualizations of apprehendeds with respect  to  turning  away.  E.g.
   through observing the true paths of hearers, adherence to them  as  truly
   existent objects to be turned away from, relative  to  the  Mahayana.  In
   general, hearers’ true paths are not to be turned away from, but relative
   to the Mahayana, they are to be turned away from.
 - conceptualizations of  apprehendeds  are  conceptualizations  related  to
   objects
 - conceptualizations of apprehenders are related to object-possessors.

- Q&A: The accomplishment of a pure land depends on the  karma  of  sentient
beings as well as the accomplisher of that pure land. This  is  why  we  say
that a person who wants to accomplish a  pure  land  needs  to  establish  a
connection with sentient beings. It is through  depending  on  both  oneself
and other sentient beings that this pure land  comes  about.  A  bodhisattva
enacts the welfare of sentient beings, and thus tries to establish a  karmic
connection with sentient beings as much as possible.  Both  the  application
of a pure land and the pure land itself depend on one’s training and on  the
karma of sentient beings. If one does not train, this pure land will not  be
actualized. If sentient beings do not have the karma, this  pure  land  will
also not be actualized.
Q&A: It is said that there are many prayers of bodhisattvas that  cannot  be
accomplished.  Bodhisattvas  do  make  prayers  that  in  fact   cannot   be
accomplished like “may samsara be empty,” “may the hell realms be  emptied,”
etc. For instance, if a bodhisattva were  to  sincerely  promise  to  attain
buddhahood only after all sentient beings have attained buddhahood,  due  to
the force  of  this  virtuous  mind,  the  bodhisattva  would  complete  the
gathering of the accumulations very quickly and actually  attain  buddhahood
before all sentient beings attained buddhahood.
If a bodhisattva has a very strong  wish  to  benefit  sentient  beings  and
makes very powerful prayers, due to the strength of the mind of  compassion,
he would complete the accumulations very quickly, and as a result  of  that,
attain buddhahood quickly.  For  example,  in  the  practice  of  tong  len,
although one visualizes taking on  the  suffering  of  sentient  beings  and
giving happiness to them, it does not happen in reality. A  bodhisattva  has
this very strong wish to release sentient beings from their  sufferings  and
to take on their sufferings. Through this  practice  of  tong  len,  it  can
happen that, for example, one actually recovers when one is sick.
Q&A:If a person is of indefinite lineage and enters  the  Hinayana  vehicle,
as soon as he starts to abandon the objects of abandonment of  the  PoM,  he
will not turn away from the Hinayana vehicle. He will definitely proceed  to
attain the state of Hinayana foe-destroyer.
- There are two types of conceptualizations of apprehendeds:
   1. Those with respect to engagement - the apprehendeds  that  are  to  be
      engaged in by bodhisattvas.
   2. Those with respect to turning away - the  apprehendeds  to  be  turned
      away from by bodhisattvas.
- The objects to be abandoned by the PoS that  are  conceptualizations  with
respect to these two types of apprehendeds:
   - (1) the apprehendeds (that are paths as well as the  results  conjoined
with the wisdom  realizing  that  the  objects  to  be  engaged  in  of  the
bodhisattvas are not observed as truly existent) adopted by bodhisattvas
   - (2) the apprehendeds (by means of the dharmas of  the  hearers  and  so
forth, the entitinesses that observe the objects to be turned away  from  as
truly existent) discarded by bodhisattvas
as truly existent.  The  objects  to  be  abandoned  by  the  PoS  that  are
conceptualizations with respect to apprehendeds are the  discordant  classes
of the PA of PoS, like the afflictions that are to be abandoned by the  PoS,
because they act to hinder the production of  that.  [This  means  that  the
apprehendeds are good, but the conceptualizations of them as truly  existent
are to be abandoned.]
-the paths as well  as  the  results  of  hearers  that  are  bound  by  the
conception of true existence that are  to  be  discarded  as  they  are  the
objects to be turned away from by bodhisattvas. Note that  these  paths  and
results of hearers in general are not objects to be turned  away  from,  but
relative to bodhisattvas, they are objects to be turned away from..
There are two levels of the conceptions of apprehendeds in general:
 1. innate conceptualizations
 2. acquired conceptualizations.
- In this context, the objects of abandonment of the PoS  are  the  acquired
conceptualizations  with  respect  to  apprehendeds.  They  are   discordant
classes because they act to hinder the production of the PoS.
- When  we  use  the  expression  “conceptualizations  of  apprehendeds”  or
“conceptualizations with  respect  to  apprehendeds”  the  apprehendeds  are
precisely the observed objects of the conceptualizations.  For  example,  we
can posit the paths and results of  bodhisattvas.  We  can  also  posit  the
paths and results of hearers. These objects/apprehendeds are adhered  to  as
truly existent objects of utilization by these conceptualizations.
- There are 9 types of conceptualizations with respect to apprehendeds  that
are to be engaged in.
- There are 9 types of conceptualizations with respect to apprehendeds  that
are to be turned away from.
- These divisions exist through divisions of the objects.
- These conceptualizations adhere to their objects in erroneous way, not  in
a way that accords with reality.
- There are two types of the conceptions of apprehenders that are  knowledge
obscurations:
  1. Apprehenders of substantial existence
  2. Apprehenders of imputed existence
- The  conceptions  of  apprehenders  are  basically  the  conceptions  that
observe apprehenders.
- An apprehender of substantial existence is an  apprehender  that  observes
substantial existence. There is an  apprehender  that  observes  substantial
existence and there is a conception  that  takes  this  apprehender  as  its
observed object.
- In this context the  conceptualization/conception  of  an  apprehender  of
substantial existence that is a knowledge obscuration.
- The conception observes an apprehender of substantial existence,  and  the
apprehender observes substantial existence.
- In the text, conceptions of apprehendeds and conceptions  of  apprehenders
are  mentioned  without  the   qualification   that   they   are   knowledge
obscurations, but you must understand that the conceptions in  this  context
are knowledge obscurations.
- A conception of an apprehender of imputed existence that  is  a  knowledge
obscuration  observes  an  apprehender  of  imputed  existence,   and   that
apprehender observes imputed existence.
5.6abc      Through the divisions of ordinary beings and aryas,
            With respect to sentient beings  as  substantial  existents  and
imputed existents,
            The apprehenders, conceptualizations are asserted.
- When  we  talk  about  conceptions  of  apprehendeds  and  conceptions  of
apprehenders:
   -Conceptions of apprehendeds are conceptions with respect to objects
  - Conceptions of apprehenders are  conceptions  with  respect  to  object-
possessors.
- In general, any object of knowledge is an apprehended.
- In this context we are using the word “apprehended” in a  specific  sense.

- A conception of apprehendeds  [that  is  a  knowledge  obscuration]  is  a
conception that, through observing  an  apprehended  that  is  its  observed
object, adheres to it as a truly existent object of utilization.
- A conception of apprehenders  [that  is  a  knowledge  obscuration]  is  a
conception that, through observing  an  apprehender  that  is  its  observed
object, adheres to it as a truly existent utilizer.
- For an imputed existent to dawn to the mind, another object needs to  dawn
to the mind i.e. in order for an imputed existent to dawn to  the  mind,  it
relies on another object.
- For a substantial existent to dawn to the mind, another  object  does  not
need to dawn to the mind i.e. it does not rely on another object for  it  to
dawn to the mind.
-  The  aggregates  that  are  the  bases  of  imputation  are   substantial
existents, while a person is an imputed existent. Actually,  there  is  some
awkwardness to simply posit the  5  aggregates  in  general  as  substantial
existents. It is more comfortable if we posit the form aggregate,  which  we
can perceive. In order for the form aggregate to dawn to the  mind,  another
object is not relied on,  but  for  a  person  to  dawn  to  the  mind,  the
aggregates are relied on, and the aggregates are not the person.
5.6d  Those are individually the natures of nine.
5.7         If they are asserted to be the apprehenders of any,
            The apprehended objects in reality,
            Then those would be of the characteristic of
            Being empty of the entities of apprehenders in that way.
- There are 9 types of conceptions of apprehenders of substantial  existence

- There are 9 types of conceptions of apprehenders of imputed existence.
- These are divisions due to objects because there are 9  types  of  objects
each, therefore there are 9 types of  conceptions  each.  These  conceptions
adhere to true existence, so are mistaken consciousnesses.
- “It follows that it is inappropriate that they  are  asserted  to  be  the
apprehenders of any object that  accords  with  reality,  because  they  are
mistaken  consciousnesses  whose  apprehended  objects  do  not   exist   in
reality.”-the “apprehended objects” refer to objects of adherence.
- The objects of adherence of these conceptions do not exist in reality,  so
they are mistaken consciousnesses.
- The 9 conceptions are conceptions of  true  existence.  Their  objects  of
adherence actually do not exist.
- In the phrase “It follows that it is inappropriate that they are  asserted
to be the apprehenders of any object  that  accords  with  reality,  because
they are mistaken consciousnesses,”  in  this  context,  they  are  actually
wrong consciousnesses, although the  text  says  that  they  are  “mistaken”
consciousnesses.
- “If that is accepted” means if “that it is  inappropriate  that  they  are
asserted to be the apprehenders of any object that accords with reality”  is
accepted, “then those conceptions would be of the  characteristic  of  being
empty of the entities of unmistaken apprehenders in that way.”
- Geshela’s interpretation on the underlined part is that:
  -  the conceptions that apprehend objects that  accord  with  reality  are
not mistaken apprehenders - they are unmistaken apprehenders and
   - their objects are emptinesses.
because that  -it  is  inappropriate  that  they  are  asserted  to  be  the
apprehenders of any object that accords with reality -is accepted.
-The conceptualizations with respect to apprehenders that are objects to  be
abandoned by the Mahayana PoS are the discordant classes of the  PA  of  the
PoS because they act to hinder the production of that.
-These apprehenders of substantially existent beings exist in  the  continua
of ordinary beings
-The apprehenders of imputedly existent beings  exist  in  the  continua  of
arya persons.
- These kinds of explanations are probably given from the point of  view  of
what is mainly possessed by ordinary beings and arya  persons  because  some
texts mention that in the continua of ordinary beings,  there  are  manifest
conceptions of true existence, and in the continua of  arya  persons,  there
are no manifest conceptions of true existence.
- They are consciousnesses that do not apprehend  that  according  with  the
reality of objects.
- Q&A: “all phenomena appearing like dreams” means that they  appear  to  be
empty of true existence, like illusions. We would say  that  true  existence
appears to the knowledge obscurations in the continuum of  the  bodhisattva,
but they do not appear  to  the  8th  ground  bodhisattva.  These  knowledge
obscurations are conceptions of true existence. An  8th  ground  bodhisattva
still has the conception of true existence.
- There are no manifest conceptions of true existence in  the  continuum  of
the 8th ground bodhisattva. If the conception  of  true  existence  were  to
manifest, then true existence would appear to  the  person.  True  existence
never appears to a bodhisattva on the 8th ground.  Whatever appears  appears
empty of true existence, like illusions.
- True existence  appears  to  a  mental  consciousness,  but  there  is  no
pervasion that it appears to the mental consciousness that is the  basis  of
characterization of person. This is because there are many types  of  mental
consciousnesses, such as the mental  consciousness  realizing  selflessness,
the  mental   consciousness   realizing   impermanence,   and   the   mental
consciousness that is conventional bodhicitta.  The  conventional  generated
mind is a special mental consciousness of a person. It is a  special  mental
knower.
-How are conceptualizations of the 1st  type  of  apprehendeds  bearing  the
support of that to be engaged in of 9 types?
-There are 9 types of apprehendeds to be engaged in.
5.8   The entitiness, lineage,
            The perfect accomplishment of the path,
            The unmistaken observed object of a knower,
            The discordant classes and antidotes,
5.9   One’s own realizations, making,
            The actions of that, and the result of activity:
            The conceptualizations bearing  the  support  of  the  class  of
engagement in them
            Are asserted to be of nine types.
- The conceptualizations of the  1st  type  of  apprehendeds,  the  9  types
bearing the support of the class of engagement that adhere  to  “objects  to
be engaged in as objects to be apprehended  with  respect  to  the  Mahayana
paths as well as results” as  truly  existent  objects  of  utilization  are
asserted to be objects to be abandoned by the occasions of  the  application
of the Mahayana PoS because they are conceptions  that  act  to  hinder  the
production of that. [“That” refers to the PoS. You could also say it  refers
to the uninterrupted path of the PoS because when the PoS is  attained,  one
attains the uninterrupted path of the PoS.]
There are 9 objects of the conceptualizations.
- First the generality -the Mahayana paths and results  -is  explained,  and
after that, the particularities.
- The bodhisattva’s objects of engagement as a generality
(1)  The  Mahayana  paths  and  results,  the   entitiness   of   attainment
conventionally, even though unsurpassable enlightenment devoid  of  ultimate
existence is not realized and not attained ultimately by the  6  perfections
devoid of ultimate existence are the bodhisattvas’  objects  of  engagement,
because they are their objects of practice.

- The particularities of the bodhisattvas’  objects  of  engagement  have  3
divisions:
      A. cause of the Mahayana path.
     B. entities of the Mahayana path.
     C. results  of the Mahayana path.
A. Cause of the path
(2) Bodhisattvas become definite in the Buddha lineage,  due  to  definitely
entering the immovable ground and so  forth.  “To  become  definite  in  the
Buddha lineage” means the bodhisattvas definitely enter the  Mahayana  path.
The reason is  “due  to  definitely  entering  the  immovable  ground.  This
“immovable  ground”  does  not  refer  to   the   8th   bodhisattva   ground
“Immovable,” but it means definitely entering the  Mahayana  without  moving
to other grounds. It has the sense of not moving to  other  paths  i.e.  not
moving to the grounds of hearers and solitary realizers.

B. Entities of the path have 3 divisions
      B1. Actual path
      B2. Objects of observation of the path
      B3. Ability to destroy the objects of abandonment
B1. Actual path [“actual paths” refer to the Mahayana PoS, PoM and PoNML]
3. Bodhisattvas perfectly accomplish the paths of seeing and so  forth,  due
to realizing all phenomena as empty of true existence, like illusions.
B2. Objects of observation of the path
4. They observe unmistaken objects of observation  of  consciousnesses,  due
to understanding  all  phenomena  are  exhausted  in  being  mere  appearing
images.  [The  “consciousnesses”  refer  to  the  Mahayana  knowers.   These
unmistaken objects of observation of  consciousnesses  are  the  objects  of
observation of the paths.]
B3. Ability to destroy the objects of abandonment
5. They have  attained  a  special  ability  to  eliminate  the  objects  of
abandonment,  because  of  having  attained  the  ability  to  produce   the
antidotes to the  knowledge  obscurations  and  to  destroy  the  discordant
classes, due to adopting that is  preceded  by  having  seen  the  excellent
qualities and discarding that is preceded by having seen the faults.

C. Results of the path gas two divisions:
      C1. One’s welfare
      C2. Others’ welfare
C1. One’s welfare
6. EKAA has attained the  final  realization  of  Mahayana  itself,  due  to
separation from all stains  of  any  realization.  [For  one’s  welfare,  we
should actually posit  the  attainment  of  the  final  realization  of  the
Mahayana itself. The final realization is one’s welfare.]
C2.Others’ welfare has 3 divisions:
    i. Ability to enact others’ welfare
   ii. Actions of others’ welfare
  iii. Results of others’ welfare
i. Ability to enact others’ welfare
7. EKAA acts to keep the grounds of the hearers and so  forth  distant  with
respect to those who are  definite  in  the  Mahayana  lineage,  because  of
setting them in the Mahayana paths and results, due to  the  inferiority  of
the hearers’ paths and the non-sublimity of the results.[This expresses  the
ability of the EKAA to enact others’ welfare.]
ii. Actions of others’ welfare
8. EKAA possesses actions of sentient beings’ welfare, because  of  enacting
others’ welfare through emanating as Indra and so forth in  accordance  with
the mentality of trainees.
iii. Results of others’ welfare.  [Due  to  the  EKAA  knowing  exactly  the
mentality of trainees,  it  enacts  sentient  beings’  welfare,  because  of
enacting others’ welfare through emanating as Indra and so forth.]
9. EKAA engages by way of faultlessness  with  respect  to  the  results  of
placing all beings who are the 3  lineage-bearers  in  nirvana,  because  of
acting in that way through the force of perfect skillful means  in  enacting
others’ welfare.
[The results of others’ welfare refers to the 3  results  -the  nirvanas  of
the 3 lineage-bearers -because of acting in that way through  the  force  of
perfect skillful means in enacting others’ welfare.]
- “Perfect skillful means in enacting others’ welfare” means that  the  EKAA
does not insist on teaching the Mahayana to every trainee,  but  checks  the
interests and dispositions of the trainees.
   -For those who are suitable to be taught the hearer vehicle,  the  hearer
vehicle is taught.
   -For those who are suitable to be taught the solitary  realizer  vehicle,
the solitary realizer vehicle is taught.
   -For those who are suitable  to  be  taught  the  Mahayana  vehicle,  the
Mahayana vehicle is taught.
Due to this, there is perfect skillful means in enacting others' welfare.]
Conceptions of apprehendeds to be turned away from
-How are conceptualizations of the 2nd  type  of  apprehendeds  bearing  the
support of that to be turned away from of 9 types?
5.10  Due to having fallen into cyclic existence and solitary peace,
            Lesser realizations,
            Lacking a tutor,
            An incomplete type of path,
5.11  Progressing through the conditions of others,
            A wrong object of intent,
            Trifling, various,
            Those confused about abiding and engaging,
5.12  Accompanying:
            These conceptualizations, the natures of nine,
            Bearing the support of the class to be turned away from
            Arise in the minds of hearers and so forth.
- The paths as well as  the  results  of  hearers  that  are  bound  by  the
conception of true existence that are  to  be  discarded  as  they  are  the
objects to be turned away from by bodhisattvas.
- There are 9 types of these conceptions  which  are  divisions  by  way  of
objects.
- One of these  objects:  “the  paths  of  hearers  and  solitary  realizers
[being] lesser realizations due  to  having  fallen  into  the  extremes  of
cyclic existence and solitary peace and so forth.”
- The conceptualizations of the 2nd type with respect to  apprehendeds,  the
9 types of conceptions of  apprehendeds  in  which  those  arising  as  mere
objects to be adopted in the continua  of  hearers  and  solitary  realizers
have been taken as objects, bearing the support of the class  to  be  turned
away from by bodhisattvas are asserted to be objects to be abandoned by  the
occasions of the uninterrupted path engaging the minds  and  mental  factors
of the PoS of the bodhisattvas, because their seeds are destroyed by it.
-There are 9 adherences to the objects to  be  turned  away  from  as  truly
existent by way of objects: those said to  be  objects  to  be  turned  away
from, in not being objects to be upheld in  the  continua  of  bodhisattvas,
since the paths and results of hearers are together with flaws.
- The 9 types of conceptions of apprehendeds to  be  turned  away  from  are
subsumed under 5 categories:
  1. Lesser realizations, the paths and results  of  hearers  and  solitary
     realizers
  2. Lesser tutor, the empowering condition
  3. Lesser method for achieving the two welfares
  4. Degeneration from special abandonments and realizations
  5. Degeneration through not attaining the special path and result
1. Lesser realizations, the  paths  and  results  of  hearers  and  solitary
realizers
(1) The hearers and solitary realizers are of lesser  realizations  compared
to persons of the Mahayana, due to having  fallen  into  either  nirvana  or
samsara even though they have entered the path to liberation.
  -Compared to the realizations of the Mahayana, the paths  and  results  of
hearers and solitary realizers are lesser realizations.
  - In this context, it talks about hearers and  solitary  realizers  having
fallen into either nirvana or samsara relative to a conventional base.
2. Lesser tutor, the empowering condition
(2) The hearers and solitary realizers lack a tutor who holds  them  with  a
special path, due to separation from a spiritual guide  who  is  skilled  in
means.
- A supreme emanation  body  has  in  his  retinue  trainees  of  all  three
vehicles. If that is the case, then the supreme emanation body serves  as  a
tutor also to hearers and solitary realizers. This means that  there  is  no
basis for saying that the tutor of the Mahayana trainees is superior to  the
tutor of hearer and solitary realizer trainees. So from the  perspective  of
the tutor being a supreme emanation body, then we cannot say that the  tutor
is lesser with respect to hearers and solitary realizers.
- However, from the perspective of the way the  tutor  takes  care  of,  the
hearers and solitary realizers is different from the  way  the  tutor  takes
care of the Mahayana trainees. Then we can say that the way of  taking  care
of the trainees is different,  and  lesser,  with  respect  to  hearers  and
solitary realizers.
- With respect to the Mahayana trainees, the tutor would reveal  the  entire
path to enlightenment, whereas with respect to hearer and solitary  realizer
trainees, the tutor would not reveal the entire path.  From  that  point  of
view, we can say that the tutors  of  hearers  and  solitary  realizers  are
lesser. Therefore, this concept of “lesser” is  really  explained  from  the
point of view of the trainees.
- “due to separation from a spiritual guide who is skilled in  means”  -  If
we consider the tutor to be a supreme emanation body, of course  this  tutor
is a spiritual  guide  who  is  skilled  in  means.  Therefore  hearers  and
solitary  realizers  are  not  separated  from  a  spiritual  guide  who  is
separated from skill in means.
- The supreme emanation body is a spiritual guide who is skilled  in  means,
but because of the trainees -hearers and  solitary  realizers  -we  say  the
supreme emanation body does not reveal the entire  path.  For  that  reason,
hearers and solitary realizers are said to be held by  a  lesser  tutor,  or
separated from a spiritual guide who is skilled in means.
- From the side of the spiritual guide, he is a  tutor  who  is  skilled  in
means.
-If the disciples are not suitable vessels, the tutor is not able to  reveal
the entire path of method and wisdom. For this reason, it is said that  from
the side of the trainees, this  tutor  is  a  lesser  tutor,  and  that  the
trainees are separated from a spiritual guide who is skilled in means.
3.Lesser method for achieving others’ welfare has 3 divisions:
      3A. Lesser method for achieving others’ welfare
      3B. Lesser method for achieving one’s welfare
      3C. Lesser method for achieving the welfares of both
3A. Lesser method for achieving others’ welfare
(3)  The  hearers  and  solitary  realizers  is  an  incomplete   path   for
accomplishing others’ welfare, due to  being  able  to  abandon  merely  the
afflictive obscurations and the knowledge obscurations that are  conceptions
of  apprehendeds.  They  are  not  a  complete  antidote  to  all  knowledge
obscurations.
   - Due to not exhaustively abandoning  both  the  afflictive  obscurations
and the knowledge obscurations, hearers and solitary realizers are not  able
to achieve others’ welfare, so in that sense they have a lesser  method  for
achieving others’ welfare.
  - “knowledge obscurations that are conceptions of  apprehendeds”  are  the
conceptions of apprehendeds as external objects.
3B.Lesser method for achieving one’s welfare
(4) The hearers and solitary realizers progress to  liberation  through  the
condition of others, due to  relying  upon  the  oral  instructions  of  the
tathagatas and so forth even in the life  they  attain  the  state  of  foe-
destroyer.
   -There are Mahayanists who rely on the instructions of tathagatas in  the
life in which they attain the state of foe-destroyer. There  are  also  some
hearers who rely on the instructions of tathagatas and  so  forth  in  their
last life, and there are hearers  who  do  not.  The  3  types  of  trainees
-hearers, solitary realizers, and bodhisattvas - are  the  same  in  needing
instructions  before  attaining   their   respective   enlightenments.   The
difference is that after bodhisattvas  attain  enlightenment,  they  do  not
need any more instructions because they are buddhas, but after  hearers  and
solitary realizers attain  their  enlightenments,  they  need  instructions,
because otherwise they will not enter the Mahayana path.


3C.Lesser method for achieving the welfares of both
(5) The hearers and solitary realizers possess a  wrong  object  of  intent,
due to desiring to attain liberation for the sake of themselves alone.  They
do not engage the objects of intent: the 3 greatnesses, the  great  mind  of
the supremacy of all sentient beings and so forth.
   - Hearers and solitary realizers have a lesser method for  achieving  the
welfares of both because they desire to attain liberation for  the  sake  of
themselves alone, so they are not able to perfectly fulfill the welfares  of
both. In some way they can achieve  the  welfares  of  both  themselves  and
others, but there is no way they can perfectly fulfill the welfares of  both
oneself  and  others.  On  the  other  hand,  if  one  engages   the   three
greatnesses, one has  a  special  method  for  perfectly  accomplishing  the
welfares of both oneself and others.
Degeneration from special abandonments and realizations has two divisions:
      i. Lesser abandonments
      ii. Lesser realizations
i. Lesser abandonments
(6) The hearers and solitary realizers possess the  actions  of  a  path  of
trifling abandonments, due to cultivating the mere  antidote  to  afflictive
obscurations.
    -Only hearers cultivate the mere antidote  to  afflictive  obscurations.
Solitary realizers, in addition to cultivating the antidotes  to  afflictive
obscurations,  also  cultivate  the  antidotes  to  the   coarse   knowledge
obscurations. So from the point of view of comparing them with the  Mahayana
abandonments, hearers and solitary realizers possess the actions of  a  path
of trifling abandonments relative to the Mahayana.
ii. Lesser realizations
(7) The hearers and solitary realizers  possess  the  different  classes  of
higher and lower realizations, the first result  of  stream-enterer  and  so
forth, because of acting to attain the four results gradually through  being
together with the observation of the bases and paths as truly existent.
   -“Lesser realizations” refers to realizations that  are  lesser  compared
to those of the Mahayana.
   - “and so forth” includes the other three  results:  once-returner,  non-
returner, and foe-destroyer. The reason is “because of acting to attain  the
four results gradually through being together with the  observation  of  the
bases and paths as truly existent.”
Degeneration through not attaining the  special  path  and  result  has  two
divisions:
      i. Degeneration through not attaining the special path
      ii. Degeneration through not attaining the special result
i. Degeneration through not attaining the special path
(8) The hearers and solitary realizers do not know abidance on the  Mahayana
path and progression by way of that path as long as they have  not  attained
the extreme of solitary peace, due to not having abandoned all latencies  of
ignorance through abiding on the mere Hinayana path.
   - Here it means that these hearers and solitary  realizers  first  attain
the extreme of solitary peace, and then enter the Mahayana path. So as  long
as they have not attained the extreme  of  solitary  peace,  they  will  not
enter the Mahayana path, but of course there is  no  pervasion.  This  is  a
general explanation.
ii. Degeneration through not attaining the special result
(9) The hearers and solitary realizers are to progress  to  and  attain  the
exalted knower of all aspects at the  end  of  all  nirvanas,  because  that
exalted knower of all aspects is the finality due to  encompassing  all  the
classes of Mahayana abandonments and realizations.
- In general, hearers and solitary realizers do not enter the Mahayana  path
as long as they have not attained the extreme  of  solitary  peace.  Due  to
this, they have degeneration through not attaining the special  result.  The
special result being buddhahood. Due to attaining the result of  a  Hinayana
foe-destroyer, these hearers  and  solitary  realizers  do  not  attain  the
special result of omniscience.  They  will  attain  the  special  result  of
buddhahood later.

- How are conceptualizations of apprehenders of the  1st  type  of  ordinary
beings bearing the support of substantially existent beings of 9 types?
5.13  Upholds and discards,
            Attention, closely related
            To all three realms,
            Abiding, adhering,
5.14  Imputing things that are phenomena,
            Grasping, antidotes, and
            Impaired progress as desired:
            The first type of apprehenders is to be understood.
-  There  are  9  types  of  conceptions  of  apprehenders  of   substantial
existence.
-There are 4 types of conceptions that are object of abandonment.
      - For conceptions of apprehendeds, there are 2 types:
  1. conceptions of apprehendeds to be engaged in
  2. conceptions of apprehendeds to be turned away from
      - For conceptions of apprehenders, there are 2 types:
  1. conceptions of apprehenders of substantial existence
  2. conceptions of apprehenders of imputed existence
- Each of these 4 types is sub-divided into 9 divisions.
- We have many objects of abandonment -  there  are  36  conceptions  to  be
abandoned.
-  When  we  talk  about  the  presence  of  36  objects   of   abandonment,
correspondingly there are 36 uninterrupted paths (the direct antidotes)  and
36 liberated paths (the paths in which the objects of abandonment have  been
abandoned).
- These 36 uninterrupted paths and 36 liberated paths are posited  from  the
point of view of isolates. In fact there is just one uninterrupted path  and
one liberated path.
- The manifest conceptions are easier to abandon, they  have  actually  been
abandoned prior to the liberated path of the  PA  of  PoS.  They  have  been
abandoned on the PoP. Although there is  this  explanation,  this  does  not
mean that  there  are  two  liberated  paths  in  which  the  seeds  of  the
conceptions have been abandoned. There is just one liberated path that is  a
path in which the seeds of the conceptions have been abandoned.
- The manifest conceptions are easier to abandon, so even on  the  PoP  they
are said to have been abandoned, but this does not mean that the  seeds  are
abandoned in two stages. In fact, there is just one liberated  path  posited
in which the seeds have been abandoned. There are not two liberated paths.
-  In  the  context  of  the  PoP,  we  talked  about  the  conceptions   of
apprehendeds of the  thoroughly  afflicted  class  and  the  conceptions  of
apprehendeds of the completely pure class. Here we  are  talking  about  the
conceptions of  apprehendeds  to  be  engaged  in  and  the  conceptions  of
apprehendeds to be turned away from.
- In the context of the PoP, the 4 types  of  conceptions  are  said  to  be
suppressed  in  the  order  of  the  4  levels  of  the  PoP:  heat,   peak,
forbearance, and SMQ. The manifest forms of these  4  types  of  conceptions
are respectively suppressed on the 4 levels of the PoP.
- The sequence for the abandonment is explained from the point  of  view  of
the difficulty of suppressing the manifest forms of these conceptions.
- In the context of the PoS, we do not have this sequential abandonment.  In
fact, the seeds of the 4 types of  acquired  conceptions  are  abandoned  by
just one  uninterrupted  path,  and  the  state  in  which  they  have  been
abandoned is posited as just one liberated path.
- When we talk about the PA of PoS, we are just talking about  the  path  of
seeing.
A. Degeneration from the causes of the exalted knower of all aspects
B. Degeneration from the result, the exalted knower of all aspects
A. Degeneration from the causes of the exalted knower of all aspects  has  3
divisions
      A1. Adherence to behavior
      A2. Adherence to objects of knowledge
      A3. Adherence to objects of abandonment and antidotes
A1. Adherence to behavior has 3 divisions
      A1A. Adherence to objects to be adopted and objects to be discarded
      A1B. Motivation of that, attention to true existence
      A1C. Drawback of that
A1A. Adherence to objects to be adopted and objects to be discarded
(1)  Aherence  to  the  apprehender  of  the  person  (upholding   excellent
qualities and relinquishing faults, who, although not  existing  ultimately,
is like an illusion conventionally) as substantially  existent  as  a  truly
existent utilizer that is included within acquired  objects  of  abandonment
of the PA of PoS because the seeds of it are  directly  destroyed  by  that.
[In other words, there is an apprehender  of  the  person  as  substantially
existent; then there is adherence to this apprehender as  a  truly  existent
utilizer (this adherence is a conception of an apprehender)].
- As there are two types of apprehension of substantial existence:
      (i) the apprehension of a person as being able to perform a function
      (ii) the apprehension of a person  as  self-sufficient,  substantially
existent.
In the present context, the apprehension of this person can be either:
  - the apprehension of a person as being able to perform a function or
  - the apprehension of a person as self-sufficient, substantially existent
    person.
-When  we  talk  about  a  conception  of  an  apprehender  of   substantial
existence, it is  a  conception  of  true  existence  i.e.  it  is  a  wrong
consciousness.
- When we look at what is observed by this conception, in this case,  it  is
an apprehender of substantial existence. Then there are two possibilities:
  - this apprehender of substantial existence can be a wrong  consciousness
    or
  - it can also be a consciousness that is not a wrong consciousness.
- For example, an apprehender of  a  person  as  being  able  to  perform  a
function is not a wrong consciousness. An apprehender of a person  as  self-
sufficient, substantially existent is a wrong consciousness.
- When we talk  about  the  conception  of  an  apprehender  of  substantial
existence, although it is definitely a wrong consciousness, we  cannot  tell
if the apprehender of substantial existence,  which  is  its  object,  is  a
wrong consciousness or not. There are various possibilities.
A1B. Motivation of that, attention to true existence
(2) Adherence to attention to true existence  without  paying  attention  to
the perfect meaning of the mode of abidance as a  truly  existent  utilizer.
[This  attention  to  true  existence  is  the  apprehender  of  substantial
existence.]
A1C. Drawback of that
(3) Adherence to that closely related to the three realms  together  through
the nature of generating afflictions by that attention to true existence  as
a truly existent utilizer;
A2. Adherence to objects of knowledge has 3 divisions:
      A2A. Adherence to things as truly existent
      A2B. Adherence [to things] as lacking true existence
      A2C. Adherence [to things] as mere imputations
A2A. Adherence to things as truly existent
(4) Abidance by having apprehended true existence  through  not  abiding  in
the realization of the emptiness of all phenomena.
A2B. Adherence to things as lacking true existence
(5) Adherence to all as lacking  true  existence  through  not  adhering  to
things as truly existent.
- There is an adherence to all phenomena as lacking true  existence  -  this
is the apprehender of substantial existence.
- There is a conception that adheres to this adherence as a  truly  existent
utilizer. This conception is an object of abandonment of the PA of PoS.
- This mind adheres to the  emptiness  of  all  phenomena  as  substantially
existent, but it does not need to  be  substantially  existent  in  reality.
Emptiness is adhered to as substantially existent.
A2C. Adherence to things as mere imputations
(6) Holding to the understanding of all phenomena as mere imputations  since
they lack substantial existence ultimately as  a  truly  existent  utilizer.
[“understanding” would be the  apprehender  of  substantial  existence.  The
substantial existence could be posited as all phenomena.]
A3. Adherence to objects of abandonment and antidotes has 2 divisions
A3A. Adherence to discordant classes
A3B. Adherence to antidotes
A3A. Adherence to discordant classes
(7) Grasping to  the  discordant  classes  that  precedes  non-adherence  to
anything through non-grasping that  knows  thusness  that  is  the  mode  of
abidance. [This grasping precedes non-adherence to anything.]
-  There   is   the   non-grasping   that   knows   thusness.   Before   the
arisal/occurrence of this non-grasping that knows thusness, it  is  possible
to have grasping. We are  saying  that  before  non-adherence  to  anything,
there is grasping to the discordant classes. [Before knowing  thusness,  you
grasp to the discordant classes. After knowing thusness, you don’t grasp  to
the discordant classes.]
A3B. Adherence to antidotes
(8) Apprehending the antidote to apprehending  signs  through  the  antidote
that cultivates equality of all phenomena as a truly existent utilizer.
B. Degeneration from the result, the exalted knower of all aspects
(9) Adherence to the person (who is obstructed for a long time with  respect
to progress to omniscience as desired  through  not  knowing  perfectly  the
perfection of wisdom that realizes the meaning of the mode of  abidance)  as
a truly existent utilizer  that  is  included  within  acquired  objects  of
abandonment.
Conceptions of apprehenders of imputed existence
- How are conceptualizations of the 2nd type with  respect  to  apprehenders
bearing the support of imputedly existent beings of 9 types?
5.15  Not definitely emerging as intended,
            Definitely apprehending a path as not being a path,
            Production as well as cessation,
            Possession and non-possession of properties,
5.16  Abiding, destroying the lineage,
            Seeking, lacking the cause, and
            Observing antagonists:
            These are the other conceptualizations that apprehend.
-There are  9  conceptions  of  apprehenders  of  imputed  existence.  These
divisions are by way of objects.
- A conception of an apprehender of imputed existence that  is  a  knowledge
obscuration is a  conception  that,  through  observing  an  apprehender  of
imputed existence that serves as its observed object, adheres  to  it  as  a
truly existent utilizer.
- The conceptualizations of the 2nd type that  apprehend  through  adherence
to imputed things as truly  existent  utilizers,  9  types  included  within
acquired knowledge obscurations are asserted to be objects to  be  abandoned
by the occasions of the uninterrupted path engaging  the  minds  and  mental
factors of the PA of PoS because their seeds are directly destroyed by it.
A. Not attaining the results as desired
- “Not attaining the results as desired” refers to  a  Mahayana  person  not
attaining the results as desired because this  person  relies  on  the  mere
path of hearers. By relying on the  mere  path  of  hearers,  this  Mahayana
person cannot attain the results as desired. If a Mahayana person  wants  to
attain the  results  as  desired  (i.e.,  if  a  Mahayana  person  wants  to
definitely emerge exactly to  the  three  great  objects  of  intent),  this
person cannot rely merely on the  path  of  hearers.  Hearers  are  able  to
attain the result as desired by relying on the mere path of hearers.
(1) Adherence to the apprehender of the being (who is unable  to  definitely
emerge to the  desired  results)  as  a  truly  existent  utilizer  that  is
included within acquired knowledge obscurations is an object of  abandonment
of the PA of PoS because it is directly destroyed by that.
- In other words, there is an apprehender of the being,  who  is  unable  to
definitely emerge to the desired results, as imputedly existent, then  there
is adherence  to  this  apprehender  as  a  truly  existent  utilizer  [this
adherence is a conception of an apprehender].
- The definition of a person is: an 'I' that is imputed to any of  the  five
aggregates that is its basis of imputation.
- Self, being,  person,  and  I  are  all  the  same  -  they  are  mutually
inclusive.
- In Buddhist philosophy, “person”  includes  animals  and  other  types  of
beings. All aryas, buddhas aryas, and various types of beings are persons.
B. Erroneous adherence has 2 divisions
      B1. Erroneous adherence to the path
      B2. Erroneous adherence to objects of knowledge {240}
B1. Erroneous adherence to the path
(2) Adherence to the apprehender of the being  (imputed  to  one  definitely
apprehending the other path, the six perfections, as not a path,  since  the
path of the desire of  hearers  themselves  does  not  exist)  as  imputedly
existent as a truly existent utilizer;
- “as not a path” means as not a correct path.
- “since the path of the desire of hearers themselves does not  exist”  mean
“since the path that is the mere method for pacification of  the  desire  of
hearers themselves does not exist within the Mahayana path”
- We are talking about adherence to the  apprehender  that  apprehends  “the
being  (imputed  to  one….)  as  imputedly  existent  as  a  truly  existent
utilizer.” We have an apprehender of the being as imputedly existent.  There
is adherence  to  this  apprehender  as  a  truly  existent  utilizer  [this
adherence is a conception of  an  apprehender].  The  being  is  imputed  to
someone who definitely apprehends the  six  perfections  as  not  a  correct
path.
- According to Gyeltsab, the “other path” refers to the six perfections,
but it can be interpreted as the Mahayana path.
- This person apprehends the Mahayana path as not being a correct path.
This person’s way of apprehending is not correct.
B2. Erroneous adherence to objects of knowledge has 3 divisions:
       B2A.  Apprehending  affirmative  and  negative  phenomena  as   truly
existent
      B2B. Apprehending possessing and  not  possessing  features  as  truly
existent
      B2C. Apprehending the  meaning  of  the  mode  of  abidance  as  truly
existent
B2A. Apprehending affirmative and negative phenomena as truly existent
(3) Apprehending the apprehender of the being  (who  adheres  to  states  as
existing ultimately through the conventional entities of  producing  results
and ceasing causes) as imputedly existing as a truly existent utilizer.
- “Apprehending the being” means the same as “adherence to the being.”

B2B. Apprehending possessing and not possessing features as truly existent
(4) Adherence to the apprehender of the being (imputed to  one  apprehending
as truly existent  the  continuous  possession  and  non-possession  of  all
things that  are  paths,  through  their  appearing  as  being  without  the
obstacle and the other, being with the obstacle that is  the  conception  of
true existence) as imputedly existing, as a truly existent utilizer.
- “all things that are  paths”-  for  example,  the  divisions,  causes  and
effects, and so forth.
- “the other” means “being with the obstacle,” which is  the  conception  of
true existence. There are two sets being mentioned:
      (1) possession and non-possession
      (2) appearing as  being  without  the  obstacle  and  being  with  the
obstacle.
They should be matched up in their respective orders.
- The 1st pair  would  be:  “adherence  to  the  apprehender  of  the  being
(imputed to one apprehending as truly existent the continuous possession  of
all things that are paths, through their appearing conventionally  as  being
without  the  obstacle.”  This  means  being  without  the  obstacle  in   a
conventional mode.
- The 2nd pair  would  be:  “adherence  to  the  apprehender  of  the  being
(imputed  to  one  apprehending  as  truly  existent  the  continuous   non-
possession of all things that are paths, through their  appearing  as  being
with the obstacle that is the  conception  of  true  existence  ultimately,”
i.e. from the point of view of the ultimate.
-If we talk about being without the obstacle that is the conception of  true
existence conventionally, then the presentation of forms  and  so  forth  is
feasible.
-But if we talk about being with the obstacle  that  is  the  conception  of
true existence ultimately, then the presentation of forms and  so  forth  is
not feasible.
- If the presentation of forms and so forth is not feasible, this refers  to
the non-possession of things that are paths.
- When the presentation of forms and so forth  is  feasible,  there  is  the
continuous possession of all things that are paths.
- In simpler words, if conventionally one is without the  obstacle  that  is
the conception of true existence, then the  presentation  of  forms  and  so
forth is feasible, and one  possesses  the  presentation  of  forms  and  so
forth.
- In simpler words, if one is with the obstacle that is  the  conception  of
true existence, then forms  and  so  forth  would  be  ultimately  existent;
therefore, the presentation of forms and so forth is not feasible
This second part is difficult to understand. Saying
B2C. Apprehending the meaning of the mode of abidance as truly existent
(5) Adherence to the apprehender of the being (imputed to  one  -abiding  in
the manner of adhering to forms and so forth, which do not abide  ultimately
-as truly existent, through likeness with a bird that abides in the sky)  as
imputedly existent as a truly existent utilizer.
C. Contradiction with the correct path
C1. Degenerating the lesser lineage
(6) Adherence to the apprehender of the being  (imputed  to  one  destroying
and degenerating the lineage of hearers  and  so  forth,  by  means  of  the
generated mind of enlightenment and so forth) as imputedly  existent,  as  a
truly existent utilizer.
- “Destroying and degenerating the lineage of hearers and  so  forth”  means
to destroy the mind seeking mere pacification. Mere pacification means  mere
liberation.
C2. Incomplete conducive conditions has 2 divisions
      C2A. Not seeking the special result
      C2B. Lacking the cause of that, the perfection of wisdom
C2A. Not seeking the special result
(7) Adherence to the apprehender of the being (imputed to  one  without  the
desire  of  seeking  buddhahood,  upon  having  realized  the   meaning   of
emptiness,  having  become  satisfied  with  merely  that,  since  qualities
superior to thusness do  not  exist)  as  imputedly  existent,  as  a  truly
existent utilizer.
- Someone, having realized the meaning of emptiness, becomes satisfied  with
that, since qualities superior to emptiness do not exist. This  person  thus
does not have the desire to seek buddhahood. This  could  refer  to  hearers
and  solitary  realizers  who  have  realized  emptiness  and  do  not  seek
buddhahood.
C2B. Lacking the cause of that, the perfection of wisdom
(8) Adherence to the apprehender of the being (imputed to  one  lacking  the
cause, the cultivation of the perfection of wisdom, through dependence  upon
ultimate truth) as imputedly existent, as a truly existent utilizer.
C3. Seized by adverse conditions
(9) Adherence to the apprehender of the being  one  (observing  things  that
are antagonists that  interfere  with  enlightenment,  such  as  the  maras,
through the nature of having immensely  familiarized  with  miserliness)  as
imputedly existent, as a truly existent utilizer  that  is  included  within
acquired objects of abandonment.
- Instead of miserliness, we can mention the discordant classes  of  any  of
the other 5 perfections: immorality, anger,  laziness,  distractedness,  and
corrupted wisdom.
- In summary, there are 4 types of objects of abandonment,  or  conceptions,
each of which is divided into 9  types.  Likewise,  there  are  4  types  of
antidotes, each of  which  can  be  divided  into  9  divisions  by  way  of
isolates.
- With respect to the conceptualizations that are  objects  of  abandonment,
the presentation of the 4 possibilities by means of objects is as follows:
(1) That which is a conception of  apprehendeds  but  not  a  conception  of
apprehenders is: adherence to forms and so forth as truly  existent  objects
of utilization.
(2) That which is a conception of  apprehenders  but  not  a  conception  of
apprehendeds is: adherence to a single instant of consciousness as  a  truly
existent utilizer. It is not an  apprehended  object  because  it  has  been
posited that it cannot be realized by a  direct  perceiver  of  an  ordinary
being.[“It” refers to a single instant of consciousness.]
(3) The possibility that is both  a  conception  of  an  apprehended  and  a
conception of an apprehender is as follows: with  respect  to  consciousness
that possesses continuity, adherence to it as an object of utilization is  a
conception of apprehendeds, while  adherence  to  it  as  a  utilizer  is  a
conception of apprehenders.
(4) That which is neither is:  the  non-dual  perfection  of  wisdom.[  This
refers to the omniscient mind.]
- Our own system  does  not  completely  accept  this  presentation;  it  is
faulty.
- For example, the 2nd possibility  is  posited  correctly  but  the  reason
given -that which is a conception of apprehenders but not  a  conception  of
apprehendeds - is not correct.
- There is a fault in the reason given: it says that  a  single  instant  of
consciousness is not an apprehended object because it has been posited  that
it cannot be realized by a direct perceiver of an ordinary being.
- There is no pervasion: the fact that it cannot be  realized  by  a  direct
perceiver of an ordinary being does not mean that it is not  an  apprehended
object.
-To  give  an  example  of  why  the  pervasion  is  not  established  here:
emptiness, selflessness, and subtle impermanence cannot  be  realized  by  a
direct perceiver of an ordinary being, but  they  are  apprehended  objects.
They are the apprehended objects of aryas.
-In other  words,  in  order  to  posit  “That  which  is  a  conception  of
apprehenders but not a conception of apprehendeds,” it is correct  to  posit
as an example “adherence to a single instant of  consciousness  as  a  truly
existent utilizer.” But,  the  reason  why  this  is  not  a  conception  of
apprehendeds  is  because  it  is  an  adherence  to  a  single  instant  of
consciousness as a truly existent utilizer, rather than as a truly  existent
object of utilization.
- A single instant of consciousness  is  not  an  apprehended  object  by  a
direct perceiver of an ordinary being,  but  it  is  an  apprehended  object
realized by an ordinary being.
- It is not correct to say that if something does not appear  to  a  person,
the person does not have a conception of that thing. For example, it can  be
that true existence does not appear to a certain  person,  but  this  person
still has a conception of true existence.
- For the 3rd  possibility,  this  is  not  correct  because  two  different
conceptions are posited:
      - the adherence to it as an object of utilization, and
      - the adherence to it as a utilizer.
- When you want to posit  an  example  that  is  both  a  conception  of  an
apprehended and a conception of an apprehender, you should  just  posit  one
thing. Instead, here two conceptions are posited. This is a fault.
- For the 3rd  possibility,  between  and  apprehended  and  apprehender,  4
possibilities do not exist. There are 3 possibilities because if  it  is  an
apprehender, it is necessarily an  apprehended.  What  is  intended  in  3rd
possibility is something that is both a conception of an apprehended  and  a
conception of an apprehender.
The antidotes to those
-The causes of the PA of the PoS.
-The result of the PA of the PoS, great enlightenment
-The self-entity of the PA of the PoS
-The causes of the PA of the PoS.
5.17  With respect to enlightenment, teaching others,
            Thoroughly bestowing the causes of that, and
            The uninterrupted cause for attaining that,
            The characteristics of immense merit.
-  In general, there are many causes of  the  PA  of  the  PoS.  From  among
these, three are explicitly taught here:
1. For the sake of placing other Mahayana lineage-bearers in  enlightenment,
   teaching the method for that.
2. Thoroughly bestowing the words and meanings of the perfection of  wisdom,
   the causes of that enlightenment.
3. The possession of the uninterrupted cause for attaining that  PA  of  the
   PoS, the characteristics of immense merit, cultivating the perfection  of
   wisdom during meditative equipoise by oneself and so  forth.  This  means
   that during  meditative  equipoise,  one  cultivates  the  perfection  of
   wisdom, and during subsequent attainment, one teaches the  perfection  of
   wisdom to others. Through cultivating the  perfection  of  wisdom  during
   meditative  equipoise  by  oneself  and  teaching  it  to  others  during
   subsequent attainment, one accumulates immense merit.
A. Placing in enlightenment
- Placing other trainees in enlightenment, which bears characteristics  that
will be explained below, through  teaching  the  PoS  and  so  forth,  by  a
bodhisattva on the PoP is one cause of the PA of PoS because it is  included
within  the  accumulation  of  merit   that   observes   the   final   great
enlightenment, a cause for generating it.
-“enlightenment” does not refer to the final  enlightenment.  It  should  be
interpreted as temporal enlightenment, i.e. the PoS and PoM.  “The  PoS  and
so forth” refers to the PoS and PoM.
B. Placing in the causes of that
- By means of perfect words, meanings, and so forth that teach the  mode  of
abidance,  as  the  sole  causes  of  temporal  and  final   enlightenments,
bestowing the perfection of  wisdom  perfectly  and  individually  to  those
trainees by a bodhisattva on the PoP, is the 2nd cause  that  generates  the
PA of PoS, because it is included within the accumulation of merit, a  cause
for generating it, and it places others in the causes of it.
- “Placing in the causes of that” means placing in the causes of the  PA  of
PoS.
C. Cultivating one’s uninterrupted cause
- The exalted wisdom of meditative  equipoise  of  the  PoP  possessing  the
characteristics of much more merit  of  cultivation  of  the  perfection  of
wisdom during meditative equipoise by oneself, teaching it to others  during
subsequent attainment, and so forth, the uninterrupted cause  that  acts  to
attain enlightenment included within the PA of PoS is the 3rd cause  of  the
PA of PoS because it is other than the two previous causes  and  it  is  the
substantial cause of it.
- “enlightenment” here referring  to  the  temporal  enlightenment  included
within the PA of PoS.
- “much more merit”- there seems to be some kind of comparison being made.
- “the uninterrupted cause” as the cause of the uninterrupted  path  of  the
PoS. The interruptions, or obstacles, are the objects of abandonment of  the
PoS.
- What is the substantial cause of the PA of PoS? It is the  exalted  wisdom
of meditative equipoise of the PoP. This uninterrupted cause, which is  also
the substantial cause, is the exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise of  the
PoP.
- Teaching the perfection of wisdom to others during  subsequent  attainment
is not the substantial cause of the PA of PoS, but we  can  posit  it  as  a
cooperative condition.
- Perhaps it means that if one were to memorize the words of the  Perfection
of Wisdom sutras and teach the Perfection of Wisdom  to  others,  one  would
accumulate merit.
- But if, after memorizing the words of the Perfection of Wisdom, etc.,  one
also puts it into practice  and  gains  some  experience  during  meditative
equipoise, and then teaches it to others during subsequent  attainment,  one
would accumulate much more merit [than one teaches the Perfection of  Wisdom
without having put it into practice and gained an experience of it.]
- We can compare these two activities:
            (1) bestowing the oral transmission of the Perfection of  Wisdom
sutras, and
            (2) explaining the meaning of these sutras.
- The 2nd, the explanation, is of greater  benefit,  and  therefore  creates
more merit than just bestowing the oral transmission of  the  Perfection  of
Wisdom.
The result of the PA of PoS
- Identification of great enlightenment in our system
- For those who assert that things are truly existent, the incorrectness  of
that
-Indicating that those desiring to attain final great enlightenment need  to
assert that all phenomena are empty of true existence.
Identification of great enlightenment in our system
Question: What is that  great  enlightenment  for  the  aim  of  which,  the
result, the PoS is asserted to be generated  by  being  together  with  such
causes of it?
5.18  The exalted wisdom of the extinction and
            Non-production of stains is described as “enlightenment.”
            Because they lack extinction and lack production,
            Those are to be known respectively.
-There  is  a  reason  for  indicating  in  sutra  that  “Obscurations  lack
extinction ultimately and lack  production  ultimately,”  because  they  are
established in dependence on a correct sign  to  lack  extinction  and  lack
production ultimately.
-Those final exalted wisdoms directly knowing that they lack extinction  and
production  ultimately  are  to  be  known   respectively   as   the   great
enlightenments knowing extinction and non-production,  because  the  exalted
wisdom  directly  knowing  the  extinction  and  non-production  of   stains
ultimately is described in sutra as the “final great enlightenment”  and  is
suitable in that way.
- This passage mainly says that the  exalted  wisdom  directly  knowing  the
extinction and non-production of stains  ultimately  is  described  as  “the
final great enlightenment” in sutra, and it is suitable in that way.
- The afflictive and knowledge obscurations lack true existence  because  of
lacking cessation and production ultimately.
- A citation from Maitreya’s Differentiation of the Middle and the  Extremes
is  stated  to  support  this  previous   syllogism:   “Not   belonging   to
dharmadhatu, in this way phenomena do not exist.” This means that  there  is
no phenomenon that  does  not  belong  to  dharmadhatu,  i.e.  there  is  no
phenomenon that is not empty of true existence.
- The “Propounders of Things” refers to the followers of GES and SS.
- As GES & SS do not assert knowledge  obscurations,  they  probably  assert
two  types  of  obscurations:  afflictive  obscurations  and  non-afflictive
obscurations.
- The statement here is made  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  MWS,  and
according  to  them,  the  stains  that   are   afflictive   and   knowledge
obscurations are imputed as truly existent by the Propounders of Things.
- According to the AMWS, the knowledge obscurations are conceptions of  true
existence, but for the Propounders of Things, conceptions of true  existence
are not objects of abandonment -they  are  not  stains,  and  they  are  not
obscurations.
- The Propounders of Things do not assert selflessness of phenomena.
- From our school’s point of view,  there  are  afflictive  obscuration  and
knowledge obscurations, and we say that they are imputed as  truly  existent
by the Propounders of Things.
- The obscurations lack true existence,  because  they  are  free  from  the
entitinesses of truly existent one and many.
- If you want to prove this reason [that obscurations are  free  from  being
truly existent one and many] you have to prove two parts:
1. They are free from being truly existent one: the  obscurations  are  free
   from being truly existent one because they have parts.  The  obscurations
   have  parts  because  having  parts  and  not  having  parts  are  direct
   contradictories, and an object of knowledge that does not have  parts  is
   impossible. Since an object of knowledge that  does  not  have  parts  is
   impossible, it means that the obscurations must have parts. There are two
   possibilities, having parts and not having parts; if one is not the case,
   then the other is the case.
2. They are free from being truly existent many: the obscurations  are  free
   from being truly existent many,  because  truly  existent  one  does  not
   exist. There is pervasion, because many depend on one.
Q&A: An eye consciousness perceiving blue, which is remembered by  a  mental
consciousness, is both an apprehended and an apprehender. Any  consciousness
is both an apprehended and an apprehender. If it is an  apprehender,  it  is
pervaded by being an  apprehended  object.  But  if  it  is  an  apprehended
object, it is not pervaded by being an apprehender.
- If you consider the pervasiveness,  apprehended  objects  have  a  broader
pervasion, and apprehenders have a narrower pervasion.
- Any consciousness is an apprehended  object.  Any  phenomenon/existent  is
necessarily an apprehended object. For example, it must  be  established  by
valid  cognition  and  is  also  apprehended  by  a  buddha.  If   it’s   an
apprehended, there must be an agent that apprehends it, i.e. there  must  be
an apprehender.
- But here we are saying that it is possible  to  posit  something  that  is
both an apprehended and an apprehender, but it  is  not  possible  to  posit
something that is both a conception of an apprehended [that is  a  knowledge
obscuration] and a  conception  of  an  apprehender  [that  is  a  knowledge
obscuration].
-The stains that are afflictive and knowledge obscurations  that  have  been
produced and are past now, and that have not been produced and  are  future,
imputed as truly existent by the Propounders of Things lack true  existence,
because of lacking cessation and production ultimately.
-There is  pervasion,  because  of  the  entitinesses  of  dharmadhatu,  the
emptiness of true existence, like space, of all phenomena, which  are  empty
of true existence, since, also in that way “Not  belonging  to  dharmadhatu,
in this way phenomena do not exist” occurs in Maitreya’s Differentiation  of
the Middle and the Extremes.
-The obscurations lack true  existence,  because  they  are  free  from  the
entitinesses of truly existent one and many.
      - Different systems have different ways of  positing  true  existence,
or existence by way of the object’s own  character.  For  example,  what  is
posited as true existence in the MOS  coincides  with  what  is  posited  as
existence by way  of  its  own  character  in  the  MOS,  is  an  object  of
refutation/negation for the MWS. In the MOS, there  is  true  existence  and
there is existence by way of its own character, but when you move up to  the
MWS, they refute what is posited by the MOS.
    -According to the followers of MOS, there is  establishment  by  way  of
its own character, or existence by way of the object’s own  character.  This
true existence that is posited by the MOS is refuted/negated by the AMWS.
      -What is accepted as existence by way of its own  character  according
to the AMWS is negated by the CMWS.
      -According to the AMWS,  phenomena  do  exist  by  way  of  their  own
character, but their measure of existence by way of their own  character  is
in turn refuted/negated by the CMWS.
      - The measure of true existence according to the AMWS “that  which  is
established from the side of  the  object’s  uncommon  mode  of  subsistence
without being posited through the force of appearing to an awareness”
-Those lack production ultimately because they are not produced ultimately
      (i) from a cause that is self, other, or both, or
      (ii) causelessly.
      - The term “ultimately” should be applied to all four possibilities:
      1. they are not produced ultimately from a cause that is self,
      2. they are not produced ultimately from a cause that is other,
      3. they are not produced ultimately from a cause that is both, and
      4. they are not produced ultimately causelessly.
- This  is  because  with  respect  to  the  above  predicate  and  subject,
ultimately existent results are not produced and also those  that  are  non-
things are not produced ultimately, like a lotus in the sky.
      - The “above subject” refers  to  the  obscurations,  and  the  “above
predicate”  refers  to  the  predicate  in  the  previous  sentence:   “lack
production ultimately.”
      -If we apply the reason for the subject and predicate [as  underlined]
in Jetsun Chokyi Gyeltsen’s General Meaning, the syllogism would read,  “The
subject -the obscurations -lack production ultimately, because they are  not
produced as existents ultimately, not as non-existents  ultimately,  not  as
both  ultimately,  and  not  as  neither  ultimately.”  (“Both”  means  both
existents and non-existents.)
- The stains lack extinction and production ultimately,  because  they  lack
cessation and production ultimately.
      -“The signs” refers to the signs as mentioned above: being  free  from
truly existent one and many, and so forth.
-The EKAA, the characteristic of realizing  the  mode  of  abidance  of  all
phenomena non-erroneously, the nature of exactly the 3 exalted  bodies,  the
truth body and so forth is  described  as  being  the  great  enlightenment,
because it is the final exalted wisdom respectively knowing  the  extinction
and non-production of stains ultimately.
      -“knowing the extinction  and  non-production  of  stains  ultimately”
means “knowing the lack of extinction of stains ultimately and the  lack  of
production of stains ultimately.” It means the final exalted wisdom  knowing
the lack of extinction of stains ultimately and the lack  of  production  of
stains ultimately.
 -As expressed by those  Propounders  of  Things  as  being  the  knower  of
extinction and non-production:
-“(i) a knower which considers  extinction  with  regard  to  extinction  by
thinking of the destruction of previously existing  things  that  are  truly
existent stains” – means that this knower considers extinction  by  thinking
of something that previously existed [something that was  a  truly  existent
stain]  being  destroyed,  as  extinction.  This  is  an  assertion  of  the
Propounders  of  Things  as  they  think  that  this  is  the   meaning   of
“extinction.”
-“(ii)  a  knower  which  considers  non-production  with  regard  to   non-
production by thinking of non-production due to  severing  the  continuation
of production of truly existent things that are stains”  -  the  Propounders
of Things’ interpretation  of  “non-production”  –  means  by  severing  the
continuation of production of truly existent things that are  stains,  there
is non-production.
- the Propounders of Things say that the 1st knower (i)  is  the  knower  of
extinction, while the 2nd knower (ii) is the knower of non-production.
- the enlightenment of our system expressed as being such a final knower  of
extinction and non-production, such  a  knower  is  not  suitable  as  great
enlightenment,  since  extinction  and  non-production  only  do  not  exist
ultimately. Because of stains being established as empty of  true  existence
like that.
- “the enlightenment of our system expressed as being such  a  final  knower
of extinction and non-production”
-“our system” refers to the AMWS
- “such a final knower of extinction and non-production” refers to  a  final
knower of extinction and non-production in which the stains that  have  been
destroyed are truly existent stains, and the non-production of stains is  of
truly existent stains.
-“such a knower is not suitable as  great  enlightenment,  since  extinction
and non-production only do not exist ultimately”- If  the  enlightenment  of
our own system were also expressed as such a final knower of extinction  and
non-production mentioned above, this would not be acceptable,  or  would  be
faulty.
- It is the same knower mentioned above, i.e. “such a knower”  refers  to  a
knower knowing various characteristics of truly existent stains.
- To refute such a great enlightenment exists as imputed by the  Propounders
of Things with the interceding stanza.
5.19  With respect to the nature that is without cessation,
            By the path called “seeing”
            What type of conceptualization is extinguished?
            What aspect of non-production is attained?
-By the Mahayana  path  called  “seeing”  -what  previously  existing  truly
existent type of  conceptualization  that  is  a  knowledge  obscuration  is
extinguished, and what true cessation that is the aspect  of  non-production
that is a severance of the continuation of production of  a  truly  existent
type of conceptualization that is a knowledge obscuration is attained?
-It follows that it is not attained, because the stains are  of  the  nature
that is without a cessation in  which  previously  existing  truly  existent
stains are newly stopped.
-That follows, because truly existent stains have never existed  previously.
You accepted the former consequence.
- “what previously existing truly existent type  of  conceptualization  that
is   a   knowledge   obscuration   is   extinguished”—there   is   no   such
conceptualization that is extinguished
- “what true cessation that is  the  aspect  of  non-production  that  is  a
severance of the continuation of production of  a  truly  existent  type  of
conceptualization that is a knowledge obscuration  is  attained”-  there  is
also no such type of non-production.
- When the emptiness, or the lack of true existence is  proven,  it  is  not
the case that something that was previously existent  becomes  non-existent.
When one  negates  true  existence,  it  is  not  that  something  that  was
previously existent becomes non-existent.
- If you think about it, why do we need to negate  true  existence,  because
true existence never existed?
-Although true existence never existed,  we  have  the  conception  of  true
existence, i.e., a mind that holds to the measure of true existence.
-In the process of negating true existence, what we are  actually  doing  is
proving that the object of adherence of the  conception  of  true  existence
does not exist.
-This is not a process in  which  something  that  was  previously  existent
becomes non-existent.
-When we talk about different kinds of objects of negation,  there  are  two
types:
      1. an object of negation by way of reasoning
      2. an object of negation by way of path.
- The objects of negation  by  way  of  reasoning  do  not  exist;  if  they
existed, there would be no way to negate them. An example of  an  object  of
negation by way of reasoning is true existence.
- The objects of negation by way of path do exist. If they  did  not  exist,
there would be no reason  to  negate  them.  An  example  of  an  object  of
negation by way of path is the conception of true existence.
-By the strength of the path of seeing imputed by the Propounders of  Things
who wrongly adhere  to  the  mode  of  abidance  of  things,  regarding  the
previously existing truly  existent  produced  entities,  conceptualizations
that are knowledge obscurations and so forth, what are extinguished?
      - Our system says that there  is  no  such  extinction  of  previously
existing truly existent conceptualizations that are knowledge  obscurations.
This is not possible.
- Regarding the not-yet-produced liberated path bearing the property of non-
production that is a severance of the continuation of  production,  what  is
produced?
      -Our system  says  that  this  is  not  possible.  There  is  no  such
production. This lack of production, or non-production, that is a  severance
of the continuation of production does not exist. In general, there is  non-
production, but we say that there is no  production  ultimately.  Ultimately
there is no production.
- It follows that such extinction  and  production  are  incorrect,  because
extinction by antidotes and the cessation with the characteristic of  acting
to hinder production respectively of the produced and  the  not-yet-produced
stains are free from ultimate existence.
- That follows, because it is the nature of  the  entity  of  thusness,  all
phenomena’s emptiness of true existence ultimately. Because of that, it  has
been thought that only the scriptural system of AMWS is to be  asserted,  as
ultimately existent extinction and production are  only  not  even  slightly
existent.
-“the knower of extinction and  non-production”  refers  to  a  knower  that
knows that stains, upon being extinguished, bear the property of  not  being
produced again.
- This is how our system would  interpret  this  expression,  but  from  the
ultimate point of view, our system would say that  there  is  no  extinction
ultimately and there is no production ultimately.
- it is less ambiguous to say “there is no  production  ultimately,”  rather
than  saying  “non-production  ultimately,”  because  when  we   say   “non-
production ultimately,” it seems that  there  is  this  thing  called  “non-
production”  that  exists  ultimately.   For   “there   is   no   production
ultimately,” we are just saying production does not exist ultimately.
Q&A: Is there  a  conception  of  true  existence  that  is  neither  (i)  a
conception of apprehendeds that  is  a  knowledge  obscuration  nor  (ii)  a
conception of apprehenders that is a knowledge obscuration?
If you posit a conception  of  a  table  as  truly  existent,  it  satisfies
neither  of  those  definitions,  i.e.,  it  is  neither  a  conception   of
apprehendeds  that  is  a  knowledge  obscuration  nor   a   conception   of
apprehenders that is a knowledge obscuration.
- It is possible to view an object without viewing it as  either  an  object
of utilization or as a utilizer.
- By asserting that phenomena are not empty  of  true  existence  -in  other
words, that they exist truly -and asserting that the Bhagavan has  abandoned
the conceptualizations that are afflictive  and  knowledge  obscurations  in
all ways, in the manner of having abandoned  the  seeds  are  contradictory.
These two assertions are contradictory, and this making  such  contradictory
assertions is “greatly amazing.”
-If phenomena were to exist perfectly, they would exist truly. If that  were
the case, the conception of  true  existence  would  not  be  an  object  of
abandonment.
5.20  Any statement that the Teacher
            Has extinguished the obscurations also with respect  to  objects
of knowledge,
            Even though phenomena of others exist,
            I deem that as amazing!
-   I,  Maitreya,  deem  that   -  any  statement  that  the   Teacher   has
extinguished the obscurations of confusion also with respect to  objects  of
knowledge, even though outer and inner phenomena  ultimately  exist  in  the
system of others, the Propounders of Things -as amazing, because  if  things
were to exist ultimately, it would be  unsuitable  for  obscurations  to  be
abandoned!
-Someone mentioned about the “4 yogic grounds” but  our  system  says  there
are only 3 yogic grounds, which correspond to:
    -(1) the small  vehicle,  the  common  realization  of  selflessness  of
persons
     -(2)  the  middling  vehicle,  the  realization  of  apprehendeds   and
apprehenders being empty of different substances
    -(3) the great vehicle, the realization of  primary  consciousnesses  as
not being truly existent.
- It is not correct to say that the first yogic ground is the  yogic  ground
of hearers, and the second yogic ground is the yogic ground of the MOS.
- Our system (AMWS) - the uncommon tenets of MOS are to be refuted.
-If the first two yogic grounds are correlated in this way, this would  mean
that they are correct, but according to the AMWS,  the  uncommon  tenets  of
the MOS are to be refuted.
- According to the Hearer schools, GES & SS, the 3 kinds of persons
      -hearers
      -solitary realizers
      -Mahayana persons
-They all have the same principal object of cultivation  -  the  realization
of subtle selflessness i.e. they cultivate the realization of the lack of  a
self-sufficient, substantially existent person.
- Their objects of abandonment are not exactly the same.
      -for hearers and solitary realizers are the afflictive obscurations
      -for Mahayana persons are non-afflictive obscurations.
- In the MOS,  hearers  and  solitary  realizers  have  the  same  principal
objects of cultivation and the same principal objects of abandonment.
- The principal object of cultivation - the subtle selflessness of  persons,
the lack of a self-sufficient, substantially existent person
- The principal object of abandonment - the conception of a self of persons
- According to the MOS, Mahayana persons mainly  cultivate  the  realization
of the emptiness of duality, and their main object  of  abandonment  is  the
conception of duality, which, according  to  the  AMWS,  is  just  a  coarse
knowledge obscuration.
- The AMWS asserts that all 3 types of persons:
      - have different principal objects of cultivation
      - have different principal objects of abandonment.
|Types of persons|objects of cultivation             |objects of abandonment   |
|Hearers         |realization of subtle selflessness |conception of self       |
|                |of persons                         |                         |
|Solitary        |realization of the emptiness of    |coarse knowledge         |
|realizers       |duality                            |obscurations             |
|Mahayana persons|realization of the emptiness of    |subtle knowledge         |
|                |true existence                     |obscurations             |


- The explanation by the MOS regarding objects of  cultivation  and  objects
of abandonment is not shared by the AMWS. In this way, the  uncommon  tenets
of the MOS are refuted by the AMWS. Thus it is incorrect  to  say  that  the
first two grounds correspond to the hearer school (GES &SS) and MOS.
- For someone having taken the yogic grounds to be  4,  explained  that  the
2nd accords with the view of solitary realizers, and the  3rd  accords  with
the view of MOS. This is also incorrect:
 -(i) because the views of solitary realizers  and  MOS  do  not  differ  in
being higher or lower
-(ii)because, although it  is  propounded  that  “Since  solitary  realizers
assert  that  apprehenders  are   truly   existent,   whereas   MOS   assert
consciousnesses (in which apprehendeds and apprehenders are non-dual)  exist
ultimately, their views are different,” that is  merely  agreeable  only  in
the absence of having undertaken investigation
  -(iii)  because  the  view  based  upon  a  sign  of  definite  concurrent
observation by the 2nd yogic ground has been indicated, and there is no  MOS
who has asserted a way to determine a view that is higher than that.
 - In fact, the main object of  cultivation  of  solitary  realizers  agrees
with the view of MOS.  So  our  system  says  this  way  of  correlation  is
incorrect, because the views of solitary realizers and MOS do not differ  in
being higher or lower.
- The 2nd reason is presented in a very careless manner. It is  not  correct
to say that solitary realizers assert that apprehenders are truly  existent,
because some solitary realizers realize emptiness.
- In the 3rd reason, it is a sign for proving that an  apprehended  and  its
apprehender are not different substances.
- “the view based upon a sign of definite concurrent observation by the  2nd
yogic ground has been indicated” means that this view, based upon a sign  of
definite concurrent observation by the ground  of  the  solitary  realizers,
has been indicated.
- The “2nd yogic ground” refers to the ground  of  the  solitary  realizers.
This has been indicated and there is no proponent of MOS who has asserted  a
way to determine a view that is higher than  that,  i.e.  higher  than  that
view that is based upon a sign of definite concurrent observation.
- “The assertion of the ‘4 yogic grounds’ is also something to be  reflected
upon, because the stages of a person who -having  refuted  that  blue  is  a
different substance from the consciousness to which blue appears,  does  not
refute that (apprehendeds  and  apprehenders  are  different  substances  in
which) the consciousness to which blue  appears  is  a  different  substance
from blue -are incorrect.”
- This is saying that to say that there is a person who realizes  that  blue
is empty of being a different substance  from  the  consciousness  to  which
blue appears, but does not realize that  the  consciousness  to  which  blue
appears is empty of being a different substance from blue is incorrect.
- This hypothetical person realizes that blue is empty of being a  different
substance from the  consciousness  to  which  blue  appears,  but  does  not
realize that the consciousness to which blue appears is  empty  of  being  a
different substance from blue. Such a person is not possible.
-Someone says: Even though it has been refuted on the 2nd yogic ground  that
blue is an external object, an apprehended being  merely  another  substance
relative to an inner consciousness has not  been  refuted.[This  means  that
even though external objects have been refuted  on  the  2nd  yogic  ground,
apprehenders and  apprehendeds  being  different  substances  has  not  been
refuted. This person is saying that there is a person who has realized  that
blue is not a different  substance  from  the  valid  cognizer  apprehending
blue, but has not realized that the valid cognizer apprehending blue is  not
a different substance from blue].
- Our system -if a person realizes that blue is empty of being  a  different
substance from the consciousness  to  which  blue  appears,  the  person  is
pervaded by also realizing that the consciousness to which blue  appears  is
empty of being a different substance from blue.
-This person is saying that it is  possible  to  have  such  a  person  [who
realizes that blue  is  empty  of  being  a  different  substance  from  the
consciousness  to  which  blue  appears,  but  does  not  realize  that  the
consciousness to which blue appears is empty of being a different  substance
from blue]. This is why he say that the view of  the  3rd  yogic  ground  is
higher than that of the 2nd yogic ground.
- Our system - that  is  not  correct.  As  from  Dharmakirti’s  text:  “The
argument  is  similar  for   that,”   and   therefore,   “apprehendeds   and
apprehenders being different substances relative to an  inner  consciousness
has also been refuted in dependence on that  very  previous  reasoning,  and
the levels of higher or lower tenets with respect  to  that  have  not  been
taught by any of the great trailblazers.”
- Our system - if one refutes blue as an external  object,  one  would  also
refute that inner consciousness is an external object.
-According to this someone - one can realize that blue is  not  an  external
object, but not realize that an  inner  consciousness  is  not  an  external
object. (This person does not extend the realization to everything.  To  him
such a person exists.)
- This someone say: on the 2nd yogic ground,  apprehendeds  are  refuted  as
being external objects, but apprehenders are not refuted as  being  external
objects. It is thus only on the  3rd  yogic  ground  that  apprehenders  are
refuted as being external objects.
Q&A: “apprehending an inner  consciousness  as  an  external  object”  means
apprehending the consciousness to be a different substance from  the  object
it apprehends.
-“external object” does not mean an object outside. According to MOS,  there
are no external objects.
- Yogic AMWS, external objects  are  also  refuted.  The  ways  of  refuting
external objects are very different in these two schools.
-  In  MOS,  form’s  being  the  basis  of  adherence  of   the   conception
apprehending form does not exist by way of its own character i.e. form  does
not exist by way of its own character as  the  basis  of  adherence  of  the
conception apprehending form.
- In the YAMWS, form’s being  the  basis  of  adherence  of  the  conception
apprehending form is established by way  of  its  own  character  i.e.  form
exists by way of its  own  character  as  the  basis  of  adherence  of  the
conception apprehending form.
-  In  MOS,  not  only  are  forms  refuted  to  be  external  objects,  the
conceptions apprehending forms are also refuted as external objects.
- In Yogic AMWS, we do not find  a  similar  refutation  of  the  conception
apprehending blue as being an external object, as is done in  the  MOS  i.e.
the Yogic AMWS does refute conceptions as being external objects,  but  this
refutation is carried out in a different way than in the MOS.
- According to this someone:
      -on the 2nd yogic ground, apprehendeds are refuted as  being  external
objects
      -on the 3rd yogic ground, apprehenders are refuted as  being  external
objects.
- Through such an assertion, he differentiates a higher and lower view
- Our system, there is no such difference.
- The text says, “the levels of higher or lower tenets with respect to  that
has not been taught by any of the  great  trailblazers  because  it  follows
that the MOS have not  refuted  apprehendeds  and  apprehenders  being  mere
different substances from the point of view  of  a  sense  consciousness  in
dependence on a sign of definite concurrent observation.
-  According  to  our  system,  with  this  sign  of   definite   concurrent
observation,  apprehendeds  are  refuted  as  being  external  objects   and
apprehenders are also refuted to be  external  objects.  Thus,  “a  sign  of
definite concurrent observation that accords to the MOS has  been  indicated
by the 2nd yogic ground, but, according to you, it is  necessary  to  refute
apprehendeds and apprehenders being mere different substances in  dependence
on the 3rd yogic ground above that 2nd yogic ground.”
- “With respect to determining the view of the MOS, it is  realized  without
exception in dependence on a sign of the definite  concurrent  observation”-
this  means  that  in  dependence  on  the  sign  of   definite   concurrent
observation, the lack of external objects  is  realized  without  exception,
i.e. with respect to apprehendeds and apprehenders.
- “That which accords with it is just what has been  indicated  as  the  2nd
yogic ground. Since there is no other view above that besides  the  view  of
the MWS, the so-called ‘4 yogic grounds’ are only something to be  reflected
about” - according to our school, the 3rd yogic ground is that of  the  MWS,
and there is none higher; there is no 4th yogic ground.
-  “Further,  one  initially  meditates  on  the   common   realization   of
selflessness of persons.Having been preceded by that, after  that  one  pays
attention  to  apprehendeds  and  apprehenders  being  empty  of   different
substances, in which there is an absence of external objects,  the  mode  of
Cognition-Only (Vijñaptimatra) conventionally” - this means that  initially,
one meditates on the common realization  of  selflessness  of  persons,  and
after that, one meditates on the emptiness of apprehendeds and  apprehenders
being different substances,  and  this  is  a  meditation  on  the  lack  of
external objects. This lack of external objects  is  actually  the  mode  of
conventional existence asserted by the MOS.
- “Since the Acarya made a presentation of the absence of  external  objects
concordant with that of the Yogic AMWS conventionally, the sign of  definite
concurrent observation has been mentioned here” -This  similar  presentation
is made by the Acarya, and because of that, the sign of definite  concurrent
observation has been mentioned here.
- “The occasion [the time] for determining the uncommon tenets  of  MOS  has
not  arrived  and  they  are  not  asserted  here,   since   it   would   be
inappropriate.”
-With respect to  that,  the  indication  according  to  two  levels  is  as
follows:
- In terms of realizing subtle emptiness, when  one  directly  realizes  the
emptiness of true existence during meditative equipoise,  during  subsequent
attainment one realizes that dependent-arising  are  illusions  through  the
force of experience.
 - Like that, when one directly realizes the emptiness of  apprehendeds  and
apprehenders being different substances during meditative equipoise,  during
subsequent  attainment  one   turns   away   the   apprehension   of   sense
consciousnesses to which blue appears and  so  forth  as  unmistaken  other-
powered natures, and realizes that they are mistaken  other-powered  natures
through the force of experience.
-“and so forth” include sense consciousnesses to which yellow, black,  etc.,
appear.
-Due to this realization during meditative equipoise that  apprehenders  and
apprehendeds are empty of  being  different  substances,  during  subsequent
attainment one will turn away the apprehension of sense  consciousnesses  to
which blue and so forth  appear  as  unmistaken  other-powered  natures.  In
fact, a sense consciousness to which blue appears as a  different  substance
from the sense consciousness is a mistaken other-powered nature.
-Due to one’s realization during  meditative  equipoise,  during  subsequent
attainment one turns away the apprehension of such a sense consciousness  as
being an unmistaken  other-powered  nature.   This  sense  consciousness  to
which blue appears is basically a sense consciousness to which blue and  the
consciousness apprehending blue appear as different substances.
- In brief, if one directly realizes the emptiness of true existence  during
meditative  equipoise,  during  subsequent  attainment  one  realizes   that
dependent-arising are illusions.
- Similarly, when during meditative equipoise one realizes the emptiness  of
apprehendeds and apprehenders being different substances, during  subsequent
attainment one turns away  the  apprehension  of  sense  consciousnesses  to
which blue  and  so  forth  appear  as  unmistaken,  through  the  force  of
experience.
- Conclusion:  “Therefore,  the  stages  of  the  modes  of  realization  of
meditative equipoise and subsequent attainment have been  merely  indicated,
The assertion  that  the  sequence  of  higher  and  lower  views  has  been
indicated is only inappropriate since it cannot withstand analysis.”
-This means that if one were to say that the sequence of  higher  and  lower
views has been indicated, we would say, “That is not correct.”
Q&A: We can have the conception of  a  sense  consciousness  to  which  blue
appears as a truly existent utilizer [i.e. this conception  adheres  to  the
sense consciousness as being a truly existent utilizer], but this  does  not
mean that the sense consciousness to which blue appears is a  conception  of
true existence.
- That sense consciousness to  which  blue  appears,  which  is  a  mistaken
consciousness, is coarse compared to the conception of true existence.
- This sense consciousness to which blue appears as an external object is  a
mistaken consciousness but not necessarily a wrong consciousness because  it
does not necessarily apprehend blue as an external object.
-Blue  appears  as  an  external  object,  but  blue  is   not   necessarily
apprehended as an external object. Such a sense consciousness  is  mistaken,
but not wrong.
- Mistaken consciousnesses are those  that  are  mistaken  with  respect  to
their appearing object
- Wrong consciousnesses are those that  are  wrong  with  respect  to  their
object of engagement/apprehended object.
- Our system- there are 3 yogic grounds:
 1. the yogic ground that realizes the selflessness of persons
 2. 2.the yogic ground that  realizes  the  emptiness  of  apprehenders  and
    apprehendeds being different substances
 3. the yogic ground that realizes that all  phenomena  are  empty  of  true
    existence.
- The yogic ground that realizes the selflessness of  persons  is  discussed
under 3 headings:
   A. Reasoning of the wisdom arisen from contemplation
   B. Yoga of the wisdom arisen from meditation
   C. The result of meditation
- Reasoning of the wisdom arisen from contemplation refers to  a  mind  that
proves the selflessness of persons. This is an  awareness  that  proves,  or
establishes, that the self of persons does not exist.
- Yoga of the wisdom arisen from meditation is the  yoga  during  meditative
equipoise that depends on calm abiding that cultivates the  selflessness  of
persons.
      -For the yoga of the wisdom arisen from meditation, in  dependence  on
calm abiding, one meditates during meditative equipoise.
      -For a person definite in Mahayana lineage, on the PoA, one  does  not
have a union of calm abiding and special insight observing selflessness.  At
the beginning, one has mere calm abiding.
      -Upon attaining the PoP,  the  person  definite  in  Mahayana  lineage
attains a union of calm abiding and special insight observing  selflessness.

- The result of meditation is that through having  meditated  or  cultivated
in that way, the manifest acquired adherence to a self of persons  has  been
abandoned and also the manifest innate adherence to a self  of  persons  has
been suppressed.
      -This is the case on  the  PoA.  Upon  attaining  the  PoS,  both  the
manifest acquired adherence to a self  of  persons  and  the  seeds  of  the
adherence to a self of persons are abandoned.
-“Having completely cast that away, because aggregates and so  forth  devoid
of that self are dependent-arisings, one perfectly observes the  bearers  of
the  properties  of  production   and   disintegration   during   subsequent
attainment.”
-Due  to  that,  one  perfectly  observes  the  bearers  of  properties   of
production  and  disintegration  during  subsequent  attainment,  i.e.   one
perfectly observes the things that have the  properties  of  production  and
disintegration during subsequent attainment.
-The bearers of the properties of  production  and  disintegration  are  the
aggregates and so forth. These aggregates and so forth have  the  properties
of production and  disintegration.  One  observes  those  during  subsequent
attainment.
-“One acts to abandon the  adherence  to  the  continuity  as  substantially
existent” means one acts to abandon the adherence to the self.
- “Meditation on this through a union of calm abiding  and  special  insight
exists from the PoP through to the PoS”- this is a bit awkward as  it  seems
to say that on the PoM there is no such meditation. Why is it that  the  PoM
is not mentioned with respect to this meditation through the union  of  calm
abiding and special insight?
- In general, even on the PoM, there is meditation on selflessness.
-“However, the meditation in dependence on mere calm abiding exists even  on
the PoA. The purpose is, having destroyed the glory of  the  afflictions  on
the occasions of the PoA and PoP for the sake of suppressing the classes  of
sufferings of cyclic existence.”
- “There is a  purpose  for  cultivating  the  yogic  ground  that  observes
selflessness because it is for the sake - of: (i) suppressing  the  manifest
afflictions and
(ii) passing through the grounds of hearers having viewed  them  by  knowing
and seeing.”
- On the Mahayana PoS, the bodhisattva has passed  through  the  grounds  of
hearers by having viewed them  by  knowing  and  seeing.  Perhaps  for  this
reason, the PoM is not explicitly mentioned  as  a  path  during  which  one
meditates on selflessness through  a  union  of  calm  abiding  and  special
insight.
-“Further, if one has not abandoned the cyclic existence that  is  a  result
of karma and afflictions, let alone accomplishing others’ welfare, one  will
not be able to accomplish even one’s welfare. Hence it has been taught  that
bodhisattvas have despondency with respect to cyclic  existence  that  is  a
hundred thousand times stronger than that of hearers.”
-In general, the cultivation of the aspects of  the  four  noble  truths  is
very important for hearers  and  solitary  realizers.  Is  this  cultivation
unimportant for bodhisattvas? In fact, on the Mahayana path, the aspects  of
the four noble truths are cultivated in an even more profound and  extensive
manner.
-As much as possible, one needs to contemplate suffering.
- If one’s contemplation on suffering is strong, the wish  to  be  separated
from suffering will be  strong,  and  thus  the  mind  of  renunciation,  or
definite emergence, will be strong. As a result, one  is  able  to  generate
great compassion.
-  If  one’s  meditation  on  suffering  is  weak,   one   cannot   generate
renunciation or great compassion.
- Among the various types of meditation, meditation  on  suffering  is  very
important.
- With respect to meditation on suffering, it is important not to  let  this
contemplation become like an observation of others’ suffering, as if one  is
a spectator. One needs to relate the suffering to oneself.  It  is  possible
that when one  contemplates  suffering,  one  thinks  of  the  suffering  of
others, without thinking that this suffering could affect oneself.
-When we contemplate suffering, it is important  to  remember,  “Although  I
may not  be  experiencing  these  sufferings  now,  I  have  the  causes  to
experience them. These sufferings can happen to me tomorrow, or  next  year,
or next life, etc.” In  this  way,  we  need  to  relate  the  suffering  to
ourselves, otherwise the wish to be free from suffering will not be  strong.

-Most of us want to be free from suffering, but our desire to be  free  from
suffering is superficial.
-When we are healthy, happy, free  from  temporal  problems  etc.,  we  feel
contented and do not engage in any methods to be free from  suffering.  This
is a sign that our wish is not of good quality.
-So we need to contemplate suffering in the proper way  by  relating  it  to
ourselves, so that the wish to be free of suffering will be generated  in  a
powerful way, and in that way we can also generate  renunciation  and  great
compassion.
-Among the three kinds of suffering:
      -suffering of suffering
      -suffering of change
      -pervasive compounded suffering
contemplation on pervasive compounded suffering is very important.
-If you contemplate well on this, you will be  able  to  generate  the  mind
that wishes to be free of suffering in a good way. If you  just  contemplate
the first two types [suffering of suffering  &  suffering  of  change],  you
will not be able to generate a mind wishing to be free of suffering that  is
of good quality.
The stages of meditation during meditative equipoise in  dependence  on  the
reasoning of the wisdom arisen from contemplation
Reasoning of the wisdom arisen from contemplation
-Blue and the awareness to which blue appears, are not different  substances
because of definite concurrent observation. -This is an assertion common  to
the MOS & AMWS. They share this assertion.
-There are 2 types of appearing objects:
      - the common appearing object
      - the uncommon appearing object.
- Let us say 40 people look at a blue color:
      -This object that the 40 people look at  is  posited  as  the  “common
appearing object.”
The  common  appearing  object  exists  only  if  one   does   not   perform
investigation or analysis. If one performs investigation and  analysis,  the
common appearing object does not exist.
      -In dependence on the  individual  eye  consciousnesses  viewing  this
blue, different modes of appearance will arise. One person  may  think,  “It
is too dark,” others think, “It is too light,” “It is good,”  “It  is  bad,”
etc.
In  dependence  on  different  eye  consciousnesses,  there  are   different
appearing objects. These are the “uncommon appearing objects.”
- An individual would have an  uncommon  mode  of  appearance  that  is  not
shared by others. This uncommon mode of appearance  is  established  in  the
entity of the consciousness of that person. This uncommon  appearing  object
is of one substance, or one entity, with the consciousness of that person.
- This uncommon appearing object and  the  consciousness  (the  knower)  are
said to be one substance, or one entity because they are established from  a
single latency.
-Due to the nourishing of a single latency, blue and the awareness to  which
blue appears come into existence concurrently. Blue  and  the  awareness  to
which blue  appears  are  observed  simultaneously,  or  concurrently.  This
assertion is shared by the MOS & Yogic AMWS.  The  Sutra  AMWS  has  a  very
different assertion.
Yoga of the wisdom arisen from meditation
-During meditative equipoise, one pays attention, thinking,  “This  blue  is
the nature of only mere mind; there is no external  object,”  and  meditates
on that.
The result of meditation
The  result  of  meditating  on  the  emptiness  of  the   apprehender   and
apprehended being different substances is that  one  abandons  adherence  to
external objects and one will  understand  that  dualistic  appearances  are
mistaken. This occurs even though one does not meditate on subtle  emptiness
and does not abandon adherence to true existence.
-There is a purpose for meditating on apprehendeds  and  apprehenders  being
empty of different substances, because it is for the sake of :
      (i) abandoning the adherence to apprehendeds  and  apprehenders  being
different objects and
      (ii)passing through the grounds of solitary  realizers  having  viewed
them by knowing and seeing.
-In the 2nd chapter,  it  is  indicated  for  the  sake  of  abandoning  the
adherence to apprehendeds and apprehenders being  different  substances  and
also to take care of solitary realizer trainees.
-In the 3rd chapter, it is indicated for the sake  of  bodhisattvas  passing
through the grounds of solitary realizers, having  viewed  them  by  knowing
and seeing.
-It  is  meditated  on  the  Mahayana  PoA  through  to  the  PoS.  So   the
significance of positing these as the boundaries  is  the  same  as  in  the
context of the yogic ground that realizes the selflessness of persons.
-Q&A: Example of a bowl of liquid appearing as blood and  pus  to  a  hungry
ghost, as water to a human, and as nectar to a god. These various  modes  of
appearance depend on karma. Karma is very powerful. It is  said  that  if  a
hungry  ghost  approaches  a  river,  the  water  will  vanish  -  what  was
previously a river will appear as dry.
If we say there is a bowl of blood and pus that is seen  in  different  ways
by those three beings, we are not saying that there is blood and pus in  the
bowl from its own side. The reason we say “water” in general is  that  human
beings, in general, have moderate karma compared to beings of other  realms,
and their view is more balanced, or moderate. From  the  point  of  view  of
hungry ghosts, due to their having accumulated heavy negativities,  the  way
in which things appear to them is  extreme,  not  moderate.  If  a  bowl  of
nectar were placed in front of an ordinary human being, whether or not  this
person can see the nectar is questionable. If they have pure karma,  it  may
appear as nectar; if they do not have pure karma, it  may  not  appear  like
nectar.
The stages of attention during subsequent attainment
- By definitely thinking during the occasion of subsequent  attainment,  “If
apprehendeds do not exist as another substance, unmistaken  apprehenders  to
which apprehendeds and apprehenders appear to be of different substances  do
not  exist,”  having  eliminated  even  that  mere   apprehension   of   the
characteristics of  the  aspect  of  apprehender  as  unmistaken  cognition,
having ascertained that “Solely this exalted wisdom of  non-duality  of  the
apprehendeds and apprehenders is a  perfectly  existing  entity,”  one  pays
attention to that.
      This is the meaning of not having abandoned  the  conception  of  true
existence of a knower of non-duality with respect to  the  imprint  of  that
realization; it is inappropriate [to interpret it as] (i) adherence to  true
existence that is induced by its own force and (ii) establishment  as  truly
existent as the meaning of the formulated  tenets.  (a)  Understanding  that
apprehenders  to  which  apprehendeds  and  apprehenders  appear  to  be  of
different substances are mistaken and  (b)  counteracting  the  apprehension
that they are  unmistaken  as  explained  above  indicate  the  occasion  of
subsequent attainment.
-  During  meditative  equipoise,  one  realizes   that   apprehendeds   and
apprehenders do not exist as different substances.  As  a  result  of  this,
during subsequent attainment,  one  eliminates  the  apprehension  that  the
apprehenders  to  which  apprehendeds  and  apprehenders  appear  to  be  of
different substances are unmistaken. In other words, one realizes that  such
apprehenders are mistaken. One then places one’s attention on that.
- “This is the meaning of  not  having  abandoned  the  conception  of  true
existence of a knower of non-duality with respect to  the  imprint  of  that
realization; it is inappropriate to interpret it as:
      (i) adherence to true existence that is induced by its own force and
      (ii) establishment as truly existent as the meaning of the  formulated
tenets.
-In other words, although one has  not  abandoned  the  conception  of  true
existence of a knower of non-duality, this does not mean  that  one  adheres
to true existence in the way that adherence to true existence is induced  by
its own force.
- There is a 2nd wrong interpretation: it is inappropriate to  interpret  it
as “establishment as  truly  existent  as  the  meaning  of  the  formulated
tenets.” If one were to think that true existence was  the  meaning  of  the
formulated tenets, this would be inappropriate.
-  (a)  Understanding  that   apprehenders   to   which   apprehendeds   and
apprehenders appear to be of different substances are mistaken and
- (b) counteracting the apprehension that they are unmistaken  as  explained
above indicate the occasion of subsequent attainment.
-Q&A: From the point of view of CMWS, emptiness of duality is  not  posited.
From the point of view of CMWS, we would say  that  at  the  beginning,  one
meditates on impermanence, then  on  coarse  selflessness,  then  on  subtle
selflessness. Subtle selflessness, according to CMWS, is nothing other  than
emptiness.  When  differentiating  between  selflessness  of   persons   and
selflessness of phenomena, it is the bases of emptiness that are  different.
Selflessness of persons and selflessness of phenomena  do  not  differ  from
the point of view of the subtlety of the objects of negation.
- In Yogic AMWS, the final basis of characterization of a person is  posited
as the  mental  consciousness.  It  is  possible  to  say  that  the  mental
consciousness that is  the  basis  of  characterization  of  the  person  is
imputedly existent, not substantially existent.
-  For  the  relationship  between  the  person  and  the  final  basis   of
characterization of the person,  if  you  look  for  the  person  among  the
aggregates, in the end, you will  end  up  with  the  mental  consciousness,
because it is the mental consciousness that transfers to the  next  rebirth,
not the other aggregates. For this reason, the AMWS is  not  able  to  posit
the mere “I,” as is posited in the CMWS. The AMWS, besides pointing out  the
mental consciousness as the final basis of  characterization,  cannot  point
out anything else. These points come about because  of  the  tenets  of  the
AMWS.
Yogic ground that realizes all phenomena are empty of true existence
Reasoning of the wisdom arisen from contemplation
-Here it refers to the awareness that arises in dependence on the sign.
-“The subject -furthermore, that knower  of  non-duality  -lacks  entitiness
ultimately, because it is a dependent-arising.” The sign -it is a dependent-
arising.
-In this context “the reasoning of the wisdom arisen from contemplation”  is
related to the realization of emptiness  of  true  existence.  In  order  to
realize emptiness, it is not sufficient to just think of  emptiness.  Simply
thinking about emptiness will not make us realize emptiness. We need to  use
a correct sign. Based on such a  sign,  we  need  to  contemplate  emptiness
again and again. However, even a repeated  contemplation  of  the  sign  for
proving emptiness is still  not  sufficient  to  realize  emptiness  because
without a strong backing support of the accumulation of merit, there  is  no
way to be able to realize emptiness. We have  habituated  with  negativities
since  beginningless  time.  As  a  result,  these  negativities  serve   as
hindrances to easily realizing impermanence, emptiness, etc. So it  is  very
important to accumulate merit and purify our negativities. This practice  of
gathering the accumulation of merit will definitely benefit the  realization
of emptiness.
- Contemplation by means of this sign as stated here -“that knower  of  non-
duality lacks entitiness ultimately,  because  it  is  a  dependent-arising”
-can be considered the  accumulation  of  exalted  wisdom.  On  top  of  the
accumulation of exalted wisdom, we need to also work on the accumulation  of
merit.
- When we contemplate emptiness, if the mind is distracted/scattered,  there
is no way  to  come  to  the  realization  of  emptiness.  Therefore  it  is
indispensable to also work on meditative stabilization,  gathering  all  the
conditions for calm abiding and attaining calm abiding.
-Knower  of  non-duality  lacks  entitiness  ultimately  because  it  is   a
dependent-arising. For example, like an  illusion,  since,  by  way  of  the
reasoning, “When the true existence of things has been  negated,  since  the
object of negation does not exist, it is clear that the  negation  does  not
exist perfectly,” that the negation is truly existent is also refuted.
-In dependence on the reasoning of the  wisdom  arisen  from  contemplation,
from within the state of calm abiding, the yogi meditates on  emptiness.  In
that way, one is able to abandon the manifest adherence to true existence.
-During the meditative equipoise in which one directly  realizes  emptiness,
the  afflictive  obscurations  and  the  knowledge  obscurations  are  being
abandoned.
-During  subsequent  attainment,  one  realizes  that  phenomena  are   like
illusions. On the PoP, one who is definite in the Mahayana  lineage  attains
a union of calm abiding and special insight observing emptiness.
-The manifest acquired adherence to true existence has been  abandoned,  and
also the manifest innate conception of true existence has been suppressed.
-On the PoP, one does not have a direct realization of emptiness yet.
-Upon attaining the PoS, one has a direct realization  of  emptiness  during
meditative equipoise. On the PoS, one abandons the  acquired  conception  of
true existence along with the seeds.
-When one attains the PoM,  one  abandons  the  innate  conception  of  true
existence along with the seeds. During  meditative  equipoise  of  the  PoM,
there is this abandonment, and during subsequent  attainment,  one  has  the
realization of phenomena as being like illusions.
Yoga of the wisdom arisen from meditation
- Through having meditated, thinking, “Perfectly and solely,  phenomena  are
free from the imputed entities as the thing  that  is  true  existence,  the
truly existent lack of the thing (that is true existence) in which that  has
been negated, and so forth,” one abandons the adherence to true existence.
The result of meditation
- The result of the meditation is that one attains a clear  appearance  with
respect to dharmata in dependence on a union of  calm  abiding  and  special
insight. Also, the yogi perfectly abandons the afflictive  obscurations  and
knowledge obscurations.
- The  reason  is  because,  at  that  time,  all  signs  that  mistake  the
aggregates  as  truly  existent,  the  seeds  of  the   acquired   knowledge
obscurations, have been abandoned,  and  the  non-conceptualizing  awareness
(of meditative equipoise to which the awareness itself, although  appearing,
is empty of  true  existence,  appears  as  the  nature  of  being  like  an
illusion) is perfectly produced like whatever that is to be cognized by  the
individual meditative equipoise itself.
-There are 3 levels of dependent-arising:
   1. dependent-arising in dependence on causes and conditions, i.e., due to
      dependence on causes and conditions, something is dependent-arising;
   2. dependent-arising due to dependence on parts; and
   3. dependent-arising due to dependence on imputation.
-  Without  calm  abiding,  one  can  have  intermittent  flashes   of   the
realization of emptiness. One cannot abide in that realization  for  a  long
time because even if one may get  a  flash  of  insight,  it  is  lost  very
quickly. For this reason, it is important to cultivate calm abiding.
- With calm abiding, one is able to remain on the object for  a  long  time,
for as long as one wishes. If one  accomplishes  calm  abiding  and  attains
calm abiding, the manifest afflictions are also suppressed. On  that  basis,
if one goes on to attain special insight, one has a very powerful  mind  for
realizing emptiness. On that basis, one first attains a clear appearance  of
emptiness, and eventually a direct realization of emptiness,  through  which
one can abandon the various objects of abandonment.
- If the mind is powerful, one can remain in  equipoise  on  emptiness,  and
even when one arises from equipoise, phenomena appear like illusions.
- Dependent-arisings do not appear as illusions  in  the  perspective  of  a
learner arya’s  meditative  equipoise  that  directly  comprehends  ultimate
truths.  If  dependent-arisings  were  to  appear  as   illusions   in   the
perspective  of  a  learner  arya’s  meditative  equipoise   that   directly
comprehends ultimate truths, this would mean that there is a learner  arya’s
meditative equipoise that directly realizes the two truths. In  fact,  there
is no such learner arya’s meditative equipoise that  directly  realizes  the
two truths simultaneously.
-In fact, illusions  do  not  have  to  be  established  through  reasoning.
Likewise, the reflection of a face  in  the  mirror  does  not  need  to  be
established through reasoning.
Illusions, reflections of a face in a mirror,  and  the  like  are  used  as
examples. In dependence on examples, the actual meaning can be  realized.  -
The reflection  is  an  example  used  to  realize  the  emptiness  of  true
existence.
Demonstration of damage to ultimately existent obscurations
-  If  obscurations  were  to  exist  ultimately,  then  meditation  on  the
antidotes would not damage the obscurations, just as  one  is  not  able  to
produce benefit or damage to uncompounded space.
- Just as one is not able to benefit space and cause damage  to  space,  one
would not be able to damage the objects of abandonment, because  they  exist
ultimately.
- If the obscurations that are the objects  of  abandonment  are  ultimately
existent, then how can you posit the antidotes  in  this  AMWS  system?  The
fact that there are objects of abandonment means that there are  some  kinds
of antidote to counteract them.
- In this system, the realization of emptiness being  the  antidote  to  the
objects of abandonment, but if the objects  of  abandonment  are  ultimately
existent, how can the realization of emptiness damage them?
- The realization of emptiness is a mind  realizing  the  lack  of  ultimate
existence, so if the obscurations are  ultimately  existent,  how  can  this
mind realizing the lack of ultimate existence harm the obscurations?
The contradiction between accepting that and accepting  the  assertion  that
the seeds of knowledge obscurations can be abandoned
-Accepting that knowledge obscurations have been abandoned by the  Bhagavan,
and accepting that objects of abandonment  and  antidotes  exist  ultimately
are contradictory.
-As the reason, the Propounders of Things, (a) have accepted that  knowledge
obscurations have been abandoned by the  Bhagavan,  and  (b)  have  accepted
that objects of abandonment and antidotes exist ultimately, and do not  turn
away the errors of adherence to ultimately existent  things  if  they  exist
ultimately.” (The underlined part means the Propounders  of  Things  do  not
turn away the errors of adherence to  ultimately  existent  things  because,
according to them, things exist ultimately. If they  exist  ultimately,  the
adherence to ultimately existent things is not erroneous, and  since  it  is
not erroneous, they do not  turn  away  from  the  adherence  to  ultimately
existent things.)
- From the point of  view  of  our  own  system,  if  you  assert  that  the
knowledge obscurations have been abandoned, it is unreasonable to  say  that
the objects of abandonment and antidotes exist ultimately.
Indicating that those desiring to attain final great enlightenment  need  to
accept that all phenomena are empty of true existence
-Having eliminated the position of ultimately existent obscurations in  that
way, by firmly taking the position of lack of entitiness  ultimately,  those
desiring liberation should accept only this emptiness of true  existence  of
all phenomena.”
5.21a With respect to those, there is no object to be eliminated,
- This means that if the objects of adherence of  the  conceptions  of  self
exist, then upon analysis they will  become  clearer  and  clearer.  But  in
fact, when one analyzes, one is not  able  to  find  them.  The  objects  of
adherence of the conceptions of the self of persons and of phenomena do  not
exist, and ultimately existent afflictions also do not exist. There  are  no
previously existent objects of adherence of  the  two  conceptions  of  self
that need to be newly eliminated.
-Through this,
      (i) the superimpositions  that  adhere  to  any  phenomenon  as  truly
existent and have deviated from the meaning of the mode of abidance, and
      (ii) their objects  of  adherence,  have  been  indicated  to  not  be
established from the beginning.
Although  the  conception  of  afflictions  as  ultimately  existent  is   a
conception of self of phenomena, explaining that itself separately  is  with
purpose.
- The afflictions themselves are not conceptions of self of  phenomena,  but
the conception of the afflictions as ultimately existent is a conception  of
self of phenomena.
- “the superimpositions… have been indicated to not be established from  the
beginning…” sound strange  as  this  may  means  that  the  superimpositions
mentioned in point one have been indicated to not be  established  from  the
beginning. How can you say that it is not established  from  the  beginning?
For example, we have innate ignorance.
Geshe-la: One way is to combine points  (i)  and  (ii),  and  say,  “Through
this, the objects of adherence of the superimpositions that  adhere  to  any
phenomenon as truly existent and have deviated from the meaning of the  mode
of abidance have been indicated to not be established from the beginning.”
- Another way is, in addition to this statement  that  combines  points  (i)
and (ii), to say, “In addition, the  superimpositions  that  adhere  to  any
phenomenon as truly existent and have deviated from the meaning of the  mode
of abidance  have  been  indicated  to  not  be  established  as  ultimately
existent from the beginning.”
- Indeed, ultimately  existent  ignorance  has  never  existed.  It  is  not
established from the beginning.
-Q&A: If there is an unmistaken appearance of  apprehended  and  apprehender
as being of the same substance, e.g. the sense consciousness to  which  blue
appears and the color blue appearing as being of the  same  substance,  then
how does the coarse realization appear?
- This unmistaken appearance of apprehended and apprehender as being of  the
same substance has to appear to  an  arya  who  is  directly  realizing  the
emptiness of apprehendeds and apprehenders being different  substances.  For
a conceptual realization, it is  necessarily  mistaken.  For  an  unmistaken
appearance,  it  is  an  arya’s  direct  realization.  Experientially,  this
unmistaken appearance has to occur in an arya’s direct realization.
-When blue is apprehended by a sense consciousness to  which  blue  appears,
does one see the shape and color beyond the form  of  this  object?  E.g.  a
blue flower as the object, when one perceives the form of this blue  flower,
simultaneously one also perceives its shape  and  color.  This  is  a  sense
consciousness to which blue appears.
Q&A: To this  direct  realization  of  the  emptiness  of  apprehendeds  and
apprehenders  of   being   different   substances,   do   apprehendeds   and
apprehenders appear?
 - If one is in meditative equipoise directly  realizing  the  emptiness  of
duality, apprehendeds and apprehenders would not appear; only the  emptiness
of apprehendeds and apprehenders being different  substances  would  appear.
That very consciousness of  meditative  equipoise  would  not  realize  that
apprehendeds and apprehenders are established as being the  same  substance,
because if that meditative equipoise were to realize that  apprehendeds  and
apprehenders are of the same substance, it would mean that the emptiness  of
duality would be an affirming negative. [Note: an example  of  an  affirming
negative is the reverse of non-pot; by eliminating non-pot, pot is  implied,
thus it is an affirming negative. [see Meditation on Emptiness, p. 723]
5.21b There is no object to be posited slightly.
-“There is no object  to  be  posited  slightly”  means  that  there  is  no
previously  non-existent  selflessness  of  persons   or   selflessness   of
phenomena to be newly posited  even  slightly.  It  is  not  the  case  that
through proving them through reasoning, the  two  selflessnesses  come  into
existence. Before proving them through reasoning, they existed.  It  is  not
the case that at one time  a  self  of  persons  and  a  self  of  phenomena
existed, and due to them being refuted through reasoning,  the  selflessness
of persons and the selflessness of phenomena came into existence.
- With respect to these constituents, there is  no  previously  non-existent
object -the two selflessnesses -to be newly posited even  slightly,  because
they are the natures of being devoid of a self of persons and of  phenomena.

-Through this, the refutations of
      (i) the deprecations that wrongly engage the meaning of  the  mode  of
abidance, saying, “the two selflessnesses do not exist,” and
      (ii) their objects of adherence, have been indicated to not  be  newly
posited.
-Explaining in general that there is no stain to be eliminated and there  is
no antidote to be generated -without affixing qualifications to the  objects
of negation -is a deprecation. [if we simply say, “There is no stain  to  be
eliminated, and no antidote to be generated,” this is a deprecation. But  if
we qualify it, saying, “There is no stain to be eliminated  ultimately,  and
no antidote to be generated ultimately,” then this is correct.]
-Furthermore, that very explanation by way of the first two  lines  [5.21ab]
is correlated to the meaning established: if it is  established  that  there
is no previously existent affliction that is  truly  existent  to  be  newly
eliminated, then it is established that there is no previously  non-existent
affliction that is empty of true existence to be newly posited.
-That is an explanation in terms of the explicitly indicated  self-isolates;
if the emptiness of true existence, ultimate truth, is  established  (since,
with respect to these -the person and the aggregates -there is  no  previous
existent that is truly existent to be newly eliminated), then, (since it  is
established that there is no previously non-existent  illusion-like  falsity
that is empty of true existence to be newly  posited  even  slightly),  with
respect  to  objects  that  are  empty  of  being  established   by   nature
ultimately, conventional  truths  -in  which  all  actions  and  agents  are
feasible  -are  established.  [If  ultimate  truth  is   established,   then
conventional truths are established.]
[Why do we say  that  ultimate  truth  is  established?  The  answer  is  as
mentioned, “since, with respect to these  -the  person  and  the  aggregates
-there  is  no  previous  existent  that  is  truly  existent  to  be  newly
eliminated.” In other words, the person and the aggregates are not  previous
existents that are truly existent and that need to be newly eliminated.
- “since  it  is  established  that  there  is  no  previously  non-existent
illusion-like falsity that is empty of true existence to  be  newly  posited
even slightly.” The reason says that there  is  no  previously  non-existent
illusion-like falsity that is empty of true existence to  be  newly  posited
even slightly. In other words, it is not the case  that  it  was  previously
non-existent, and now needs to be newly posited.]
-In summary, the union of the two truths  -that  is  permitted  due  to  our
system’s acceptance of
      (i) ultimate truth, the emptiness  of  true  existence  in  which  the
focal object of the  conception  of  true  existence  does  not  exist  even
slightly, and
      (ii) all presentations of objects and agents
has been indicated.
5.21c It correctly views the perfect.
- The wisdom realizing the lack of nature ultimately, which correctly  views
the  perfect  -the  emptiness  of  the  person  and  the  aggregates   being
established by nature ultimately -in that way, is the view that  understands
the meaning of the mode of abidance.
- “It correctly views the perfect.”
- “The perfect” refers to the emptiness of ultimate existence of the  person
and the aggregates.
-“It” which views the perfect is the wisdom realizing  the  lack  of  nature
ultimately.
5.21d Having seen the perfect, liberation.
- If one has seen this view  of  emptiness,  conjoined  with  the  extensive
factor of method, and familiarizes with the meaning of emptiness  again  and
again, one will attain the state of  liberation,  the  state  of  a  perfect
complete buddha.
- The point to understand from this passage is that:
      - if one has only method, one will not attain liberation; likewise
      - if one only has wisdom,  the  correct  view,  one  will  not  attain
liberation.
It is through a union of method and wisdom that one will  attain  liberation
and omniscience.
- Dependent-arisings, forms and so  forth,  these  entitinesses  that  exist
perfectly, that is, by way of their own  character,  conventionally  -should
be investigated and meditated upon as  entities  lacking  nature  ultimately
and so forth by those desiring to attain omniscience.
-Because to be liberated ultimately from adherence to things that  have  not
been abandoned is incorrect.
- They should view the mode of abidance of conventionalities  that  are  the
bases in the manner of a union of the two  truths,  because  any  phenomenon
should be known as not existing ultimately and as  existing  conventionally,
without having been:
(i) eliminated by the entity of deprecation,  saying,  “It  does  not  exist
even conventionally,” or
(ii)  posited  by  the  entity  of  superimposition,  saying,   “It   exists
ultimately.”
-When, through having familiarized with it in that way,  one  sees  suchness
with direct cognition, one will  be  completely  liberated,  since,  if  one
familiarizes with it in that way, one turns away errors, falsities that  are
objects of abandonment, by way of falsities  that  are  antidotes,  like  an
illusory elephant defeating another illusory elephant.
-In brief, the above passage means those who desire  to  attain  omniscience
should meditate on dependent-arising -forms and so forth -as lacking  nature
ultimately. If one has adherence to things, it is  not  possible  to  attain
omniscience. One desiring omniscience should view the mode  of  abidance  of
conventionalities in a manner of the union of the two truths.
-In other words, one should know phenomena without deprecation  and  without
superimposition. In this way, being free from the  extremes  of  deprecation
and superimposition, one should know the two truths. By  familiarizing  with
this, one will eventually see suchness with direct cognition, and  one  will
attain liberation and omniscience.  “Like  an  illusory  elephant  defeating
another illusory elephant.”
The self-entity of the peak application of the path of seeing
5.22  That included within the forbearance that is the same instant as
            That which is those mutually included
            In each of generosity and so forth,
            Is the path of seeing in this.
-  That  uninterrupted  path  included  within  the  forbearance  of  dharma
knowledge with respect to sufferings that is the same instant as that  which
is those 6 perfections mutually included in each of generosity and so  forth
is the PA of the PoS in this context, because it is a clear  realization  of
the truth that acts to directly destroy the seeds of the  conceptualizations
of apprehendeds and apprehenders that are the objects  to  be  abandoned  by
the path of seeing.
-  the  uninterrupted  path  included  within  the  forbearance  of   dharma
knowledge with respect to true sufferings that is conjoined with the  wisdom
that desires to practice inclusively the 6  perfections  in  their  entirety
within each of the 6 perfections.
- The uninterrupted path of the Mahayana PoS can be divided into  8  by  way
of isolates. The forbearance  of  dharma  knowledge  with  respect  to  true
sufferings is one of the eight isolates.
- that uninterrupted path which has been produced  bearing  the  36  aspects
that are divisions by way of isolates distinguished by the  pure  3  circles
with respect to all 6 perfections, that included within the  forbearance  of
dharma knowledge with respect to sufferings, the same instant as that  which
is the 6 perfections mutually included in each entity of generosity  and  so
forth individually is the PoS with respect to this clear realization of  the
peak.
-That uninterrupted path with respect to directly destroying the seeds  that
are the knowledge obscurations has been indicated as being produced  in  the
nature of infinite clear realizations.  If  it  were  not  distinguished  by
infinite accumulations of merit, it would not be able to abandon  the  seeds
that are the knowledge obscurations.
- In chapter 1, in the context of the  achieving  of  armor,  there  was  an
explanation of the bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined with  the  attitude  wishing
to practice inclusively the 6 perfections in their entirety in each  of  the
6 perfections. If each of the 6 perfections is practiced within each of  the
6 perfections, we end up with 36 aspects.
- The uninterrupted path of the Mahayana PoS is conjoined with 36 aspects.
- In the continuum of a bodhisattva, there is an innate conception  of  true
existence. We would not say that the uninterrupted path  is  conjoined  with
the innate conception of true existence. Although the innate  conception  of
true existence exists in the continuum of  this  bodhisattva,  it  does  not
assist the uninterrupted path. For this reason we would  not  say  that  the
uninterrupted  path  is  conjoined  with  this  innate  conception  of  true
existence.
-So because these 36 aspects assist/support the uninterrupted path,  we  say
that the uninterrupted path is conjoined with these 36 aspects.
- Why is there a need for the uninterrupted path to  be  conjoined  with  so
many minds? If one were not conjoined with so  many  minds,  one  could  not
accumulate infinite merit and could not  abandon  the  seeds  that  are  the
knowledge obscurations. To be  able  to  abandon  those  acquired  knowledge
obscurations, one needs to accumulate a lot of merit, which is  attained  by
the uninterrupted path being conjoined with many such minds.
- When we talk about the uninterrupted path being  conjoined  with  the  36,
those aspects are conjoined with the uninterrupted path  in  a  non-manifest
manner.
- During meditative equipoise we  have  the  exalted  wisdom  of  meditative
equipoise; that is manifest, and in its retinue  are  the  five  omnipresent
mental   factors   [feeling,   discrimination,   intention,   contact,   and
attention]. They are also manifest during the uninterrupted path.
- If that PA of the PoS has been produced, then the abandonment of  the  108
afflictions that are latencies that act to generate  the  conceptualizations
included within those conceptualizations of  apprehendeds  and  apprehenders
that are objects to be abandoned by the PoS is attained through  the  nature
of dependent-arising, since the 108 conceptualizations of  apprehendeds  and
apprehenders that  are  objects  to  be  abandoned  by  the  PoS  have  been
exhaustively abandoned by it. [According to the AMWS, these 108  afflictions
are knowledge] obscurations.
-It is appropriate to divide the conceptualizations into 108, because  there
are 36 with respect to each realm  by  the  divisions  included  within  the
levels  of  the  desire,  form,  and  formless  realms,  through  9  aspects
individually of each of the 4 conceptualizations that exist.
-The 4  types  of  conceptualizations:  2  types  of  conceptualizations  of
apprehendeds and 2 types of conceptualizations of apprehenders.
- Each of these has 9 divisions ( 4 x 9 = 36.
- There are  3  realms  (  36  x  3  =108.   We  have  these  108  knowledge
obscurations.
-For afflictive obscurations that are objects of  abandonment  of  the  PoS:
there are 112
- 40 in desire realm, 36 in the form realm, and 36 in the formless realm.
- There are 4 less in the form realm and formless realm because there is  no
anger in the form realm and formless realm.
- To gain control over the PA of PoS means to gain control over the  objects
of abandonment of the PA of  PoS.  In  order  to  do  that,  one  repeatedly
cultivates the PA of PoS.
5.23  Then, due to having absorbed into the meditative stabilization
            Of the loftily looking lion,
            He realizes the forward order and
            Reverse order of dependent-arising.
- The 1st two lines refer to meditative equipoise.  The  yogi  absorbs  into
the meditative stabilization of the loftily looking lion  during  meditative
equipoise, and  during  subsequent  attainment,  realizes  the  forward  and
reverse order of dependent-arising. A lion  trains  in  dexterity  from  the
time of being small. As it becomes older, it becomes more dexterous  and  is
able to jump here and there.
- The yogi realizing the forward  and  reverse  order  of  dependent-arising
during subsequent attainment. We can think about  the  forward  and  reverse
order of dependent-arising with respect to the  thoroughly  afflicted  class
as well as with respect to the completely pure class.
- Having indicated the mode of abandoning the objects  to  be  abandoned  by
the PA of PoS, then, the yogi who cultivates the PA of the PoS  possesses  a
special function that acts to gain control over  the  abandonment,  because,
due to having absorbed  into  the  meditative  stabilization  of  a  loftily
looking lion during meditative equipoise, during  subsequent  attainment  he
realizes the forward order and reverse order of dependent-arising.
-The assertion that the yoga (that is cultivated on the occasion of the  PoM
after the PA of PoS has been cultivated) has been indicated  by  the  “then”
mentioned in the root text 5.23a  is  unrelated,  because  the  Acarya  very
clearly indicated that it refers  to  the  cultivation  by  that  very  yogi
abiding on the PA of PoS.
-Even if they were correlated to the earlier and later stages  with  respect
to ascertainment, one should explain that the uninterrupted  path  has  been
indicated by the earlier passage, and the liberated path (in which  fear  of
the two obscurations has been  extinguished)  has  been  indicated  by  this
passage.
-Someone says: You cannot say there is  repeated  cultivation,  because  the
clear realization of truth is just one instant.
-Our system: Since  the  uninterrupted  path  and  liberated  path  are  two
different occasions, there is repeated cultivation.  Furthermore,  not  only
is there cultivation during meditative equipoise, but it also occurs  during
subsequent attainment. So from that point of view, we can  also  talk  about
repeated cultivation.
Peak application of the path of seeing included within meditative  equipoise

-The yogi who has  attained  the  PA  of  the  PoS  has  absorbed  into  the
meditative stabilization of  the  loftily  looking  lion  during  meditative
equipoise  and  does  not  have  fear  of  the  knowledge  obscurations  and
afflictive obscurations that are to be abandoned by the PoS. The  reason  is
that  he  has  directly  abandoned  the  seeds  of  the  acquired  knowledge
obscurations.
Peak application of the path of seeing that is to be passed through,  having
been viewed by knowing and seeing, that is attained subsequent to that
- The twelve links of dependent-arising are [the links of  dependent-arising
of]:
   1. Ignorance
   2. Compositional action
   3. Consciousness
   4. Name and form
   5. Six sources
   6. Contact
   7. Feeling
   8. Craving
   9. Grasping
  10. Existence
  11. Birth
  12. Aging and death
-There is a maximum of 3 lives and a  minimum  of  2  lives  to  complete  a
single round of twelve links. However, this does not mean that the  3  lives
are necessarily successive; there may be many lives between the 1st and  the
3rd. But the actual number of rebirths for a single round of 12 links  is  3
at the maximum. Between the 1st and the 3rd -between the start and  the  end
-we can have other rounds of dependent-arising operating.  However,  in  the
case of completing one round of 12 links in  2  lives,  these  must  be  two
consecutive lives; there cannot be other lives in between them,  because  as
soon as another round  of  dependent-arising  intervenes,  the  first  round
would have to be completed in 3 rebirths.
- In 2 lives, the 12 links can be completed. One begins with ignorance,  and
due  to  this,  creates  compositional  action,  the   second   link.   This
compositional action is deposited on the consciousness. With that, we go  to
the link  craving,  which  is  attachment  that  nourishes  the  latency  of
compositional  action.  This  attachment  becomes   stronger   and   becomes
grasping; grasping nourishes the latency of the  compositional  action  that
was deposited before on the consciousness.  This  leads  to  existence,  the
tenth link, which is a potentialized  action.  Due  to  being  nourished  by
craving and grasping, the latency of the action is potentialized.  Following
existence, there is birth. This link of birth is  established  at  the  same
time as the link of name and form. In the  next  instant  after  birth,  the
link of aging and death is established. After the link of name and  form  is
established, the 6 sources are established; after that,  there  is  contact,
and after that, feeling. In this way, all the 12 links are included.
-The link of name and form is established in the same instant  as  the  link
of birth; these two links are established at the same time. As soon  as  one
takes rebirth, the form within name and form is established. In the  instant
after birth, there is aging and death. We say  that  after  name  and  form,
there are the 6 sources. This link of the 6 sources corresponds to a  period
during which the 6 sources have been formed, but even upon  the  aggregation
of the three -object,  sense  power,  consciousness  -one  is  not  able  to
utilize the objects of the 6 sources. The next  link,  contact,  corresponds
to a period when one is able to utilize the object upon the  aggregation  of
the object, sense power, and consciousness. However,  one  is  not  able  at
this point to experience feelings of pleasure and  suffering.  At  the  next
link, feeling, one is able to experience feelings of  happiness,  suffering,
or neutral feelings. This is an explanation of how one round of 12 links  of
dependent-arising occurs in terms of 2 lifetimes.
-If we discuss how one round occurs in 3 lives, we begin  in  the  same  way
with ignorance; motivated by this, we create  karma,  compositional  action,
which is deposited on consciousness. This karma is  not  nourished  in  that
same life. In a later life, it is nourished by  craving  and  grasping,  and
the link of existence is established. After  this  link  of  existence,  one
takes rebirth, so that is the 3rd life. In  that  3rd  life,  the  remaining
links -birth, aging and death, name and form, the six sources, contact,  and
feeling-occur.
- The 12th link is “aging and death”; why are  these  two  enumerated  as  a
single link, rather than as two separate links?  Between  aging  and  death,
aging is disintegration, because aging  involves  momentary  disintegration,
but death is not the same as momentary disintegration.
- In the same instant as birth, death does not occur.  It  is  possible  for
death to occur soon, but it can’t occur in the same instant.  When  we  talk
about taking rebirth, the process of taking rebirth takes time, we  need  to
have various instants.
- We can talk about the process of dying commencing as soon as one has  been
born. Although we talk about the dying process beginning after  having  been
born, this does not mean that one has died once one has been born. For  that
reason we can describe the time between birth  and  death  as  the  time  in
which aging occurs.
- Aging and death are both impermanence -subtle and  gross  impermanence  so
is that why they are both included in the same link.
- Here, aging and death are enumerated as a single link  because,  according
to the way aging and death are renowned in the world, there is  no  definite
sequence. In the world, someone who has  aged  is  someone  whose  hair  has
turned white, who has wrinkles, etc. So, as renowned in the world, there  is
no certainty that death will come after one’s hair has turned  white,  etc.,
so there is no certainty which will come first. It  can  be  the  case  that
death comes before aging,  or  that  aging  comes  before  death.  For  this
reason, they are enumerated as a single link.
- Is it possible for someone to die in the second instant after having  been
born, so there is no chance for aging to occur? No, this  is  not  possible.
This instant is 1/65th of a finger snap. It is not possible that  one  takes
rebirth and then, in the very next instant, dies.  This  second  instant  we
are talking about is a very short instant of time. It is not  possible  that
one dies in that moment without aging occurring.
- As renowned in the world,  the  sequences  of  aging  and  death  are  not
definite. You can see this in the world: sometimes young  children  die,  or
babies die, so from that point of view  the  sequence  is  not  definite.  A
person may become old, get white hair and wrinkles, and then die, but  there
is no certainty, because even before reaching that state, a person  can  die
as a baby, or as a teenager.
- Rebirth refers to conception; one is born as soon as one is conceived.
- The link of dependent-arising  of  aging  is  established  in  the  second
instant after the link of dependent-arising of birth. Of  course,  according
to what is renowned in the world, aging is not  established  in  the  second
instant after birth.
-In science, the moment of conception begins when the sperm enters the  egg,
but what causes the sperm to seek the egg, since consciousness has  not  yet
entered; the sperm has no consciousness? It is because of karma. The  reason
the sperm seeks the egg is that there are microorganisms in  the  sperm  [or
the semen]. In our bodies, there are many microorganisms which  are  active;
the  new  consciousness  does  not  need   to   have   entered   for   these
microorganisms to be active.
- There are said to be 84,000 microorganisms in the body. We would say  that
they are sentient beings. So there are sentient beings in the sperm [or  the
semen]. According to science, the mobility of sperm is due to  genetics.  In
order  for  mobility  to  occur,  it  is  not  necessary  for  there  to  be
consciousness. Plants are able to move, but  this  is  not  a  sign  of  the
presence of consciousness.
- When we talk about the 84,000 microorganisms, they arise  because  of  the
afflictions in  our  continuum.  21,000  microorganisms  arise  due  to  our
ignorance, 21,000 arise due to attachment, 21,000 arise due  to  anger,  and
21,000 arise due to a combination of the three poisons. When one is able  to
suppress these afflictions, then these microorganisms vanish.
- About investigating the 12 links in forward order and reverse  order  with
respect to the thoroughly afflicted and the completely pure;
- the thoroughly afflicted in forward order:
      -through ignorance, compositional action arises;
      -through compositional action, consciousness arises;
      -through consciousness, name and form arise;
      -through the six sources, contact arises;
      -through contact, feeling arises;
      -through feeling, craving arises;
      -through craving, grasping arises;
      -through grasping, existence arises;
      -through existence, birth arises; and
      -through birth, aging and death arise.
- the thoroughly afflicted in reverse order,:
      -aging and death arise from birth;
      -birth arises from existence;
      - existence arises from grasping, and so forth.
- the completely pure in forward order:
      -through having ceased ignorance, compositional action ceases;
      -through having ceased compositional action, consciousness ceases;
      -through having ceased  consciousness,  compositional  action  ceases,
and so forth.
-the completely pure in reverse order:
      -through having ceased birth, aging and death cease;
      -through having ceased existence, birth ceases;
      -through having ceased grasping, existence ceases, and so forth.
-If you contemplate well the twelve links from the  point  of  view  of  the
thoroughly  afflicted  in  forward  and  reverse  order,  as  well  as   the
completely  pure  in  forward  and  reverse  order,  you  will  be  able  to
understand the four noble truths well.
-In this way you will be able to produce the desire  to  be  separated  from
true sufferings, the desire to abandon true origins,  the  desire  to  cease
sufferings, and the desire to rely on true paths.
- For the desire to be separated from suffering and the  desire  to  abandon
the origins of suffering, if we examine our mind, we will see that there  is
some form of these desires, but if  we  do  not  cultivate  them,  they  are
probably quite feeble. In order to really have the  desire  to  abandon  the
origins of suffering, one  must  have  a  strong  desire  to  be  free  from
suffering, and in order to have this genuine  desire.  It  is  necessary  to
think about the variety of sufferings and how they can  happen  to  oneself.
It is not sufficient just to think, “There is  this  suffering,  etc.,”  one
must think “it can happen to me,” etc.
-If one can produce the desire to be free  from  suffering,  one  will  ask,
“What is the cause of suffering?” Through that one will go  on  to  identify
the origins of suffering and then generate the desire to abandon them.
-Without doing this contemplation, it is possible  that  our  desire  to  be
free from suffering and abandon the origins of suffering is very feeble.  It
is very likely that we have a strong wish to be  free  from  suffering  only
intermittently; e.g. when we are unwell, sick, unhappy, etc.,  the  wish  to
be free of suffering  comes  up  strongly.  But  this  wish  is  limited  to
temporal circumstances; we do not have the wish to be free  in  a  long-term
manner. This is definitely a fault.
-You should also try to generate the wish to be separated from suffering  in
the long-term way. If  you  contemplate  like  this  on  suffering  and  the
origins of suffering on the basis of the 12  links,  you  will  realize  the
uncertainty of cyclic existence in this life  and  future  lives.  You  will
realize how you are always vulnerable to suffering. If  you  contemplate  in
this way, you will develop the wish to be free from  suffering  in  a  long-
term way, and the wish to be liberated from cyclic existence.








