Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/Personal notes/Personal notes - Obj of Observation of Mahayana Achieiving.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:11.717550
================================================================================


Objects of Observation of Mahayana Achievings
- The 11 divisions of objects of observation of the Mahayana achievings:
Indicated in general:
1. Virtues: objects to be adopted
2. Non- virtues: objects to be discarded
3. The unspecified: neutral objects
Divided into eight (four pairs):
Paths:
4. Mundane paths
5. Supramundane paths
6. The contaminated: objects of abandonment:
7. The uncontaminated: antidotes
Truths:
8. The compounded (true paths)
9. The uncompounded (true cessations)
Results:
10. The results common to all aryas (the concentrations)
11. The uncommon results, i.e. qualities of the buddhas (the ten powers)

What is observed by the exalted wisdom of non-duality?
- Someone ask: The constant purity, dharmadhatu, the object of observation
of the very exalted wisdom of non-duality. Since it is the very constant
purity, how is it to be expressed as proceeding higher and higher to
distinguished purity?
- For Cittamatra, the exalted wisdom of non-duality (i.e. non-duality of
subject and object) is a realization of subtle selflessness of phenomena.
- Our response: Thinking “purity is the exalted wisdom of suchness” is
strong adherence to the antidotal  class
- Therefore, strong adherence to the discordant class is implied. The
consequence of partial purity would follow
- Someone ask: What is the final object of observation like?
-Our response: The very realization gradually of that which obscures the
nature of suchness as illusory is purity.
-  For Cittamatra and the three natures
• Other‐powered natures: all compounded phenomena.
• Thoroughly established natures: emptinesses, e.g. the lack of
apprehenders (subjects) and apprehendeds (objects) being different
substances.
• Imputational natures: all other phenomena, e.g. all permanent phenomena
that are not emptinesses. There are both existent and non‐existent
imputational natures.
- On the basis of other-powered natures, one establishes their lack of
existing separately from the apprehenders perceiving them.This is the
thoroughly established nature of other-powered natures.

- The Cittamatra position on the object of observation of an arya’s
meditative equipoise e.g. forms as the object of observation of an arya’s
meditative equipoise: the emptiness of the apprehended-objects and
apprehender-subjects being different substances is the aspect of this
arya’s meditative equipoise.
- Someone say: Cittamatrins asserts that only the thusness that is the
emptiness of apprehended-objects and their apprehender-subjects being
different substances is the object of observation of an arya’s meditative
equipoise.
   - Therefore, it is refuted that all phenomena are objects of
observation.
   - Then what is the meaning of saying that all phenomena are the objects
of observation?
- Our system: This is not the Cittamatra assertion. Your interpretation is
a sign of you not having understood the Cittamatra system, since no
trailblazer of Cittamatra has made such an assertion.
It has been established many times in the Seven Treatises that the direct
damager (the exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise) and that which is to
be damaged (the superimposition) are identical in the object of
observation.
- The Cittamatra view of what is observed by an arya’s meditative
equipoise. According to Cittamatra:
  - One takes an other-powered nature as the object of observation
  - Emptiness of the apprehended and apprehender being different substances
in terms of that is the aspect
  - That aspect is directly seen by an arya’s meditative equipoise.
  - Saying this is not the case is a contradiction of Cittamatra tenets

- Someone say: Other-powered natures do not appear to an arya’s meditative
equipoise
- Therefore, other-powered natures are not realized by a direct cognizer to
  not be established in the way they appear
- Therefore, only thusness is observed by that meditative equipoise
- Our system: This is not  correct  because  other-powered  natures  can  be
realized by a direct cognizer to not be established in the way they  appear.

- In the perspective of an arya’s meditative equipoise,  not  only  thusness
is observed.
- Thusness, that is the emptiness of true  existence,  is  observed.  Beside
that,  the  emptiness  of  apprehendeds  and  apprehenders  being  different
substances is also observed.
 -  When  we  talk  about  an  arya’s  meditative  equipoise  observing  the
emptiness of true existence, this  exists  in  sentient  beings.  An  arya’s
meditative equipoise observing non-duality also exists in sentient beings.
- However, these two types of meditative equipoise are not a  single  arya’s
meditative equipoise. They are two different arya’s meditative equipoises.
- There is not a single meditative equipoise realizing  both  the  emptiness
of true existence and non-duality in sentient beings.
- All phenomena are the objects of observation of Mahayana achievings
  because all phenomena are the bases for eliminating superimpositions
  regarding them.
- The main eliminator of the superimpositions is the arya’s meditative
  equipoise.
- The objects of observation of an arya’s meditative equipoise are all
  phenomena. But if it is an object of observation, it does not have to
  appear.
- In our system, the emptiness of true existence appears to an arya’s
  meditative equipoise.
- In Cittamatra, the emptiness of apprehendeds and apprehenders being
  different substances appears to an arya’s meditative equipoise.
- According to our system, apprehendeds and apprehenders are empty of being
different substances, but for a Mahayana arya’s meditative equipoise this
emptiness is not the direct object of comprehension. For solitary realizer
aryas it is the direct object of comprehension.
- In the Autonomy school, the 3 vehicles (hearer, solitary realizer, and
Mahayana) are posited in terms of different objects of abandonment, as well
as different main objects of cultivation.
- For a hearer learner arya, the main object of cultivation is the
selflessness of persons, and the main object of abandonment is the
conception of a self of persons.
- For a solitary realizer learner arya, the main object of cultivation is
the emptiness of apprehendeds and apprehenders being different substances,
and the main object of abandonment is the conception of apprehendeds and
apprehenders being different substances.
- For a Mahayana learner arya, the main object of cultivation is the
emptiness of true existence, the main object of abandonment is the
conception of true existence.
- There are hearers and solitary realizers who realize the emptiness of
true existence but not all do. This is because in this school, to become
free from samsara, there is no need to realize emptiness.
- In this presentation, these three main objects of cultivation are
presented in terms of the meditative equipoise that is either an
uninterrupted path or a liberated path.
- There is also a 3rd type of meditative equipoise: that which is neither
an uninterrupted path nor a liberated path.
- These 3 different kinds of main objects of observation are not made in
terms of this 3rd kind of meditative equipoise because during this 3rd kind
of meditative equipoise, all 3 objects can be taken as the object of
observation. – This mean there are instances of the meditative equipoise
that is neither an uninterrupted path nor a liberated path:
   - observing selflessness of person,
   - observing the emptiness of apprehenders and apprehendeds being empty
of being different substances, as well as
   - observing the emptiness of true existence.
- Cittamatrins and the Autonomists hold the same view on the emptiness of
apprehendeds and apprehenders being different substances.
- If we take the apprehendeds as forms, then for this kind of emptiness, it
is the emptiness of form and its apprehender being different substances.
- E.g. many people are looking at a flower but there are many different
ways of looking at it. We can say that a flower appears commonly but there
is also an uncommon way of appearance of the flower: one person thinks it
is beautiful, another sees that the color is too dark, etc. So although
there is a common flower that is seen, there are many uncommon modes of
seeing it.
- Various individuals will have their individual object of appearance. This
particular object of appearance that is unique to the individual and the
sense consciousness apprehending it are said to be of one substance. This
comes about because of a single imprint or latency being nourished.
- The uncommon object of appearance of a particular individual does not
appear to someone else, so this object of appearance is uncommon to the
individual. This is because this object of appearance is of the nature of
this individual’s consciousness.
- When this uncommon object of appearance is presented, this uncommon
object of appearance is established e.g. for the eye consciousness of that
person. So we do not talk about such an object of appearance being
established in general for all consciousnesses.
- The object that appears to a particular sense consciousness of a person
occurs through the latency in the mind that is nourished. As a result of
this latency that is nourished, there is the object of appearance.
- Lama Tsongkhapa explained the existence of this emptiness of apprehendeds
and apprehenders being different substances with respect to a conceptual
consciousness.

- Someone say: Since, in our system, it is asserted that the property-
possessor, such as sprout, appears to the seer that is a meditative
equipoise, we do not have a similar fault of refuting the Cittamatrins’
assertion. [This person thinks that in the Autonomy School, we assert a
property-possessor such as a sprout appears to the seer that is a
meditative equipoise. He thinks that if such an assertion is made in our
system, the Middle-Way system, we do not incur any fault. If the
Cittamatrins were to say this, they would incur a fault.]
- Our own: This is seriously inappropriate as an assertion of the Middle
Way system.
  -Consequence 1: If that property‐possessor (the sprout) appears to the
path of seeing directly realizing suffering as empty of true existence
a) like water placed in water, then a sprout is an ultimate truth
b) dualistically, then since even a meditative equipoise would appear
dualistically to a meditative equipoise that realizes it as empty of true
existence, that meditative equipoise would be a different substance from
itself.
  -Consequence 2: If suffering appears differently (i.e. dualistically) and
ultimate truth appears like water in water to an arya’s meditative
equipoise, then modes and varieties (ultimate truths and conventional
truths) appear dissimilarly. Otherwise, meditative equipoise and subsequent
attainment are one entity.
- If ultimate truth is realized implicitly, then what is realized
explicitly?
  - If suffering is explicitly realized, then suffering is an ultimate
truth.
- So how does the sprout (suffering, etc.) appear?
- There is no Middle-Way Consequentialist or Autonomist who asserts that
compounded property possessors appear to a seer that is a meditative
equipoise of an arya learner.
- In other words, sprouts, suffering, etc. (conventional truths) do not
appear to the meditative equipoise of an arya learner.

- Does suffering appear in a manner of water placed in water, or does it
appear dualistically, to this path of seeing directly realizing suffering
as empty of true existence?
- If it is said that a property-possessor [which is suffering] appears to a
seer that is the path of seeing directly realizing suffering as empty of
true existence, does this property-possessor appear in a manner of water
placed in water, or does it appear dualistically?
- This property-possessor is suffering.
- If suffering appears in a manner of water placed in water, the
  consequence is that it would follow that suffering is an ultimate truth.
  This consequence would be difficult to counter.
- If suffering appears dualistically to an arya’s meditative equipoise that
  sees suffering as empty of true existence, then the apprehended and the
  apprehender appear as different substances. The consequence would be that
  meditative equipoise and itself are different substances. This
  consequence would be difficult to counter.
- To an exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise, the appearing object, the
  object of engagement, and the object of the mode of apprehension are the
  same.
- When we say there is dualistic appearance, then object and object-
  possessor appearing dualistically.
- The arya’s meditative equipoise is both the object and the object-
  possessor.
- Meditative equipoise is the object-possessor. If the property-possessor
  appears dualistically, it would follow that the object (meditative
  equipoise), and the object-possessor (meditative equipoise) would be
  different substances.
- Our system: Suffering does not appear dualistically to an arya’s
meditative equipoise. Suffering does not appear at all to an arya’s
meditative equipoise that sees the emptiness of true existence. It does not
appear like water placed in water, and it does not appear dualistically
because this meditative equipoise sees itself as empty of true existence.
- To an exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise, the appearing object, the
object of engagement, and the object of the mode of apprehension are the
same.
- To understand what appears in the perspective of an arya’s meditative
equipoise, let’s say that one analyzes suffering to see if it truly exists.
Through the process of analysis, one finds that suffering is empty of true
existence. What appears is this emptiness of true existence.
- Suffering exists when we do not analyze it.
- If suffering were to appear to the meditative equipoise that analyzes it,
this would imply that suffering is truly existent.
- If suffering were to be found by the seer that is this meditative
equipoise, then it would be truly existent.
- If we investigate suffering, we do not find suffering. We realize the
emptiness of true existence of suffering.
- If we were to find suffering, then suffering would be ultimately or truly
existent.
- If suffering were to appear in the perspective of the seer of emptiness,
this would mean that suffering is truly existent, or ultimately existent,
or ultimately established.
- However, if something were to not exist in the perspective of a seer of
the emptiness of true existence, this does not mean that the object does
not exist because all phenomena exist conventionally.
- The definition of an arya’s meditative equipoise is: an arya’s clear
realization that is placed single-pointedly on the selflessness that is its
object.
- Compassion can act as a motivation for entering meditative equipoise.
During meditative equipoise on emptiness, compassion is not manifest, but
it is present, i.e. it exists. Also, if it were manifest, you cannot do
anything, because you are meditating and cannot move.

- Someone’s qualm: Further, to that path of seeing,  does  suffering  appear
differently and does ultimate truth appear in a manner of  water  placed  in
water, or is ultimate truth realized implicitly?
This qualm has two possibilities:
1st possibility: to that path of seeing, does suffering appear differently
and ultimate truth appears in a manner of water placed in water? (Suffering
appearing “differently,” means it appears dualistically)
2nd possibility: is ultimate truth realized implicitly?
- Our system: If you were to say “suffering appears differently or
dualistically to a bodhisattva arya’s meditative equipoise”, one would
contradict reasoning.
 - In the 1st case, one considers the scenario of suffering appearing
dualistically and ultimate truth appearing in a manner of water placed in
water. Suffering here is an example of a “variety” (a conventional truth),
while ultimate truth is a “mode” (an emptiness). In other words, the modes
of appearance of these two types of objects, modes and varieties, appear
dissimilarly. According to our system, this contradicts reasoning.
Otherwise, one must assert that meditative equipoise and subsequent
attainment are one entity on that occasion of a learner’s path.
  -In the 2nd case: Meditative equipoise of the path of seeing is a direct
cognizer. If we were to say that ultimate truth is realized implicitly by
this meditative equipoise, then what would be realized explicitly by it?
- Someone says: Suffering is explicitly realized by it.
- Our system: If that were the case, then suffering would be an ultimate
truth. If suffering is explicitly realized by this exalted wisdom of
meditative equipoise, then suffering is the main object realized by this
exalted wisdom, and therefore it is an ultimate truth. That would be this
absurd consequence. You cannot counter this consequence.
- Our system:  We  accept  that  all  consciousnesses  in  the  continua  of
ordinary beings, such as sense  consciousnesses  that  are  apprehenders  of
apprehendeds, are other-powered natures.
- We assert that with respect to sense  consciousnesses,  even  though  the
  apprehended-objects and their apprehender-subjects appear to be different
  substances, they are seen by an arya’s meditative  equipoise  to  not  be
  established in the way they appear.
- It is asserted that the objects  of  analysis  do  not  appear  to  sense
  consciousnesses and unchanging thoroughly established natures appear in a
  manner of water placed in water [thoroughly established natures appear to
  an arya’s meditative equipoise in a manner of water placed in water].
- -Nevertheless we assert that apprehendeds and apprehenders  are  directly
  seen to not be established  in  the  way  they  appear  to  be  different
  substances  to  sense  consciousnesses  i.e.   they   (apprehendeds   and
  apprehenders) appear to be different substances, and they are seen to not
  be established in the way they appear to sense consciousnesses.
- We assert they are directly seen in that manner, we do  not  assert  that
  they are not seen i.e. in the way they appear to sense consciousness.
- The object of observation according to our system
- We assert the following:
-All consciousnesses in the continuum of ordinary beings, such as sense
consciousnesses, are other-powered natures.
- Even though apprehended objects and their apprehender subjects appear to
be different substances to sense consciousnesses, an arya’s meditative
equipoise sees them to not be established in the way they appear.
- The objects of an arya’s meditative equipoise do not appear to sense
consciousnesses.
- Thoroughly established natures (emptinesses) appear to meditative
equipoise in a manner of water placed in water.
- Nevertheless, objects of sense consciousness are directly seen to not be
established in the way they appear to sense consciousnesses; we do not
assert that they are not seen.
- This is the meaning of the assertion that the constant purity that is
dharmadhatu is the object of observation of non-conceptual exalted wisdom.

- Cittamatrins asserts that other-powered natures and thoroughly
established phenomena being truly existent.
- Middle-Way school refuted and fling the absurd consequences saying that
if other-powered natures are truly existent, there is no way that purity
can occur.
- Our system - When other-powered natures are observed during subsequent
attainment by aryas, it follows that purity would not become enhanced
because other‐powered natures are truly existent and they exist the way
they appear.
- With respect to the truly existent, enhancement does not exist; purity
would not become distinguished in meditative equipoise, i.e., the seeds
would not be purified more and more.
- During subsequent attainment, the mistaken appearances and
conceptualizations of apprehendeds and apprehenders as different substances
become weaker. However, if other-powered natures were truly existent, these
mistaken appearances and conceptualizations would not become weaker because
the mistaken appearances and the conceptualizations have previously entered
into the nature of other-powered natures, and that state of entry is truly
existent. This is because other-powered natures themselves are truly
existent.
- With respect to what is truly existent, change cannot occur, and
enhancements do not exist. In that way, purity will not become enhanced.
Therefore, it would follow that purity would not become distinguished in
meditative equipoise, that is, the seeds would not be purified more and
more.
- If there is no weakening of the mistaken appearances and
conceptualizations during subsequent attainment, then during meditative
equipoise, this purity would not become distinguished by way of the seeds
that are the objects of abandonment becoming purified.
- In other words, if we have no way of weakening the potentiality of the
objects of abandonment during subsequent attainment, then there is no way
to purify or eliminate these objects of abandonment during meditative
equipoise.
- Vijñaptimatrin (Cognition-Only,  Mind-Only  or  Cittamatrins)  says:  Even
though water, gold, and space are pure by  nature,  they  can  be  gradually
purified of dirt,  blemishes,  and  so  forth.  Likewise,  stains  are  also
gradually purified by antidotes.
- If we have muddy water, we can let this water settle and then obtain pure
water. Likewise, if we have gold, there could be temporary blemishes, which
can be removed. Also, there are clouds in the sky, but the clouds can go
away. Just as water, gold, and space are pure by nature, and can be
gradually purified of dirt, blemishes and clouds, likewise stains can be
gradually purified by antidotes.

- To Cittamatrins, the term “suchness” is the emptiness of apprehended-
objects and their apprehender-subjects being different substances.
According to them, this suchness is a thoroughly established nature, and is
truly existent. It would be inappropriate for this suchness to abandon the
discordant classes.
- The conception of apprehendeds and apprehenders being different
substances has entered into the nature of other-powered natures in which
the apprehended-objects and their apprehender-subjects appear as different
substances and even other-powered natures themselves are truly existent.
According to Mind-Only, other-powered natures are truly existent.
- There is no occasion in which that which is embraced by falsity (object
that is false) abides as truly existent. This means that if something is
false, it cannot be truly existent.

- Our system: If you accept that, then it follows that this conception of
apprehendeds and apprehenders being different substances is a knowledge
obscuration, and it follows that you would be unable to abandon it because
an awareness that is unmistaken with respect to its object of adherence is
faultless.
- It is faultless because apprehendeds and apprehenders appear to it as
being different substances. In fact they are different substances.
Therefore this awareness is unmistaken, i.e. faultless.

- Someone’s opinion: Since you assert  “The  object  of  observation  of  an
exalted knower of all aspects is a non-thing,” the subject -  the  emptiness
of true existence of a  sprout  -it  follows  that  it  is  truly  existent,
because it exists for a rational knower  (reasoning  knower)  that  analyzes
finality.
  You asserted the sign. If you accept that, then it follows that  you  will
incur the fault that was explained earlier. There is pervasion,  because  if
something were to exist for that ultimate  awareness,  then  it  must  exist
with respect to that ultimate, in which case it must exist ultimately.
- A consciousness that analyzes the ultimate is an ultimate awareness. In
the perspective of an ultimate awareness, there is ultimate truth.
- Emptiness is a truth, and it exists in the perspective of an ultimate
awareness, therefore it is an ultimate truth.
 -Does emptiness exist ultimately?
- No. It exists in the perspective of the ultimate awareness, but it does
not exist ultimately.
Our system: We do not incur fault.  Although the emptiness of true
existence of a sprout exists for a rational knower (that analyze the
ultimate), we do not say it is truly existent because even that negation is
empty of true existence and false, abiding like an illusion.

- Even though conceptual and non-conceptual rational knowers are asserted
to be ultimates consciousnesses, they are asserted to be real
conventionalities. They are not asserted to be truly existent.
- Therefore, what serves as the principal nature is the lineage. What
serves as the principal transformation is the object of observation, thus
that both are both is not refuted.
- The meaning of “that both are both is not refuted” is that it becomes the
lineage abiding in the nature by means of observing the six inner sources
as being empty of true existence, without being separated from the property-
possessor. It is inappropriate for the property-possessor to be abandoned.
This means that when we talk about the property dharmata, we cannot talk
about it in the absence of the property-possessor.
- In this context of the objects of observation, the basis upon which
superimpositions are to be eliminated is principally a conventionality. So
even thusness (emptiness) serves as an object of observation.

The way the eleven objects of observation are contemplated.
- Sequence to contemplate the 11objects of observation:
- A bodhisattva begins by observing the 3 phenomena; virtue, non-virtue,
  and the unspecified in general.
Then he looks at their divisions. (Virtue, non-virtue, and the unspecified
are taken as the bases of division. Using these as the basis, the remaining
divisions come.)
- He starts by looking at the pair of the mundane and supramundane.
- Then he examines the contaminated and the uncontaminated.
- With respect to the uncontaminated, he goes on to look at the causal and
  resultant factors, i.e. the causal factors are true paths and the
  resultant factors are true cessations.
- Then he looks at the common and uncommon qualities.

Objects of observation in a general way
The three objects of observation of the achievings that are bases for
eliminating the superimpositions regarding them
1. Virtue that is to be adopted; the mere manner of the trainee-in-virtue
2. Non-virtue that is to be discarded; killing and so forth and
3. The unspecified that is to be set aside in neutrality; unspecified
   actions of body and so forth
Definitions (from Jetsun Chokyi Gyeltsen’s General Meaning)
• Virtue is: a specified phenomenon that abides in a class of positive
fruition.
• Non‐virtue: a specified phenomenon that abides in a class of negative
fruition.
• Unspecified: a phenomenon distinguished by being unspecified as either
virtuous or non‐virtuous
- Taking the three phenomena; virtue, non-virtue,  and  the  unspecified  as
the bases of division for the other 8  objects  of  observation.  There  are
four divisions of the two aspects:-
 i. Mundane and supramundane
ii. Object of abandonment
iii. Cause and result
iv. Result to be obtained

4. Mundane - the 5 aggregates  included  within  mundane  paths  which  are
   related to all ordinary beings  because  they  are  qualities  that  are
   familiar with respect to cyclic existence since beginningless time
5. Supramundane - the 4 uncontaminated concentrations included  within  the
   continua of all arya beings  because  they  are  antidotes  to  craving,
   qualities that are unfamiliar with respect to cyclic existence.

Object of abandonment (for the sake of abandoning the discordant classes)
6. Contaminated - the 5 appropriated aggregates  are  contaminated  because
   they are produced from the root that  is  the  view  of  the  transitory
   collection, and they are not a class of antidote to the view of a self
7. Uncontaminated - the 4 uncontaminated close  placements  of  mindfulness
   because they are arya’s  exalted  knowers  that  abide  in  a  class  of
   antidote to the view of a self.

Dividing the uncontaminated itself into the two factors of cause and result
8. Compounded [Causal factor] - true paths based upon the desire realm  and
   so forth, which are contingent upon causes and conditions because it  is
   the method for attaining true cessations;
9. Uncompounded [Resultant factor] - separation from the seeds that are the
   objects of abandonment, thusness not relying upon causes because it is a
   result of separation of a true path. A true cessation  is  a  result  of
   separation but it is not a result. It is not virtue, but it is  ultimate
   virtue.

Result to be attained
10.  Common excellent qualities - the four concentrations  which  arise  in
    the continuums  of  aryas  of  all  three  vehicles  because  they  are
    excellent qualities which arise in the continuums of all arya beings of
    all three vehicles.
11. Uncommon excellent qualities -  the  ten  strengths  because  they  are
    excellent qualities which arise  only  in  the  continuums  of  perfect
    complete buddhas. Stating “property-possessors”  is  for  the  sake  of
    making known that they are the support of all the  excellent  qualities
    of the buddhas without exception.

