Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/Personal notes/Personal notes - Path of Preparation.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:11.697317
================================================================================


THE MAHAYANA PATH OF PREPARATION

Support for generating the Mahayana path of preparation
    - body supports of men and women of 3 human continents & 6 types of gods
      of the desire realm
    - mind support is the absorption of an actual concentration.
- 3 human continents - eastern, southern, and western continents.
- Human continents of the northern continent (Unpleasant Sound) cannot
generate the Mahayana path of preparation because they have very strong
karmic obscurations.
- Beings of the lower realms are not able to generate this path of
preparation because of the fruitional obscurations. These beings have these
fruitional obscurations because they experience the fruitional result of
much suffering.
- Some beings of the form realm generate the heat and peak levels but they
are not the support for generating the SMQ level of the path of preparation
because there is a predominance of the bliss of absorption. Due to this,
they have very weak disillusionment for cyclic existence. The support for
newly generating the Mahayana path of seeing has to be a desire realm
support.
- After newly generating the path of seeing, a bodhisattva can arise in
subsequent attainment. At that time, the support can be other than that of
the desire realm. So such a bodhisattva may be reborn in the form realm
such as in Akanishta and receive teachings there from a complete enjoyment
body.
-  For the new generation of the path of preparation, form realm is not the
support for generating the SMQ level. This is because it is not a support
for generating the path of seeing. A support for generating the path of
seeing has to be one in which there is strong despondency regarding cyclic
existence. The best support for newly generating the path of seeing is a
support of the desire realm. In particular, human support in the desire
realm is most suited for generating the path of seeing. If one is extremely
tormented by suffering, it is difficult to generate despondency regarding
suffering. If one is extremely happy, it would be difficult to generate
despondency. Therefore, it is said that the human support, which is like
the middling level among the various levels of the desire realm, is the
best for generating despondency regarding the suffering of cyclic
existence. Therefore, we are free from the two extremes, and have the best
opportunity.

Definition of a path of preparation - a Mahayana mundane path that abides
in a class of clear realizations that arise subsequent to the completion of
a partial concordance of liberation that is its cause and is concordant
with a clear realization of the truth.
- mundane means bodhisattva has not yet directly realized emptiness as
emptiness is still being realized by way of a meaning-generality (a
conceptual image).
- the Mahayana path of preparation does not necessarily a wisdom arisen
from meditation. There are many cases of wisdom arisen from hearing and
from contemplation on the path of preparation. However, the wisdom arisen
from meditation is principal.
­ A wisdom arisen from hearing is a wisdom arisen mainly  from  hearing  the
  meaning of the scriptures.
­ A wisdom arisen from contemplation is a  wisdom  arisen  mainly  from  the
  contemplation of the meaning of the scriptures.
­ A wisdom arisen from meditation is a wisdom arisen mainly in dependence on
  meditating on a meditative stabilization of the  first  concentration  and
  above. Note that this description does not contain the words  “meaning  of
  the scriptures.”
-  significance of the word “mainly”: e.g. the wisdom arisen from
meditation on emptiness - such a wisdom is a wisdom arisen from hearing the
meaning of the scriptures but it is not a wisdom arisen mainly from hearing
the meaning of the scriptures. It arises mainly from meditating on
meditative stabilization.
-  For someone who is definite in the Mahayana lineage on the Mahayana path
of accumulation, there is calm abiding observing emptiness. This calm
abiding observing emptiness is solely calm abiding observing emptiness. At
this point, such a calm abiding observing emptiness is a wisdom arisen from
meditation, but it is not a wisdom arisen from meditation that observes
emptiness.
- A wisdom arisen from meditation that observes emptiness is necessarily a
special insight observing emptiness.
- When such a bodhisattva on the path of accumulation who is definite in
the Mahayana lineage attains the path of preparation, he simultaneously
attains the heat level of the path of preparation and the wisdom arisen
from meditation observing emptiness.
Divisions
- Divisions of occasions: small, medium, and great. Different
interpretations regarding this.
- Interpretation in terms of faculty - The path of preparation in the
continuum of someone of:
    - Sharp faculty is great,
    - Middling faculty is middle, and
    - Dull faculty is small.
- Interpretation in terms of when it is generated:
    - the small path of preparation is the one that is initially generated
      (at the beginning of the path of preparation),
    - the middle path of preparation is the one generated in the middle, and


    - the great path of preparation is the one generated at the end.
- Divisions by way of entity:
   1. Heat
   2. Peak
   3. Forbearance
   4. Supreme mundane quality
-   Each of these can be sub-divided into small, middling, and great giving
a total of 12 divisions.
-   The heat level is divided into small, middle, and great in terms of
time, rather than faculty. When one initially attains the heat level, one
has the small heat level, following which one generates the middle heat
level, and then the great heat level.
-   In the Mahayana presentation, there are three sub-divisions of each of
the four levels of the path of preparation: small, middle, and great.
-   In the Hinayana presentation, the heat, peak, and forbearance levels
are each divided into three – small, middle, and great – but the SMQ is not
divided into three as the SMQ lasts the shortest instant in which an action
is completed.
- Mode of generation - For someone who is definite in Mahayana lineage on
the path of accumulation, although there are wisdoms arisen from meditation
that observe impermanence, suffering, unattractiveness, and so forth, there
is no wisdom arisen from meditation that observes emptiness.
-  Once the wisdom arisen from meditation observing emptiness is generated,
one attains the path of preparation.
-  For a bodhisattva, the main object of abandonment is the conception of
true existence. This manifest conception of true existence needs to be
suppressed prior to the path of seeing.
-  On the four levels of the path of preparation, one suppresses the 4
types of manifest conceptions of true existence.
-  In that way, upon attaining the path of seeing, one abandons the
acquired conception of true existence.
- Four types of conceptions that are suppressed on the four levels of the
path of preparation:
1. On the heat level of the path of preparation, the  conceptions  regarding
  apprehendeds of the thoroughly afflicted class are suppressed.
2. On the peak level of the path of preparation, the  conceptions  regarding
  apprehendeds of the completely pure class are suppressed.
3. On the forbearance level of the  path  of  preparation,  the  conceptions
  regarding apprehenders of substantial existence are suppressed.
4.  On the supreme mundane quality level of the  path  of  preparation,  the
  conceptions regarding apprehenders of imputed existence are suppressed.

- The wisdoms arisen from hearing and contemplation observing emptiness:
although the meaning generality of the object dawns well, the object and
the object-possessor appear as though unrelated because of the presence of
very coarse dualistic appearances.
- The wisdom arisen from meditation observing emptiness: although there are
dualistic appearances, it appears as if one has penetrated the object,
emptiness, due to having overcome the coarse dualistic appearances.
Although this happens, this is not a clear appearance that is free from
conceptions.
- Within calm abiding, through the force of analyzing well with reasoning
the meaning of emptiness, one will be able to induce the bliss of pliancy
of the body and the mind.  At that point one has attained the fully
qualified special insight observing emptiness and one also have attained a
union of calm abiding and special insight observing emptiness.
- For someone who is definite in the Mahayana lineage, the attainment of a
union of calm abiding and special insight observing emptiness occurs
simultaneously with the attainment of the heat level of the path of
preparation.
- Just by attaining a union of calm abiding and special insight does not
mean one attains the heat level of the path of preparation.  In fact, the
union of calm abiding and special insight exists in those who are on the
path of accumulation and even in those who have not entered the path such
as non-Buddhists.
-  In order to attain an actual concentration, one must first have a union
of calm abiding and special insight.
-  Initially one attains calm abiding and this is solely calm abiding.
After this, one attains a similitude of special insight and then an actual
special insight. Actual special insight is special insight that is attained
from within the state of calm abiding.
- One attains calm abiding, and from within that state, one abides single-
pointedly on an object analyzing the object with wisdom. When one is able
to induce the bliss of pliancy of body and mind through the force of
analysis, then one attains special insight. This takes place from within
the state of calm abiding. At that point, one attains the union of calm
abiding and special insight and with that one can proceed to suppress or
abandon the manifest desire realm afflictions. Eventually one will abandon
the nine desire realm afflictions, and at that point one attains an actual
concentration. Without a union of calm abiding and special insight, such
abandonment cannot take place.
Differentiation between the four levels of the path of preparation
The four levels of the path of preparation: heat, peak, forbearance and
SMQ, do not differ in terms of:-
(i) their objects lacking nature and being small, middling and great clear
appearances and
(ii) their subjects lacking nature and being complete clear appearance.
-  It is difficult to differentiate among the four levels of the path of
preparation because at that time one is placed in the meditative equipoise
on their emptiness of true existence by simultaneously withdrawing all
phenomena that are objects and subjects, and there is no difference with
respect to their meaning generalities of dharmata dawning clearly.
- The four levels of the path of preparation can be differentiated w.r.t.
the abilities to destroy four types of manifest conceptions:
­ The heat level of the path of preparation has the ability to destroy the
  manifest conceptions regarding apprehended-objects of the thoroughly
  afflicted class that are knowledge obscurations;
­ The peak level of the path of preparation has the ability to destroy the
  manifest conceptions regarding apprehended-objects of the completely pure
  class that are knowledge obscurations;
­ The forbearance level of the path of preparation has the ability to
  destroy the manifest conceptions regarding apprehender-subjects of
  substantial existence that are knowledge obscurations;
­ The SMQ of the path of preparation has the ability to destroy the manifest
  conceptions regarding
     apprehender-subjects of imputed existence that are knowledge
  obscurations.
- The 1st two levels of the path of preparation are correlated with the
conceptions regarding the apprehended-objects, - The 3rd and 4th levels of
the path of preparation are correlated with the conceptions regarding
apprehender-subjects.
- The four levels of the path of preparation can be correlated with the
four types of conceptions that are knowledge obscurations. These are
correlated with the four levels of the path of preparation through the
force of the degree of difficulty and ease of abandoning the respective
conceptions.
Examples of these various types of conceptions:
1. Conception regarding apprehended-objects of the thoroughly afflicted
  class - the conception of the suffering aggregates as truly existent
  objects of utilization.  Basically, this is a conception of true existence
  in which the suffering aggregates are apprehended as truly-existent
  objects of utilization. The suffering aggregates are an example of true
  sufferings.
2. Conception regarding the apprehended-objects of the completely pure
  class is a conception of true existence in which completely pure
  aggregates are apprehended as truly-existent objects of utilization.
3. Conception regarding apprehender-subjects of substantial existence that
  are knowledge obscurations is a conception of true existence in which an
  apprehender-subject of the aggregates as substantially existent is
  apprehended as a truly-existent utilizer.  Basically, there is an
  apprehender-subject that apprehends the aggregates as substantially
  existent. This 3rd conception is a conception of that apprehender-subject
  as a truly-existent utilizer.
4. Conceptions that observe the apprehender-subjects of imputed existence.
  The apprehender-subjects themselves observe imputed existence. A person is
  an imputed existent.  There is an apprehender-subject that observes the
  person, an imputed existent. The conception of such an apprehender-subject
  as a truly-existent utilizer is an example of the 4th type of conception-
  conceptions regarding apprehender-subjects of imputed existence that are
  knowledge obscurations.
Analysis of the awareness and knower
Two categories of awarenesses and knowers: 1. Valid cognizer   2. Non-valid
cognizers
Valid cognizers (prime cognizers) are of two types:
   1. Direct valid cognizers
   2. Inferential valid cognizers
Non-valid cognizers (non-prime cognizers) are divided into:
   1. Subsequent cognizers
   2. Correct assumption
   3. Awareness to which an object appears but is not ascertained
   4. Doubt
   5. Wrong consciousness
-  The nature of the meditative equipoise of the path of preparation in the
continuum of someone definite in the Mahayana lineage is a subsequent
cognizer.
This exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise is–
-  NOT a  direct  valid  cognizer  because  it  is  an  awareness  realizing
emptiness in the continuum of an ordinary being.
- NOT an inferential valid cognizer because an  inferential  valid  cognizer
has to be a new realization, but  such  an  exalted  wisdom  is  not  a  new
realization.
- NOT a correct assumption, an awareness to which an object appears  but  is
not ascertained, or doubt because it is a path to liberation.
- NOT  a  wrong  consciousness  because  it  is  a  realizing  awareness.  A
realizing awareness realizes its object while  a  wrong  consciousness  does
not.
- A non-conceptual mind of ordinary beings cannot realize a hidden
phenomenon. Dharmata is a hidden phenomenon for ordinary beings.
- If such an exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise is free from
conception, and if it were mistaken with respect to dharmata (its main
object), then it would be incorrect for it to eliminate manifest
superimpositions because it would be a non-conceptual wrong consciousness.
- According to our system, it is not mistaken with respect to dharmata. But
it is a mistaken consciousness because it is a conception that apprehends a
meaning-generality and a sound-generality as suitable to be mixed.
- If it is a conception, it is pervaded by being a mistaken consciousness.
-E.g. of sound-generality: if there is a person who has never been to Sera
Monastery and if you describe Sera Monastery to this person, the person
will have an appearance induced by those sounds.
- If this person actually goes to Sera, then he will have an appearance of
Sera Monastery. This appearance is a meaning-generality. In general, a
sound-generality is a meaning-generality.
- A sound-generality and a meaning-generality are seen as suitable to be
mixed means that a sound-generality is suitable to be mixed with a meaning-
generality, and a meaning-generality is suitable to be mixed with a sound-
generality.
-  A subsequent cognizer is incontrovertible. It is not a valid cognizer
because it is not a new, or prime, cognizer. According to the Prasangikas,
the definition of a valid cognizer is: an incontrovertible knower.
According to the lower schools, however, it has a different connotation: a
new incontrovertible knower.
Six attributes of the Mahayana path of preparation are:
   1. Object of observation
   2. Aspect
   3. Cause
   4. Tutor
   5. Possessing four conceptions
   6. Divisions into small, middling, and great
1. The subject—the Mahayana path of preparation—is superior to the  Hinayana
   path of preparation from the point of view of the object of  observation,
   because it observes the four noble truths by means of  infinite  aspects,
   whereas the Hinayana path of preparation does not.
2. The subject—the Mahayana path of preparation—is superior to the  Hinayana
   path of preparation from the point of view of aspect,  because  it  bears
   the aspect of stopping adherence  to  the  four  noble  truths  as  truly
   existent by means of infinite enumerations of reasonings.
3. The subject—the Mahayana path of preparation—is superior to the  Hinayana
   path of preparation from the point of view of cause, because it  acts  as
   the proximate cause of the Mahayana path of seeing by way  of  completing
   the class of realizations of the three  vehicles,  whereas  the  Hinayana
   path of preparation is not like that.
4. The subject—the person on the Mahayana path  of  preparation—the  supreme
   emanation body acts as the tutor to this person (on the Mahayana path  of
   preparation) by means of revealing the complete  Mahayana  path,  whereas
   this is not the case for a person on the Hinayana path of preparation.
5. The subject—the person on the Mahayana path of preparation—possesses  the
   four conceptions as the main objects of abandonment, but this is not  the
   case for the person on the Hinayana path of preparation.
6. For each of the four levels of the  Mahayana  path  of  preparation—heat,
   peak, forbearance, and SMQ—there are divisions into small, middling,  and
   great, but this is not the case for the Hinayana path of preparation.
 - [In fact, the heat, peak, and forbearance qualities of the Hinayana  path
 of preparation each have divisions into small, middling, and great, but the
 SMQ level of the Hinayana path of preparation is not  divided  into  small,
 middling, and great.
 - For the Mahayana path of preparation, the objects of abandonment are more
 difficult to  abandon,  because  the  bodhisattva  needs  to  abandon  both
 afflictive and knowledge obscurations. Because of the need to suppress more
 manifest objects of abandonment, the bodhisattva needs to abide  longer  on
 the SMQ level.
 - The objects of abandonment of the Hinayana person are not so difficult to
 abandon, so  there  is  no  need  for  someone  on  the  Hinayana  path  of
 preparation to abide for a long time on the SMQ level.]
-  The four partial concordances with definite discrimination of
bodhisattvas are superior to those of hearers by way of 5 or 6 attributes.
- The “bases for the attributes” refer to the heat, peak, forbearance, and
SMQ levels of the Mahayana path of preparation possess superior cause, and
are together with special result and special entity.
- possess superior cause: because they arise after the special cause, the
partial concordance with liberation (the path of accumulation).
- special result because the path of seeing will arise. They are the causes
of the path of seeing.
- special entity because they are paths  arisen  from  meditation  observing
emptiness.
Why the Mahayana path of preparation is superior by way of five attributes?
The five attributes are:
   1. object of observation
   2. aspect
   3. cause
   4. tutor
   5. four types of conceptualization
1. Object of observation - observation of the properties of the four  truths
distinguished by the sixteen attributes, impermanence and so forth,  because
they are held as the bases for  eliminating  superimpositions  by  means  of
infinite enumerations of reasonings  [infinite  enumerations  of  reasonings
means that when Mahayanists think about  emptiness,  they  can  derive  many
levels of understanding while Hinayanists are not able to do this]
2.  Aspect - the meditative equipoise realizing emptiness has the aspect of
realizing emptiness of true existence, and this acts as an antidote to the
conception adhering to apprehendeds and apprehenders as truly existent by
means of infinite enumerations of reasonings.
[The meditative equipoise of the Mahayana path of preparation observing
emptiness is the direct antidotes to viewing phenomena and such antidotes
can also exist for the meditative equipoise of the Hinayana path of
preparation. For this reason, the phrase “by means of infinite enumerations
of reasonings” is added.
- This means that this meditative equipoise of the Mahayana path of
preparation engages the aspect of lack of strong adherence as truly
existent and so forth. This meditative equipoise realizing emptiness has
the aspect of realizing emptiness of true existence and this act as an
antidote to the conception adhering to apprehendeds and apprehenders as
truly existent. But this does not just distinguish the Mahayana path of
preparation since the Hinayana path of preparation can also act as an
antidote to the conception adhering to apprehendeds and apprehenders as
truly existent. Thus we need to add the phrase “by means of infinite
enumerations of reasonings” because in the Hinayana case, there is the
absence of these enumerations of reasoning. This means to say that
Mahayanists can realize emptiness by means of infinite enumerations of
reasonings i.e. they can understand it on many levels while Hinayanists are
not able to do so.]
5. The four types of conceptualizations or objects of abandonment can be
acquired or innate.  On the path of preparation, the manifest forms are
suppressed and this suppression actually damages both the acquired and
innate forms.
- The objects to be abandoned by the paths of seeing and meditation
included within the peak
- “peak” refers to peak application with four divisions:
i. peak application of the path of preparation,
ii. peak application of the path of seeing,
iii. peak application of the path of meditation and
iv. uninterrupted peak application.
-  the assertion that these conceptions are abandoned only on the three
pure ground is incorrect because the manifest conceptions are abandoned
even on the path of preparation, and some of the seeds of those conceptions
are abandoned on the first seven grounds.
-  the assertion that the seeds of the four conceptions are possessed in
respective order is incorrect because the seeds of all four conceptions are
possessed at the time of the heat level of the path of preparation.
- “Possessed in respective order” means that:-
    -  the seeds of the 1st type of conceptualization are possessed by the
heat level,
    -  the seeds of the 2nd type of conceptualization are possessed by the
peak level,
    -  the seeds of the 3rd type of conceptualization are possessed by the
forbearance level, and
    -  the seeds of the 4th type of conceptualization are possessed by the
SMQ level.
-  the assertion that the heat level and so forth possess the manifest
conceptions in respective order: Are they simultaneous or not?
-     If they are simultaneous, are they one [entity] or different
entities?”
- Simultaneous one entity  is incorrect because the two: -
       (1) the conception of apprehendeds and apprehenders as truly existent
 and
       (2) the realization of emptiness of true existence
   - have directly contradictory modes of apprehension in observing a single
 observed object.
- Simultaneous different entities is incorrect for two manifest conceptions
  of different entities to be produced together in one continuum.  For it
  would follow that there are many continua with respect to a single
  person.
- In general, it is possible for there to be two manifest conceptions of
  different entities to be produced together in one continuum, but it is
  not possible for two manifest conceptions of different entities with
  directly contradictory modes of apprehension in observing a single
  observed object to be produced together in one continuum.
- Not simultaneous is incorrect because there is no reason for the four
  levels of the path of preparation to individually possess four
  conceptions. Further, it is inappropriate to make differentiations by way
  of whether or not the four phenomena of apprehendeds and apprehenders are
  realized as lacking true existence because all phenomena are realized as
  being empty of true existence, even at the time of the heat level of the
  path of preparation.
- Our own system: Yes, the abandonment takes place in the respective order:-


  - the heat level abandons the manifest conceptions regarding apprehended-
  objects of the thoroughly afflicted class
  -  the peak level abandons the manifest conceptions regarding apprehended-
  objects of the completely pure class and so on. The abandonment occurs in
  this order.
-  The four levels of the path of preparation are antidotes to the four
types of conception respectively:
- is not due to the fact that the four levels of the path of preparation
  differ from the point of view of realizing emptiness, or their having
  clear appearance.
- is from the point of view of the length of time of familiarization with
  the object. Compared to the heat level, the peak level has longer
  familiarization with the object, and therefore has greater potency to
  abandon the conception of true existence.
- in terms of the ease and difficulty with regard to abandoning the various
  types of conceptions, conceptions regarding apprehended-objects are
  easier to abandon than conceptions regarding apprehender-subjects,
  because apprehender-subjects are consciousnesses.
- from the point of view of the property-possessors, there is a difference
  in regard to ease and difficulty of abandoning the manifest conception of
  true existence. For example, consider two property-possessors: coarse
  form and consciousness. It is easier to abandon the manifest conception
  of coarse form as truly existent, and more difficult to abandon the
  manifest conception of consciousness as truly existent.

­ The four levels of the path of preparation are the same in realizing
  emptiness and in having clear appearance with respect to emptiness, but
  they are not the same with respect to the length of time in which they
  have familiarized with emptiness. As a result, they are not the same in
  their capacity to abandon the conception of true existence.
­ These four levels are posited from the point of view of their capacity to
  sever or abandon the manifest conceptions of true existence.
­ They are not posited from the point of view of the extensiveness or
  narrowness of the property-possessors (extensiveness of the property-
  possessor means many objects, narrowness of the property-possessor means
  few objects).
­ According to our system, a bodhisattva on the path of seeing in meditative
  equipoise directly realizes the emptiness of all phenomena, but has not
  directly realized all phenomena.
­ ‘conceiving apprehended-objects’ and ‘conceiving apprehender-subjects’
  explain the modes of apprehension of the aspects, not the observed
  objects. They do not explain the observed objects of the conceptions.
­ conceiving apprehended-objects - refers to conceiving of apprehended
  objects as truly existent objects of utilization
-  conceiving apprehender-subjects - refers to conceiving apprehender-
subjects as truly existent utilizers.
-  According to our system, the four levels of the path of preparation
abandon the four conceptions sequentially.

Why do we need to assert that there is a common locus between direct
benefit and harm to the peak application of the path of seeing?
- If the path of preparation and the manifest conceptions to be abandoned
  by it are one entity, then the SMQ level of the path of preparation would
  both harm and benefit the path of seeing. It would harm the path of
  seeing because the manifest conceptions that are objects to be abandoned
  are one entity with. It would benefit the path of seeing because it is a
  path of preparation.
- If the path of preparation and the objects of abandonment are one entity,
  the SMQ level of the path of preparation itself would need to be
  abandoned because it is one entity with the objects to be abandoned.
Our system - possession in taking thorough affliction. When we say the path
of preparation possesses the conceptualizations, which has been taught to
mean “possession in taking thorough affliction,” it means possessing those
conceptualizations as objects of abandonment.
- Two possible meanings of possession in taking thorough affliction:-
­ Hearers need to abandon the afflictive obscurations deliberately;
  otherwise, they would not attain the result of mere pacification.
­ Bodhisattvas need to deliberately abandon conceptualizations that
  apprehend apprehended-objects and apprehender-subjects as truly existent;
  otherwise they would not attain omniscience.
- The four levels of the path of preparation are correlated to the four
  types of conceptualization that are abandoned respectively. The reason for
  this particular order is that, in the list of conceptualizations, those at
  the top are easier to abandon, whereas those at the bottom are more
  difficult.
- The reason the later levels of the path of preparation are able to
  abandon the conceptualizations that are more difficult to abandon is
  because they have familiarized with emptiness for a greater length of
  time, and in terms of excellent qualities of realization, they have more.
- Because of differences in the length of time and the increase of
  excellent qualities, the various levels of the path of preparation have
  the ability to abandon their respective objects of abandonment.
Mahayana path of preparation being superior to the Hinayana path of
preparation is due to the Hinayana path of preparation does not possess
those five or six attributes.
-  In terms of the objects of observation, the Hinayana path of preparation
observes the four truths.
-  In terms of the aspects, it is stated that the Hinayana path of
preparation engages in the aspects of impermanence and so forth by way of
way of just acting as the mere antidotes to viewing a self of persons and
does not stop the adherence to true existence.
-  By way of cause, it says, for the purpose of the cause that is realizing
only the hearers own vehicle.  The Hinayana path of preparation acts as the
cause for realizing only the hearers’ own vehicle, whereas the Mahayana
path of preparation acts as the cause of realizing the three vehicles
together.
-  Hinayana path of preparation is separated from a tutor by means of
completely teaching method and wisdom.
-  Hinayana path of preparation does not arise possessing the four types of
conceptualization and also the antidotes to the objects of abandonment.
How one should train in the four noble truths.
-  First one needs to understand true sufferings, then understand true
origins as the objects to be abandoned.
-  Next, one realizes that one is able to actualize true cessations, and
finally one understands that true paths are to be practiced for a long
time.
-  Without understanding true sufferings at the beginning, one will not
generate the mind wishing to separate from true sufferings and without a
mind wishing to separate from true sufferings, a mind wishing to separate
from true origins will not arise. Therefore one needs to understand true
sufferings well and generate the mind wishing to separate from the cause of
sufferings. From that, one understands that one can separate from the
causes and develops the wish to actualize cessations. In order to actualize
true cessations, one relies upon true paths.
-  Eight attributes - four attributes of true cessations and the four
attributes of true paths.
The twelve modes of observation consist of three for each of the four
levels of the path of preparation:-
1. by means of cause
2. by means of result
3. by means of entity and
4. by means of the aspect of dharmata.
- On some occasions of middling forbearance, it observes by means of cause
i.e. it observe the four truths by means of cause because they apprehend
that the realization of the lack of true existence of samsara and nirvana
is the cause of the five pure aggregates, the body and so forth..
- On some occasions of small SMQ, it observes by way of result i.e. it
observe the four truths by means of result because they realize that these
meditative stabilizations "Going Heroically" and so forth possess the
result of benefiting sentient beings.
 - On some occasions of small forbearance, it observes by means of entity
i.e. it observes the four truths by means of the very entity of the two
truths because they apprehend that those lacking entitiness ultimately
exist conventionally.
- On the nine others, by means of the aspect of dharmata i.e. it observes
the four truths by means of the aspects of dharmata which means they view
the four truths as lacking entitiness ultimately.
-  This is posited for the sake of making the trainees understand this
presentation.
-  During meditative equipoise there is observation by means of the aspects
of dharmata, and during subsequent attainment there is observation by means
of entity, cause, and result.
Observing by means of other aspects: There are two modes of observing the
four noble truths:
-  the Mahayana mode of observing them involves stopping adherence to true
existence
-  the Hinayana mode does not involve stopping adherence to true existence
The Mahayanists also observe the four truths by way of the aspect of lack
of self of persons, or by the aspect of selflessness of persons. This is
for the sake of training in the mentality of the medium scope - the
mentality of the beings of middling capacity - so they can destroy the
glory of afflictions, generate disillusionment of cyclic existence and take
care of Hinayana lineage-bearers on that occasion.

Dispelling objection

- Someone says:  If one were to observe the four truths by way of infinite
aspects, this would contradict a statement from Vasubandhu’s Treasury of
Manifest Knowledge (Abhidharmakosha) : “The stainless do not have aspects
other than the sixteen.” [“The stainless” refers to the stainless paths
observing the 16 attributes of the four noble truths, impermanence and so
forth.]
-  These stainless paths do not have aspects other than those attributes.
- Our system: The other vehicles that do not meditate on that other than
the 16 aspects of the four truths – refers to the Hinayana vehicles because
they meditate on the 16 aspects of the four truths and do not meditate on
that other than those aspects. The Mahayana does not meditate merely on the
16 aspects of the four truths as they also meditate on the emptiness of
true existence of these aspects.

Attributes of the objects of observation, aspects, and causes of the heat
level

1.28  The objects of observation are impermanence and so forth,
                Bearing the support of the truths.
                The aspect is stopping strong  adherence  of  those  and  so
forth.
               It is the cause of attaining the three vehicles together.
-  object of observation is the object that the mind observes. The object
of the mind is the object of observation.
-  aspect is an aspect of the mind
- the truths refers to the four noble truths.
- objects of observation of the small heat level of the Mahayana path of
preparation is the four noble truths because they are the bases for
eliminating the superimpositions regarding those. This should also be
applied to the middling and great heat levels of the Mahayana path of
preparation.
-  aspect : The exalted wisdom of the small heat level that stops these
three levels of superimpositions.
The exalted wisdom of the small heat level eliminates these
superimpositions on the basis of the 16 attributes of the four noble truths
(the object of observation).
- Superimpositions- refer to various degrees of the conception of true
existence. It can be divided into three levels:
      1st level:  strong adherence,
      2nd level: exaggerated abidance,
      3rd level: knowing all.
- Exalted wisdom of the small heat level  acts as the cause of a special
result because it is the cause of the Mahayana path of seeing that will
attain the three vehicles together. This means it being the cause of the
Mahayana path of seeing that will attain the complete class of realizations
of the three vehicles together.

1.29ab      Freedom from assembly and establishment of forms and so forth,
abidance and
      Abidance, imputation, and the lack of expression,
“The four truths distinguished by freedom from truly existent assembly and
establishment of forms and so forth are the objects of observation of the
middling heat level”-
- objects of observation of the middling heat level : the four truths
distinguished by freedom from truly existent assembly and establishment of
forms and so forth [truly existent assembly and establishment of forms and
so forth refers to ultimately existent generation or production and
disintegration of forms and so forth.]
- Truly existent has the same meaning as ultimately existent.
- The aspect is that the exalted wisdom realizing
      a. freedom from abidance of the continuity of name ultimately and
      b. the lack of ultimate abidance
-  objects of observation of the middling heat level are, due to attention
to the imagined and to suchness, “not observing” and “not seeing”
respectively affirmative and negative phenomena, forms and so forth
 - “affirmative” refers to production and “negative” refers to
   disintegration.
 - “Attention to the imagined” refers to a mind that has not realized
   emptiness. Such a mind does not observe affirmative phenomena as
   existing ultimately, i.e. it does not observe production.
 - “Attention to suchness” refers to a mind that has realized emptiness.
   This mind does not see negative phenomena as existing ultimately, i.e.
   it does not see disintegration.
 - aspect of the middling heat level is the exalted wisdom of middling
   level realizing the non-existence of characteristics engaging in
   dissimilar continuity of names and similar continuity of types due to
   the very lack of existence of all names ultimately.
 - “dissimilar continuity of names and similar continuity of types” – e.g.
   a particular form has a similar continuity of type. This form has many
   instants. From one instant to another, the form has a similar continuity
   of type. If we consider a first instant of a form and a second instant
   of a feeling, however, they do not have the same continuity of type, and
   they are dissimilar in terms of the continuity of names.
- objects of observation of the great heat level : All phenomena, from
forms through buddha, phenomena that are imputed with terminology
distinguished by mere conventions of names. These objects of observation
exist conventionally, but not ultimately.
- aspect - phenomena that are virtue and so forth themselves lack
expression in any way. These phenomena exist conventionally, but not
ultimately.
“In that way, because of being an omen of the  fire  of  non-conceptualizing
exalted wisdom, transformed to heat, possessing objects of  observation  and
aspects, is of three types”
-  non-conceptualizing exalted wisdom refers to the path of seeing,
-  transformed to heat is a sign, or omen, of this fire of non-
conceptualizing exalted wisdom. It is a sign that the path of seeing is
coming.
-  The heat level has objects of observation and aspects, and is of three
types: the small, middling, and great heat levels.
-  The path of seeing is described as this special ability to burn the
discordant classes. Prior to the attainment of such a fire, there is this
omen of heat. This heat is precisely the start of the wisdom arisen from
meditation that observes emptiness, thus it is called “transformed to
heat.”

    1.29cd       Those forms and so forth which do not abide,
             Their entity lacking nature.
    1.30a  They are the nature of one another.
- objects of observation of the small peak level: those forms and so forth
that do not abide ultimately, distinguished by their entity lacking nature
ultimately
- aspect : the exalted wisdom realizing that forms and so forth and their
dharmata are the nature of one another
- Sutra citation: “When a great bodhisattva practices the perfection of
wisdom, he does not abide on forms and that which is the emptiness of form
is not form. Form is also not other than emptiness.”
-  In this 1st case, the four noble truths have not been presented.  Forms
here are illustrations or bases of characterization of true sufferings. We
can posit the contaminated aggregates, such as forms, as an illustration of
true sufferings.
    1.30bcd      They do not abide as impermanent and so forth;
             Those are empty of those entities.
             They are the nature of one another.
-  Sutra citation: “Bhagavan, with respect to whatever emptiness of
impermanence, that is not impermanent; there is no emptiness apart from
impermanence.”
-  In this citation, the first of the four attributes of true
sufferings—impermanence—is mentioned. This citation also applies to all the
other attributes of the four noble truths. Thus, we could say “Bhagavan,
with respect to whatever emptiness of suffering, that is not suffering;
there is no emptiness apart from suffering,” and so forth. The attributes
of true origins, true cessations, and true paths can also be applied in
this way.
-  In this 2nd case, the four noble truths have been presented. The
attributes of true sufferings are used in the explanation: impermanence,
suffering, and so forth.
-  As in the 1st case, when the four noble truths have not been presented
by Acarya Arya Vimuktisena, the bases for characterization are used instead
of the attributes of true sufferings.
-  In the explanation of the objects of observation and aspect, forms are
mentioned in the 1st case, without explicitly mentioning the attributes of
true suffering.
    1.31ab Whatever phenomena not apprehended,
             Because they are not seen as signs,
- objects of observation of the middling peak level: Whatever phenomena not
apprehended as signs ultimately.
- Sutra citation: “Bhagavan, the exalted knower of all aspects does not
apprehend signs,” and “It does not fully apprehend phenomena which are
empty of their characteristics ultimately. In this way, with respect to
that knower, inner attainments and clear realizations are not perfectly,
subsequently seen by it ultimately.”
-  To the Autonomy school, phenomena are not empty of their
characteristics, but they are empty of their characteristics ultimately.
-  Someone definite in the Mahayana lineage will generate the path of
preparation. In this context, the attainment of the heat level of the
Mahayana path of preparation is simultaneous with the attainment of the
wisdom arisen from meditation observing emptiness. These two attainments
are not simultaneous in general, but for someone definite in the Mahayana
lineage, they are simultaneous.
- The Mahayana path of preparation arises subsequent to the small level,
the middling level, and the great level of the Mahayana path of
accumulation, but it only arises immediately after the great level of the
Mahayana path of accumulation. In general, we would say the path of
preparation arises immediately subsequent to the Mahayana path of
accumulation.
- To be specifics, for example, the small level of the Mahayana path of
accumulation, we cannot say the Mahayana path of preparation arises
immediately subsequent to it. However, we would say the Mahayana path of
preparation arises immediately subsequent to the completion of the Mahayana
path of accumulation.
    1.31cd Fully investigating with wisdom,
             All are not observed.
- objects  of  observation  of  the  great  peak  level:  The  four  truths,
distinguished by  fully  investigating  and  having  investigated  with  the
wisdom analyzing the ultimate. [the wisdom analyzing the ultimate refers  to
a reasoning consciousness that analyzes the ultimate.]
- aspect: the exalted wisdom of the great peak  level  which  realizes  that
all the three circles are not  observed  to  be  truly  existent.[the  three
circles refer to the object, the object-possessor, and the person who  views
the object. More specifically, the three circles here are:
   1) the object: the four noble truths,
   2) the object-possessor: the mind observing the four noble truths; and
   3) the person who makes this observation.]

Haribhadra’s commentary
-  object of observation of the small peak level: since forms and  so  forth
are of the very entity of  being  free  from  their  own  entities,  due  to
emptiness of their own entities, “not abiding in forms and so forth.”
- aspect: since all phenomena such as forms  and  emptinesses  are  mutually
one entity ultimately, due to impermanence and  so  forth  not  existing  in
emptiness,  “not  abiding  in  those  forms  and  so  forth  as   permanent,
impermanent, and so forth.
-  objects of observation of the middling peak level :since due to the very
entity of dharmadhatu impermanence and so forth and emptinesses do not have
their own entities, impermanence and so forth and emptiness are mutually
one nature. This refers to the 16 aspects of the four noble truths.
- aspect: exalted wisdom realizing not taking forms and so forth as one’s
own ultimately by negating the truly existent entities themselves.
- objects of observation of the great peak level : those forms and so forth
not seen as signs that are blue and so forth
- aspect: since wisdom thoroughly differentiates phenomena
perfectly,“definitely realizing all things as not observed.”
    1.32ab Forms and so forth lack entity;
             Their lack of existence is the very entity.
-  objects of observation of the small forbearance level are forms and so
forth lacking entity ultimately
-  aspect is the realization that their lack of existence ultimately is the
very entity of conventionalities.
    1.32cd Those lack production and lack definite emergence,
             Purity,…
- objects of observation of the middling forbearance level: those forms  and
so forth distinguished by lacking production and lacking definite  emergence
[Lacking production refers to  the  lack  of  birth  into  cyclic  existence
ultimately.  Lacking  definite  emergence  means  non-existence  of  nirvana
ultimately.]
- aspect: by observing the four truths in that manner, realizing the  purity
of the body and so forth through meditation
- Conventionally, there is birth into samsara and there is definite
emergence from samsara (i.e. the attainment of nirvana). Through the force
of karma and afflictions, there is birth into samsara, but there is no
birth in samsara ultimately. Likewise, through becoming free from karma and
afflictions, there is definite emergence from samsara/attainment of
nirvana, but this definite emergence/nirvana does not exist ultimately.
-“forms and so forth”: correlated with the 16 aspects of the four noble
truths. They can be understood as the contaminated aggregates. By grasping
the contaminated aggregates which are impermanent as permanent, which are
suffering as happiness, which are unclean as clean, which are selfless as
having self, one creates karma and circles in samsara.
- By realizing the aggregates as impermanent, suffering, empty, selfless,
and so on, one becomes free from samsara and attains nirvana.
- Due to grasping to the aggregates in erroneous ways, one creates the
karma to circle in cyclic existence.
-  The four truths are divided into two sets:
  - the first two have to do with entry into cyclic existence, whereas the
last two have to do with reversing from cyclic existence. Conventionally,
there is entrance into and reversal from cyclic existence. However, these
do not exist ultimately.
- “Realizing the purity of the body and so forth” means to realize the
purity of the body, speech, and mind through meditation.
    1.32d  …Those are signless,
    1.33ab Due to not being based upon their signs,
             Does not imagine and lack of discrimination.
-  objects of observation of the great forbearance level : those  forms  and
so forth distinguished by being signless [“those”  refer  to  forms  and  so
forth, or to body, speech, and mind. This means that those distinguished  by
lacking truly existent signs are the objects of observation.]
-  aspect: the exalted wisdom that, due to not being based upon their  signs
ultimately, does not imagine and realizes the lack  of  discrimination  with
the two attentions.[The “two attentions” refer to:
(1) the attention that realizes emptiness through mere imagination – this
realizes emptiness through a meaning-generality;
(2) the attention that directly realizes emptiness.
The 1st attention does not imagine the object of imagination ultimately.
The 2nd attention does not fully understand the signs of the three doors
ultimately.]

Haribhadra’s commentary
- objects of observation of the small level of the forbearance level: Forms
and so forth distinguished by just lacking the very entity ultimately.
These forms and so forth lack entity ultimately.  The entity does not exist
ultimately, since the very entity of characteristics, characterizing by
these, and the characteristics of the very entity, these, the objects to be
characterized are oneness in emptiness ultimately.
-  aspect: The realization of ‘the very entity of forms and so forth’ in
the perspective of a being bearing the object of observation who adheres to
true existence, even though forms and so forth are just without property
ultimately.
-  To a person who is bound by the conception of true existence, forms have
true existence when in fact forms and so forth lack true existence. In the
perspective of appearance to a being who adheres to true existence, forms
and so forth are established truly; they exist truly.  The realization of
the very entity of forms and so forth, in the perspective of such a person,
is the aspect of small forbearance. Such a realization of the perspective
of appearance of this person who adheres to true existence is the aspect of
the small forbearance.
- The first two of the four noble truths explain the stages of entering
cyclic existence, and the third and fourth noble truths explain the stages
of turning away from cyclic existence.
- With respect to forms and so forth, ultimately birth in samsara does not
exist and nirvana does not exist. This explanation corresponds with this
entry into samsara and turning away or exiting from samsara. Conventionally
there is birth in samsara and conventionally there is turning away from
samsara, however ultimately there is no birth in samsara and there is no
turning away from samsara.
- object of observation of the middling forbearance level: ultimately birth
in samsara does not exist and nirvana does not exist. Samsara and nirvana
do not exist ultimately, since they are just not born by nature ultimately.
So they are not produced by nature ultimately.
- aspect: the exalted wisdom of the middling forbearance level realizes
that three doors; body, speech and mind, the noble signs of a Buddha and
the lands [referring to the various buddha lands] and so forth will be
attained completely pure in all ways.

The twelve modes of observation summarized into four

The subject- the bodhisattvas’ partial concordances with definite
discrimination- observe the properties of the four truths, however possible
the modes of apprehension of their aspects are, because of observing the
four truths through the strength of skillful means in practicing the
complete path: (1) by means of cause on some occasions of middling
forbearance, (2) by means of result on some occasions of small supreme
mundane quality, (3) by means of the very entity of the two truths on some
occasions of small forbearance, and (4) by means of the aspects of dharmata
on some occasions that are the nine others.
- The bodhisattvas’ partial concordances with definite discrimination
observe the properties of the four truths, however possible the modes of
apprehension of their aspects are, because of observing the four truths
through the strength of skillful means in practicing the complete path:
(1) by means of cause on some occasions of middling forbearance,
(2) by means of result on some occasions of small SMQ,
(3) by means of the very entity of the two truths on some occasions of
small forbearance, and
(4) by means of the aspects of dharmata on some occasions that are the nine
others.
- The aspect is not always the aspect of dharmata, so it is not always
about realizing emptiness.
- The 12 modes of observation of the Mahayana path of preparation can be
summarized into 4 modes of observation observing the four noble truths.
- The 12 division of the Mahayana path of preparation, 3 for each of the
four levels of the path of preparation observe by means of the aspects of
dharmata during meditative equipoise, and by means of entity, cause, and
result during subsequent attainment.
- 3 of these take place during subsequent attainment and 9 take place
during meditative equipoise.
- In terms of the cause, result, and entity, these are actually realized
during subsequent attainment.
- Observation by means of the aspect of dharmata takes place during
meditative equipoise.
-  object of observation of the great forbearance level: all phenomena just
lacking signs
-  aspect is the exalted wisdom realizing “not imagining signs through
attention to the imagined” and “not completely knowing the signs through
attention to thusness that is directly realized.”
- an example of a specific sign of form as being the conventional nature of
form.
- an example of a general sign of forms would be true sufferings.
- form can refer to the contaminated, appropriated aggregates, with the
specific signs being the forms themselves while the general signs are true
sufferings.
- According to Svatantrika system, it is possible for one who has attained
forbearance to go to the bad migrations through the force of compassion,
but not through the force of karma. The fact that bodhisattvas can take
rebirth in bad migrations through the force of compassion does not
contradict the statement from the Great Commentary. Bodhisattvas
voluntarily take rebirth in bad migration through the force of compassion,
so they do not fall into bad migrations.
    1.33cd Meditative stabilization, the very activity of that,
             Prediction and has extinguished clinging,
    1.34ab The three, mutually in the same entity,
             Not conceptualizing meditative stabilization—

- object of observation of the small SMQ level: the object of meditation
transformed into the entity of meditative stabilization.
-aspect: spontaneous engagement in the activity of that meditative
stabilization. This spontaneous engagement is a result.
- object of observation of the middling  SMQ level: Forms and so forth that
lack entity themselves ultimately
- aspect : the exalted wisdom that has extinguished coarse clinging to the
three circles ultimately
- Here, the three circles are the object cultivated, that which cultivates,
and the person who performs the cultivation.
Emptiness is the object of meditation, the meditator is the agent, or
person, who meditates, and that which meditates is actually the meditative
stabilization or the mind which meditates.
- “The special cause of hidden prediction,” - when a bodhisattva reaches
the middling SMQ, they receive prediction of when and where they will
attain enlightenment. This is “hidden” in that it is not proclaimed in
public. A hidden prophecy is a secret prediction.
- object of observation of the great  SMQ level: The three circles mutually
in the same entity in the nature of dharmata
- aspect : the meditative stabilization of the great supreme mundane
quality not conceptualizing any limit. It is said that the meditative
stabilization not conceptualizing any limit is the excellent method for
attaining buddhahood.

Haribhadra’s commentary
- object of observation of the small SMQ level: meditative stabilization
and forms and so forth of inseparable entity in suchness. The meditative
stabilization referred to here is the meditative stabilization of “going
heroically and so forth.”
-aspect: The exalted wisdom realizing engaging in the activity of
meditative stabilization spontaneously, exactly in accordance with the
fortunes of trainees in all the world systems when one has become
enlightened.
-One engages in exalted activities spontaneously by
(i) the force of one’s previous prayers, the two collections of merit and
exalted wisdom, and
(ii) the power of the pure and just inconceivable sphere of dharma. [sphere
of dharma is emptiness. When one makes prayers and accumulates merit and
wisdom, then, because of the power of dharmata, the result of prayers,
collections of merit, and so forth, will arise in a dependent way.]
- This exalted wisdom occurs on the small SMQ.
- As a result of this meditative stabilization, one will be able to act in
accordance with the fortune of trainees, and so forth.
- In accordance with that cause – the activity of meditative stabilization
– one will attain the result, “acting in accordance with the fortunes of
trainees…when one has become enlightened.”
- One engages in meditative stabilization and as a result one is eventually
able to act spontaneously in accordance with the fortunes of trainees.
- object of observation of the middling  SMQ level: the special cause of
prediction and forms and so forth of inseparable entity ultimately
-aspect: The meditative stabilization of the middling SMQ level that does
not apprehend the three circles as truly existent.
- When a bodhisattva is set in the meditative stabilization of the middling
SMQ, he or she does not apprehend the three circles as truly existent,
thinking, “I am in meditative equipoise.” Thus, the apprehension of true
existence is stopped, and the exalted wisdom that does not conceive the
three circles as truly existent is the aspect of the middling SMQ level.
- object of observation of the great  SMQ level: meditative stabilization
by way of dharmata which is empty of true existence, the bodhisattva, the
perfection of wisdom that is the object of meditation, and the four truths
distinguished by the three meanings being mutually one entity.
- The “three meanings” are the object of meditation, the person who is the
meditator, and emptiness. These are mutually one entity; they are the
objects of observation of the great SMQ level, because “they are the bases
for eliminating the superimpositions of that.” [“That” can refer to the SMQ
level itself. Simply, the four noble truths are the objects of observation
of the great SMQ because they are the bases for eliminating
superimpositions regarding that SMQ level.]
- aspect: the exalted wisdom realizing that not conceptualizing in
meditative stabilization ultimately is the excellent method for attaining
buddhahood.
- Why it is called “supreme mundane quality”- This is because an
uncontaminated exalted wisdom will be directly produced. This is referring
to the path of seeing, which will be directly produced.

- The four levels of the path of preparation are concordant causes of the
path of seeing, thus through observing the four noble truths one must
realize emptiness and so forth.
- For the small heat level, the four noble truths were explicitly stated as
“impermanence and so forth bearing the support of the truths” are the
objects of observation. One realizes emptiness on the basis of the four
noble truths.
- For the subsequent levels, 2nd through the 12th, the words “support of
the four noble truths” is not explicitly mentioned, but this must be
understood by implication that the qualities refer to qualities of the four
noble truths.
If we look at verse 1.29ab, related to the middling and great heat levels,
it says, “Freedom from assembly and establishment of forms and so forth,
abidance and abidance, imputation, and the lack of expression.” According
to our system, these words express the qualities.

- Form of a vase: Form is the basis for the attribute. Vase is the
attribute.
- When such an expression is made, what is removed and what is not removed?

- When one says “beautiful form,” one can generate a doubt wondering “of
what?”
- By expressing “beautiful form of a vase,” one understands that the
beautiful form is attributed by the vase.
One understands that this is the form of a vase and not the form of
something else.

- Expression “impermanent sound” and “the impermanence of sound” mean
different things. The two expressions differ in terms of the mode of
indication.
- Impermanence of sound - Impermanence  is  the  basis  for  the  attribute.
Sound is the attribute.
- Impermanent sound- Sound is the basis for the attribute.  Impermanence  is
the attribute.
- For “the impermanence of sound” – “impermanence” is taken as the
principal. “Sound” acts as its qualification. Impermanence is the basis of
characterization. Sound is the attribute which characterizes it.
- For “impermanent sound” - “sound” is taken as the principal and is
qualified by impermanence. “Impermanent” is a qualification of sound. Sound
is the basis for characterization. Impermanence is the attribute that
characterizes it.
- When we say “impermanence of sound,” something is removed. We are  talking
about the impermanence of sound, not of something else. This  expresses  the
quality, and removes other attributes.
- Impermanent sound - When we say “impermanent sound,” other attributes  are
not removed. This expresses the quality-bearer, and does  not  remove  other
attributes.
- The three types of conceptions that are abandoned on the path of
preparation are:
1. Incorrect indicative conception: e.g. a wrong conception
2. A mind bearing a rough aspect: a mind that is very closed or narrow in
perspective
3. A conception apprehending a sound-generality and a meaning-generality as
suitable to be mixed: a general conception or conceptual consciousness, as
opposed to a direct perception.

-  Here, we are talking a conception apprehending a sound-generality and a
meaning-generality as suitable to be mixed.
-  A negative phenomenon necessarily involves some type of negation, i.e.
it is realized through an explicit negation of the object to be negated.
There are two types of negative phenomena:
(1) Non-affirming negative: e.g. the lack of true existence of forms. There
is no affirmative phenomenon implied by negating true existence of forms.
(2) Affirming negative: e.g. the reverse of non-pot. By eliminating non-
pot, pot (an affirmative phenomenon) is implied.
-  The meaning of the conception of a negative phenomenon is a conception
in which the principal object of the mode of apprehension is a negative
phenomenon.
- For the conception of true existence of a vase - the main object of the
mode of apprehension is what dawns to the mind, i.e. a truly existent vase.
Such a mind is posited in terms of apprehending a truly existent vase.
- For the conception of emptiness of true existence of a vase - the main
object of the mode of apprehension is the emptiness of true existence of
the vase. This is a negative phenomenon.
- A conception of a negative phenomenon means the object of the conception
is a negative phenomenon.
  E.g. a conception of emptiness of true existence, a conception of non-
pot.
- Affirmative phenomena are not realized through an explicit negation of
the object to be negated. They are realized in an “affirmative” or
“positive” way.
- A conception of an affirmative phenomenon means a conception that
apprehends an affirmative phenomenon.
  E.g. a conception apprehending a pot
- Someone says: If  the  conceptions  indicated  here  were  conceptions  of
negative phenomena, there would be repetition with the attributes  that  are
the aspects.
 - Whatever is a conception of a negative phenomenon indicated here is  only
a realization of apprehendeds and apprehenders as lacking true existence.
- Our system:  You  do  not  know  the  classification  of  the  objects  of
abandonment and antidotes, i.e. how they are classified.
- When we talk about the “conceptions indicated here,” they are  objects  to
be abandoned. They are not  the  aspects  (the  minds  realizing  emptiness)
which  are  actually  the  antidotes.  Therefore,  there  is  no  fault   of
repetition.
- Our system says: According to you if one has a conception that adheres to
the emptiness of true existence as truly existent, this is a conception of
a negative phenomenon. Such a conception is included within the knowledge
obscurations in this context.
- E.g. the emptiness of true existence of forms. This is a negative
phenomenon. However, truly existent emptiness of true existence of forms is
not a negative phenomenon. Therefore, the conception of the emptiness of
true existence of forms as truly existent is not a conception of a negative
phenomenon.
Our system: The conception of the emptiness of true existence of
apprehendeds and apprehenders as truly existent is not a conception of a
negative phenomenon.
-Someone says: One would have to take the adherence to the emptiness of
true existence of apprehendeds and apprehenders as truly existent as a
conception of a negative phenomenon.
- Our system: The conception of the emptiness of true existence of
apprehendeds and apprehenders as truly existent is not a conceptions of
negative phenomena. They can also be conceptions of affirmative phenomena.
In other words, there are conceptions of both negative and affirmative
phenomena.

- Conceptions of apprehendeds - through observing apprehended-objects,
adhere to them as truly existent objects of utilization. They are not just
conceptions that observe apprehendeds. They observe apprehendeds and adhere
to them as truly existent objects of utilization.
- Conceptions of apprehenders - through observing apprehender-subjects,
adhere to them as truly existent utilizers.
- Conceptions are  objects  to  be  abandoned.  They  do  not  just  observe
apprehenders. They are conceptions  that,  through  observing  apprehenders,
adhere to them as truly existent utilizers.
- Examples of conceptions:
1. The apprehension of the aggregates as truly existent
2. The apprehension of the negation (in which the objects  of  adherence  of
that apprehension of the aggregates as truly existent are negated) as  truly
existent. These are conceptualizations which are objects of abandonment.
- The 1st example is an apprehension of the aggregates as truly existent -
conception of an affirmative phenomenon.
- The 2nd is an apprehension of the negation as truly existent. This is
also a conception of an affirmative phenomenon.
(apprehension of the negation as truly existent = an apprehension of the
emptiness of true existent as truly existent)
The reason for saying that this is a conception of an affirmative
phenomenon is the same as the reason for saying:
- The conception of truly existent emptiness of true existence of forms is
a conception of an affirmative phenomenon. The reason is that the object of
the mode of apprehension is not a negative phenomenon.
- When such a conception adheres to the true existence of the emptiness of
true existence of forms, it does not involve negation.
- When adhering or grasping to true existence, nothing is negated. Negation
is not involved.  Therefore, the object of the mode of apprehension is not
a negative phenomenon. Thus such a conception is not a conception of a
negative phenomenon and this is a conception of an affirmative phenomenon.
- True existence is not an affirmative phenomenon. However, a conception
that adheres to true existence is a conception of an affirmative
phenomenon, or an affirmative conception.
- When such a mind adheres to true existence, it does not apprehend non-
existence, the non-existence of something. It apprehends true existence.
Thus a mind apprehending true existence is a conception of an affirmative
phenomenon.
- Conception of affirmative phenomenon is that the object of the mode of
apprehension is an affirmative phenomenon. We are not saying that the
object of observation is an affirmative phenomenon. We are mainly talking
about how the object is apprehended.
- True existence is neither an affirmative phenomenon nor a negative
phenomenon because it is not a phenomenon. It does not exist. However, a
mind that apprehends true existence is classified as a conception of an
affirmative phenomenon. The reason for this is that it apprehends true
existence. It is not a conception of a negative phenomenon.

Conceptions that are knowledge obscurations
- Definition: A conception that is a knowledge obscuration is an awareness
that apprehends its object as truly existent.
- The conception that is a knowledge obscuration has 2 divisions:-
   1) a conception of an apprehended that is a knowledge obscuration,
   2) a conception of an apprehender that is a knowledge obscuration.
- The conception of an apprehended that is a knowledge obscuration has 2
divisions:
   1a) A  conception  of  a  thoroughly  afflicted  apprehended  that  is  a
   knowledge obscuration
   1b) A conception of a completely pure apprehended  that  is  a  knowledge
   obscuration
- The conception of an apprehender that is a  knowledge  obscuration  has  2
divisions:
   2a) A conception of an apprehender of substantial  existence  that  is  a
   knowledge obscuration
      2b) A conception of an apprehender of imputed existence that is a
knowledge obscuration
-Definition:
1) A conception of an apprehended that is a knowledge obscuration is a
conception that, through observing an apprehended that serves as its
observed object, adheres to it as a truly existent object of utilization.
1a) A conception of a thoroughly afflicted apprehended that is a knowledge
obscuration is a conception that, through observing a truth of the
thoroughly afflicted class that serves as its observed object, apprehends
it as a truly existent object of utilization.
1b) A conception of a completely pure apprehended that is a knowledge
obscuration is: a conception that, through observing a truth of the
completely pure class that serves as its observed object, apprehends it as
a truly existent object of utilization.[ a truth of the completely pure
class is true paths].
2) A conception of an apprehender that is a knowledge obscuration is a
conception that, through observing an apprehender that serves as its
observed object, adheres to it as a truly existent utilizer.
2a) A conception of an apprehender of substantial existence that is a
knowledge obscuration is a conception that, through observing an
apprehender of substantial existence that serves as its observed object,
adheres to it as a truly existent utilizer.
2b) A conception of an apprehender of imputed existence that is a knowledge
obscuration is a conception that, through observing an apprehender of
imputed existence that serves as its observed object, adheres to it as a
truly existent utilizer.
- Each of these four types of conceptions has 9 divisions.
- In the expression of “a conception of an apprehender of substantial
existence,” there are 3 things involved:
1) a conception
2) the apprehender
3) substantial existence.
- The conception observes the apprehender of substantial existence, and the
apprehender of substantial existence observes substantial existence.
- In the expression “a conception of an apprehender of imputed existence,”
there are 3 things involved:
1) a conception
2) the apprehender
3) imputed existence.
- The conception observes the apprehender of imputed existence, and this
apprehender observes imputed existence.

Qualm about substantially existent persons and imputedly existent beings
• Here, we will look at some different assertions about the meaning of
“substantially existent person” and “imputedly existent being.”
1st possibility:
- Substantially existent person = self-sufficient, substantially existent
 person
- Imputedly existent being = that imputed to the collection of aggregates
 as a being
- This cannot be the case, because an apprehender observing a self-
 sufficient, substantially existent is an afflictive obscuration, and cannot
 be a knowledge obscuration.
- An apprehender of an imputedly existent being apprehends the meaning
 established by valid cognition, i.e. observes it in a correct way.
 Therefore, it cannot be an object of abandonment.
2nd possibility:
- Substantially existent person = a person that is able to perform a
 function
- Imputedly existent being = a person that is not able to perform a
 function
- Refuting an apprehender of a person that is able to perform a function
 would become deprecation since such a person does exist. [Deprecation means
 that there is something that exists and you say that it does not exist. It
 is also deprecation if it is something and you say ‘No, it is not’].
- Even a valid cognizer of conventionalities can refute a person who is not
 able to perform a function; it need not be refuted by way of observing the
 meaning of the mode of abidance (i.e. emptiness).
3rd possibility:
                   - Substantially existent person = truly existent person
                   - Imputedly existent person = person that is empty of
                     true existence, like an illusion
A conception apprehending a person that is empty of true existence could
not be an innate affliction.
- There is no such an innate conception. No one innately gives rise to a
conception that a person is empty of true existence like an illusion. If
there was such a conception of a person that is empty of true existence
like an illusion, this has to come about through the learning of tenets.
Response: There are two types of apprehension of substantial existence:
1. The apprehension of a person as being able to perform a function, and
2. The apprehension of a person as self-sufficient substantially-existent.
  (The object of adherence of the conception of a self-sufficient
  substantially-existent person being refuted through the force of
  experience exists in aryas, not in ordinary beings).
- Aryas refute the object of adherence of the apprehension of a person as
self-sufficient substantially existent through the force of experience,
while ordinary beings do not.
- Ordinary beings are not able to refute the object of adherence of a
conception of a self-sufficient substantially-existent person through the
force of experience. However, they are able to refute the object of
adherence of a conception of self-sufficient substantially-existent.
- Hence the apprehension of substantial existence bears the support of
ordinary beings whereas the apprehension of imputed existence bears the
support of aryas.
- In general, both the apprehension of substantial existence and the
apprehension of imputed existence bear the support of both ordinary beings
and aryas.
- Even ordinary beings who have not entered a path can have a manifest
innate apprehension of imputed existence, i.e. an apprehension in which the
collection of aggregates is imputed as a being.
- For a conception that apprehends a substantially-existent person,
adhering to the utilizer as truly existent. One observes either a person
who is able to perform a function, or a self-sufficient substantially-
existent person, or both of them.
- For the conception of an imputedly existent being, one observes that
imputed to the collection of aggregates as a being and adheres to it as a
truly existent utilizer.  One observes that imputed to the collection of
aggregates as a being.
- For a conception apprehending imputed existence, one observes a being who
is empty of true existence like an illusion, and one apprehends such a
being to be a truly existent utilizer. Such a conception is of two types:
acquired and innate.
- These two types are not differentiated by means of the object of
observation, the being who is empty of true existence like an illusion. If
one were to discriminate them by means of this object of observation,
ridiculous consequences would follow.
-The Mahayana path of preparation is superior to the Hinayana path of
preparation because it possesses the four conceptions as principal objects
of abandonment (one of the 5 or 6 attributes).
- However if you do say that these conceptions, due to being possessed as
objects of abandonment, have been taken as attributes, therefore the
Mahayana path of preparation is superior, then it follows that hell
sentient beings would be superior due to their great suffering, because
having greater suffering is an attribute of the hell beings.
 - Does the meditative equipoise of the path of preparation abandon or not
abandon the manifest conceptions indicated? Thus there are two
possibilities:
1st possibility: In the case where the meditative equipoise of the path of
preparation does not abandon the manifest conceptions indicated here, it
follows that the superimposition that apprehends sound as permanent would
not be damaged even slightly by the inferential valid cognizer realizing
that sound is impermanent.
2nd possibility: In the case where the meditative equipoise of the path of
preparation does abandons the manifest conceptions indicated here, the
absurd consequence that the objects of abandonment would not be definite in
number as the two: (i) objects of abandonment by the path of seeing and
(ii)objects of abandonment by the path of meditation – would become one’s
own.
- In other words, this consequence would become one’s own fault. One would
incur this fault.
Someone says: Since the antidotes that abandon the seeds are definite as
two, in general, the objects of abandonment are definite as two.
Our system: Nobody say that the seeds of the conceptions are abandoned by
the path of preparation. These conceptions are the principal object of
abandonment.
 - Their seeds are being abandoned on the occasions of the path of seeing
and path of meditation.
- On this occasion, the path of preparation has been taken as attributed by
acting to achieve enlightenment by way of having abandoned with effort some
of the manifest conceptions.
- The path of preparation can abandon the manifest conceptions and then,
although it cannot abandon the seeds of the conception, it is able to
induce future antidotes that abandon the seeds.
- Basically the manifest conceptions are being abandoned on the path of
preparation. The conceptions along with their seeds are actually abandoned
only on the path of seeing and above.
- The attribute possessing the four conceptions and the attribute of
bearing the aspect of the emptiness of true existence of the four noble
truths by way of infinite reasonings are different.
Someone says: The conceptions should be divided into the seeds and the
manifest conceptions. The seeds are possessed during meditative equipoise
and the manifest is possessed during subsequent attainment. Because their
aspects are contradictory, the manifest conceptions and the path of
preparation are not the same entity.
- The manifest conceptions that are to be abandoned have the aspect of
apprehending true existence, whereas the path of preparation has the aspect
of realizing the emptiness of true existence. So it is clear that their
aspects are contradictory.
- The conceptions of apprehendeds are of two types:
1. Those bearing the support of the thoroughly afflicted basis (the
conceptions of thoroughly afflicted apprehendeds)
2. Those bearing the support of the antidotes to that [i.e. the completely
pure class] (the conceptions of completely pure apprehendeds)
- Each is divided into nine, by way of particularities that observe
confusion (i.e. ignorance) and the aggregates and so forth.
- The conceptions of apprehenders are of two types:
1. Those bearing the support of the substantial person
2. Those bearing the support of the imputed being
Each is divided into nine, “due to there being nine- observing entity, an
independent self and so forth, and support, the aggregates and so forth.
Haribhadra’s enumeration:[Conceptions of thoroughly afflicted apprehendeds]
Bearing the support of the thoroughly afflicted basis -
1. Ignorance
2. The aggregates of form and so forth
3. Strong adherence to name and form
4. Attachment to the two extremes
5. Not knowing the thoroughly afflicted and the completely pure
6. Not abiding on the arya path
7. The objects of observation
8. The self and so forth
9. Generation of purity and so forth
—conceptualizations of apprehendeds

- The conceptualizations of apprehendeds bearing the support of the
thoroughly afflicted basis have 9 types of bases of divisions. They are
divided by way of the object of observation which are:-
 1. The generalities of true sufferings and true origins and
 2. The particularities of true sufferings and true origins.

-  Objects of observation in terms of generalities:
(1) the generality of true origins -  adherence to the generality of
afflictions, afflicted ignorance, as truly existent objects of utilizations
(2) the generality of true suffering - adherence to the generality of
sufferings, the contaminated aggregates of form and so forth, as truly
existent objects of utilizations

- Objects of observation in terms of particularities of afflictions, there
are 4 objects of observation because there is adherence to truly existent
objects of utilization by way of:
(3) having observed strong adherence to name and strong adherence to form,
by observing them craving for an erroneous result arises
(4) attachment to the two extremes of permanence and annihilation, craving
for an erroneous object of knowledge
(5) not knowing the thoroughly afflicted and the completely pure as objects
to be discarded and to be adopted respectively, observing non-faith
(6) having observed laziness, not abiding in a manner of strong enthusiasm
on the arya path.
- By observing these 4 types of objects of observation and adhering to them
as truly existent objects of utilizations, we then have these 4 types of
conceptions.

- Objects of observation in terms of particularities of suffering, there
are 3 objects of observation because there is strong adherence to truly
existent objects of utilization by way of having observed:
(7) the objects of observation that are contaminated feelings, the three
fruitions of comfort, discomfort, and neutrality,
(8) the supports of feelings, the self, others, and so forth
(9) generation of purity and so forth when the nature of suffering feelings
is understood, by way of disillusionment due to it. This is because when
one is disillusioned due to feelings, the cessation which is the separation
from suffering feelings, as well as the path that proceeds to that, are
induced.
- The objects of observation for the 7th conception of a thoroughly
afflicted apprehended is “the objects of observation that are contaminated
feelings, the three fruitions of comfort, discomfort, and neutrality.”
- This refers to three types of contaminated feelings: suffering,
happiness, and neutral feelings.
- For the 8th “the supports of feelings: the self, others, and so forth,”
due to a feeling of happiness, one develops attachment to oneself; due to
suffering feelings, one develops aversion for others. Due to the causes
that are feelings, one generates attachment to oneself and aversion to
others. The causes of attachment and aversion are feelings of happiness and
suffering. These feelings of suffering and happiness are counted as one.
-  For the 9th it is posited in Golden Rosary that suffering is generated
indirectly from nirvana.
- To summarize, on 7th point, there are three kinds of contaminated
feelings. On the 8th, there are two kinds of contaminated feelings:
suffering and happiness. On the 9th, there are suffering feelings.

Haribhadra’s enumeration: [Conceptions of completely pure apprehendeds]
Bearing the support of antidotes (completely pure class) -
1. The aggregates
2. Entrances of generating
3. Classes
4. Birth
5. Emptiness
6. The meaning of the perfections
7. The path of seeing
8. Path of meditation
9. Path of no‐more‐learning
—conceptualizations of apprehendeds

- The 9 types of conceptualization of apprehendeds bearing the support of
antidotes of completely pure apprehendeds are divided into three
categories:
   -  5 observing completely pure objects of knowledge,
   - 1 observing deeds, and
   - 3 observing entity.
In the 1st category, 5 observing completely pure objects of knowledge, the
objects of observation are stated.
- Four that are varieties:
1. The completely pure form aggregates, feeling aggregates, and so forth.
2. The eye source, the ear source, the nose source, etc.
3. The substantial cause will give rise to something of concordant type.
4. The reverse process of the twelve links of dependent  arising.  (When  we
  talk about the twelve links, we can talk about the forward process or the
  reverse process. In  this  context  we  are  talking  about  the  reverse
  process, and in particular the  completely  pure  birth  of  the  reverse
  process).
 - One observing the modes:
5. Emptiness can be thought about in detail from the point of  view  of  the
  twenty emptinesses.
- As illustrations of these objects of observation:
1. Form included in the completely pure five aggregates.
2. The eye is the one included within the entrances of  generating  included
  within the sources, the empowering condition.
3. “The constituents of the eye, form, and eye  primary  consciousness”  are
  illustrations of  the  third.  Their  classes  are  included  within  the
  constituents, the substantial cause.
4. Ignorance here is that included within the reverse process of the  twelve
  links of dependent arising.
5. From among the twenty emptinesses, inner emptiness is the first, and  the
  emptiness of the very entity of lack of thing is the twentieth.
- The first five conceptualizations are from the point of view of observing
the five completely pure objects of knowledge: completely pure aggregates,
entrances, constituents, the reverse process of dependent arising, and
emptiness.
- One observing deeds
  6. One observes the meaning of the Perfections that are deeds and adheres
to them as being truly existent.
The completely pure entities are the paths of seeing, meditation and no-
more learning.
- Three observing entity:
  7. The 37 harmonies of enlightenment [refers to the 37 harmonies that  are
in the entity of the path of seeing].
  8. The four concentration, the clairvoyances, the immeasurables,  and  the
formless absorptions [refers to the four concentrations, the  clairvoyances,
the immeasurables, and the formless absorptions that are in  the  entity  of
the path of meditation.]
  9. The ten powers of the tathagatas, and so forth  until  omniscience.  In
other words, one observes the thirty-nine aspects  beginning  from  the  ten
powers of the tathagatas and so  forth,  through  to  omniscience,  i.e.  an
exalted knower of all aspects.  Through observing  these  that  are  in  the
entity of the path of  non-more  leaning,  one  adheres  to  them  as  truly
existent.

Haribhadra’s enumeration: [Conceptions of apprehenders of substantial
existents]
Bearing the support of substantially existing persons—
1. An independent self
2. Unitary
3. Cause
4. A self which is a viewer and so forth
5. Thorough afflictions
6. Separation from attachment
7. Seeing
8. Meditation
9. The support which enacted the welfare
- conceptualizations of apprehenders

- For the conceptions of apprehenders of substantial existents, there are
three things involved:
   1. a conception,
   2. an apprehender, and
   3. a substantial existent.
- The conception observes the apprehender, and the apprehender observes a
substantial existent.
- The conceptualizations of apprehenders bearing the support of
substantially existent persons which strongly adheres to apprehenders as
truly existent utilizers have 9 types:
- One object of observation, an apprehender of substantial existence that
is its object of adherence
- Eight divided by way of object of adherence.
-One object of observation, an apprehender of substantial existence that is
its object of adherence is established, because having observed:
(1) an apprehender of an independent self, it adheres to it as a truly
existent utilizer.
- Independence is the mode of apprehension of that apprehender of
substantial existence, it is not the mode of apprehension of the conception
of an apprehender of substantial existence that is a knowledge obscuration.

- If it were the mode of apprehension of the conception that is a knowledge
obscuration, referring to the conception of an apprehender of substantial
existence, then this conceptualization of apprehenders would be an
afflictive obscuration, not a knowledge obscuration.

-There are eight divided in terms of object of adherence:-

- Three in terms of the generalities, the objects of observation, the
apprehenders of substantial existents
(2) Observing the apprehenders of an independent self as a self which is
unitary [refers to something that does not rely on its parts.]
(3) Observing the apprehenders of an independent self as a self which is
cause [the cause is viewed as a self by an apprehender; this apprehender is
adhered to as a truly existent utilizer. For example, in dependence on the
self, a primary consciousness is produced. The self is a cause.]
](4) Observing the apprehenders of an independent self as a self which is a
self which is a viewer, knower, and so forth
-The conceptualizations observe their objects of observation in this way
and adhere to them as truly existent utilizers.

- Five divisions in terms of the particularities:
(5) Observing the apprehender of thorough afflictions, such as ignorance,
as an independent self
(6) Observing the apprehender of separation from mundane attachment as an
independent self. [“Apprehenders of separation from mundane attachment”
refers to the apprehender of an agent, who has separated from mundane
attachment, as a self. “Agent” is a person.  Through observing such an
apprehender, adhering to it as a truly existent utilizer, is the 6th
conception.]
(7) Observing the apprehender of seeing as an independent self. [An
apprehender of seeing refers to an apprehender of a practitioner on the
path of seeing as a self. Through observing such an apprehender, adhering
to it as a truly existent utilizer is the 7th conception.]
(8) Observing the apprehender of meditation as an independent self. [The
object of observation is an apprehender of a practitioner on the path of
meditation as a self. Through observing such an apprehender, adhering to it
as a truly existent utilizer is the 8th conception.]
(9) Observing the apprehender of the powerful support which enacted the
welfare as an independent self.
- These are observed and adhered to as truly existent utilizers.

Haribhadra’s enumeration:[Conceptions of apprehenders of imputed existents]
Bearing the support of imputedly existing beings—
1. The aggregates
2. The sources
3. The constituents
4. Dependent-arising
5. The completely pure
6. Path of seeing
7. Path of meditation
8. Path of distinction
9. Path of no-more-learning
—conceptualizations of apprehenders.
- These conceptualizations observe apprehenders, which view (i.e. have the
support of) imputedly existent beings; the conceptualizations then view
these apprehenders as being truly existent utilizers.

-Conceptions of apprehenders of imputed existents are divided into two
categories:
1. Three divisions in terms of generalities
2. Six divisions in terms of particularities.
- The 3 divisions in terms of generalities have objects of observation that
are the apprehenders of the aggregates, the sources, and the constituents.
The first object of observation is:
1. The apprehender of the 5 aggregates as beings, which are the bases for
  the imputation.
2. The apprehender of the 6 sources as beings: the eye, ear, nose, tongue,
  body, and mental sources.
3. The apprehender of the 18 constituents as beings: eye, ear, nose,
  tongue, body, and mentality; forms, sounds, odors, tastes, objects of
  touch, phenomena; and the six primary consciousnesses: eye, ear, nose,
  tongue, body, and mental consciousnesses.
    - Through observing these 3 apprehenders: the aggregates, the sources,
      and the constituents - as beings, adhering to them as truly existent
      utilizers, are the first three conceptions of apprehenders of imputed
      existence.
- The 6 divisions in terms of particularities include apprehenders of:
  4. The 12 links of dependent arising, ignorance and so forth
  5. The completely pure 37 harmonies with enlightenment,
  6. The paths of seeing
  7. The path of meditation,
  8. The path of distinction [refers to the path of the 10th ground]
  9. The path of no-more-learning.
- These apprehenders are observed as beings. Through observing them,
adhering to them as truly existent utilizers, we have the last 6
conceptions of apprehenders of imputed existence.
- For the conceptions of apprehenders of imputed existence, the
apprehenders are observed as beings.
- For the conceptions of apprehenders of substantial existence, the
apprehenders are observed as a self.
- The four partial concordances with definite discrimination (path of
preparation)- heat, peak, forbearance, and SMQ, possess the abilities to
destroy the four types of objects of abandonment, i.e. the four types of
manifest conceptions: 1. conception of thoroughly afflicted apprehendeds,
2. conception of completely pure apprehendeds,
3. apprehenders of substantial existence, and
4. apprehenders of imputed existence.
- Completely pure aggregates – e.g. the completely pure aggregate of mental
consciousness. There is also the completely pure aggregate of form. The
aggregates of a buddha are completely pure aggregates.
- Completely pure, in general, means free from afflictive obscurations and
from knowledge obscurations. In general, emptiness is said to be of the
completely pure class.  Emptiness is a means that purifies; in dependence
on it, one attains complete purity.

The sequence of the 5 attributes is listed as:
   1. object of observation
   2. aspect
   3. cause
   4. tutor
   5. possessing the four conceptions.
- In the extensive explanation, we went through the first 3 attributes, and
then discussed the possession of the four conceptions (the 4th attribute).
Now we are discussing the tutor, so the 4th and 5th attributes have been
reversed.
- Two purposes:
-1st: the purpose for having taught the tutor prior to the four conceptions
in the brief indication because this has to do with the convenience of the
composition of the stanza.
-2nd: the purpose for having taught it with an interceding stanza again at
the end of the conceptions in the extensive explanation because to indicate
that “All four levels of the path of preparation explained will become
distinguished by the force of tutor taught later.”
- There are two types of tutors: inner tutor and outer tutor.
- The inner tutor of the bodhisattva on the Mahayana path of preparation is
the exalted wisdom in the continuum of the bodhisattva that is not
separated from the attention to an EKAA. This means that this exalted
wisdom is not separated from the generated mind (the mind of enlightenment,
bodhicitta).
- The inner tutor of the bodhisattva on the Mahayana path of preparation is
an exalted wisdom endowed with qualities such as bodhicitta, realization of
emptiness, and freedom from the awareness seeking one’s own liberation
alone.
- It is also skilled in the means of undaunted and unafraid minds and so
forth regarding the meaning of profound emptiness. It is not afraid or
discouraged with regard to the meaning of emptiness.
- It discards the discordant classes of:
      - the attention of hearers and solitary realizers - referring to the
awareness seeking one’s liberation alone.
      - adherence to true existence - referring to the manifest conceptions
of true existence.
- On the path of preparation, this bodhisattva turns away the various types
of manifest conceptions of true existence. - Such an exalted wisdom with
these features is in all ways the inner tutor of the bodhisattva on the
path of preparation because it is a clear realization of that bodhisattva
that acts to stop the extremes of cyclic existence and solitary peace.
- The inner tutor within us is also very important. It causes us to
restrain from non-virtue, to observe the law of karma, to be honest, to
engage in goodness, and to develop excellent qualities.
- An outer tutor is very important, but without the inner tutor, there is
not much the outer tutor can do.
- Even if Shakyamuni Buddha were our outer tutor, if the inner tutor was
absent, the benefit would be limited. Thus in order for us to attain
perfection, the role of the inner tutor is extremely important.
- Although we may not have these qualities yet, we should try to work in
that direction, cultivating virtue and so on. Those qualities that we can
develop are our inner tutor. Over time, they will improve and through the
condition of developing the inner tutor, we will definitely meet with a
good outer tutor.
- The outer tutor of a bodhisattva on the path of preparation is a buddha’s
supreme emanation body who teaches all Dharmas, the lack of entitiness
ultimately and so forth to that bodhisattva on the path of preparation and
also reveals the path in which one gives up the discordant class of a
virtuous spiritual guide, maras, negative companions, and the like because
he is a virtuous spiritual guide who is the empowering condition that acts
to instruct that bodhisattva on the path of preparation on the fully
complete method and wisdom.
- An emanation body has the skillful means to lead one on the path of
undaunted and unafraid minds regarding the meaning of profound emptiness.
He teaches in a very skillful way using gentle terminology.
- In accordance with the mentality of trainees, he also teaches
selflessness of persons and phenomena, bodhicitta, and the six perfections,
revealing negative companions (those who cause one to abandon Mahayana
texts and paths) as negative companions, and also teaches one not to have
qualities such as miserliness, corrupt morality, and so forth, which are
the discordant classes of the six perfections.

- There are two types of maras: inner and outer.
- Outer demons with the aspect of horns and fangs have difficulty harming
us because we would escape from them quickly.
- The inner maras, our afflictions, are more dangerous. They can harm us
any time. We should work on trying to dispel them.
- There are various types of negative companions; some intend to harm us,
while others do not. Those who do not intend to harm us may exert a
negative influence on us due to the ignorance in their minds. For example,
they may say “the path is very difficult; don’t practice it.” If we are not
able to benefit such people, it is better to try to keep a safe distance
from them.
|Conce|Bearing the support of the thoroughly|Bearing the support of antidotes     |
|ptual|afflicted basis—                     |(completely pure class)—             |
|izati|1. Ignorance                         |1. The aggregates                    |
|ons  |2. The aggregates of form and so     |2. Entrances of generating           |
|of   |forth                                |3. Classes                           |
|appre|3. Strong adherence to name and form |4. Birth                             |
|hende|4. Attachment to the two extremes    |5. Emptiness                         |
|ds   |5. Not knowing the thoroughly        |6. The meaning of the perfections    |
|     |afflicted and the completely pure    |7. The path of seeing                |
|     |6. Not abiding on the arya path      |8. Path of meditation                |
|     |7. The objects of observation        |9. Path of no‐more‐learning          |
|     |8. The self and so forth             |                                     |
|     |9. Generation of purity and so forth |1,2,3,4,5 - observing completely pure|
|     |1,2,3 - objects of observation in    |objects of knowledge                 |
|     |term of generalities                 |6 - observing deeds                  |
|     |3,4,5,6 - particularities of         |7,8,9 -  observing entity:           |
|     |afflictions                          |                                     |
|     |7,8,9 – particularities of suffering |                                     |
|Conce|Bearing the support of substantially |Bearing the support of imputedly     |
|ptual|existing persons—                    |existing beings—                     |
|izati|1. An independent self               |1. The aggregates                    |
|ons  |2. Unitary                           |2. The sources                       |
|of   |3. Cause                             |3. The constituents                  |
|appre|4. A self which is a viewer and so   |4. Dependent‐arising                 |
|hende|forth                                |5. The completely pure               |
|rs   |5. Thorough afflictions              |6. Path of seeing                    |
|     |6. Separation from attachment        |7. Path of meditation                |
|     |7. Seeing                            |8. Path of distinction               |
|     |8. Meditation                        |9. Path of no‐more‐learning          |
|     |9. The support which enacted the     |These conceptualizations observe     |
|     |welfare                              |apprehenders, which view (i.e. have  |
|     |There are nine types of              |the support of) imputedly existent   |
|     |conceptualizations of apprehenders   |beings; the conceptualizations then  |
|     |bearing the support of substantially |view these apprehenders as being     |
|     |existent persons, which strongly     |truly existent                       |
|     |adhere to apprehenders as truly      |utilizers.                           |
|     |existent utilizers.                  |                                     |
|     |                                     |1,2,3 -  in terms of generalities,   |
|     |1- object of observation, an         |the objects of observation, the      |
|     |apprehender of substantial existence |apprehenders that are their          |
|     |that is its object of adherence      |objects of adherence                 |
|     |2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9 - Eight divided in   |4,5,6,7,8,9 - in terms of            |
|     |terms of object of adherence         |particularities                      |


Definition of a conception that is a knowledge obscuration: an awareness
that apprehends its object as truly existent.
Two divisions:
1. A conception of an apprehended that is a knowledge obscuration: a
conception that, through observing an apprehended that serves as its
observed object, adheres to it as a truly existent object of utilization.
2. A conception of an apprehender that is a knowledge obscuration: a
conception that, through observing an apprehender that serves as its
observed object, adheres to it as a truly existent utilizer.
Subdivision of a conception of an apprehended that is a knowledge
obscuration:-
a. Conception of a thoroughly afflicted apprehended that is a knowledge
obscuration: a conception that, through observing a truth of the thoroughly
afflicted class that serves as its observed object, apprehends it as a
truly existent object of utilization.
b. Conception of a completely pure apprehended that is a knowledge
obscuration: a conception that, through observing a truth of the completely
pure class that serves as its observed object, apprehends it as a truly
existent object of utilization.
Subdivision of a conception of an apprehender that is a knowledge
obscuration:
a. A conception of an apprehender of substantial existence that is a
knowledge obscuration: a conception that, through observing an apprehender
of substantial existence that serves as its observed object, adheres to it
as a truly existent utilizer.
b. A conception of an apprehender of imputed existence that is a knowledge
obscuration: a conception that, through observing an apprehender of imputed
existence that serves as its observed object, adheres to it as a truly
existent utilizer.
• Simply put, apprehendeds are “objects of utilization,” and apprehenders
are “utilizers.”

