Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/Personal notes/Personal notes- Knower of Bases.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:11.629280
================================================================================


The Knower of Bases
-  Definition: An exalted wisdom -conjoined with a wisdom directly
realizing selflessness in the continuum of the person who possesses it in
his continuum -that abides in a Hinayana class of realizations.
- Boundary: exists in the continua of all aryas.
- Mutually inclusive with “an exalted knower in an arya’s continuum abiding
in a Hinayana class of realizations.”
- The knower of bases is explained as a branch that purifies the  knower  of
paths.
- The reason for explaining the knower of all  after  having  explained  the
knower of paths, is because without fully knowing  all  bases,  impermanence
and so forth, there is no full knowing of the paths of  the  three  vehicles
well. Therefore it will be explained as a branch of the knower of paths.
- This means that without fully  knowing  all  bases,  impermanence  and  so
forth, one will not be able to fully know that the  three  types  of  paths,
those of the three vehicles, are not truly produced.
- As in lam rim presentation: in order to know the great scope, one  has  to
be preceded by knowing the middle scope, and in order  to  know  the  middle
scope, one has to be preceded by knowing the small scope.
- “it has been taught that a knower of bases is necessary prior to a  knower
of paths” does not mean that one must first generate a knower  of  bases  in
order to generate a knower of paths. It means that in order to generate  the
knower of paths fully, one must first fully know the bases.
Question: What is the knower of  bases  that  is  the  main  subject  to  be
explained in this 3rd chapter?
 -1. Is it  the  knower  of  bases  bearing  the  aspects  of  the  sixteen,
impermanence  and  so  forth,  an  object  to  be  meditated  on   also   by
bodhisattvas?
-2. Is it the knower of bases of the discordant class?
-3. Is it what has been imputed with the  convention  “antidotal  knower  of
bases”
Answer:  It is not the 3rd possibility.
- For the 2nd possibility, indeed the knower  of  bases  of  the  discordant
class is indicated, but this is not what is mainly indicated.
- The main subject to be explained is contained in the 1st possibility:  the
knower  of  bases  bearing  the  16  aspects  that  is   meditated   on   by
bodhisattvas.
- Qualm: When a bodhisattva’s path of seeing and  path  of  meditation  were
previously indicated as paths that purify the  two  extremes,  what  creates
the dissimilar imprints that stop the two extremes?
Response: As in  the  citation  from  chapter  one:  “Through  knowing,  not
abiding in cyclic existence; through compassion,  not  abiding  in  solitary
peace,” the exalted wisdom realizing impermanence and so  forth  that  stops
the extreme of cyclic existence.
Qualm: On the occasion of the knower of  paths,  the  knower  of  bases  has
already been explained. Why is there a need to explain it again  separately?

Response: There are two reasons:
1. When that very bodhisattva’s path bearing  the  aspects  of  impermanence
and so forth is posited as a knower of paths, it  is  to  be  understood  as
being conjoined with the three attributes.
2. Further, the generated mind must be preceded by great  compassion,  which
is contingent upon training well in the attitude  of  a  being  of  middling
capacity -impermanence, suffering, and so forth.
   - In order to generate great compassion and bodhicitta,  one  must  first
train in the middle scope. This means that in order  to  know  a  knower  of
paths, one must first know the knower of bases.
   - In order to fully know  the  three  types  of  paths  as  lacking  true
existence, first one must know the bases, impermanence and  so  forth.  This
means that bodhicitta must  be  preceded  by  great  compassion,  and  great
compassion must be preceded by training  well  in  impermanence,  suffering,
and so forth.
 - The three attributes are as follows:
1. The subject -the exalted wisdom  of  a  bodhisattva  arya  that  directly
   realizes the sixteen aspects, impermanence and so forth -does  not  abide
   in the extreme of cyclic existence, because it is an  exalted  knower  in
   the continuum of a bodhisattva arya that is  conjoined  with  the  wisdom
   directly realizing the selflessness of persons.
2. The subject -the exalted wisdom  of  a  bodhisattva  arya  that  directly
   realizes the sixteen aspects, impermanence and so forth -does  not  abide
   in the extreme of solitary peace, because  it  is  conjoined  with  great
   compassion.
3. The subject -the exalted wisdom  of  a  bodhisattva  arya  that  directly
   realizes the sixteen aspects, impermanence and so forth -does  not  abide
   ultimately between the extremes of cyclic existence and  solitary  peace,
   because it is conjoined with the wisdom directly  realizing  that  cyclic
   existence and peace do not exist truly. [Peace refers  to  the  peace  of
   nirvana.]
- We can posit:  1. cyclic existence relative to a conventional  base:  this
is cyclic existence itself
           2. the peace of nirvana relative to a conventional base: this is
        nirvana itself
           3. cyclic existence relative to an ultimate base: this is  truly
        existent cyclic existence
           4. the peace of nirvana relative to an ultimate  base:  this  is
        truly existent peace or nirvana.
- Abiding in cyclic existence relative to  a  conventional  base  refers  to
 taking  rebirth  in  cyclic  existence  through  the  force  of  karma  and
 afflictions.
- Abiding in the peace of nirvana relative to a conventional base refers  to
 abiding in the sphere of peace due to being captivated by its bliss.
- Abide in cyclic existence relative to an ultimate base refers to  adhering
 to cyclic existence as truly existent.
 (Truly existent cyclic existence does not exist, but  to  abide  in  cyclic
 existence relative to an ultimate base is to adhere to cyclic existence  as
 truly existent.)
- Abiding in the peace of nirvana relative to an ultimate base is to  adhere
 to the peace of nirvana as truly existent.
- The reason  the  three  attributes  mentioned  here  are  not  bodhicitta,
dedication, and the wisdom realizing  emptiness  is  because  if  it  is  an
exalted wisdom conjoined with these three, it is not  pervaded  by  being  a
knower of paths.
- Syllogisms: The subject -the exalted wisdom of  a  bodhisattva  arya  that
directly realizes impermanence and so forth -does not abide in  the  extreme
of cyclic existence.
-Predicate: This means that this subject is a knower of paths that does  not
abide in the extreme of cyclic existence.
-Reason:  Because  it  is  a  bodhisattva  arya’s  exalted  wisdom  directly
realizing the selflessness of persons.

Knower of paths not abiding in cyclic existence through knowing
- Definition: A Mahayana arya’s exalted knower abiding in a class of
realizations that stops the extreme of cyclic existence relative to a
conventional base.
- Boundary: exists from the Mahayana path of seeing through the buddha
ground.
- Mutually inclusive with “a knower of paths knowing hearers’ paths.”

Knower of paths not abiding in solitary peace through compassion
- Definition: A Mahayana arya’s exalted knower abiding in a class of
realizations that stops the extreme of solitary peace relative to a
conventional base.
- Boundary: exists from the Mahayana path of seeing through the buddha
ground.
- Mutually inclusive with “a Mahayana arya’s exalted knower that abides in
a class of realizations of special method.”
- The subject - the exalted wisdom directly realizing the  sixteen  aspects,
impermanence,  and  so  forth,  in  the  continuum  of  a  bodhisattva  arya
conjoined with an exalted wisdom that directly knows the  phenomena  of  the
three times are just equal in lacking the nature  of  true  existence.  [The
three times and the three circles refer  to  different  objects.  The  three
times are past, present, and future, while the three circles are the  giver,
the object to be given, and the recipient.]
- This implicitly indicates that those of  hearers  and  solitary  realizers
are distant from the continua of buddhas and bodhisattvas, since  they  lack
that reason stated above.
- The exalted wisdom directly realizing the sixteen  aspects,  impermanence,
and so forth, in the continuum of a bodhisattva arya does not abide  in  the
extreme of cyclic existence on this side, and the extreme of solitary  peace
on that side, because it acts to stop those two extremes.
- It does not  abide  ultimately  between  these  extremes,  because  it  is
conjoined with the wisdom that realizes emptiness.
- Although conventionally it abides in the middle that  is  neither  of  the
two extremes, it does not abide ultimately between these two extremes.
-  The  subject  -  the  exalted  wisdom  directly  realizing   the   bases,
impermanence, and so forth, in the continuum of  a  bodhisattva  arya  -  is
asserted to be near to the continua of  buddhas  and  bodhisattvas,  due  to
directly realizing that the phenomena of the three times are just  equal  in
the aspect of lacking truly existent production.
-  The  subject  -  the  exalted  wisdom  directly  realizing   the   bases,
impermanence, and so forth,  in  the  continuum  of  a  bodhisattva  arya  -
through it, the extreme of permanence (in  which  one  transmigrates  for  a
long time through the force of karma and  afflictions  included  within  the
extreme of samsara on this side) is stopped, because it  destroys  the  root
of samsara.
- the extreme of permanence refers to the extreme of cyclic existence
- “permanence” does not have the meaning of  not  disintegrating  moment  by
 moment. It is a situation in  which  one  transmigrates  for  a  long  time
 through the force of karma  and  afflictions.  It  has  the  sense  of  not
 stopping, or not ending. In fact, samsara  is  impermanent.  Therefore  the
 word “permanence” in “the extreme of permanence” means  staying  in  cyclic
 existence for a long time.
- The subject -the great  compassion  in  the  continuum  of  a  bodhisattva
-through it, the extreme with the characteristic of severance in  which  one
attains the extreme of nirvana on that side in dependence on having  severed
rebirths in cyclic existence is stopped, because, by  taking  rebirth  again
and again in cyclic existence through its force, it is a path that  acts  to
achieve non-abiding nirvana.
- the extreme of severance (the  extreme  of  annihilation)  refers  to  the
extreme of nirvana.
- the word “severance” has two possible connotations:
1. That one has severed taking  rebirth  in  cyclic  existence  through  the
power of karma and afflictions
2. That the welfare of sentient beings has been severed.
-  The  subject—the   exalted   wisdom   directly   realizing   the   bases,
impermanence, and so forth, in the continuum of a bodhisattva arya—does  not
abide in cyclic existence or solitary peace and does  not  abide  ultimately
between them, since it stops the extremes of cyclic existence  and  solitary
peace from the point of view of the conventional being  conjoined  with  the
wisdom realizing that cyclic existence and  solitary  peace  are  not  truly
existent, it does not abide ultimately between them.


- If one posits that which stops the extreme of  cyclic  existence  relative
to the conventional is the wisdom realizing emptiness:
 - this is incorrect in the Autonomy school.
 - it would contradict the assertions of Haribhadra and Vimuktisena as  both
say that this wisdom sees the faults of cyclic existence.
- the faults of cyclic existence are not found by the rational  knower  that
comprehends the ultimate.
- The  wisdom  realizing  emptiness  does  not  see  the  faults  of  cyclic
existence. However, the faults of cyclic existence are seen  by  the  wisdom
realizing selflessness of persons because the wisdom realizing  selflessness
of persons sees the  fault  of  ignorance,  which  is  the  root  of  cyclic
existence.
- Ordinary beings are those who take rebirth  in  cyclic  existence  through
karma and afflictions, but there is no pervasion  because  there  are  aryas
who take rebirth  in  cyclic  existence  through  the  force  of  karma  and
afflictions.
- There are some  hearer  and  solitary  realizer  aryas  who  take  rebirth
through karma and afflictions, such as the “maximum seven-timers.”
- When one attains the state of an arya, one does not newly create karma  to
take rebirth, but one still has karma that was created before one became  an
arya and through this one can take rebirth.
- Bodhisattva aryas do not take rebirth through karma and afflictions.  They
take rebirth through the force of compassion and prayers.
- The main knowers of bases are those of  hearers  and  solitary  realizers,
but the main perfections of wisdom are those of bodhisattvas.
- Therefore the knower of bases that is a reflection [means  something  that
is not the actual] of that in the continua of bodhisattvas.
- Knower of bases is generated on the 8th ground and  is  a  branch  of  the
knower of paths knowing all three paths. This has been  taken  in  terms  of
attaining a knower of the three paths naturally without effort.
- It knows impermanence and so forth in the path  of  seeing  indicates  the
objects of a knower of paths.
- The path of meditation is supported on a desire  realm  mind.  When  these
various minds are explained to be the mind support, it is explained  in  the
context of newly generating the path of seeing or the path of meditation.
- The desire realm mind of a bodhisattva on the path of meditation is not  a
disturbed mind.
- When attachment manifests in the minds of  ordinary  beings,  their  minds
become disturbed. But when  attachment  manifests  in  the  continuum  of  a
bodhisattva arya, their minds are not disturbed.
- A bodhisattva on the  path  of  meditation  can  generate  the  meditative
equipoise of the path of meditation on the support of a desire  realm  mind.
So this is a single-pointed mind.
- In the syllogism: The subject -a bodhisattva arya’s  exalted  wisdom  that
directly realizes impermanence and so forth -does not abide in  the  extreme
of cyclic existence, because  it  is  conjoined  with  the  wisdom  directly
realizing selflessness. We need to say “…because it is an exalted knower  in
the continuum of a bodhisattva  arya  that  is  conjoined  with  the  direct
realization of selflessness of persons.
- The fault if we do not have these words “it is an exalted  knower  in  the
continuum of a bodhisattva arya” instead of simply saying “it  is  conjoined
with the wisdom directly realizing selflessness,” is  that  we  could  posit
the example of the maximum-seven-timers  who  take  14  rebirths  in  cyclic
existence through the force of karma and afflictions.
- Such maximum-seven-timers, when they are abiders in the result of  stream-
enterer, are also conjoined with the wisdom directly realizing  selflessness
of persons. They have the wisdom  that  stops  cyclic  existence  and  still
abide in the extreme of cyclic existence. By adding  the  qualification  “an
exalted knower in the continuum of a bodhisattva arya,”  we  eliminate  that
problem because a bodhisattva arya does not abide in the extreme  of  cyclic
existence. The meaning of  this  expression  -“abiding  in  the  extreme  of
cyclic existence” -is that one takes rebirth  in  cyclic  existence  through
the force of karma and afflictions.
- Knowing of the three times as just equal does not exist in hearers and  so
forth, by way of  being  distant  from  the  perfect  perfection  of  wisdom
because the perfection of wisdom which is merely realized by  themselves  is
separated from compassion-mercy and wisdom, by just observing  the  property
and the lack of the property, they are to be known  as  abiding  in  samsara
and nirvana.
- Above passage means:
  - because of being separated from compassion-mercy, they abide in nirvana
  - because of being separated from wisdom, they abide in samsara.
- The subject -hearer aryas, solitary realizers, and so forth -abide by  way
of being distant from the perfect  perfection  of  wisdom,  because  due  to
adhering to the extremes of cyclic existence and  solitary  peace  as  truly
existent, the knowing of the three times as just equal  does  not  exist  in
them.
 - The subject -hearers who for the time being abide in a reflection of  the
perfection of wisdom that is a knower of bases which is merely  realized  in
a trifling manner by hearers and solitary  realizers  themselves  -abide  in
the extreme of samsara, because they apprehend the mere property of  rebirth
in cyclic existence as an object to be discarded categorically
- Although  they  see  rebirth  in  cyclic  existence  as  something  to  be
discarded categorically, they  abide  in  the  extreme  of  samsara  because
-since they desire to stop not only rebirth through the force of  karma  and
afflictions, but also rebirth through the force of  compassion  and  prayers
-they are separated from compassion-mercy, a  cause  of  taking  rebirth  in
samsara.
- The hearers have not abandoned karma and afflictions. They  also  have  no
wish to take  rebirth  in  samsara  through  the  force  of  compassion  and
prayers. As a result, they abide in the extreme of samsara.
- These hearers have not been liberated from cyclic  existence.  They  abide
in cyclic existence as they have nowhere else to go because  they  have  not
extinguished the karma and afflictions for taking rebirth in samsara.
- On top of that, they do not wish to take rebirth in  samsara  through  the
force of compassion  and  prayers.  Hence,  they  take  rebirth  in  samsara
through the force of karma and afflictions.  Therefore  they  abide  in  the
extreme of samsara.
- Learner hearer are to be known as not abiding in the  extreme  of  nirvana
by just observing the lack of the property of rebirth  in  cyclic  existence
that is attained from severing  mere  rebirth  in  cyclic  existence  as  an
object to be adopted. [The  lack  of  the  property  of  rebirth  in  cyclic
existence means  lack  of  rebirth  in  cyclic  existence.  This  refers  to
nirvana]
-Reason -That follows because, although they desire to attain the  severance
of rebirth in cyclic existence and they wish to  stop  rebirth  through  the
force of karma and afflictions, they are  separated  from  the  wisdom  that
knows the method for accomplishing nirvana in dependence on  taking  rebirth
in cyclic existence.
- The difference between these learner  hearers  and  bodhisattva  aryas  is
that the learner hearers, through  stopping  rebirth  in  cyclic  existence,
accomplish nirvana, whereas  bodhisattva  aryas,  in  dependence  on  taking
rebirth in cyclic existence, accomplish nirvana.
- This wisdom that knows the method for accomplishing nirvana in  dependence
on taking rebirth in cyclic  existence  is  not  possessed  by  the  learner
hearers. They are separated from this wisdom.

Knower of bases that is distant from the resultant Mother
- Definition: A knower of bases devoid of great compassion and bound by the
conception of true existence.
- Boundary: exists from the Hinayana path of seeing through the Hinayana
path of no-more-learning.
- Mutually inclusive with “a knower of bases of the discordant class”

Knower of bases that is near to the resultant Mother
- Definition: An exalted knower in the continuum of a Mahayana arya abiding
in a class of Hinayana realizations that is conjoined with great compassion
and the wisdom directly realizing emptiness.
- Boundary: exists from the Mahayana path of seeing through the buddha
ground.
- Mutually inclusive with “a knower of bases of the antidotal class”

Our system: We assert that  by  having  the  exalted  wisdom  that  directly
realizes that the three times are just equal in lacking true existence,  the
bodhisattva aryas are near to the Perfection  of  Wisdom.  That  by  lacking
this wisdom that realizes the three times as  just  equal  in  lacking  true
existence, hearers and solitary realizers are distant  from  the  Perfection
of Wisdom.
Someone  says:  Even  hearers  and  solitary  realizers  have  this   wisdom
realizing the three times  as  just  equal.  The  reason  is  based  on  the
citation from Nagarjuna’s text.
Our system: The Autonomy School says that  hearers  and  solitary  realizers
are not pervaded by realizing emptiness. However,  there  are  some  hearers
and solitary realizers who realize emptiness.
 -Those who are definite  in  the  Hinayana  lineage  are  pervaded  by  not
realizing emptiness. This is because in order to  attain  liberation,  there
is no need  to  realize  emptiness.  It  is  sufficient  to  merely  realize
selflessness  of  persons.  Since  that  realization  of   selflessness   is
sufficient, why would they want  to  undertake  the  hardship  of  realizing
emptiness? They merely seek liberation. They do not wish to attain  a  state
higher than that.
- Some hearers and solitary realizers do  realize  emptiness.  They  may  be
Mahayanists who fall from the Mahayana into the Hinayana who  can  have  the
realization of emptiness.
- Some people with very strong motivation enter the Mahayana path and  while
on the Mahayana path, they strive to realize emptiness. But  after  a  while
they realize that it is very difficult  to  work  for  sentient  beings  and
their bodhicitta degenerates. They then fall into the  Hinayana.  So  it  is
possible that such people have realized emptiness.
- When we talk about being distant from or near  to  the  resultant  Mother,
the criteria is not just the realization of emptiness. It is  possible  that
someone has the realization  of  emptiness  and  yet  is  distant  from  the
resultant Mother.
- If someone is separated from great compassion and is also  separated  from
the wisdom realizing emptiness, this person is distant  from  the  resultant
Mother.

- That resultant Mother (or  EKAA)  is  distant  from  hearer  and  solitary
realizer aryas because they, by means of observing signs of  true  existence
with respect to bases, are conjoined with incorrect skill in the  means  for
generating the resultant Mother. This is because they are separated  from  a
spiritual guide who teaches the mode of abidance, and they also  practice  a
reflection of the Perfection of  Wisdom  [i.e.  they  do  not  practice  the
actual Perfection of Wisdom.]
-  The  subject  –bodhisattvas  -there  is  a  reason  for  explaining  that
Perfection of Wisdom as correctly near to them, because they  are  conjoined
with skill in the means for generating the resultant Mother.
- The Mother of the Victors  is  distant  from  those  hearer  and  solitary
realizer aryas because:
 1. The hearers and so forth, who do not know that the entity of  things  is
empty of true existence and free from elaborations, do not have the  exalted
wisdom of equality of the three times.
 2. Since they realize things as possessing  the  signs  of  true  existence
[means they realize forms and  so  forth  by  way  of  being  bound  by  the
conception  of  true  existence]  because,   simply   realizing   the   mere
selflessness of persons,
 3. They are separated from skill in means, a spiritual  guide  who  teaches
subtle selflessness and so forth.
- It is not that there is no analogy for adherence in that  manner  because,
with regard to the things that  are  horses  and  elephants  emanated  by  a
magician appearing, due to strong adherence  to  them  as  things  that  are
horses and elephants by those who do not know the self-entity of those  that
are illusions, they are not realized and do not appear as lacking  the  very
entity of horses and elephants. Likewise, they adhere  to  things  as  being
truly existent.
- The subject -those bodhisattva aryas -are correctly close to this  Mother,
because:
 1. They know that the three times are just equal.
 2. They know that  phenomena,  forms  and  so  forth,  are  empty  of  true
existence and free from elaborations.
It follows that there is  pervasion,  because  that  very  full  knowing  of
phenomena, forms and so forth, as empty of  true  existence  and  free  from
elaborations is the full knowing of the three times as just equal.
 3. They have eliminated mistaken signs of strong  adherence  to  things  as
truly existent, due to skill in the means of generating a knower of  hearing
and so forth that is supported on skill in the divisions of the two  truths.

 4. They bear the non-erroneous instructions of a  spiritual  guide  skilled
in the divisions of the two truths whom they have correctly  pleased  for  a
long time.

-The difference of the perfection of wisdom being near to  or  distant  from
the hearers and solitary realizers and the bodhisattvas are:-


-  hearers and solitary realizers are distant due to incorrect skill in  the
means of meditating on the Mother


-  bodhisattvas are not distant due to skill in means.

-If those who are temporally definite in  the  hearers’  lineage  and  those
definite in the bodhisattvas’ lineage were to enter at the same  time  their
respective  paths,  and  accomplish  their  respective  enlightenments  with
effort,  the  hearers’  lineage  would  need  a  longer   time   to   attain
unsurpassable enlightenment.
Someone says: A hearer’s enlightenment is attained in three lifetimes if  it
is accomplished with effort. Then, by entering from the 7th Mahayana  ground
and so forth, the time to attain unsurpassable enlightenment  will  be  very
much shorter than that of the other definite in the bodhisattvas’ lineage.
Our response: In that case, if one wishes to quickly attain  buddhahood,  it
would be appropriate to initially enter into a hearer’s path. Entry  from  a
high path has already been refuted.

Therefore, although the attainment of  a  hearers’  enlightenment  is  quick
-through the force of :
   1. not having familiarized with principally striving for others’  welfare
and
   2. having single-pointedly familiarized with the mind that  observes  the
faults of cyclic existence in the past they  attain  the  state  of  a  foe-
destroyer due to an intense awareness that contemplates the benefits of  the
happiness of pacification, after which they enter absorption in  the  sphere
of peace for eons.
- Although they are urged by the light rays of  buddhas  and  are  awakened,
they enter absorption in the sphere of peace again and again.
- And also, after having generated the mind towards  supreme  enlightenment,
even though they know  that  they  should  not  enter  into  the  meditative
equipoise of the sphere of peace for a  long  time,  through  the  force  of
previous familiarity, they enter that state again and again.
- For this very  reason,  they  are  very  much  slower  compared  to  those
definite in the bodhisattvas’ lineage.
- There is a great difference of being close to or distant from  the  result
since they have to start collecting the infinite accumulation of merit  from
the beginning. Know that the path of those definite in the Mahayana  lineage
is a quick path relative to that of those definite in the hearers’ lineage.

Knower of bases of the discordant class
- Definition: A knower of bases devoid of the two -special method and
wisdom.
- Boundary: From the Hinayana path of seeing through the Hinayana path of
no-more-learning.
- Mutually inclusive with “a knower of bases bound by the conception of
true existence in the continuum of a Hinayana arya.”
- The hearers’ and solitary realizers’ knower of bases that is devoid of
great compassion and bound by the conception of true existence is a
discordant class from the point of view of bodhisattvas.
      - In general, that knower of bases is  not  a  discordant  class,  but
relative to bodhisattvas, it is a discordant class. Such a knower  of  bases
that is devoid of great compassion and  bound  by  the  conception  of  true
existence is distant from the  resultant  Mother.  So  it  is  considered  a
discordant class to the path to enlightenment and is not  practiced  by  the
bodhisattvas.
      - Bodhisattvas do cultivate the knower of bases as they  do  cultivate
the realization of the sixteen aspects, impermanence, and so forth.
      - They cultivate the knower of bases by  being  conjoined  with  great
compassion and the wisdom realizing emptiness of true existence. So they  do
generate the knower of bases.
- A path that is bound by the discrimination of the practice regarding
1. the objects of knowledge which are the bases: the emptiness in lacking  a
self of persons of the aggregates,  forms,  and  so  forth  included  within
modes
2. the objects of knowledge which are the bases: phenomena belonging to  the
three times included within varieties and
3. paths: the harmonies with enlightenment, generosity, and so forth
- as truly existent is a discordant class  that  is  a  corrupted  path  for
those definite in the bodhisattvas’ lineage, because it is  a  distant  path
for achieving the resultant perfection of wisdom.
- A path bound by the conception of true existence  is  a  discordant  class
for those definite in the bodhisattva lineage because it is a  distant  path
for achieving the resultant perfection of wisdom.
- Someone says: A meditative  equipoise  of  hearer  and  solitary  realizer
aryas is a  conception  of  true  existence.  If  that  is  the  case,  that
meditative equipoise would be similar to a conception of  self  of  persons,
since it could not destroy the seeds that are the  afflictive  obscurations,
because they are  similar  in  being  wrong  consciousnesses  mistaken  with
respect to the object of adherence.
-  If someone were to accept that grasping and so on could not be  abandoned
by the learners’ vehicle, then if that person had bodhisattva vows,  a  root
downfall would be incurred.
- Knower of bases that is bound by the conception of  true  existence  means
that in the continuum of the person who has this knower of bases,  when  the
knower of bases is practiced or cultivated,  it  is  cultivated  by  way  of
adherence to true existence.
- Being bound by the conception of true existence does not simply mean  that
this person has a conception of true existence. It actually means  that  one
cultivates by way of adhering to true existence.
- There are bodhisattva aryas who have a conception  of  true  existence  in
their continua. However they  are  not  bound  by  the  conception  of  true
existence.
-The dharma forbearance of true sufferings of a hearers’ path of  seeing  is
the antidote to its corresponding objects of abandonment  because  it  is  a
path  that  directly  harms  the  seeds  of  acquired  (thoroughly  imputed)
afflictive obscurations.
-Although it is the antidote to  those  objects  of  abandonment,  it  is  a
discordant class with respect to  bodhisattvas  because  the  generation  of
this discordant class in the continuum of a bodhisattva is an object  to  be
abandoned.
- Since we have identified this dharma forbearance of the hearers’  path  of
seeing that is bound by the conception of true existence  as  an  object  of
abandonment of bodhisattvas,  one  may  think  that  the  opposite  observed
object and aspect should be cultivated, but that is not correct.
- When we talk about dharma forbearance, this is an exalted wisdom  directly
realizing the selflessness of persons. So  if  one  were  to  apprehend  its
opposite, one would apprehend  a  self  of  persons.  This  is  not  what  a
bodhisattva should do.
- Therefore, if one were to apprehend the opposite of those, there would  be
a wrong consciousness that  is  mistaken  with  respect  to  its  object  of
adherence.
- The dharma forbearance of the hearers’ path of seeing being an  object  of
abandonment.
- We are not talking a general dharma forbearance of true sufferings of  the
hearers’ path of seeing. We are talking about  one  that  is  bound  by  the
conception of true existence that is to be abandoned by a bodhisattva.
- When one investigates whether the bases and paths exist truly or not,  one
does not transcend adherence to them as truly  existent.  [Not  transcending
adherence means one adheres to them  as  truly  existent  in  terms  of  not
having previously determined the mode of abidance of  phenomena  by  way  of
hearing and contemplation i.e. not  having  determined  the  final  mode  of
abidance of phenomena.] Bodhisattvas should abandon entering this path.

Knower of bases of the antidotal class
- Definition: An exalted knower in the continuum of a Mahayana arya abiding
in a class of Hinayana realizations that is conjoined with the two -special
method and wisdom.
- Boundary: From the Mahayana path of seeing through the buddha ground.
- Mutually inclusive with “a knower of bases in the continuum of a  Mahayana
arya.”
-“That reverse of the bodhisattvas is the antidote”  means  the  reverse  of
the knower of bases  bound  by  the  conception  of  true  existence,  which
belongs to the bodhisattvas, is the antidote
- The subject -by he himself abiding without the apprehension  of  “I”  that
adheres to the three circles regarding generosity  and  so  forth  as  truly
existent,
-  that  exalted  wisdom  directly  realizing  bases  and  paths  lack  true
existence in the continuum of a bodhisattva which  connects  other  trainees
to that ceases  the  extreme  of  grasping  to  bases  and  paths  as  truly
existent,
- because it is the direct antidote to that.
- “grasping” does not refer to attachment. It refers  to  the  adherence  to
true existence.

- The subject -paying homage and so forth to the Victors and so forth  while
being bound by the subtle grasping to the buddhas as truly  existent  -is  a
discordant class of bodhisattvas’ paths, because it is a corruption.
-Regardless of what virtue one performs, if one were to create virtue  while
being bound by the conception of true existence, then this is  a  discordant
class of the bodhisattvas’ path.

- The subject -paying homage and so forth by the hearers to  the  tathagatas
and so forth motivated  by  faith  -are  included  in  the  antidote  class,
through just being a cause of the accumulation of merit.
- Although paying homage and so forth by the hearers to the  tathagatas  are
an antidote to non-faith and so forth, they are  not  an  antidote  that  is
separated from faults in all ways.
- Although paying homage to the tathagatas and so forth  by  hearers  is  an
antidote class, they are a discordant class of bodhisattvas’ paths. This  is
because they are bound by the conception of the results as truly existent.
Qualm: How is subtle grasping a discordant class?
Reply: The final mode of abidance that is  the  path  of  phenomena  is  the
profound itself because it is dharmata that is devoid of nature.
- If one views the tathagatas as an ultimately existent  object  of  refuge,
then that is a discordant class  because  the  final  mode  of  abidance  of
phenomena is emptiness of true existence.
- So by viewing them as a final refuge that is ultimately existent, one  has
engaged erroneously.
- The final mode  of  abidance  of  phenomena  is  the  profound,  i.e.  the
emptiness of  true  existence.  Because  of  this,  the  adherence  to  true
existence is a discordant class.
- Question: Well then, how is it abandoned?
- The subject -the exalted wisdom that  is  the  bodhisattva  aryas’  direct
knowing of phenomena  as  being  of  one  nature  in  being  empty  of  true
existence -abandons grasping to results as truly  existent,  because  it  is
the direct antidote to that.
- The subject -the path  of  seeing  that  directly  and  fully  knows  that
knowers and the objects to be known are one  in  being  just  equal  in  not
being existent in suchness -abandons grasping to results as truly  existent,
because it is the direct antidote to that.
It follows that the modes of abidance of phenomena are of  one  taste  since
the modes of abidance of all phenomena, forms and so forth, are only of  one
nature and  taste  is  the  meaning  of  ascertaining  “Like  this,  without
nature.”
- When we say that the modes of abidance of all phenomena are  only  of  one
nature, or one taste, do not interpret this to mean that the emptiness of  a
pillar is the emptiness of a vase.
- The modes of abidance of all phenomena that are only of one  nature  means
that the emptiness of a vase and the emptiness of  a  pillar,  in  terms  of
entity, do not differ in terms of coarseness or subtlety.
- The object of abandonment is the conception  of  true  existence  and  the
antidote is the direct realization of the mode of abidance of all  phenomena
as being one nature.
Question: Further, how are phenomena profound by nature?
- The subject -that ultimate truth -there is a reason for explaining  it  to
be difficult to realize, since it is to  be  realized  by  only  a  rational
knower that analyzes the ultimate.  Realizing  it  is  blocked  by  a  valid
cognizer of conventionalities seeing forms and so forth.
-The subject -that nature of phenomena -is the profound itself because
  1. it is to be seen by an arya’s meditative equipoise
  2. it is difficult to understand by a knower of  conventionalities  itself
since  that  it  is  an  object   observed   by   all   consciousnesses   of
conventionalities, sense consciousnesses apprehending forms  and  so  forth,
is eliminated by valid cognition.
Question:  What is that difficult to realize itself like?
- The subject -that ultimate truth -is difficult to realize by an  awareness
of conventionalities  because  it  is  reasonable  that  ultimate  truth  is
asserted to be inconceivable for an awareness of conventionalities.
- because an awareness of conventionalities does not know that forms and  so
forth are conventional truths.
- Ultimate  truth  is  difficult  to  understand  by  a  valid  cognizer  of
conventionalities because it is asserted to be just beyond thought for  this
cognizer of conventionalities.
-Etymology  of  conventional  literally  means  all-obscuring.  Conventional
truth literally means truth for the all-obscuring.
- Conventional truth refers to ignorance, the conception of true  existence,
because this ignorance obscures the  seeing  of  the  mode  of  abidance  of
phenomena.
- An example of a conventional truth is a vase:  a  vase  is  a  falsity  in
general but it is a truth for the ignorance that is  a  conception  of  true
existence. For this reason, it is a conventional truth.
- When one realizes that forms and so forth are conventional truths  (truths
for the all-obscuring) then  one  realizes  that  forms  and  so  forth  are
falsities.
- Thus one realizes that the mode of abidance and the mode of appearance  of
forms and so forth are  discordant,  and  therefore  one  realizes  ultimate
truth.
- The realization of selflessness of persons is not  a  conception  of  true
existence. If you say that it is a conception of  true  existence,  then  it
would be a wrong consciousness.
- Those hearers and solitary realizers who have directly realized  emptiness
can be considered to be of sharpest faculty.  Therefore,  they  abandon  the
objects of abandonment simultaneously. They are  thus  able  to  attain  the
state of foe-destroyer in that very life, in the intermediate state,  or  in
the next life. In other words,  they  do  not  have  to  pass  through  many
rebirths before attaining the state of foe destroyer.
- Those who only  have  the  realization  of  selflessness  of  persons  are
probably those of duller faculties.
|Knower of bases of the antidotal class   |Knower of bases of the discordant class  |
|Is conjoined with great compassion and   |Is NOT conjoined with great compassion   |
|the wisdom realizing emptiness           |and the wisdom realizing emptiness       |
|Is a knower of bases in the continua of  |Is a knower of bases in the continua of  |
|bodhisattvas.                            |hearer aryas.                            |


- A knower of bases of the discordant class is an  object  to  be  abandoned
for those who are definite in the bodhisattva lineage.
- If those who are definite in  the  bodhisattva  lineage  were  to  be  led
through this knower of bases of the  discordant  class,  they  would  become
distant from the buddha ground.
- The bodhisattva aryas actualize the knower of  bases  by  being  conjoined
with great compassion and  the  wisdom  realizing  emptiness.  They  do  not
actualize a knower of bases that is not conjoined with great compassion  and
not conjoined with the wisdom realizing emptiness.
- Is the knower of bases in the continuum of a hearer  arya  conjoined  with
the realization of emptiness a knower of bases of the discordant class?  [It
is conjoined  with  the  wisdom  realizing  emptiness  but  not  with  great
compassion.]
- If you say, “Yes, it is a knower of bases of  the  discordant  class,”  it
follows that it is a knower of bases devoid of great  compassion  and  bound
by the conception of true existence.  But  how  can  this  knower  of  bases
conjoined with the wisdom realizing emptiness be bound by the conception  of
true existence?
- Someone definite in the hearers’ lineage  is  pervaded  by  not  realizing
emptiness. Thus the knower of bases in the continuum of  such  a  person  is
pervaded by not being conjoined with the wisdom realizing emptiness.
- Someone definite in the hearers’ lineage is  interested  in  the  hearers’
path from the beginning  without  being  interested  in  other  paths.  This
person knows it is not necessary to realize the emptiness of true  existence
to attain the state of foe-destroyer, and would  not  undergo  hardships  in
order to realize emptiness. Thus, by realizing the selflessness of  persons,
this person goes on to attain the state of foe-destroyer.
- There are hearers who realize emptiness. They  are  those  who  enter  the
Mahayana path and make effort to understand  and  realize  emptiness.  After
some time, they find that the responsibility  of  taking  care  of  sentient
beings is too much for them to shoulder. Their  bodhicitta  degenerates  and
they fall into the Hinayana vehicle.
-As a person cannot degenerate from the Mahayana  path  after  the  middling
level of the path of accumulation, thus it is not possible for one  to  have
directly realized emptiness before falling from the Mahayana path.
- It is possible for a hearer who directly realizes emptiness as  there  can
be a person who has degenerated from the Mahayana and  enters  the  Hinayana
path. On  the  Hinayana  path  of  seeing,  this  person  attains  a  direct
realization of emptiness.
- There is no such person  who  has  directly  realized  emptiness  but  not
entered any path.
- In order to have directly realized emptiness,  one  must  be  pervaded  by
having attained an arya path as in order to directly realize emptiness,  one
must generate a yogic direct perceiver which exists only in aryas.

Applications of a bodhisattva indicated in the context of a Knower of Bases
- Definition: A bodhisattva’s yoga that cultivates an antidote to either:
 (i) erroneous adherence to the entity and attributes of the mode of
subsistence of conventional bases or
 (ii) erroneous adherence to the entity and attributes of the mode of
subsistence of the ultimate.
- Boundary: exists from the Mahayana path of accumulation through the end
of the continuum of a sentient being.
Qualm: Having described the discordant class and so forth in that way,  what
are the applications which meditate on them?
Reply: Applications. There are 10 types of applications:
|            |          |Applications                                               |
|Divisions by|Convention|1. Stopping adherence to the bases for characterization,   |
|way of      |al        |forms and so forth, as truly existent.                     |
|object      |          |                                                           |
|            |          |2. Stopping adherence to the characterizing attributes,    |
|            |          |impermanence and so forth, as truly existent.              |
|            |          |3. Stopping adherence to the incomplete and the thoroughly |
|            |          |complete as supports of excellent qualities as truly       |
|            |          |existent.                                                  |
|            |Ultimate  |4. Stopping the practice that, having abided in the        |
|            |          |non-grasping to the ultimate as a truly existent object of |
|            |          |observation, adheres to it as truly existent.              |
|Divisions by|          |5.Stopping of the adherence to the action as truly existent|
|way of      |          |                                                           |
|entity      |          |[is correlated with unchanging  which means not changing   |
|            |          |through increasing or decreasing ultimately.]              |
|            |          |6. Stopping of the adherence to the agent as truly existent|
|            |          |                                                           |
|            |          |[is correlated with not being the agent.]                  |
|            |          |7. Stopping of the adherence to the resultant activities as|
|            |          |truly existent                                             |
|            |          |[is correlated with the applications of the three types of |
|            |          |difficult activities.]                                     |
|Divisions by|          |8. Fruitful due to attaining the results according to the  |
|way of      |          |fortunes by means of performing the activity that will     |
|action      |          |produce the result.                                        |
|            |          |[This is an application that does not adhere to that which |
|            |          |is fruitful as truly existent.]                            |
|            |          |9. That which is not contingent on others by means of      |
|            |          |possessing benefit.                                        |
|            |          |[This is an application that does not adhere to that which |
|            |          |is not contingent on others as truly existent.             |
|            |          |If the causes are not incomplete, the causes are complete. |
|            |          |Since the causes are complete, it is not contingent on     |
|            |          |others.                                                    |
|            |          |If the causes are not incomplete, then the result cannot be|
|            |          |averted.                                                   |
|Division by |          |10. This is an application that stops adherence to the     |
|way of      |          |seven types of appearances as truly existent.              |
|indicator   |          |[Any kind of phenomena, while being not established as     |
|example.    |          |truly existent by means of indicators, are indicated by    |
|            |          |means of seven types of appearances.]                      |


- The subject -the applications that  stop  the  adherence  to  the  various
objects of the applications of the bodhisattvas as truly  existent  -are  of
10 types because there are full knowings, that accomplish  with  respect  to
the seven types of appearance by the entity and  attributes  of  the  bases,
differentiated by means of eliminating the conception of true existence.
- There are 4 divisions by way of object because:
  - there are 3 that stop the adherence :-
   1. to the bases for characterization, all phenomena, forms and  so  forth
as truly existent
   2. to the characterizing attributes, the impermanence and  the  emptiness
of those [forms and so forth] themselves as truly existent
   3. to the attributes of the support,  the  incomplete  and  the  complete
individually as supports of excellent  qualities,  and  varieties  as  truly
existent
-4. the stopping of the adherence to the grasping and  the  non-grasping  to
modes as ultimate objects of observation as truly existent.
- The  realization  of  other-powered  phenomena  as  being  empty  of  true
existence, like illusions, is complete as a support of  excellent  qualities
because in dependence on it one would be able to abandon discordant  classes
and excellent qualities would increase more and more.
- The adherence to other-powered phenomena as truly existent  is  incomplete
as a support of excellent qualities because it  hinders  the  generation  of
excellent qualities.
- There are 3 divisions by way of entity because there are:
  5. the application realizing that action, the perfection of  wisdom,  does
not change into another through increasing and decreasing ultimately
  6. in terms of doer, the application realizing the very  non-existence  of
the agent ultimately
  7. in terms of the result, respectively the  applications  of   the  three
types of difficult activities that:
  i. although not observing the object of intent, the EKAA of the nature  of
     the three exalted knowers of all, as existing ultimately, realizes  the
     object of intent as existing conventionally;
 ii. although not observing the knower of paths of the time of the cause  as
     existing ultimately, realizes the application which is the cause of  an
     EKAA as existing conventionally; and
iii. although not observing the knower  of  bases  as  existing  ultimately,
     realizes it possesses the action of being a method for taking  care  of
     other trainees as existing conventionally.
-  The  subject  -an  application  of  a  knower  of  bases  indicated  here
-possesses a special action because:
    8. by causing them to attain the results according to  the  fortunes  of
the three types  of  lineage-bearers,  it  does  not  deprive  them  of  the
results. [The application  of  a  knower  of  bases  indicated  here  causes
hearer, solitary  realizer,  and  Mahayana  lineage-bearers  to  attain  the
results. Hence it does not deprive them of their respective results.
   9. It holds a special benefit, because one possesses
      i. the attainment of enlightenment not contingent on only  others  but
by one’s own strength, and
     ii. not progressing through the conditions of  others  due  to  oneself
being able to protect, guard, and so forth.
- 10 The  subject  -these  contaminated  dependent-arisings  -do  not  exist
truly:
  (a) because they are mere appearances that are complete transformations of
  the latencies of strong adherence; for example, like a dream;
  (b) because they are appearances which  are  the  assembling  together  of
  causes and conditions; for example, like an illusion;
  (c) because they are appearances that are contradictory to true existence;
  for example, like a mirage;
  (d) because they are appearances that are contingent  on  conditions;  for
  example, like an echo;
  (e) because they are appearances that are not transferred from the  aspect
  that deposits latencies; for example, like a reflection;
  (f) because they are appearances that lack a truly existent  support;  for
  example, like a city of smell-eaters;
  (g) because they are appearances that  are  not  established  as  a  truly
  existent agent; for example, like an emanation.
-The stopping of adherence to the  seven  appearances  to  consciousness  as
truly existent in this way is the reason for being able to meditate  on  the
entity, the attributes, and so forth of the bases by way  of  negating  true
existence.

Further Explanation:
10(e) Because they are appearances that are not transferred from the  aspect
that deposits latencies; for example, like a reflection.” For  example,  the
reflection of a face in a mirror does exist, but there is no  face  that  is
as it appears in the reflection.
- Similarly there are various kinds of appearances.  These  appearances  are
due to the latencies that have been deposited. For example, one can look  at
one’s face in the mirror, and think, “I  haven’t  aged,”  clinging  to  true
existence. Although there are these  appearances  due  to  latencies,  these
appearances are not transferred from the  aspect  that  deposits  latencies.
When we look in the mirror, we are actually depositing the latencies of  the
conception of permanence, of true existence, of self, and so forth.
7(i) “not observing the object of intent, the EKAA  of  the  nature  of  the
three exalted knowers of all, as existing ultimately,  realizes  the  object
of intent as existing conventionally” - we are talking about  phenomena,  in
particular the result that is the object of intent, the EKAA that  does  not
exist  ultimately  but  exists  conventionally.  This  is   true   for   any
phenomenon. Any phenomenon exists conventionally but not  ultimately.  Here,
we have the application that realizes  the  object  of  intent  as  existing
conventionally, but does not observe it as existing ultimately.
 - Division by  way  of  indicator  example:  An  indicator  is  that  which
indicates, or that which makes known.
In this context, the  indicators  are  the  analogies  of  the  7  types  of
appearances. The contaminated dependent-arisings (that is the  subject  that
was used in the explanation) are not established as truly existent by  means
of the analogies  that  are  the  7  types  of  appearances,  but  they  are
indicated, or made known,  by  these  7  types  of  appearances.  There  are
contaminated dependent-arisings, for example, a table. How do we know  them?
They are they made known by means of the analogies,  such  as  a  dream,  an
illusion, a reflection, etc. They are made known or indicated to  not  exist
truly by means of the 7 types of appearances.

Explicitly shown: path of preparation and bodhisattva’s applications.
- The applications of a knower  of  bases  are  the  bodhisattva’s  path  of
preparation bearing the aspects of the sixteen (impermanence and  so  forth)
which is the cause for the clear realization that is to  be  passed  through
in the continuum of a bodhisattva on the occasion of the path of seeing.
- The path of preparation bearing the aspect of emptiness that is  meditated
on by having been conjoined with the wisdom realizing those bases  as  empty
of true existence is a cause of  the  path  of  seeing  that  acts  to  pass
through.
- That path bearing the aspects of the sixteen (impermanence and  so  forth)
is explicitly shown to be meditated on by bodhisattvas through stopping  the
conception of true existence on the occasion of the path of preparation.
Implicitly  shown:  the  paths  of  preparation  of  hearers  and   solitary
realizers  of  definite  lineage  are  meditated  on  without  stopping  the
conception of true existence.

Equality of the applications of a bodhisattva indicated in the context of
the knower of bases
-Definition: A bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined with the wisdom that stops
adherence to the divisions of bases, definitions, definienda, objects, and
object-possessors as truly existent.
-Boundary: exists from the Mahayana path of accumulation through the end of
the continuum of a sentient being.
- This topic is known as the equality of the applications  of  a  knower  of
bases explicitly indicated here.
- As it is necessary to meditate on the applications of a knower of bases
bearing the aspects of impermanence and so forth by means of being
conjoined with the wisdom of the equality of objects and object-possessors
in not existing in suchness, after the applications, equality.
- The subject -the meditative equipoise of the  path  of  preparation  of  a
bodhisattva realizing emptiness
  -is an equality of the applications since it is an equality  in  realizing
that the objects and the object-possessors  of  applications  do  not  exist
truly,
  - because it is an application of a knower of  bases  that,  by  means  of
realizing that the objects and the object-possessors do not exist truly,  in
all ways does not observe
      (1) strong adherence to the entities of forms and so forth, and
      (2-4) the clinging to the uncommon signs of blue  and  so  forth,  the
elaborations of  divisions,  and  the  realizations  that  are  the  object-
possessors as truly existent.
- There are four types of  equality  of  those  applications  that  meditate
conjoined with those applications of a knower of bases:
1. An equality of the applications that does not cling to  the  entities  of
   forms and so forth as truly existent.
2. An equality of the applications that  does  not  cling  to  the  uncommon
   signs of blue and so forth as truly existent.
3. An equality of the applications that does not cling to  the  elaborations
   of divisions as truly existent.
4. An equality of the applications that does not cling to  the  realizations
   that are the object-possessors as truly existent.

Path of seeing explicitly indicated in this context
- Definition: A Mahayana clear realization of the truth that directly
realizes freedom from elaboration that is explicitly indicated in this
context.
- Boundary: exists only on the Mahayana path of seeing.
- Having individually realized the equality of applications on the  occasion
of the path of preparation, as it is necessary to meditate on  the  path  of
seeing, the path of seeing:
-  The  subject  -this  nature  of  the  instants  -forbearance  of   dharma
knowledge,  forbearance  of  subsequent  knowledge,  and  the   dharma   and
subsequent knowledges [dharma-forbearance,  subsequent-forbearance,  dharma-
knowledge, and subsequent-knowledge] -by way of observing the  four  truths,
sufferings and so forth, explicitly shown here
  -is the path of that sees the mode of a knower of all,
  -because it is a  clear  realization  of  the  truth  that  acts  to  pass
through, which implies a path of seeing that is to be passed through.
- the clear realization that acts to pass through  is  the  path  of  seeing
  directly realizing emptiness
- the path of seeing that is to be passed through  is  the  path  of  seeing
  directly realizing the four noble truths.
- The path of  seeing  that  is  to  be  passed  through  directly  realizes
  impermanence, etc., the 16 aspects of the four noble truths. This is to be
  passed through  because  bodhisattvas  do  not  deliberately,  principally
  cultivate these 16 aspects. These 16 aspects are cultivated to  take  care
  of hearer lineage-bearers.
- The path of seeing that acts to pass through directly  realizes  emptiness
  of true existence is principally cultivated by bodhisattvas.
- The emptiness of true existence is the principal object of cultivation  of
  bodhisattvas. Bodhisattvas deliberately cultivate it, while  they  do  not
  deliberately cultivate the selflessness of persons.
- The 16 instants of the path of seeing are the 8  forbearances  and  the  8
knowledges.
- There are 8 forbearances by way of isolates, so there is in fact just  one
uninterrupted path
- There are 8 knowledges by way of isolates, so there is in  fact  just  one
liberated path.
All of these are awarenesses directly realizing emptiness.
Question: What are the aspects of the truths?
- The subject -the path of seeing that acts to pass  through  is  explicitly
shown here, “forms as not permanent” and so forth -are of 16, because  there
are
    (i) 8 divisions by way of isolates included within uninterrupted  paths,
that, by way of observing the aspects  of  the  four  truths,  directly  and
newly realize emptiness of true existence  and  freedom  from  elaborations,
and
   (ii) 8 divisions by way of isolates included within liberated paths.

The aspects of the forbearances and knowledges of sufferings
1. The subject -impermanent forms and so forth -are  neither  permanent  nor
impermanent ultimately,  since  they  are  free  from  being  permanent  and
impermanent ultimately.
   - That follows  because  they  lack  entitiness  ultimately.  The  direct
realization in that manner is the aspect of the forbearances and  knowledges
of true sufferings.
2. The subject -the aspect of  suffering  -is  free  from  the  extremes  of
permanence and severance ultimately, since it is free from  being  suffering
and non-suffering ultimately.
  - That  follows  because  they  lack  entitiness  ultimately.  The  direct
realization in that manner is the aspect of the forbearances and  knowledges
of true sufferings.
3. The subject -sufferings’ emptiness of a self that is a  different  object
-is purity by way of nature, because it is free from being  empty  and  non-
empty ultimately.
  - That  follows  because  they  lack  entitiness  ultimately.  The  direct
realization in that manner is the aspect of the forbearances and  knowledges
of true sufferings.
4. The subject -sufferings’ not being established in the entity  of  a  self
-is not produced and not ceased, and not the thoroughly afflicted,  grasping
and so forth, and not the completely pure, faith and so  forth,  ultimately,
since  the  very  entities  of  self  and  non-self  are   not   established
ultimately.
  - The exalted wisdoms that realize with direct cognition in this  way  are
“the aspects of the forbearances and knowledges of true sufferings.”

The aspects of the forbearances and knowledges of origins
The subject -karma and craving-
1. do not exist ultimately, like space, because  of  the  speciousness,  the
  lack of ultimate existence of cause and non-cause of sufferings,
2.  have  abandoned  all  ultimately  existent  afflictions  and   secondary
  afflictions, because of not possessing ultimately existent origins and non-
  origins,
3. are liberated from full holding to ultimate  existence,  by  non-relation
  with ultimately existent strong production  and  non-strong-production  of
  intense sufferings [strong production means that the  sufferings  are  not
  simply produced. They are produced forcefully,  intensely,  and  they  are
  produced again and again, for a long time.]
4. not expressible by its entity ultimately, because of complete  liberation
  as existing ultimately from conditions and non-conditions of sufferings
- The new realizations with direct cognition in this way are the aspects  of
the forbearances and knowledges of true origins.
- The four aspects of true origins: cause, origin,  strong  production,  and
condition.

The aspects of the forbearances and knowledges of cessations
The  subject  -the  meaning  of  true  cessations,  a  separation  in  which
sufferings have been abandoned -
1. it cannot be  imparted  to  the  others’  continua  ultimately  by  being
  articulated in words because it is not related  with  cessation  and  non-
  cessation ultimately. [alternatively  apply  “it  cannot  be  imparted  to
  others’ continua immediately by merely being articulated in words”]
2.  it  acts  without  a  truly  existent  object  of   observation,   since
  pacification and non-pacification of suffering do not exist ultimately,
3. has transcended the two extremes  of  permanence  and  severance  and  is
  purity by way of nature because the sublime liberation and the non-sublime
  are free from ultimate existence, and
4. it possesses the benefit that all diseases are not  produced  because  of
  having realized with direct cognition that definite emergence and also non-
  definite-emergence do not exist ultimately.
The realizations in this  way  are  the  aspects  of  the  forbearances  and
knowledges of true cessations.
- The four aspects of true cessation:  cessation,  pacification,  sublimity,
and definite emergence.

The aspects of the forbearances and knowledges of paths
The subject -the exalted wisdom that realizes newly  with  direct  cognition
that paths are empty of true existence -
1. possesses severance of bad  migrations  such  as  the  hells  because  of
  realizing with direct cognition that paths and  non-paths  are  free  from
  ultimate existence;
2. is non-conceptualization of the method with the aim  of  actualizing  the
  results such as stream-enterers as ultimately existent because of directly
  realizing that it is not mixed with those that are suitable or  unsuitable
  as antidotes to afflictions ultimately
3. not related with the  signs  of  true  existence  of  all  phenomena,  by
  complete  liberation  from   achieving   the   accomplishment   and   non-
  accomplishment of the  non-erroneous  measure  of  abidance  of  the  mind
  ultimately; and
The subject -the subsequent knowledge with respect to  a  Mahayana  path  of
seeing –
4. is without the production of a knower that observes the two, the  meaning
that is to be known, that which is  to  be  expressed,  and  the  term,  the
characteristic of the entity that expresses, by way of being  together  with
dualistic appearances because it  is  an  exalted  wisdom  distinguished  by
newly realizing with direct cognition the non-existence of  deliverance  and
non-deliverance to nirvana ultimately.
- In the perspective of a direct realization of the ultimate,  phenomena  do
not appear as if they are  expressed  by  terms.  This  is  the  meaning  of
dualistic appearance having vanished.
-  The  aspects  of  true  paths:  path,  suitability,  accomplishment,  and
deliverance.
- The subject -those instants of forbearances and knowledges of a knower  of
all bearing such aspects -are the path of  seeing  of  bodhisattvas  because
they are their clear realizations of the truth.
- The importance of 16 aspects - One meditates on the four noble  truths  by
looking first at true sufferings.
- One has  to  contemplate  the  3  types  of  suffering:  1.  suffering  of
suffering
                                              2. suffering of change
                                                3.   pervasive    compounded
 suffering.
- One has to contemplate these in detail and apply to them the four  aspects
of true suffering:
   1. impermanence
   2. suffering
   3. emptiness
   4. selflessness
- By contemplating these well, one generates a very  strong  awareness  that
does not want suffering, and when such an awareness is generated,  then  one
will have a very firm mind of definite emergence, or renunciation -  a  mind
wanting to emerge from samsara. If this  renunciation  is  strong,  it  will
lead to strong compassion.
-  Similarly,  one  should  contemplate  the  second  truth:  true  origins,
thinking in detail about karma and the afflictions that are the  origins  of
suffering, in terms of the four  attributes  of  true  origins.  Using  many
reasons, one generates the awareness wishing to be free of  the  origins  of
suffering.
-This is how we should proceed for each of the four noble  truths,  thinking
about them in detail and applying reasoning.
- When we contemplate these various points, we must apply them  to  our  own
minds. For example, when we contemplate suffering, we need to think of  what
type of attitude we have in relation to suffering. If we check honestly,  we
see that we do not want sufferings such as sickness, cancer, AIDS, etc.
- When we are healthy, do we have a strong awareness wishing to be  free  of
suffering? Probably not. This is  a  sign  that  our  wish  to  be  free  of
suffering is not genuine or strong. Our wish to be free  from  suffering  is
just limited to wishing  to  be  free  from  temporal  sufferings,  such  as
sickness, hunger, and so on.
-It is important that when we contemplate this, we need  to  mix  this  with
our own  mind.  Otherwise,  even  if  we  can  list  the  various  types  of
suffering, it will not be of benefit to our mind.
- True cessations are explained before true paths  because  first  one  must
wish to be separated from suffering and to actualize cessation.  Because  of
that wish, one will ask: “is there a  method  to  attain  the  cessation  of
suffering?” and based on that, one will think about true paths.
- It is possible to present the four noble truths  in  terms  of  cause  and
effect: true origins are followed by true sufferings,  and  true  paths  are
followed by true cessations. But when we present them in the order  of  true
sufferings,  true  origins,  true  cessations,  and  true  paths,  this   is
according to the order of how one contemplates them.
- Bodhisattvas do not deliberately cultivate the knower of bases,  but  they
cultivate the knower of bases for the sake of taking care of hearer lineage-
bearers.
- Meditation on the 16 aspects benefits the development of  compassion,  but
the meditation on emptiness benefits  the  development  of  compassion  even
more.
- The  exalted  wisdom  directly  realizing  the  aspects  of  impermanence,
suffering, etc.in the continua of hearers is the  reverse  of  that  bearing
the aspect of freedom from elaborations. Indeed it does not bear the  aspect
of freedom from elaborations as such an exalted wisdom of a hearer  arya  is
not conjoined with the wisdom realizing freedom from elaborations.
- On the occasion of the Mahayana path of meditation, there is no  need  for
hearers’ paths to be diligently actualized by  bodhisattvas,  since  on  the
occasion of the path of seeing, these paths have been viewed by knowing  and
seeing and have been passed through.
Qualm: Why is there no separate explanation of the path  of  meditation  for
the knower of all, just as it has been shown for a knower of paths?
Response:   Hearers’  paths  are  not  to  be   diligently   actualized   by
bodhisattvas on the path of meditation.
   - The excellences of hearers and solitary realizers have  been  shown  as
those to be passed through having been  viewed  by  knowing  and  seeing  of
bodhisattvas, whereby they are not to be actualized.
   - Since acting  to  actualize  again  and  again  that  very  meaning  in
accordance with how it is fully seen in hearers and so forth  is  cultivated
again and again on the hearers’ path of meditation (not  the  Mahayana  path
of meditation). Since this is easy to understand, it is not indicated.
- Hearers and solitary realizers need to diligently meditate on  this  path,
realizing the 16 attributes and so forth on the path of seeing because  they
need to abandon the afflictive obscurations,  their  respective  objects  of
abandonment (their respective discordant classes).
- On the path of meditation, hearers and solitary  realizers  also  need  to
diligently cultivate the path realizing the 16 aspects because they need  to
abandon the seeds of the afflictive obscurations.
- Someone says: This text does not  show  the  path  of  meditation  in  the
continua of hearers because the aspects, impermanence and so forth, are  not
diligently cultivated.
-Our system: With  respect  to  a  knower  of  all,  there  is  no  path  of
meditation. The reason that the hearers’ and  solitary  realizers’  path  of
meditation has not been indicated is because it is easy to  understand.  The
reason is not because it is not diligently cultivated. The general  path  of
seeing is not generated  only  in  the  continua  of  hearers  and  solitary
realizers.
- Someone says: In the 2nd chapter, the path  of  meditation  (the  Mahayana
path of meditation bearing the aspects of impermanence  and  so  forth)  was
shown after the path of seeing was  shown.  Why  is  it  that  the  path  of
meditation is not shown in 3rd chapter after  having  explicitly  shown  the
path of seeing?
- Our system: That is because here, when the path of  seeing  is  explicitly
shown, it is shown for the sake of understanding the path that acts to  pass
through.
- On the occasion of the Mahayana path of meditation,  the  bodhisattvas  do
not need to diligently cultivate the sixteen aspects,  impermanence  and  so
forth, therefore the Mahayana path of meditation realizing the  16  aspects,
impermanence and so forth is not shown.
- On the occasion of the knower of paths, in the 2nd chapter,  the  path  of
seeing and the path of meditation were  explained.  In  that  context,  they
were explained from the point of view of realizing emptiness.
- In the 3rd chapter, in the context of the knower of  bases,  the  path  of
seeing is explained, but  the  path  of  meditation  is  not.  The  path  of
meditation  bearing  the  aspects  of  impermanence  and  so  forth  is  not
diligently cultivated by bodhisattvas because the path bearing  the  aspects
of impermanence and so forth is a path that is to be passed through,  having
been viewed by knowing and seeing on the path of seeing.  For  this  reason,
this Mahayana path of meditation bearing the aspects of impermanence and  so
forth is not shown in this chapter on the knower of bases.
- In the first three chapters, it is taught that one has to meditate on  the
aspects of the  three  exalted  knowers  through  gathering  them  with  the
cultivation that is a union of calm abiding and special insight.
- Through this application that gathers the aspects  of  the  three  exalted
knowers, one cultivates all the aspects of the eight clear realizations.
-  A  bodhisattva  on  the  path  of  meditation  does  have   these   clear
realizations, but they do not diligently cultivate them.  That  is  why  the
path of meditation bearing the aspects of impermanence and so forth is  said
to be an object not to be actualized by the bodhisattvas.
- The path of meditation in  the  continua  of  bodhisattvas  that  acts  to
familiarize with those very sixteen, impermanence and so forth,  which  have
been already newly realized with  direct  cognition  by  means  of  diligent
familiarization, is not shown. This means this path  of  meditation  is  not
actualized by bodhisattvas. A bodhisattva on the path of meditation has  all
these clear realizations of impermanence and so forth. However, since  these
clear realizations are not cultivated diligently, the actualization of  this
path through diligent cultivation does not occur.
Bodhisattvas realize the 16 aspects on the path  of  preparation,  and  they
are directly realized on the path of seeing.
- A bodhisattva has trained well in  meditative  stabilization,  so  he  has
gained dexterity in it. On top of that, he also has great  mental  strength.
As a result of that, when a bodhisattva  cultivates  a  single  aspect,  the
meanings of the other aspects are complete. A bodhisattva  has  the  ability
to cultivate the aspects through gathering them together.
-  For  someone  who  has  not  trained  in  the  dexterity  of   meditative
stabilization and does not have great  mental  strength,  when  this  person
cultivates a single aspect, the  meanings  of  the  other  aspects  are  not
involved in this cultivation of one aspect.
- Knower of bases is concluded by way of stopping the two extremes that  are
opposing counterparts:  permanence  and  impermanence,  suffering  and  non-
suffering, and so forth
- Knower of paths is concluded by way of stopping the two extremes that  are
the discordant and the antidote with respect to all phenomena.
- Exalted knower of all aspects is concluded  by  means  of  presenting  the
exalted knower of all aspects that is included  within  the  fulfillment  of
the two welfares and the cause of the teachings, a  result  concordant  with
the cause that is the realization of dharmadhatu.

- A bodhisattva on the path of meditation does have the  clear  realizations
of the sixteen, impermanence  and  so  forth  but  they  do  not  diligently
cultivate them. Therefore the path of  meditation  bearing  the  aspects  of
impermanence and so forth is said to be an object not to  be  actualized  by
the bodhisattvas. Indeed these clear realizations  of  impermanence  and  so
forth are generated in the continua of bodhisattvas.
- A bodhisattva on the path of meditation has all these  clear  realizations
of impermanence and so forth. However, since these  clear  realizations  are
not cultivated diligently, the actualization of this path  through  diligent
cultivation does not occur.
-A Mahayana path of meditation that directly realizes  the  selflessness  of
persons is a path of meditation of achieving but is not  an  exalted  wisdom
directly realizing emptiness.
- Before a bodhisattva attains the path of preparation,  he  must  attain  a
concentration  using  an  object  other  than  emptiness.  The   object   of
observation can be anything such as one of the 16 aspects of the four  noble
truths, a buddha image, etc.
- To attain calm abiding, one necessarily needs to recognize the  faults  of
a coarse mind and in that way one gets rid of laxity  and  excitement.  This
does not involve using the coarse mind as an object of observation.
-In order to achieve calm abiding, one needs to observe an  object.  One  is
not able to single-pointedly observe the object at the beginning. One  needs
to examine the faults of not being able  to  stay  single-pointedly  on  the
object, and the faults of the coarse minds, such as  attachment,  ignorance,
etc. By thinking about their faults, one will generate a mind that  dislikes
them. In that way, one is able to reduce  the  force  of  these  minds,  and
distractions are reduced. In this way, one cultivates a desire to develop  a
mind of a higher level.
- It is very important to achieve calm abiding; without it, it is  difficult
to have uncontrived renunciation, bodhicitta, etc.
- Just by observing a single object at the beginning, one will  not  develop
calm abiding, because we need to constantly check the mind  for  faults.  We
need to identify the states of mind that are unsubdued, and  try  to  subdue
them. It is through this process that  eventually  one  will  able  to  stay
single-pointedly on the object.  If  you  are  able  to  reduce  attachment,
aversion, and ignorance, this will benefit the attainment of calm abiding.
- Q: When a bodhisattva definite in the Mahayana lineage  attains  the  path
of seeing, he also attains the direct realization of  the  sixteen  aspects,
impermanence and so forth. Is this because  the  acquired  obscurations  are
removed?
-A: It is not the case that when a bodhisattva newly  attains  the  path  of
seeing, the bodhisattva has abandoned the acquired  obscurations.  When  the
bodhisattva newly attains the path of seeing, he  is  on  the  uninterrupted
path. At that time, he is abandoning the acquired obscurations. He  has  not
abandoned the acquired obscurations.
-  The reason for the direct realization of impermanence and so  forth  when
one attains the path of seeing is  because  of  the  direct  realization  of
emptiness.
- If one has directly realized emptiness, there is no way that one does  not
realize the selflessness of persons.
-When one newly attains the path of seeing, one has the direct  antidote  to
all the acquired obscurations that are  to  be  abandoned  by  the  path  of
seeing. Due to this direct antidote, one directly realizes impermanence  and
so forth.
- If we say that when the path of seeing is attained, emptiness is  directly
realized, but impermanence and  so  forth  are  not  realized  directly  but
rather are realized by means of a meaning-generality, then we must say  that
on the liberated path, impermanence and so forth are also  realized  by  way
of a meaning-generality. In that  way,  one  is  not  able  to  abandon  the
acquired conception of permanence, the acquired conception of self,  and  so
forth.
- The realization of emptiness  of  true  existence  is  more  difficult  to
attain than the realization of the emptiness of  permanence,  so  first  you
should  try  to  realize  impermanence.  In   fact,   the   realization   of
impermanence  and  the  realization   of   emptiness   of   permanence   are
simultaneous.
Q: With regard to the terms  “knower-aspect”  and  “object-aspect,”  how  do
they relate to the base, the superimposition, and the antidote?
A: Take the example of the bases as the aggregates. The aggregates  are  the
bases  upon  which  superimpositions  are  to  be   eliminated,   e.g.   the
superimposition of permanence. We check if the aggregates are  permanent  or
impermanent. The mind  realizing  impermanence  is  able  to  eliminate  the
superimposition of the aggregates as permanent.
- When we look at this  mind  realizing  impermanence,  it  is  the  knower-
aspect.
- The mind realizes impermanence, and  impermanence  is  the  object-aspect.
[This knower-aspect and  object-aspect  is  the  knower-aspect  and  object-
aspect of the antidote]. In this context, we are talking about  the  knower-
aspect  of  the  antidotal  class.  We  do  not  posit   the   object-aspect
corresponding to this antidotal class as the aggregates.
- The path of seeing that is implicitly shown in the context of  the  knower
of bases is the  path  of  seeing  directly  realizing  the  16  attributes,
impermanence and so forth.
- Q: Why is it that the path of seeing that is explicitly explained  in  the
context of knower of bases is a path of seeing  that  is  not  a  knower  of
bases?
- A: It is explained from the point of view of realizing emptiness.
- All aryas have a knower of bases, but not all that is in the continuum  of
an arya is a knower of bases.
-Q: When a bodhisattva is cultivating the sixteen aspects  on  the  path  of
accumulation and path of preparation, is there the danger  of  falling  into
the extreme of nirvana?
-A: Although  bodhisattva  diligently  cultivates  those  aspects  on  those
paths, there is no danger of falling into the extreme of solitary peace.
- On the occasions of the path of  accumulation  and  path  of  preparation,
there is a need to diligently cultivate the 16 aspects because  there  is  a
danger of afflictions arising strongly. [Diligent cultivation  means  strong
cultivation.] Although the 16  aspects  are  diligently  cultivated  by  the
bodhisattva on the paths of accumulation and preparation, they are  not  the
principal objects of cultivation. If the bodhisattvas were to  take  the  16
aspects as their principal object of cultivation, there would be the  danger
of falling into the extreme of  peace.  However,  16  aspects  are  not  the
principal objects of cultivation  because  the  objects  abandoned  by  this
cultivation are not the main object of abandonment.
- If one takes selflessness as the main  object  of  cultivation,  then  the
conception of self would be the main object of abandonment, but this is  not
the case for bodhisattvas.
- If an object is taken as the principal object of cultivation, then  it  is
diligently  cultivated.  But  if  it  is  an  object  that   is   diligently
cultivated, it does not have to be a principal object of cultivation.
- The path bearing the aspects of the sixteen, impermanence  and  so  forth,
is explicitly shown to be meditated on by bodhisattvas through stopping  the
conception of true existence on the occasion of the path of preparation.
- This implies  that  the  paths  of  hearers  and  solitary  realizers  are
meditated on without stopping the conception of  true  existence.  It  comes
with all these qualifications:  without  stopping  the  conception  of  true
existence, and so forth.
- In general, there is a need to teach, or  show,  the  path  of  meditation
that is similar in type to the  clear  realization  realizing  the  sixteen,
impermanence and so forth, to persons of the Mahayana and Hinayana.
- The path of meditation that is similar in type to  that  is  the  path  of
meditation that directly realizes impermanence, and so forth.
-  The  path  of  seeing  directly   realizing   the   sixteen   attributes,
impermanence and so forth, is the clear realization to be passed through.
- In general, also the path of accumulation, path of  preparation,  path  of
seeing, etc., that are similar in type to  this  clear  realization  of  the
sixteen aspects need to be shown to persons of the  Mahayana  and  Hinayana.
Here, there is no need because the path of meditation  that  is  similar  in
type to that is not diligently cultivated by those of the Mahayana,  and  it
is easy to understand for those of the Hinayana.
-  The path of seeing to  be  passed  through  exists  in  the  continua  of
hearers and solitary realizers, not just in the  continua  of  bodhisattvas.
The reason for saying that it  exists  in  the  continua  of  all  three  is
because the direct realization of impermanence and so forth  exists  in  the
continua of hearers, solitary realizers, and  bodhisattvas.  In  fact,  this
clear realization of impermanence and so forth exists in all aryas.
- We don’t use the expression “path of seeing that  acts  to  pass  through”
for hearers and solitary realizers because in order to use this  expression,
we must be able to posit the object that is to be passed through.
- We use these expressions for bodhisattvas, because there is a path  to  be
passed through and a path that passes through.
- In the context of the path of seeing in the third chapter, there  are  two
paths of seeing that are implicitly indicated:
   1. the path of seeing directly realizing the sixteen  attributes  in  the
      continua of hearers and solitary realizers, and
   2. the general path of seeing directly realizing the sixteen  attributes,
      impermanence and so forth. This is the principal object indicated.
- The path of seeing that is implicitly shown in the context of  the  knower
of bases is an object to be passed through by bodhisattvas.
- The direct realization of impermanence and so forth  in  the  continua  of
hearers is an object to be passed through by bodhisattvas.
- The main object to be passed through by bodhisattvas is the  general  path
of seeing directly realizing impermanence and so forth.
-  Hearers  and  solitary   realizers   diligently   cultivate   the   clear
realizations of sixteen, impermanence and so forth.
- The clear realizations of  sixteen,  impermanence  and  so  forth  is  not
diligently cultivated by bodhisattvas on the path  of  seeing.  Bodhisattvas
pass  through  this  diligent  cultivation  of  the  clear  realization   of
impermanence and so forth.
-  Bodhisattvas  diligently  cultivate  the  path  realizing   the   sixteen
attributes on the path of accumulation and path of  preparation,  so  it  is
not that they do not diligently cultivate it. Upon attaining an  arya  path,
there is no need for them to diligently cultivate this path.
- On the Mahayana path of accumulation and path  of  preparation,  there  is
the danger of afflictions arising strongly, therefore bodhisattvas  need  to
cultivate the realizations of impermanence and  so  forth  diligently.  Upon
attaining  the  Mahayana  path  of  seeing,  there  is  no  danger  of   the
afflictions rising strongly, so there is no  need  to  diligently  cultivate
the path realizing the sixteen attributes.
- The bodhisattvas’ path of preparation bearing the aspects of  impermanence
and so forth, conjoined with the wisdom realizing emptiness,  is  explicitly
shown.
- The paths of preparation of hearers and solitary realizers that are  bound
by the conception of true existence are implicitly shown.
-A path of seeing to be  passed  through  does  exist  in  the  continua  of
hearers and solitary realizers.
- The path of seeing that acts to pass through exists  in  the  continua  of
bodhisattvas, not hearers and solitary realizers.
- When one passes through the clear  realizations  of  impermanence  and  so
forth,  one  passes  through  the  realizations  of  hearers  and   solitary
realizers.
Q: Can we say that solitary realizers definitely attain the  state  of  foe-
destroyer in the life immediately after having reached the path of seeing?
A: There is no pervasion. It  is  possible  to  attain  the  state  of  foe-
destroyer in the same life in which one attains the  path  of  seeing.  Some
types of solitary realizers, at the time  when  they  are  ordinary  beings,
having pleased the buddhas who arise  and  collected  merit  for  a  hundred
eons, attain the result of foe-destroyer in the future life  in  which  they
attain the path of seeing. This means that there are solitary realizers  who
attain the state of foe-destroyer in the same life in which they attain  the
path of seeing, but there is no pervasion, because there are other modes  of
training.
- There are two types of solitary realizers:
    - the first collect merit for 100 eons while they are  ordinary  beings.
      In a future life, they attain the path of seeing and then the state of
      foe-destroyer in the same life.
    - the second type collect the accumulations for an indefinite period  of
      time. Some, having completely generated the partial  concordance  with
      definite discrimination  and  below  in  the  presence  of  a  master,
      generate the path of seeing in a future life, and then in a  following
      rebirth attain the result of  foe-destroyer.  This  type  of  solitary
      realizer probably accumulate merit also when  they  are  aryas,  after
      having attained the path of seeing.
- If a bodhisattva falls into the Hinayana, his great compassion would  have
degenerated. There is no Hinayanist who has great compassion.

