Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/Personal notes/Personal notes- Peak Application PoM 6&7.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:11.809415
================================================================================



The path of meditation that is the antidote
-After having explained the PA of PoS, the PA of the PoM will be  explained.

-Reason: since abandoning the discordant classes that are the supported  and
so forth will be easy to understand if one  first  establishes  the  support
(i.e. the PA of the PoM) through valid cognition.
-Prior to entering the actual leaping absorption, one has to engage  in  the
preparation, the meditative stabilization of the loftily looking lion.
- With respect to the preparation for the absorptions in forward  order  and
in reverse order:-
  - According to  General  Meaning,  the  meditative  stabilization  of  the
loftily looking lion is called  the  long  preparation.  One  enters  the  9
serial absorptions, first in forward order, and then in reverse order.
- One enters in forward order:
(1) the 1st concentration
(2) the 2nd concentration
(3) the 3rd  concentration
(4)the 4th concentration
- then the 4 formless absorptions
(5) Infinite Space
(6) Infinite Consciousness
(7) Nothingness
(8) Peak of Existence
-then ending with
(9) the absorption of cessation
-One then goes in reverse order
(10) the absorption of cessation
(11) Peak of existence
(12) Nothingness
(13) Infinite Consciousness
(14) Infinite Space
(15) the 4th concentration
(16) the 3rd concentration
(17) the 2nd concentration
(18) the 1st concentration.
- According to General  Meaning,  an  ascending  process  without  inserting
anything in-between is the short preparation.
- One starts from:
(1) the 1st concentration
(2) the 2nd concentration
(3) the 3rd  concentration
(4)the 4th concentration
- then the 4 formless absorptions
(5) Infinite Space
(6) Infinite Consciousness
(7) Nothingness
(8) Peak of Existence
-then ending with
(9) the absorption of cessation
-  The actual leaping absorptions are:
  - an ascending process by alternating  the  4  concentrations  and  the  4
formless absorptions with the absorption of cessation
  - a descending process by alternating the 9 serial  absorptions  with  the
desire realm mind.
- For the ascending process, one ascends from the 1st concentration  to  the
4th formless absorption [i.e. Peak of Existence] by using the absorption  of
cessation as the alternated property.
- For the descending process, one takes the  9  serial  absorptions  as  the
bases of alternation. One descends  using  the  desire  realm  mind  as  the
alternated property.
-Purpose of doing this practice: When one is able to enter  into  absorption
having performed alternation in that way, one will  complete  the  dexterity
in meditative stabilization.
5.24ab           Having ascended and descended in two ways
                  In  the  nine  absorptions  that  are   along   with   the
[absorption of] cessation,
-These 2 lines indicate the meditative stabilization of the loftily  looking
lion.

5.24 cd     The leaping absorption.
                 Taking the demarcation of the non-equipoise
5.25        Consciousness included in the desire realm,
                 Having leaped over one, two, three,
                 Four, five, six, seven, and eight,
                 Proceeding dissimilarly, through  to  the  [absorption  of]
cessation
- These lines indicate a mere summary of the  descending  process  involving
alternation with the desire realm mind.
Explaining the nature of the leaping absorption
-If the 4 concentrations and the 4 formless absorptions  are  taken  as  the
bases of alternation, then the alternated  property  is  the  absorption  of
cessation.
-If the 9 serial absorptions are taken as the  bases  of  alternation,  then
the alternated property is the desire realm mind.
-The purpose for engaging in leaping absorption in this manner  is  for  the
sake of completing the dexterity in meditative stabilization.
- The long preparation is long because it involves 18 steps: ascending  from
the 1st concentration all the way up to the  absorption  of  cessation,  and
then descending from the absorption of cessation all the  way  down  to  the
1st concentration
- The short preparation involves only 9 steps; for this reason, it  is  said
to be short.
-Another reason for calling long preparation is long because it is far  away
from the actual leaping absorption.
-The short preparation is closer to the actual leaping absorption
- One first engages in the long preparation, then in the short  preparation,
and then enters the actual leaping absorption. Thus  the  short  preparation
is actually closer to the actual leaping absorption.
-The leaping absorption is attained when:
(Gyeltsab Je): If one has not  previously  entered  a  Hinayana  path,  this
actual leaping absorption is attained on the 6th ground and above.
(General Meaning by Jetsun Chokyi  Gyeltsen):  If  one  has  not  previously
entered a Hinayana path,
      - The preparation is attained on the 1st and 2nd grounds.
      - The actual leaping  absorption  is  attained  from  the  2nd  ground
through to prior to the 8th ground.
      - Upon attaining the 8th ground, there is no need  for  a  bodhisattva
to cultivate a leaping absorption, because  he  has  already  completed  the
dexterity in meditative stabilization.
 5.24abc    Having ascended and descended in two ways
                  In  the  nine  absorptions  that  are   along   with   the
[absorption of] cessation,
                 The leaping absorption.
-  The  long  preparation:  It  is  an  actual  absorption  preceded  by   a
preparation, because, with respect to  the  1st  actual  absorption,  having
ascended and descended in two ways -in forward order and in reverse order  -
in the 9 absorptions that are along with the absorption of cessation,  after
that, one initiates the actual absorption.
- Actually, immediately after the  long  preparation,  one  engages  in  the
short preparation. Only after that does one initiate the actual  absorption.

5.24d            Taking the demarcation of the non-equipoise
5.25abc          Consciousness included in the desire realm,
                 Having leaped over one, two, three,
                 Four, five, six, seven, and eight,
-The purpose of taking the demarcation of  the  non-equipoise  consciousness
included in the desire realm and abiding in it -  it  is  for  the  sake  of
alternating the 9 serial absorptions with  the  desire  realm  mind  in  the
descending process.
-The 8th grounder is able to alternate the 8  serial  absorptions  with  the
desire realm mind because he is able to enter into absorption:
1. first, having entered into the absorption of cessation,  actualizing  the
  desire realm mind
2.  then,  having  leaped  over  only  1,  the  absorption   of   cessation,
  actualizing the Peak of Existence, and then actualizing the  desire  realm
  mind
3. then, having leaped over 2, the absorption of cessation and the  Peak  of
  Existence, actualizing Nothingness and then actualizing the  desire  realm
  mind;
4. then, having leaped over 3, the previous 2[the  absorption  of  cessation
  and  the  Peak  of  Existence  and  Nothingness],   actualizing   Infinite
  Consciousness and then actualizing the desire realm mind
5. similarly, having leaped over 4,  actualizing  Infinite  Space  and  then
  actualizing the desire realm mind
6. then, having leaped over 5, actualizing the 4th  concentration  and  then
  actualizing the desire realm mind
7. then, having leaped over 6, actualizing the 3rd  concentration  and  then
  actualizing the desire realm mind
8. then, having leaped over 7, actualizing the 2nd  concentration  and  then
  actualizing the desire realm mind and
9. then, having leaped over 8, actualizing the 1st  concentration  and  then
  actualizing the desire realm mind.


- There are 2 types of actual leaping absorption as mentioned above:
 (i) One takes the 4 concentrations and the 4 formless  absorptions  as  the
bases of alternation and the  absorption  of  cessation  as  the  alternated
property. This type has not been explicitly explained because  it  has  been
taught that it is easy to understand.
(ii) One takes the 9 serial absorptions as the bases of alternation and  the
desire realm mind as the alternated property
   This type is described in this passage.
Q&A: What is the difference  between  taking  the  4  concentrations  and  4
formless absorptions as the bases of alternation, and taking  the  9  serial
absorptions as the bases of alternation?
-When the absorption of cessation is taken as the alternated  property,  the
bases  of  alternation  are  the  4  concentrations  and  the   4   formless
absorptions.
- When the desire realm mind is taken as the alternated property, the  bases
of alternation are the 4 concentrations, the  4  formless  absorptions,  and
the absorption of cessation.
- How do we perform the actual leaping absorption?
 -One begins with:
(1) the 1st concentration,
(2) absorption of cessation
(3) 2nd concentration
(4) absorption of cessation
(5) 3rd concentration
(6) absorption of cessation, and so forth,
- ascending in this process until attaining the Peak of Existence, and  then
the absorption of cessation.
- Someone of dull faculty cannot proceed from the  absorption  of  cessation
immediately to the desire realm mind.
- A dull-faculty bodhisattva first needs to use the Peak of  Existence  that
is of small capacity as a bridge between the  absorption  of  cessation  and
the desire realm mind.
- One first actualizes what is called the “Peak  of  Existence  that  is  of
small capacity” as a bridge. This is a mind that is  slightly  coarser  than
the actual mind of the Peak of Existence.
- From this mind of the Peak of Existence of small capacity, one goes on  to
actualize the desire realm mind.
- Because of having  been  preceded  by  the  Peak  of  Existence  of  small
capacity, from the desire realm mind one  can  proceed  immediately  to  the
absorption of cessation. This absorption of cessation is the  start  of  the
descending process: from
(1) the absorption of cessation, one actualizes
(2) desire realm mind
(3) Peak of Existence
(4) desire realm mind
(5) Nothingness
(6) desire realm mind, and so on,
-all the way down to 1st concentration, and then desire realm mind.
- Bodhisattvas of sharp faculty do not need to use this  Peak  of  Existence
that is of small capacity as a bridge.
After the ascending leaping  absorption,  they  can  go  directly  from  the
absorption of cessation to the desire realm mind immediately.
- The Peak of Existence is the subtlest mind within the 3  realms,  and  the
absorption of cessation is even subtler than that.
-It is difficult for a dull-faculty  bodhisattva  to  proceed  from  a  very
subtle state, the absorption of cessation,  immediately  to  a  very  coarse
mind of the desire realm. Therefore, it is necessary to actualize this  mind
of the Peak of Existence of small capacity.
- But after having done  this,  the  bodhisattva  becomes  trained  and  can
proceed from  the  desire  realm  mind  immediately  to  the  absorption  of
cessation and then from the absorption  of  cessation  back  to  the  desire
realm mind.
-In general, when  we  talk  about  the  4  concentrations  and  4  formless
absorptions, they do not have to be minds realizing emptiness, but  in  this
context, these 4  concentrations  and  4  formless  absorptions  are  solely
awarenesses/minds directly realizing emptiness.
-The absorption of cessation is a non-associated compositional factor.
-The desire realm mind is a coarse mind that takes  the  attributes  of  the
desire realm -forms, sounds, etc.-as its objects.
-An absorption of cessation is a non-associated compositional factor  in  an
arya’s continuum in which the coarse feelings and discriminations have  been
stopped with respect to the subtle mental primary consciousness.
-An absorption of cessation   is  an  attribute  that  is  a  non-associated
compositional  factor  in  which  the  6  collections  of  coarse   (primary
consciousnesses) along with their retinues have been stopped.
- This is according to the Autonomy school
- To stop the coarse  feelings  and  discriminations  with  respect  to  the
subtle mental primary consciousness: You can have a  subtle  mental  primary
consciousness,   and   associated   with   that   subtle   mental    primary
consciousness, you have mental factors such as feeling  and  discrimination.
So you stop those coarse feelings and discriminations with respect  to  this
subtle mental primary consciousness.
- In General  Meaning,  an  absorption  of  cessation  is  a  non-associated
compositional factor that is an absorption in an  arya’s  continuum  abiding
in a class distinguished by having ceased the coarse concomitants  that  are
objects  to  be  ceased  with  respect  to   the   subtle   mental   primary
consciousness, the basis of cessation.
- “coarse concomitants” refer to  the  coarse  primary  consciousnesses  and
their mental factors because it mentions their  retinues,  which  means  the
mental factors in the retinue.
- The concomitants are the mental factors in the  retinues  of  the  primary
consciousnesses.
5.25d        Proceeding  dissimilarly,  through   to   the   absorption   of
cessation.
- That absorption that has been explained is  called  “leaping  absorption,”
because  it  is  an  absorption  that  proceeds  by  means  of   alternating
dissimilar equipoise and non-equipoise minds: the 4 concentrations  and  the
4 formless absorptions, through to the absorption of cessation.
-  “equipoise  minds”  refers  to  the  4  concentrations  and  4   formless
absorptions
- “non-equipoise minds” refers to the desire realm mind.
-The  4  concentrations  and  the  4  formless  absorptions,  including  the
absorption of cessation, are alternated with the non-equipoise mind  of  the
desire realm.
- This leaping absorption is for the sake of  completing  the  dexterity  in
meditative stabilization, because at this point  one  has  already  directly
realized emptiness.
-Upon attaining the 8th ground, a bodhisattva does not need to train in  the
leaping absorption any more, because he has already attained  the  dexterity
in meditative stabilization. In fact, the bodhisattva at that point is  able
to   utilize   a   desire   realm   mind   as   a   mental    support    for
generating/manifesting a path i.e. the bodhisattva can generate  the  desire
realm mind into the entity of a path.
Q&A: In this absorption, from the absorption of cessation, for example,  one
goes to the desire realm mind, then  the  Peak  of  Existence,  then  desire
realm mind, etc. One has to come out of meditation every time one  manifests
the desire realm mind because when we have a desire realm mind manifest;  it
is a  state  of  non-equipoise.  So  we  have  equipoise  followed  by  non-
equipoise, equipoise followed by non-equipoise, etc.
-The process of alternating a very coarse mind and a  very  subtle  mind  is
very difficult, but once one can do that, it is quite an achievement.
Q&A: The 5 sense consciousnesses and their  mental  factors  can  be  desire
realm minds, but conceptions that are mental  consciousnesses  can  also  be
desire realm minds.
- A desire realm mind is a mind that is included within  the  level  of  the
desire realm. “Something that is included within the  level  of  the  desire
realm” means something that is included  within  the  level  of  the  desire
realm is: that which, when observed, is  suitable  to  increase  the  desire
realm contaminations.
Preparation
-The reason for those bodhisattvas who have  attained  the  6th  ground  and
above to actualize the preparation of the  leaping  absorption  is  for  the
sake of actualizing the  actual  leaping  absorption  immediately  -  having
ascended from the 1st concentration through to the absorption of  cessation,
and after that, having descended from the absorption  of  cessation  through
to the 1st concentration.
- In that way, through the two types (the forward order and  reverse  order)
having ascended and descended in the 9 absorptions with the  characteristics
of the 4 concentrations, the 4 formless absorptions, and the  absorption  of
cessation, after that, they enter into the actual leaping absorption.
-The passage above explicitly explained the long preparation but  implicitly
indicates the short preparation.
-The purpose for actualizing the preparation of the  leaping  absorption  is
so that immediately after the preparation,  the  bodhisattva  can  actualize
the actual leaping absorption.
Actual
-The reason for those bodhisattvas who have  attained  the  6th  ground  and
above to enter into the  actual  leaping  absorption  is  for  the  sake  of
training  in  the  dexterity  of  meditative  stabilization:  again,  having
entered into absorption on the 1st concentration, having arisen  from  that,
they enter into absorption on cessation.
- Similarly, having arisen from the 2nd concentration through to the  source
Without  Discrimination  Not  Without  Discrimination,   they   enter   into
absorption on cessation.
-Having arisen  from  that,  they  enter  into  the  absorption  immediately
following the absorption on cessation.
-The reason for them to  observe  the  Peak  of  Existence  and  enter  into
absorption is because having actualized the desire realm mind after that  is
for the sake of alternating with the desire realm  mind  in  the  descending
process.
-This  ascending  process  without  inserting  anything  in-between   cannot
qualify as an actual leaping absorption because in order to have  an  actual
leaping absorption, there must be some leaping.
-For example, if the absorption of cessation  is  the  alternated  property,
the leaping absorption would be to enter the  1st  concentration,  then  the
absorption of cessation, then the 2nd concentration, then the absorption  of
cessation, and so forth.
-“Peak of Existence” is the Peak of Existence of small  capacity.  In  other
words, after the absorption of  cessation,  they  enter  into  the  Peak  of
Existence of small capacity.
-After the Peak of Existence of small capacity, the  bodhisattvas  actualize
the desire realm mind. After that, they  begin  the  descending  process  by
alternating with the desire realm mind.
- They begin the descending process with the absorption of  cessation,  then
the desire realm mind, then the Peak of Existence,  then  the  desire  realm
mind, and so forth, descending in this  manner  until  they  reach  the  1st
concentration, followed by the desire realm mind.
-Someone says: The purpose for entering into the absorption on the  Peak  of
Existence of small capacity after  the  absorption  of  cessation  is  that,
since one is unable to arise into  cessation  from  cessation,  one  recedes
slightly with respect to it.
-At the end of the 1st leaping absorption, one ends up with  the  absorption
of cessation. The next leaping absorption  begins  with  the  absorption  of
cessation.
- This person is saying  that  one  cannot  arise  into  the  absorption  of
cessation from the absorption of cessation. Therefore, one  needs  to  enter
the Peak of Existence of small capacity as a bridge. One enters the Peak  of
Existence of small  capacity  after  the  absorption  of  cessation  of  the
ascending process (the 1st leaping  absorption),  then  one  actualizes  the
desire realm  mind,  and  then  one  initiates  the  descending  process  by
entering into the absorption of cessation.
- Our system: This is not correct because  in  the  ascending  process,  the
bases of alternation are the 4 concentrations and  4  formless  absorptions,
not all the 9 absorptions. The absorption of cessation is  not  a  basis  of
alternation in the ascending process. It is the alternated property.
-Our system: According to you, the absorption of cessation can  be  regarded
as an alternated property in the  descending  process.  In  that  case,  the
alternating bases in the descending process would only include  8  bases-the
4 concentrations and 4 formless absorptions -because if  the  absorption  of
cessation is an alternated property, it cannot at the same time be  a  basis
of alternation.
-This means that the absorption of cessation would have to be excluded  from
the list of the bases of alternation.
- Therefore, instead of having 9, you would have 8, but  in  the  descending
process there are actually  9  bases  of  alternation.  That  is  a  problem
because in the descending process, the 9 absorptions  bases  of  alternation
are alternated with the desire realm mind as the alternated property.
- Therefore, although one is able  to  arise  into  an  uncontaminated  path
after the absorption of cessation, know that one enters into the  absorption
on the Peak of Existence for the sake of alternating the desire  realm  mind
in the descending process, through actualizing the desire realm  mind  after
that. [The intended meaning is that one enters the absorption  of  the  Peak
of Existence of small capacity, and actualizes the desire realm  mind  after
that, i.e. after the Peak of Existence of small capacity.]
- The absorption of cessation is the alternated property  in  the  ascending
process, and the ascending process ends with the absorption of cessation.
- But in the descending process, the absorption of cessation is a  basis  of
alternation. The descending process actually begins with the  absorption  of
cessation. [The desire realm mind does not occur in the ascending process.]
- “Know that one enters…” refers to a dull-faculty bodhisattva. Know that  a
dull-faculty  bodhisattva  enters  into  the  Peak  of  Existence  of  small
capacity  for  the  sake  of  alternating  the  desire  realm  mind  in  the
descending process, through actualizing the desire realm mind after that.
- The Peak of Existence of small capacity is  actualized  for  the  sake  of
being able to actualize the desire realm mind.
- This desire realm mind is referred to as the “demarcation consciousness.”
-“Demarcation  consciousness”  –  the  desire  realm  mind  into  which  the
bodhisattva arises after completing the  ascending  leaping  absorption  and
before beginning the descending leaping absorption.
-A dull-faculty bodhisattva is  not  able  to  enter  absorption  into  this
desire realm mind immediately from an  absorption  of  cessation.  For  that
reason, there is the need to first enter into the absorption of the Peak  of
Existence of small capacity,  which  is  like  slightly  receding  from  the
absorption of cessation in order to actualize the desire realm mind.
- Hearers have a  lesser,  or  inferior,  support,  object  of  observation,
aspect, and absorption.
- The 4 types of distances:
      -distant support
      -distant objects of observation
      -distant aspect
      -distant absorption
-are posited form the point of  view  of  being  distant  from  the  leaping
absorption.
- The support, the hearers, is  inferior  support  because  they  hold  mere
liberation for their own purpose as supreme.
- As a result of desiring to attain mere  liberation  for  their  own  sake,
they have an inferior object of observation, inferior aspect,  and  inferior
absorption.
- The object of observation  is  a  less  extensive  object  of  observation
compared to that of the Mahayanists i.e. an inferior mode of observation.
- Mahayanist could observe objects  in  a  very  extensive  manner,  whereas
hearers observe objects in a less extensive manner.
-Mahayanists are able to observe objects by way of infinite  reasonings.  In
this way, the  aspect  becomes  very  extensive,  and  the  absorption  also
becomes extensive for the Mahayanists. In comparison, these  properties  for
hearers become less extensive.
-For bodhisattvas, this absorption can be absorption on  emptiness,  through
which the mind  becomes  more  powerful.  When  we  talk  about  the  actual
antidote, the uninterrupted path, a  bodhisattva  does  not  abide  long  on
that. Likewise, a bodhisattva does not abide long on the liberated path.
Q&A: If a table is the object of observation,  what  is  the  aspect  for  a
hearer and what is the aspect for a bodhisattva?
Geshe-la: When a  hearer  views  the  table,  the  hearer  is  not  able  to
eliminate superimpositions regarding the  table  with  infinite  reasonings,
whereas when a bodhisattva observes the  table,  he  is  able  to  eliminate
superimpositions regarding the table with infinite reasonings.
-The aspect depends on what superimposition you are trying to eliminate:  if
you were trying to eliminate the superimposition of permanence,  the  aspect
would be impermanence. Likewise you can have  the  aspect  of  selflessness,
emptiness, and so forth.
-Although hearers are unable to actualize a desire  realm  mind  immediately
after the Peak  of  Existence,  a  bodhisattva,  arisen  from  the  Peak  of
Existence, through the strength  of  skillful  means,  having  actualized  a
desire realm mind like that, a non-equipoise consciousness  to  which  forms
and so forth of the desire realm appear, having set himself  on  the  entity
of  the  demarcation  consciousness  that  operates  in  the  desire  realm,
initiates the descending process.
- The Peak of Existence of small capacity is  actualized  for  the  sake  of
being able to actualize the desire  realm  mind.  It  is  not  part  of  the
descending process. (Non-equipoise is the desire realm mind.)
-{The term “demarcation consciousness” refers to the desire realm mind  that
is neither part of the ascending process  nor  the  descending  process;  it
links one to the descending process, after the ascending process.}
-Then, after that, he enters  into  cessation.  Then  he  enters  into  non-
equipoise. After that, casting away only one, the absorption  of  cessation,
he enters the source Without Discrimination Not Without Discrimination.
-Then he enters into non-equipoise. Then  casting  away  2,  he  enters  the
source Nothingness. Then he enters into non-equipoise.
- Similarly, having cast away 3 through to 8 -the 8 from  cessation  through
to the 2nd concentration -he enters into  the  1st  concentration.  Then  he
enters into non-equipoise.
- There are two types of leaping absorptions.
      -In the ascending process, there are 8 bases of alternation,  and  the
absorption of cessation  is  the  alternated  property.  In  this  way,  the
ascending process  actually  consists  of  16  members:  1st  concentration,
absorption of cessation, 2nd concentration, absorption of cessation, etc.
      -In the descending process, there are  9  bases  of  alternation,  and
there is the desire realm mind acting as  the  alternating  property;  thus,
there are 18 members in the descending process.
- In that way, having cast away one, two, and so forth, through to  reaching
the absorption of cessation and the 1st concentration, since it descends  by
means of dissimilar  bases  of  alternation  and  alternated  property,  and
ascends, alternating the 4 concentrations and  the  4  formless  absorptions
with  the  absorption  of  cessation,  progressing  dissimilarly,   due   to
actualizing the characteristic of mastery over the  leaping  absorption,  it
is the PA of the PoM.[This seems to say that when one has  attained  the  PA
of the PoM, one has attained the leaping absorption.]
-Gyeltsab Je’s text mentions that if one  has  not  previously  entered  the
Hinayana path, this leaping absorption is attained on  the  6th  ground  and
above
-General Meaning says that the preparation  of  the  leaping  absorption  is
attained on the 1st or 2nd ground, whereas  the  actual  leaping  absorption
can be attained anytime from the 2nd ground through to  prior  to  attaining
the 8th ground. In other words, someone on the 1st  ground  cannot  have  an
actual leaping absorption. Therefore it is not necessary to have  a  leaping
absorption in order to attain the PA of the PoM.
- The loftily looking lion meditative stabilization  does  not  involve  any
alternating properties. Basically,  you  ascend  and  then  descend  without
inserting anything in between.
-How long does one stay for some time on each of  these  concentrations?  It
depends on the ability and  experience  of  the  individual  meditator.  The
duration of the  meditative  stabilization  is  not  mentioned  at  all.  It
probably  depends  on  the  faculty  of  the  bodhisattva:  a  sharp-faculty
bodhisattva would be able to remain longer in  meditative  stabilization,  a
dull-faculty bodhisattva would not be able to remain as long  in  meditative
stabilization.
The conceptions that are the objects of abandonment
-The objects of abandonment of the PA of PoM are of 4 types:
      1 Conceptions of apprehendeds to be engaged in
     2 Conceptions of apprehendeds to be turned away from
     3 Conceptions of apprehenders of substantial existence
     4 Conceptions of apprehenders of imputed existence
Conceptions of apprehendeds to be engaged in
5.26  The brief, the extensive, that not held
            By the aid of the buddhas,
            The non-existent qualities of the three times,
            The three types of paths that are excellent;
5.27ab      This one type of conceptualizations of apprehendeds
            Are possessors of objects of utilization of the aspects  of  the
applications.
 -The entity of the conceptions is this one type  of  conceptualizations  of
apprehendeds that adhere to:
(i) the scriptures and
(ii) their subject matter, the bodhisattvas’ paths and results,
as truly existent objects to be engaged in.
- The antidotes are the occasions of the preparations of  the  applications,
possessors of objects of utilization of the aspects of the applications.
-The entity of the conceptions is  the  conception  of  apprehendeds  to  be
engaged in as truly existent objects of utilization.
-The description is quite similar to the conceptions of apprehendeds  to  be
engaged in that are objects of abandonment of the PoS.
-In the context of the objects of abandonment :
      -PA of the PoS, the objects of abandonment are acquired conceptions.
      -PA of the PoM, the objects of abandonment are innate conceptions.
-In the context of the conception of apprehendeds to be engaged  in  is  the
conception of the Mahayana paths and results as truly  existent  objects  of
utilization:
      -PA of the PoS is the acquired form of this conception.
      - PA of PoM is the innate conceptions
-A person who abandons the acquired conceptions of true  existence  abandons
those in his continuum, and likewise with the innate conceptions.
- Let us say that at the time of Shakyamuni Buddha, there was a  bodhisattva
on the PoS who abandoned the acquired conceptions of true existence.
-If we speak of a  conception  of  this  watch  in  front  of  me  as  truly
existent, did that bodhisattva abandon  the  conception  of  this  watch  as
truly existent?
-This watch had not yet come  into  existence  at  the  time  of  Shakyamuni
Buddha. That bodhisattva on the PoS at the time of the Buddha did  not  need
to abandon this particular conception of true existence,  because  prior  to
attaining the PoS, that bodhisattva  did  not  have  in  his  continuum  the
conception of this watch as truly existent, either in a manifest form or  in
seed form. Since he did not  have  this  conception,  he  did  not  need  to
abandon it.
- There are 9 types of conceptions of apprehendeds to be engaged in  because
there are 9  objects  to  be  abandoned  by  the  object-possessors  on  the
occasion of the application that is the PA of the PoM.
- The 9 divisions by way of objects are the objects to be abandoned on  this
occasion of the preparations of the applications are:
|              |1. the brief Dharma scriptures that take care of   |                |
|              |sentient beings who like the brief                 |                |
|Innate        |                                                   |as truly        |
|conception    |                                                   |existent objects|
|that is       |                                                   |to be engaged in|
|adherence to  |                                                   |                |
|              |2. the extensive Dharma scriptures that takes care |                |
|              |of sentient beings who like the extensive          |                |
|              |3. the attention that is a yoga of the perfection  |                |
|              |of wisdom (an antidote to not being                |                |
|              |aided/assisted/protected, that is, held by the     |                |
|              |buddhas through them acting as protectors, due to  |                |
|              |oneself not being persistent regarding the meanings|                |
|              |of the brief and the extensive as they have been   |                |
|              |explained)                                         |                |
|              |4. the excellent qualities of the PoP, which do not|                |
|              |exist ultimately but exist conventionally, by the  |                |
|              |ceasing of arisal, that is, reliance on the PoS    |                |
|              |5. the excellent qualities of the PoS, which do not|                |
|              |exist ultimately but exist conventionally, by not  |                |
|              |possessing the cause of perfectly producing them as|                |
|              |the 4 extremes                                     |                |
|              |6. the excellent qualities of the PoM, which do not|                |
|              |exist at the time of the PoS but exist at the time |                |
|              |of the PoM, by not existing as a future substance  |                |
|              |7. the path of preparing (PoP) to attain nirvana,  |                |
|              |by pacification of errors -which is the conception |                |
|              |of permanence and so forth and realizing           |                |
|              |impermanence and so forth                          |                |
|              |8. the PoS, by the accomplishment of – which is the|                |
|              |meditation on the new realization of emptiness     |                |
|              |9. the PoM, by meditating upon the lack of nature  |                |
|              |ultimately that has already been realized with     |                |
|              |direct cognition on the PoS                        |                |


-(1) & (2) have to  do  with  conceptions  that  adhere  to  the  brief  and
extensive Dharma scriptures as truly existent objects to be engaged in.
- For the brief, middling, and extensive Perfection of Wisdom Sutras:
      -The brief  is  the  8,000-stanza  Perfection  of  Wisdom  Sutra,  the
middling is the 20,000-stanza-Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, and the  extensive
is the 100,000-stanza Perfection of Wisdom Sutra.
      -In general,  all  bodhisattvas  are  of  sharp  faculty,  but  within
bodhisattvas  we  can  differentiate  dull,  middling,  and  sharp   faculty
bodhisattvas.
   -The 8,000-stanza sutra is said to be for  those  of  dull  faculty,  the
   20,000-stanza sutra for those of middling faculty, and the 100,000-stanza
   sutra for those of sharp faculty.
   -The 100,000-stanza Perfection of Wisdom Sutra contains many words, which
   contain many meanings. If this were explained  to  bodhisattvas  of  dull
   faculty, it would not be suitable -it would be too many  words,  and  too
   many meanings. For this  reason,  it  is  said  that  the  100,000-stanza
   Perfection of Wisdom Sutra is suitable for bodhisattvas of sharp faculty.


-To someone of sharp faculty, there is no need to explain too much  and  you
do not need to give them much reasoning in order for them  to  understand  a
point. They are suitable to receive a brief explanation.
- Those of middling faculty need more reasons to understand the same point
- Those of dull faculty need much reasoning  in  order  to  understand  that
point.
- A sharp  faculty  person  can  easily  understand  a  point  without  much
explanation. Then no matter how much is said, this  person  can  absorb  the
explanation. So even though many  words  and  meanings  are  conveyed,  this
person, due to being able to understand the points easily,  will  listen  to
them quite happily.
- For someone of middling faculty, it is not so easy to  grasp  the  points,
so if a lot is said, the person may experience difficulties.
- For a person of dull faculty, they lack the ability to  grasp  the  points
easily. If a lot is explained, this person would become  bored,  because  he
cannot understand the explanation.
- Dull faculty is able to absorb explanations that are brief,  because  they
would have difficulty absorbing extensive explanations.
- Middling faculty bodhisattvas can accept/absorb middling explanations.
- Those of sharp faculty can absorb extensive explanations.
- At the same time, it is also the case that  those  of  dull  faculty  need
extensive commentary to understand a particular point
- those of middling faculty need only a middling  amount  of  commentary  to
understand the same point
- those of sharp faculty need little explanation to understand that point.
- (3) The object is actually the attention that is a yoga of the  perfection
of wisdom.
-The buddhas, despite having great compassion for all sentient  beings,  are
not able to aid those who are unsuitable vessels. In fact, buddha aryas  are
the protectors of all sentient beings. Although this is the case, this  fact
alone is not sufficient for sentient beings to receive benefit,  because  if
sentient beings do not follow and practice the advice of the  buddhas,  they
cannot be protected by the buddhas. This is not a fault  from  the  side  of
the buddhas, but a fault from the side of  those  sentient  beings.  Due  to
their own faults, they cannot be protected by the buddhas.}
-(4)(5)&(6) are in terms of the excellent qualities of the paths
- (7-9) The 3 in terms of the entity of the paths
- as truly existent objects to be engaged in - are  objects  of  abandonment
of the preparations of an  application  of  the  PoM  of  a  Mahayana  arya,
because they are to be directly destroyed by them.
Q&A: An acquired conception comes about through tenets and is of two  types:
the manifest form and the seed form. For example,  animals  would  not  have
the manifest acquired conceptions, but they could  have  the  seeds  of  the
acquired conceptions.
-It is possible that a human being has contact  with  tenets,  and,  due  to
engaging  in  certain  tenets,  develops  acquired   conceptions   of   true
existence. If this person dies and is  reborn  as  an  animal,  this  animal
would have  the  seeds  of  the  acquired  conceptions  of  true  existence,
although it would  not  have  the  manifest  acquired  conceptions  of  true
existence.
-The innate conceptions of true existence are not due to  tenets.  They  are
innate. For instance, a person may not rely on reasons, e.g. “This is  truly
existent because of this reason,”  etc.  Without  relying  on  reasons  from
tenets, this conception of true existence just arises. For example,  in  the
AMWS, an innate conception of true  existence  is  asserted.  A  person  can
adhere to any kind of  phenomenon  as  truly  existent  without  relying  on
having contacted tenets.
- A sentient being on the uninterrupted path at the end of the continuum  of
a sentient being does not have the innate conception of  true  existence  in
his continuum.
Conceptions of apprehendeds to be turned away from
5.27cd      The second are asserted to be object-possessors
            Engaging minds and mental factors.
5.28  Not producing the mind, non-attention to
            The essence of enlightenment,
            Attention to the lesser vehicle,
            Non-attention to complete enlightenment,
5.29  Meditating, not meditating,
            Their opposites, and
            Not according with the meaning: these conceptions are
            To be known with respect to the path of meditation.
- The conceptions of apprehendeds to be turned away from  that  are  objects
to be abandoned by the Mahayana PoM are not abandoned by just  any  type  of
antidote, but are specifically abandoned by  the  uninterrupted  paths  that
are included within the Mahayana PoM.
- By way of divisions of the objects that are to be turned away from,  there
are 9 types of objects to  be  abandoned  by  the  Mahayana  PoM,  therefore
correspondingly there are 9 uninterrupted paths of the  PoM  that  serve  as
their antidotes.
- The conceptions of apprehendeds to be turned  away  from  included  within
innate objects of abandonment are the 9 types of  object-possessors  because
there are 9 by way of objects. They are to be destroyed on the occasions  of
the uninterrupted paths engaging minds and mental factors of the  PoM  of  a
Mahayana arya, since they are the objects to be abandoned on that  occasion.

{-In the system that asserts 3 final vehicles, there  are  said  to  be  two
types of hearer foe-destroyers:
(1) one who is called the hearer who only proceeds to peace and
(2) one who is called the hearer foe-destroyer who fully trains.
The difference between these  two  types  of  hearer  foe-destroyers  is  as
follows:
- the 1st type, upon  attaining  nirvana  without  remainder,  goes  out  of
existence due to severance  of  the  continuity  of  matter  and  cognition,
whereas
- the 2nd type of foe-destroyer, upon attaining the state of  foe-destroyer,
does  not  actualize  nirvana  without  remainder,  but  rather  engages  in
practices that cause him to have a long life
- In this way, this 2nd type of foe-destroyer enters  the  Mahayana  vehicle
and eventually attains buddhahood.
- Our own system does not assert 3 final vehicles, i.e.  we  do  not  assert
the presentation of these two  types  of  foe-destroyers  since  we  do  not
accept the existence of the 1st type.
- Our system asserts that all hearer foe-destroyers will  eventually  attain
the state of buddhahood. It is not the case that a person  will  attain  the
state of foe-destroyer, but will never go on to attain buddhahood.}
|             |1. someone on the hearer’s PoA who proceeds to        |              |
|             |solitary peace does not produce the mind of complete  |              |
|Innate       |enlightenment as long as he has not attained the      |as truly      |
|conception   |result of hearer foe-destroyer, due to being separated|existent      |
|that is      |from the spiritual guide and so forth who guides him  |objects to be |
|adherence to |in that way                                           |turned away   |
|             |                                                      |from          |
|             |2. someone on the hearer’s PoA who proceeds to        |              |
|             |solitary peace does not pay attention to the essence  |              |
|             |of enlightenment, due to lacking the superior merit of|              |
|             |observing the buddhas                                 |              |
|             |3. someone proceeding to solitary peace who abides on |              |
|             |the hearer’s PoP pays attention to the vehicle of that|              |
|             |hearer, because of being a hearer lineage-bearer.     |              |
|             |4. someone on the PoP who is definite in the solitary |              |
|             |realizer’s lineage actualizes the vehicle of that     |              |
|             |solitary realizer, because of being a solitary        |              |
|             |realizer lineage-bearer.                              |              |
|             |5. someone on the hearer’s PoS who proceeds to        |              |
|             |solitary peace does not pay attention to perfect      |              |
|             |complete enlightenment as an object to be attained in |              |
|             |his continuum for the time being, due to lacking      |              |
|             |diligent achievement of the perfection of wisdom.     |              |
|             |6. someone on the hearer’s PoM meditates on a         |              |
|             |reflection of the perfection of wisdom, due to being  |              |
|             |together with the direct observation of impermanence  |              |
|             |and so forth without being conjoined with the wisdom  |              |
|             |realizing emptiness.                                  |              |
|             |7. a hearer foe-destroyer does not meditate on the    |              |
|             |meaning of the mode of abidance, due to lacking the   |              |
|             |observation of that.                                  |              |
|             |8. a hearer foe-destroyer who:                        |              |
|             |(i) lacks meditation on the meaning of the mode of    |              |
|             |abidance, due to lacking the observation of that, and |              |
|             |(ii) also does not lack meditation, due to also       |              |
|             |lacking non-observation of impermanence and so forth. |              |
|             |9.hearers and solitary realizers adhere to that which |              |
|             |is not exactly according with the meaning of the mode |              |
|             |of abidance, since they erroneously adhere to the     |              |
|             |meaning of the mode of abidance.                      |              |


(1). Here it means someone on the hearer’s PoA who proceeds to  peace  in  a
solitary manner  on  his  own  without  being  intent  on  others’  welfare.
“solitary” in this  context  should  be  taken  to  mean  solely  for  one’s
welfare.
-The innate conception that is a bodhisattva’s adherence to that as a  truly
existent object to be turned away from, since the  Mahayana  generated  mind
is not produced on a hearer’s  PoA  is  an  object  of  abandonment  of  the
uninterrupted paths of the  Mahayana  PoM  because  it  is  to  be  directly
destroyed by them.
(2). The reason for saying that this person  lacks  the  superior  merit  of
observing the buddhas is because, although this person observes the  buddhas
(and take the buddha as an object of refuge) and accumulates  the  merit  of
doing so, such a person, due to lacking a  superior  motivation,  lacks  the
superior merit of observing the buddhas. This superior  motivation  in  this
context refers to the motivation of bodhicitta, the mind of enlightenment.
(6) The  expression  “perfection  of  wisdom”  has  many  connotations,  for
example, the Mother perfection of wisdom, the perfection of wisdom  that  is
the object, the perfection of  wisdom  that  is  the  object-possessor,  the
[Perfection  of  Wisdom]  Sutras,  the  wisdom  realizing   emptiness,   the
resultant perfection of wisdom, etc.
- In this context, the perfection of wisdom that is  the  object.  Here  the
perfection of wisdom refers to the  emptiness  of  true  existence,  and  “a
reflection of the perfection of wisdom” is, for example,  impermanence,  the
coarse selflessness of persons, or the subtle selflessness of persons.
-The antidotes to that are the uninterrupted  paths  of  the  PoM  realizing
freedom from the four possibilities in suchness.
(9) The innate conception that apprehends that as a  truly  existent  object
to be turned away from, since hearers  and  solitary  realizers  erroneously
adhere to the meaning of the mode of abidance is an  object  of  abandonment
of the uninterrupted paths of the Mahayana PoM because it is to be  directly
destroyed by them.
- In terms of the object, the innate conception that is adherence to,  there
are four possibilities as truly existent:
      (i)  adherence to meditation as truly existent,
      (ii) adherence to non-meditation as truly existent,
      (iii)  adherence  to  both  meditation  and  non-meditation  as  truly
existent, and
      (iv) adherence to neither as truly existent
-as  truly  existent  object  to  be  turned  away  from  is  an  object  of
abandonment of the uninterrupted paths of the Mahayana PoM because it is  to
be directly destroyed by them.
Conceptions of apprehenders of substantial existence
5.30  The objects of utilization imputed as a sentient being,
            Imputed as phenomena, not empty,
            Grasping, nature of discerning,
            Acting on properties, the three vehicles,
5.31  Impure gifts,
            Disturbed conduct:
            That the first type acting on apprehenders
            Are to be known is proclaimed.
- A conception that, through observing the apprehender  that  apprehends  an
ordinary being as substantially existent, adheres to it as a truly  existent
utilizer.
- The conception of an apprehender  of  substantial  existence  observes  an
apprehender of substantial existence, and  the  apprehender  of  substantial
existence observes substantial existence.
-  The  conceptualizations  with  respect  to  apprehenders  of  substantial
existence included within innate objects of abandonment are the 9  types  of
object-possessors because there are 9  divisions  by  way  of  objects,  the
objects of abandonment on the occasion of an application of the PoM:
- The 3 in terms of object of knowledge of the 3EKs:
|The innate|1.that which is merely imputed upon the 5          |as a truly existent   |
|conception|aggregates as a sentient being                     |utilizer -is an object|
|that      |                                                   |of abandonment of the |
|adheres to|                                                   |preparations of an    |
|          |                                                   |application of the PoM|
|          |                                                   |of a Mahayana arya,   |
|          |                                                   |because it is to be   |
|          |                                                   |directly destroyed by |
|          |                                                   |them.                 |
|          |2.that which is just merely imputed upon the 5     |                      |
|          |aggregates as phenomena, because phenomena that are|                      |
|          |forms and so forth are just mere appearances to a  |                      |
|          |knower of conventionalities                        |                      |
|          |3. phenomena of the EKAA and so forth (that are not|                      |
|          |empty, i.e not non-existent conventionally because |                      |
|          |the EKAA and so forth progress as comprehenders to |                      |
|          |all bases, paths, and aspects) posited as a person |                      |


(1) This conception is related to an object of knowledge of the KB
(2) This conception is  related  to  an  object  of  knowledge  of  the  KP.
“Preparation means the uninterrupted path.}
(3)This conception is related to an object of knowledge of the EKAA
- The “phenomena of the EKAA and so forth,” actually refers  to  all  bases,
paths, and aspects. As bases, we posit the aggregates and  so  forth.  These
bases are imputed as a sentient being. “EKAA and so forth” includes  the  KP
and the KB.}
-The 2 in terms of view:
(4) An ordinary being grasps to phenomena  as  truly  existent,  because  of
adhering to true existence due to not  having  abandoned  adherence  in  any
way.
(5) A bodhisattva discerns dharma that is  the  mode  of  abidance,  due  to
having realized the lack of entitiness of all phenomena ultimately.
-The 2 in terms of conduct:
(6) The hearer and solitary realizer  aryas  act  to  seek  the  objects  of
intent that are properties of  pacification  of  the  sufferings  of  cyclic
existence, due to seeking mere liberation, not acting to  seek  the  objects
of intent that are the three greatnesses.
(7) A bodhisattva has the definite emergence of the 3 vehicles,  because  of
being with  great  compassion,  and,  if  forms  and  so  forth  were  truly
existent, it would be suitable to observe them as such,  but  a  bodhisattva
does not observe them as such.
-The 2 in terms of the view and conduct of hearers and solitary realizers
(8) The innate conception  that,  through  observing  the  apprehender  that
apprehends  someone  on  the  hearers’  PoA  who  has  impure   gifts   from
benefactors, as substantially existent, adheres to it as  a  truly  existent
utilizer
- Someone on the hearer’s PoA has impure  gifts  from  benefactors,  due  to
having realized the mere selflessness of persons, not having  perfectly  and
strongly entered into dharmata.
(9) That has disturbed conduct of the perfections, due  to  having  observed
and accomplished generosity and so forth that are the 3 circles at the  time
of performing generosity and so forth.
-Summary: there are 4 types of conceptions that are objects of  abandonment.

-On the PoS, the manifest forms  as  well  as  the  seeds  of  the  acquired
conceptions are abandoned.
-On the PoM, the  manifest  forms  as  well  as  the  seeds  of  the  innate
conceptions are abandoned.
-These conceptions of true existence are abandoned over the  various  paths.
The conceptions to be abandoned by the PoS are simultaneously  abandoned  by
a single uninterrupted path.
- The 4 types of  conceptions  each  have  9  divisions,  so  there  are  36
conceptions.
-  The  acquired  conceptions  are  simultaneously  abandoned  by  a  single
uninterrupted path of the PoS and then one attains the liberated path.
-  For  the  objects  of  abandonment  of  the  PoM,  there  are  36  innate
conceptions which are:
 i. 9 conceptions of apprehendeds to be engaged in
ii. 9 conceptions of apprehendeds to be turned away from
iii. 9 conceptions of apprehenders of substantial existence
iv. 9 conceptions of apprehenders of imputed existence
- There are 10 uninterrupted paths of the PoM.
-How do you correlate the objects of abandonment with the  10  uninterrupted
paths?
-There are 10 uninterrupted paths and 9 liberated paths of the  PoM  because
the 10th liberated path is the buddha ground.
-Each of the 4 conceptions has 9 divisions, so how do  you  correlate  these
objects of abandonment with the 10 uninterrupted paths of the PoM?
- Each of the 36 conceptions are divided into 9: the great of the  great  to
the small of the small, and then the great of  the  great  is  divided  into
coarse and subtle.
- These 9 divisions are not the great of the great down to the small of  the
small.
-In fact, each of the 9 conceptions has to be sub-divided into 9  levels  of
objects of abandonment, and the great of  the  great  level  is  sub-divided
into coarse and subtle.
-In fact, we sub-divide each of the 36 conceptions into  10  levels,  ending
up with 360 objects of abandonment.
Conceptions of apprehenders of imputed existence
5.32  The object-possessors of an imputed sentient being
            And the causes of that, since being destroyed by that,
            Are nine other types
            Of discordant classes related to the path of meditation.
-The conceptions that are innate object-possessors that adheres to:
[i]  that which is imputed as the convention “sentient being” and
[ii] the aggregates that are the causes of imputing that convention
as truly existent are 9 types of discordant classes related  as  objects  of
abandonment and antidotes to the PoM of Mahayana aryas that are  other  than
the conceptions  of  apprehenders  of  substantial  existence  since  the  9
differentiated by way of objects are destroyed by that PoM.
-The conceptualizations of  apprehenders  of  imputed  existence  are  of  9
divisions by way of objects.
-The innate object-possessors that adhere to:
[i] that which is imputed as the convention “sentient being” and
[ii] that which  is  imputed  as  a  being  upon  phenomena  that  are  mere
appearances as aggregates that are the causes of  presenting  them  as  that
convention
as  truly  existent  utilizers.”  [Note:  “that  which  is  imputed  as  the
convention ‘sentient being’” means:  that  person  to  whom  the  convention
“sentient being” is imputed.]
5.33  The three types of obscurations to
            The three exalted knowers of  all  exactly  according  with  the
natures,
            The path that pacifies, being associated and
            Not being associated with thusness and so forth,
5.34  Inequality, sufferings and so forth,
            The nature of the afflictions, and
            Confusion with respect to non-duality:
            These are asserted to be the last conceptualizations. {290}
-There are 9 types of conceptions of apprehenders of imputed existence  that
are objects to be abandoned by the PoM because the 9  -from  the  conception
of apprehenders of imputed existence that is confusion about the 3 types  of
obscurations to the 3 exalted knowers of all,  exactly  according  with  the
natures of the objects of observation of the 3EKs, through to the  adherence
to that which is imputed as a being upon  confusion  with  respect  to  non-
duality as a truly existent utilizer.
- The innate conceptions of apprehenders of imputed existence  are  asserted
to be the 9 types of object-possessors, because there are  9  differentiated
by way of objects. They are objects of abandonment on the occasions  of  the
uninterrupted paths engaging minds and mental factors  of  the  PoM  because
they are to be directly destroyed by them.
- The 3 types of confusion about the objects of observation of the 3EKs  are
as follows:
(1) Someone on the hearer’s PoA is confused  about  the  abandoning  of  the
obscurations to the EKAA because of confusion due to not fully  knowing  all
aspects that are modes and varieties.
(2) Someone on the hearer’s PoA is confused  about  the  abandoning  of  the
obscurations to the KP because of confusion due to  not  fully  knowing  all
paths of the 3 vehicles.
(3) A common  ordinary  being  is  confused  about  the  abandoning  of  the
obscurations to the KB because of confusion due to  not  fully  knowing  all
bases.
-The innate conception that adheres to that which is imputed as a being  who
is confused about the abandoning of the 3 types of obscurations as  a  truly
existent utilizer is an object of abandonment of the uninterrupted paths  of
the PoM because it is to be directly destroyed by them.
-Due to confusion about the objects of observation of the 3  paths,  one  is
confused about the abandoning of the obscurations of those 3EKs.
- The 1 confusion about the entity of the path is as follows:
(4) Either common ordinary being or someone on the hearer’s PoA is  confused
about the path that pacifies all obscurations because of  confusion  due  to
not fully knowing the  perfection  of  wisdom  that  realizes  the  mode  of
abidance.
-The 2 types of confusion about the objects of observation of the  path  are
as follows:
(5) That is confused about -
  (i) forms and so forth being associated with thusness and  so  forth,  the
two truths being one entity, or
 (ii) forms and so forth not being associated with thusness  and  so  forth,
the two truths being different entities because  of  confusion  due  to  not
fully knowing:
      (a) the  property-possessors,  objects  of  knowledge,  forms  and  so
forth, and thusness and
      (b) dharmata.
(6) That is confused about the inequality between the Hinayana and  Mahayana
paths because of confusion due to not fully  knowing  emptiness,  the  self-
entities of maras and  so  forth  who  act  to  hinder  the  Mahayana  path.
Alternatively, this has been explained to be confusion about  the  attribute
of the uncommon path.
- The 1 confusion about the meaning of the mode of abidance is as follows:
(7) Someone on the hearer’s PoA is confused about  the  dharmata  of  the  4
truths, sufferings and so forth, because of confusion due to holding to  the
meaning of the sutra sets that teach impermanence and so forth as  literally
acceptable to be the final mode of abidance.
{It seems that there is an assumption that someone on the  hearer’s  PoA  is
not a Middle Wayer because a Middle Wayer would not hold to the  meaning  of
the  sutra  sets  that  teach  impermanence,   suffering,   emptiness,   and
selflessness  etc.,  as  literally  acceptable  to  be  the  final  mode  of
abidance.
-Here, “impermanence” refers  to  subtle  impermanence,  and  “selflessness”
refers to subtle selflessness. Based on these considerations, we  would  say
that this statement in (7) is actually faulty.  There  is  some  awkwardness
there.}
-The 1 confusion about the nature  of  the  objects  of  abandonment  is  as
follows:
(8) That is confused about the nature of afflictions  because  of  confusion
due to not fully knowing
      (i) the adventitious entitiness of attachment and so forth and
      (ii) emptiness.
{Someone  who  is  definite  in  the  hearers’  lineage  on  the  PoA  takes
afflictions  as  his  principal  objects  of  abandonment.  Such  a   person
definitely knows that the afflictions, attachment,  etc.,  are  adventitious
in nature. If we consider that this person is of  definite  lineage  in  the
hearers’ lineage, then he does not know emptiness. We say  that  if  someone
is definite in the  hearers’  lineage,  he  is  pervaded  by  not  realizing
emptiness.}
- The 1 confusion about the coarse selflessness of phenomena is as follows:
(9)  That  is  confused  about  non-duality  that  is   the   emptiness   of
apprehendeds  and  apprehenders  being  different  substances   because   of
confusion due to not fully knowing that the characteristics of  apprehendeds
and apprehenders are empty of being different substances.
- The innate conception that adheres to that which is  imputed  as  a  being
who is confused about the abandoning of the 3 types  of  obscurations  as  a
truly existent utilizer is an object of  abandonment  of  the  uninterrupted
paths of the PoM because it is to be directly destroyed  by  them.  Most  of
these are indicated by  way  of  manifest  conceptions  but  know  that  the
principal objects of abandonment are the seeds of the conceptions.
- These “confusions” are not the conceptions that are  to  be  abandoned  by
the PoM.
-  These  9  divisions  of  conceptions  involve  these  various  types   of
confusion.
- There are 3 wheels of Dharma. For AMWS:
      - the 1st and 3rd wheels of Dharma require interpretation
      - the 2nd wheel of Dharma is divided into 2 types:
            -some sutras in the 2nd wheel require interpretation,
            -some are definitive.
- In AMWS, the extensive, medium, and brief Perfection of Wisdom sutras  are
considered to be  definitive  meaning  sutras,  whereas  the  Perfection  of
Wisdom Sutra that is  the  Heart  Sutra  is  said  to  be  interpretable  in
meaning, i.e. it requires interpretation.
- A definitive meaning sutra is  a  sutra  that  teaches  emptiness  and  is
literally acceptable. In other words, emptiness is taken  as  the  principal
explicit subject matter, and the sutra is literally acceptable.
- An interpretable meaning sutra is that observed to be either:
  (i) a sutra  that  takes  as  its  principal  explicit  subject  matter  a
conventional truth, or
 (ii) a sutra that is not suitable to be accepted literally.
- The Heart Sutra is an  interpretable  meaning  sutra  according  to  AMWS.
However, it does not  take  as  its  principal  explicit  subject  matter  a
conventional truth. It  is  a  sutra  that  is  not  suitable  to  be  taken
literally because in the Heart Sutra, phrases such as, “the five  aggregates
are empty of inherent existence.” In this system,  the  aggregates  are  not
empty  of  inherent  existence  therefore  it  is  necessary  to   affix   a
qualification in order for this statement to be true.  In  other  words,  we
have  to  say,  “The  five  aggregates  are  empty  of  inherent   existence
ultimately.”
-The sutra teaching the four noble truths in the 1st wheel of  Dharma  is  a
sutra that is literally acceptable, but  it  is  not  a  definitive  meaning
sutra. This is because it takes as its principal explicit subject  matter  a
conventional truth.
-There are 4 types of conceptions of apprehendeds and apprehenders that  are
to be abandoned, each of which is divided into 9 making a total of 36 to  be
abandoned by the PoM.
-Corresponding to these 36 objects of abandonment, there are 36 antidotes.
The  benefits  of  having  abandoned  the  objects  of  abandonment  by  the
antidotes
-The bodhisattva arya abiding  on  the  PoM  all  the  fulfillments  of  the
classes of excellent  qualities  of  realizations  of  the  3  vehicles  are
supported  upon  him,  since,  at  just   the   same   time   as   the   108
conceptualizations of apprehendeds and apprehenders that are objects  to  be
abandoned by the PoM are abandoned,  the  108  afflictions  included  within
those conceptions are abandoned.
-The afflictive obscurations that are objects to be  abandoned  by  the  PoM
are abandoned at the same time as when the knowledge obscurations (that  are
objects to be abandoned by the PoM) are abandoned.
- According to Haribhadra’s Great Commentary, it asserted that the  manifest
conceptions and the seeds that are knowledge obscurations are  abandoned  at
the same time, and even though the manifest knowledge  obscurations  do  not
occur on the 8th ground and  above,  there  is  no  contradiction  with  the
explanation in that way.
- Each of the 36 conceptualizations x 3 = 108 conceptualizations as there
are 3 realms -desire realm, form realm, and formless realm.
- The 108 afflictions are actually caused  by  the  108  conceptualizations.
When the 108  conceptualizations  are  abandoned,  correspondingly  the  108
afflictions are also abandoned.
- In general, the knowledge obscurations are the causes  of  the  afflictive
obscurations.
- For someone definite in the  Mahayana  lineage,  the  abandonment  of  the
afflictive obscurations and the abandonment of  the  knowledge  obscurations
are simultaneous. At the same time that the 108 knowledge  obscurations  are
abandoned, 108 afflictive obscurations are also abandoned.
- In general, a hearer or solitary realizer foe-destroyer has abandoned  all
afflictions.  When  someone  abandons  the  obscurations,  he  abandons  the
obscurations in his own continuum.
-A  hearer  foe-destroyer  does  not  need   to   abandon   the   afflictive
obscurations in a bodhisattva’s continuum! In general, we do say  that  foe-
destroyers have abandoned all the afflictions.
-The 108 afflictions  mentioned  here  are  related  to  the  16  afflictive
obscurations that are to be  abandoned  by  the  PoM  but  the  relationship
between them is not so explicit. It is definitely the  case  that  when  the
108 afflictions are abandoned,  the  16  afflictive  obscurations  are  also
abandoned.
- The 16 afflictive obscurations = 6 desire realm afflictions, 5 form  realm
afflictions, and 5 formless realm afflictions.
-These can be subdivided to end up with bigger numbers. Each of the  5  form
realm  afflictions  can  be  divided  into  4:  afflictions   of   the   1st
concentration, the 2nd concentration, the 3rd  concentration,  and  the  4th
concentration => making 20.
-Same goes for the 5 formless realm afflictions. As  there  are  4  formless
realm absorptions => making 20.
-Adding 6 desire realm  afflictions,  20  form  realm  afflictions,  and  20
formless realm afflictions => 46.
-These can be further divided to correlate with the  10  grounds  =>  making
460.
-We do not usually subdivide each  of  the  46  into  10  levels  like  this
because in the text, each of the 46 is  usually  subdivided  into  9  levels
(great of the great, etc.), making 414, instead of 460.
-However, it is reasonable to divide each of the 46 into 10,  because  there
are 10 uninterrupted paths on the PoM, and corresponding to  that,  you  can
talk about the 10 levels of afflictions.
-To  account  for  the  difference  between   the   number   of   afflictive
obscurations on the PoS and the PoM, we can compare the  actual  afflictions
that are abandoned on these two paths.
-The 6 desire realm afflictions that are to be abandoned by the PoM are:
         1. attachment
         2. anger
         3. pride
         4. ignorance
         5. view of the transitory collection
         6. view holding to an extreme.
-Comparing this list to the afflictive obscurations to be abandoned  by  the
PoS, we see that doubt is not present, and besides that, the view holding  a
bad view as supreme, the view holding bad ethics and  modes  of  conduct  as
supreme, and wrong view are also absent.
-  Because  the  108  knowledge  obscurations  cause  the   108   afflictive
obscurations, when the 108 knowledge obscurations  are  abandoned,  the  108
afflictive obscurations are also abandoned.
-When the 108 innate knowledge obscurations that are to be abandoned by  the
PoM are abandoned, the 108 innate afflictive obscurations  to  be  abandoned
by the PoM are also abandoned.
-When the 108 acquired knowledge obscurations that are to  be  abandoned  by
the PoS are abandoned, 108 acquired afflictive obscurations that are  to  be
abandoned by the PoS are also abandoned. There is no contradiction.
-In the context of the objects of abandonment  of  the  PoM,  when  the  108
conceptualizations are abandoned. At the same time the 108  afflictions  are
abandoned. This is definitely the case for someone definite in the  Mahayana
lineage.
Q&A: On p. 421, it  says  that  a  bodhisattva  on  the  PoA  can  have  the
experience of phenomena appearing like reflections in a mirror. How is  this
experience different from phenomena appearing like dreams  or  illusions  to
an 8th -ground bodhisattva on the occasion of subsequent attainment?
Geshe-la: The difference in the experiences of a bodhisattva on the PoA  and
a bodhisattva on the 8th ground is that a bodhisattva on  the  PoA  requires
coarse exertion to have this experience, whereas an 8th -grounder  does  not
require coarse exertion to have this experience of phenomena appearing  like
dreams or illusions on the occasion of subsequent attainment.

5.35  Having exhausted these infectious diseases,
            Like gaining relief after a long time,
            All the fulfillments of excellent qualities that accomplish
            The happiness of migrating beings in all ways,
5.36  Like rivers [converging] in the great ocean,
            Are supported in all ways upon
            The great bodhisattva who is
            Adorned by the supreme results.
-The subject here involves the great bodhisattva abiding on the  great-great
level of the PoM.
-This is the bodhisattva who is at the end of the continuum  of  a  sentient
being.
-This bodhisattva has not abandoned the small-small objects to be  abandoned
by the PoM. However, they do not exist in  his  continuum.  This  means  the
conceptions included in the small-small objects of abandonment  of  the  PoM
are exhausted. In reality, we say that  these  objects  of  abandonment  are
being abandoned. They have not been abandoned, but they are not present.
-The knowledge obscurations and afflictive obscurations are like  infectious
diseases. Those of us who are not free of these obscurations, who  have  not
entered the path, are like patients afflicted by these  infectious  diseases
in such a way that it seems that we are not able to recover.
-However, through familiarization with the antidotes for a long time, it  is
possible to become free from these obscurations. This is like being able  to
recover from an illness. In that way, one can relax and  rest  after  having
been afflicted by these infectious diseases for a long time.
-The knowledge obscurations and afflictive obscurations are like  infectious
diseases. For each of these two types of obscurations,  we  can  talk  about
their manifest forms and their seed forms.
-Afflictions are what cause our mind to become unpeaceful. As soon  as  they
manifest in our continuum, we become unhappy. The seeds have  the  potential
to give  rise  to  manifest  afflictions.  So  this  afflictive  obscuration
afflicts our mind by making our minds unpeaceful and are  the  main  factors
causing us to be unhappy.
-The knowledge obscurations are what  obscure  us  from  seeing  objects  of
knowledge. They have a different  role  than  the  afflictive  obscurations.
What make us unhappy are the afflictive obscurations.
-When we engage in meditation, it  is  important  to  meditate  on  suitable
objects. It is not always the case that the object we meditate on has to  be
pleasant. It is important to meditate on  the  faults  of  the  afflictions:
anger, pride, jealousy, etc.
-For ordinary beings, attachment is usually seen  as  something  that  gives
pleasure. As result of  this  perception,  we  do  not  see  the  faults  of
attachment. In fact, if you do not examine attachment closely you  will  not
see its faults.  So  in  order  to  see  its  faults,  it  is  important  to
investigate attachment properly.
-There are  various  kinds  of  attachment,  to  different  objects.  It  is
important to meditate and investigate, to see if attachment  gives  rise  to
happiness or suffering. If we do not investigate, we think  that  attachment
gives rise to pleasure, and we would not have the wish to be free  from  it.
But if we look carefully, we see that attachment gives  rise  to  suffering,
and if we see that, we give rise to mind  wishing  to  abandon  it.  Without
seeing the faults of attachment, one will actually embrace attachment.
-Likewise, we need to examine anger, pride, etc. to see  their  faults,  and
generate the desire to abandon them. Once we generate the desire to  abandon
them, we will put energy into trying to reduce these afflictions. If we  are
able to do this, then on that basis, we will have the ability  to  cultivate
other excellent qualities such  as  compassion,  the  wish  to  emerge  from
samsara, bodhicitta, etc. We need to proceed in this way,  otherwise,  there
no possibility to generate these excellent qualities.
-Attachment prevents us from seeing the faults  of  samsara.  Due  to  being
under the influence of attachment, we become blind to  the  shortcomings  of
cyclic existence. If we can reduce attachment, we will be able to  see  more
clearly the faults of samara. Attachment has the function  of  admiring  the
qualities of samsara. It focuses on the good things of cyclic existence.
-In the context of  the  achieving  of  engagement,  we  looked  at  how  to
cultivate the concentrations and formless absorptions,  e.g.  the  technique
for generating a concentration on the basis of coarseness and peace.
-To attain a certain level, we look at the faults of the  lower  level,  and
consider how the higher level is more peaceful. When we examine  the  faults
of the lower level, we look at how the mind of the lower  level  is  coarse,
how it is afflicted with attachment, etc. Among  the  various  factors  that
are coarse, attachment is the main one.
-In fact, it is said that through separating from attachment  to  the  lower
level, we are able to attain the higher level. So there  is  this  technique
of viewing the lower level as coarse and the higher level  as  peaceful.  So
it is important to separate from attachment to the lower level.
-If we have attachment to  certain  object,  how  do  we  get  rid  of  this
attachment? Do we work from the side of the object or from the side  of  the
attachment in our  continuum?  For  example,  one  may  have  attachment  to
someone’s body, so we can  contemplate  the  faults  of  the  person’s  body
-being unclean, etc. This is one way to reduce attachment,  but  ultimately,
the way of getting rid attachment is  to  work  on  the  attachment  in  our
continuum.
-The object is just a condition, so even if we get rid  of  it,  we  do  not
necessarily get rid of the attachment in our continuum. If we  want  to  get
rid of attachment, we mainly have to work on reducing the attachment in  our
continuum.
-Among the various afflictions, attachment is the most difficult to get  rid
of and reduce. In comparison, anger can be said to be easier to reduce  than
attachment. So we must make effort in trying to reduce  attachment,  because
without reducing attachment,  our  spiritual  progress  is  blocked.  Please
contemplate these points well.
-The bodhisattva abiding on the great of the great PoM who is beautified  by
those excellent qualities that will attain the culminated excellent  results
that are realizations and abandonments of  the  3  vehicles  -through  being
under the  influence  of  compassion,  upon  him  all  the  fulfillments  of
excellent qualities (of skill to generate the temporal and  final  happiness
of migrating beings  in  all  ways)  included  within  the  3  vehicles  are
supported by the aspect of being anticipated and coming  beforehand  in  all
ways.
-Since through familiarization with the PoM for many countless eons,  having
exhausted  these  4  classes  of  conceptualizations  of  apprehendeds   and
apprehenders that serve as infectious diseases due to acting  to  harm,  the
conducive conditions for completing the  excellent  qualities  are  complete
and hindrances due to adverse conditions are absent.
-For example, like a  patient  gradually  recovering  from  an  illness  and
gaining relief with joy after a long time. The  analogy  for  the  excellent
qualities naturally converging is like the four rivers converging  naturally
at the great ocean.
-Here we are talking about a bodhisattva at the end of the  continuum  of  a
sentient being. Under the influence of compassion, the  excellent  qualities
of a bodhisattva naturally converge in him. This is because the  bodhisattva
has familiarized with the PoM for many countless eons.
-As a  result,  the  4  types  of  conceptualizations  of  apprehendeds  and
apprehenders are gradually abandoned, so that when the  bodhisattva  arrives
at the end of the continuum of a sentient  being,  these  conceptualizations
are absent, and the various excellent qualities naturally converge  in  him.
In this way, the analogy of the rivers converging into the  great  ocean  is
used to describe this bodhisattva (the four rivers refers to the four  great
rivers in India: the Ganges, Yamuna, Brahmaputra, and Indus.)
Topic 7: UNINTERRUPTED PEAK APPLICATION
-After the PA of PoM, the uninterrupted  meditative  stabilization  will  be
explained since this very peak is the uninterrupted path of buddhahood.
-What is the  difference  between  the  PA  of  PoM  and  the  uninterrupted
meditative stabilization? They are:
   1) the PA of PoM  is  the  generality  and  the  uninterrupted  PA  is  a
      particularity of it
   2) on the occasion of the PA of PoM the  seeds  of  the  conceptions  are
      present, whereas at the time of the uninterrupted PA the seeds are not
      even slightly present.
-“uninterrupted meditative stabilization” means  that  it  is  a  meditative
stabilization that is without any interruptions. In other words, it is  free
from even the slightest obstacle.
    5.37   Through analogies made of the virtues of setting
             The beings of the billionfold world systems in  the  excellent
                realizations
             Of hearers and the rhinoceros-like
             And in the faultlessness of the bodhisattvas,
    5.38   By immense merit,
             That uninterrupted meditative stabilization,
             Is without interruption to buddhahood,
             The exalted knower of all aspects.
-The uninterrupted meditative stabilization at the end of the  continuum  of
a sentient being is the uninterrupted PA because  it  is  the  final  direct
cause of buddhahood, the nature of the EKAA.
-Analogy- if one were to set the beings of the billionfold world systems  in
the  states  of  hearers,  solitary  realizers,  and  the  faultlessness  of
bodhisattvas (the 1st bodhisattva ground), one would create  immense  merit.
- In comparison, the merit of the  resultant  buddhahood  is  even  greater.
From  this,  the  immense  merit  of  the  direct  cause  of  buddhahood  is
characterized. This means  that  if  the  merit  of  the  direct  result  is
immense, this implies that the merit of the direct cause  must  be  immense;
if the direct cause does not have immense merit, it cannot give  rise  to  a
direct result that has immense merit.
-According to the perfection vehicle, one needs to gather the  accumulations
for 3 countless great eons in order to attain buddhahood. This  time  period
starts from the time of having generated bodhicitta, not earlier than  that,
e.g. from the time of first listening to the Mahayana Dharma!
-Taking three countless great eons is actually the minimum time period.  One
can take up to one hundred countless great eons to attain buddhahood!  There
are cases of abiding for one hundred countless  great  eons  to  gather  the
accumulations to attain buddhahood.
-In  the  sutra  system,  when  we  say  that  one  needs  to   gather   the
accumulations of three countless great eons, this means one must  abide  for
the period of three countless great eons to gather the accumulations.
-A bodhisattva at the end of the continuum of a sentient being has  gathered
immense accumulations, because through being conjoined with  bodhicitta,  he
has gathered the accumulations for the period of 3 countless great eons.
-In tantra, one utilizes a very, very subtle  mind  i.e  the  mind  that  is
indivisible bliss and emptiness.
-The sutra presentation talks about  method  and  wisdom.  Tantra  has  this
feature of indivisible bliss and emptiness, so by  using  this  very  subtle
mind, one is able to gather the accumulations very quickly.
- We have to try to pacify the coarse states of mind  through  understanding
their faults, and to achieve subtler states of mind. This  can  involve  the
cultivation of meditative stabilization such as attaining calm  abiding  and
actual concentrations. There are subtler states of mind:  for  example,  the
mind of definite emergence, great compassion, and bodhicitta.
- As soon as one is able to generate renunciation, one  will  experience  an
unprecedented transformation of the mind. Through renunciation, one  attains
a certain degree of power over the afflictions.
-  Through  great  compassion,  one  has  even  greater   power   over   the
afflictions, and if one generates bodhicitta, one has even  greater  control
over the afflictions. In such a  way,  one  generates  subtler  and  subtler
states of mind.
-In the sutra system,  there  are  these  techniques  for  transforming  and
working with the mind. One needs to start by practicing what  is  taught  in
the sutra system. On that basis, one can practice tantra.  It  is  important
to understand that this is the procedure. If one does not  proceed  in  this
way, but immediately tries to practice tantra teachings,  such  as  carrying
attachment into the path, one may make mistakes.
- In tantra, a very subtle mind is utilized, and on  a  very  subtle  level,
there is no differentiation between male and female, and one does  not  rely
on the coarse body.  Therefore,  in  the  practice  of  tantra  one  is  not
influenced by attachment.
Q&A: In the sutra system, there is no exception to the need to abide  for  3
countless great eons to  gather  the  accumulations.  It  is  said  that  in
tantra, one does not need to abide for this  length  of  time  in  order  to
gather the accumulations of 3 countless great eons.
-Sutra and tantra  are  the  same  in  asserting  the  need  to  gather  the
accumulations of three countless great eons; in tantra, it is  said  you  do
not need to abide for 3 countless  great  eons  in  order  to  gather  those
accumulations.
Explanation of the objects of observation and aspects
What are the objects of observation of that uninterrupted  peak  application
and so forth like?
    5.39   The objects of observation of this are lacking the thing.
             The empowering is asserted to be mindfulness.
             The aspect is pacification.
             Regarding these, the propounders dispute continuously.
-The objects of  observation  of  the  uninterrupted  PA  are  all  illusory
phenomena lacking true existence because they are the bases for  eliminating
superimpositions of the uninterrupted PA.
-The empowering condition: the  Mahayana  generated  mind,  the  mindfulness
that is included within the path that is the application at the end  of  the
continuum on the 10th ground.
- The Mahayana generated mind is not a mindfulness. Mahayana generated  mind
is a main mind, whereas mindfulness is a mental factor.
- Mindfulness has the function of holding a previously  familiarized  object
of observation without forgetting it.
-The  Mahayana  generated  mind  is  the   empowering   condition   of   the
uninterrupted PA because the Mahayana generated mind is the  condition  that
is self-powered with respect to generating the uninterrupted  PA.  We  would
say that the Mahayana generated  mind  and  a  mindfulness  are  similar  in
function.
- The uninterrupted PA peak application bears the aspect of pacification  by
nature, because it directly realizes all phenomena as being  empty  of  true
existence. The aspect is basically “pacification by nature.”
- The objects of observation and aspect of the  uninterrupted  PA  are  very
profound because regarding these objects  of  observation  and  aspect,  the
propounders of the two truths as contradictory pass  from  one  to  another,
and dispute.
-Are the two truths contradictory?  Yes,  they  are,  because  there  is  no
common locus between the two truths-there is  nothing  that  you  can  posit
that is both a conventional truth and an ultimate truth. Therefore we  would
say that the two truths are contradictory.
-In general, the presentation of conventional truth and the presentation  of
ultimate truth are not contradictory. In other words, when the  presentation
of conventional truths is feasible, the presentation of ultimate  truths  is
also feasible.  Likewise,  when  the  presentation  of  ultimate  truths  is
feasible, the presentation of  conventional  truths  is  also  feasible.  In
fact, the presentations of the two truths are not contradictory.
-However, some people propound that the presentations of the two truths  are
contradictory, in that if the presentation of  one  of  the  two  truths  is
feasible, the presentation of the other truth is  not  feasible.  These  are
the people being referred to in  the  expression,  propounders  of  the  two
truths as contradictory.
- There are these propounders of the two truths as contradictory  who,  when
presenting conventional truth, are unable to posit ultimate truth,  or  when
positing ultimate truth, are unable to posit conventional  truth.  They  see
these presentations as contradictory.
-This reason given here basically says that  “the  propounders  of  the  two
truths as contradictory pass from one to  another,  and  dispute.”  This  is
actually  a  sign  that  the  objects  of  observation  and  aspect  of  the
uninterrupted PA are very profound, because if they were not very  profound,
there is no reason for people to dispute about these objects of  observation
and aspect.
-  Compounded  phenomena  are  the  observed  object  conditions   of   this
uninterrupted meditative stabilization, because all phenomena  are  observed
by it as lacking the thing that is true existence.
- Uncompounded phenomena are also the observed object conditions. Since  all
phenomena -compounded or uncompounded -are the  observed  object  conditions
of this uninterrupted meditative stabilization, why  does  it  just  mention
compounded phenomena?
-This is because there is greater doubt regarding whether or not  compounded
phenomena are truly  existent.  In  fact,  there  are  more  propounders  of
compounded phenomena as truly existent than those of uncompounded  phenomena
as truly existent.
-In order to understand  the  objects  of  observation  and  aspect  of  the
uninterrupted PA, one needs to understand how the two  truths  are  posited.
Without understanding how the two truths are posited, one will be unable  to
understand the objects of observation and aspect of the uninterrupted PA.

Q&A: On pp. 523-524, in the meditative stabilization of the loftily  looking
lion, there is  no  demarcation  consciousness  between  the  ascending  and
descending  process,  so  why  is  there  a   need   for   the   demarcation
consciousness between the ascending and descending  process  of  the  actual
leaping absorption?
Is there a difference between the absorption of cessation as the  alternated
property and the absorption of cessation as the basis of alternation?
Geshe-la: The reason why there is a need for the  demarcation  consciousness
between  the  ascending  and  descending  process  of  the  actual   leaping
absorption is because there is an alternated process.
- In the ascending process the absorption of  cessation  is  the  alternated
property.
- In the  descending  process  the  desire  realm  mind  is  the  alternated
property.
- Because of the leaping that is present in the actual leaping  absorptions,
there is a need to use the demarcation consciousness.
- In the long preparation, or the meditative stabilization  of  the  loftily
looking lion, there is no leaping, therefore there is no  need  to  use  the
demarcation consciousness.
-There  is  a  difference  between  the  absorption  of  cessation  as   the
alternated property and as a basis of alternation.
-When it  is  an  alternated  property,  it  is  inserted  between  the  1st
concentration and the 2nd concentration, etc.
- When the absorption of cessation is a basis  of  alternation,  it  is  not
inserted in this manner.
Q: In the ascending process of the actual leaping absorption, when one  goes
from the 1st concentration immediately to the absorption  of  cessation,  is
this considered leaping?
Geshe-la: Yes, it is considered leaping.
Q: The absorptions (the 4 concentrations and  4  formless  absorptions)  are
minds directly realizing emptiness,  and  since  no  conventional  phenomena
would appear to such minds, when a bodhisattva passes from one to  the  next
(e.g. from the 1st concentration to the absorption of  cessation),  does  he
need to come out of meditative equipoise on emptiness and  think,  “Now  I’m
going to enter the absorption of cessation,”  or  does  the  process  happen
automatically?
Geshe-la: A bodhisattva does not need to think like that. Prior to  entering
the leaping absorption, the bodhisattva sets their  motivation;  they  plan:
“After I enter the absorption, I will go from the 1st concentration  to  the
absorption of cessation, etc.” This is  done  before  entering  the  leaping
absorption and then they go from one absorption to the next while  remaining
in meditative equipoise.
Q: On p. 523, it says, “If one has not previously entered a  Hinayana  path,
this leaping absorption is attained on the 6th ground and above.” Does  this
mean that one can attain the leaping absorptions on the Hinayana path?
Geshe-la: This does not mean one can attain the leaping absorptions  on  the
Hinayana path. On the Hinayana path there is training in  the  dexterity  of
meditative stabilization by means of alternating meditations,  but  this  is
different  from  the  leaping  absorptions.  According  to   Jetsun   Chokyi
Gyaltsen’s General Meaning, the preparations to the leaping absorptions  are
attained on the 1st  and 2nd grounds, and  the  actual  leaping  absorptions
are attained from the 2nd ground until prior to attaining  the  8th  ground.
On  the  8th  ground  and  above,  there  is  no  need  to  cultivate  these
absorptions, because one has already completed the dexterity  in  meditative
stabilization, and if the leaping absorptions occur, they occur naturally.
Geshe-la: If someone has  previously  entered  the  Hinayana  path,  one  is
probably very dull in faculty. This person would  probably  not  attain  the
actual leaping absorption until the very end, i.e. on the 7th ground.
On dull-faculty and sharp-faculty bodhisattvas, we  are  not  talking  about
the sharp-faculty ones being intelligent and eloquent compared to the  dull-
faculty ones. “Sharp-faculty” means that their mental strength is great.
