Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/Personal notes/Personal notes- Peak Application PoM 8.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:11.726525
================================================================================


Topic 8 PERVERSE ACHIEVING THAT IS TO BE ELIMINATED INDICATED HERE
Eliminating wrong conceptions
- After having explained the  uninterrupted  meditative  stabilization,  the
wrong conceptions that are to be eliminated will be explained.
- Reason: For the sake of dispelling the qualm of  those  intelligent  ones,
who think, “Through first  eliminating  what  wrong  conceptions  will  that
meditative stabilization be generated?”
    5.40   Feasible objects of observation,
             Their entitiness definitely apprehended,
             The exalted wisdom that is the exalted knower of all aspects,
             The ultimate and the conventional,
    5.41   The application, the Three Jewels,
             Together with means, the realizations of the subduers,
             The errors as well as the path,
             The antidotes and the discordant classes,
    5.42   Characteristics and meditation:
             The wrong conceptions of the propounders
             Bearing the support of the exalted knower of all aspects
             Are asserted to be of sixteen types.

Identifying the wrong conceptions that are to be eliminated
-Those wrong conceptions of all propounders do not know the skill  in  means
of the divisions of the two truths of the bodhisattvas explained above,  are
not causes of  correct  repudiations  because  they  do  not  transcend  the
entitiness of doubt when they are well examined.
[The function of a correct repudiation: It is  generally  explained  that  a
correct consequence is able to counteract  a  one-pointed  wrong  conception
(i.e. a wrong conception  that  holds  to  one  point,  being  very  decided
without wavering), and to generate a  doubt.  Once  this  one-pointed  wrong
conception is  counteracted  by  a  correct  consequence,  then  the  person
generates a doubt. A correct repudiation then counteracts that doubt.]
-These wrong conceptions are not causes of correct repudiations  means  they
are not causes of counteracting doubts.
-This is because these wrong conceptions lack  the  function  of  a  correct
repudiation, i.e. they lack the function of being able to counteract a  one-
pointed wrong conception and a doubt. Thus do not transcend  the  nature  of
doubt when they are well examined.
-In brief, these wrong conceptions  of  the  propounders  are  not  able  to
counteract wrong conceptions, and of  course  are  not  able  to  counteract
doubts. Due to not able to counteract wrong conceptions, therefore they  are
also not able to counteract doubts.
[Basically, there are these propounders who, if  they  present  conventional
truths, are not able to posit ultimate  truths,  and  vice  versa,  if  they
present ultimate truths, they cannot posit  conventional  truths.  In  other
words, they hold that the two truths are contradictory, in  the  sense  that
the presentations of the two truths are contradictory.]
-As a result of this wrong understanding, there are  16  wrong  conceptions.
Therefore, there are these disputes. These  16  wrong  conceptions  are  not
causes of correct repudiations because they do not transcend the  nature  of
doubt when they are well examined.
The subject-compounded and uncompounded phenomena -
- The wrong conception with respect to the  objects  of  observation  is  as
follows:
(1) It follows that the objects of observation of the uPA and the  EKAA  are
not feasible because compounded and  uncompounded  phenomena  are  empty  of
true existence.
-According to our system, the objects of observation of  the  uPA  and  EKAA
are all compounded and uncompounded phenomena.
The propounders have wrong  conceptions  with  respect  to  the  objects  of
observation.  They  say  compounded  and  uncompounded  phenomena  are   not
feasible  as  observed  object  conditions,  there  are   just   these   two
possibilities:
(1) because they do not exist, or
(2) because they do not exist ultimately
-Our system (AMWS), we refute that all phenomena are  established  from  the
side of the objects’ mode of subsistence without being posited  through  the
force of appearing to an awareness. We also assert that  all  phenomena  are
established as observed object conditions.
-According to these propounders of wrong conceptions:
 (i) if one has refuted that all phenomenon are established  from  the  side
of the objects’ mode of subsistence without being posited through the  force
of appearing to an awareness, one also refutes that phenomena  are  observed
object conditions, and
 (ii) if one claims that  phenomena  are  observed  object  conditions,  one
cannot refute that they are established from the side of the  objects’  mode
of subsistence without being posited through the force of  appearing  to  an
awareness.
According to them, the presentations of the two  truths  are  contradictory.
When conventional truths are presented, they are truly existent.  They  hold
that the two truths  are  contradictory,  and  as  a  result,  they  possess
different kinds of wrong conceptions. To these propounders:
- if one has refuted true existence, the compounded and  so  forth  are  not
feasible as observed object conditions.
-  if  the  compounded  and  so  forth  are  feasible  as  observed   object
conditions, phenomena are not empty of true existence i.e.  phenomena  exist
truly.
-  the  presentations  of  the  two  truths  are   contradictory   i.e.   if
conventional truths are posited, then ultimate  truths  cannot  be  posited,
and if ultimate truths are  posited,  then  conventional  truths  cannot  be
posited.
- if the consequence is:
 - It follows that the objects of observation of the uPA and  EKAA  are  not
feasible because  compounded  and  non-compounded  phenomena  do  not  exist
ultimately => we say ‘No pervasion’.
- It follows that the objects of observation of the uPA  and  EKAA  are  not
feasible because compounded and non-compounded phenomena do not exist =>  we
say ‘Reason not established’.
(2) It follows that the aspect in which the  entitiness  of  the  object  of
observation is definitely apprehended as being  free  from  elaborations  is
infeasible,  because  all  phenomena  lack  nature  in  all  ways   =>   the
sign/reason is not established.
- According to AMWS, phenomena exist by way of their  own  character,  exist
from their own side, and do not lack nature.
- If “ultimate” were affixed, “because all phenomena lack nature  ultimately
in all ways => no pervasion because according to our system  this  is  true:
all phenomena lack nature ultimately.
-“No pervasion”  in  the  context  of  this  syllogism  means  that  if  all
phenomena lack nature ultimately in all ways, there is no pervasion that  it
follows  that  the  aspect  in  which  the  entitiness  of  the  object   of
observation is definitely apprehended as being  free  from  elaborations  is
infeasible.
- if someone says:
      (i)   It follows as being that ultimately => Why
      (ii)  It follows as being that conventionally because  of  being  that
ultimately => reason not established
      (iii) It follows as being that conventionally, because of  being  that
conventionally => no pervasion
[In debate, when you are given a predicate: you can either say, “Accept”  or
“Why?” When you are given a predicate, if  you  don’t  want  to  accept  the
answer, you say “Why?”]
The 1 wrong conception with respect to the result
- (3) It follows that the result, the exalted wisdom that is  the  EKAA,  is
infeasible, due to things and non-things not being observed. =>  Reason  not
established.
- if the qualification “ultimately” is added => No pervasion.
The 2 wrong conceptions with respect to the two truths
- (4-5) It follows that  forms  and  so  forth  existing  conventionally  is
infeasible, due to  the  entitiness  of  thusness,  the  emptiness  of  true
existence.=> No pervasion.
- if “Why” => Even if forms and so  forth  do  not  exist  ultimately,  they
exist conventionally.
- “It follows that ultimate  truth  is  infeasible,  due  to  thusness,  the
emptiness of true existence of  all  phenomena”  =>  No  pervasion.  If  all
phenomena are empty of true existence, it  does  not  follow  that  ultimate
truth is infeasible.
- The 1 wrong conception with respect to the entity of conduct
(6) It follows that the application that is a  union  of  calm  abiding  and
special insight is infeasible, due to generosity  and  so  forth  not  being
observed.
The 3 wrong conceptions with  respect  to  going  for  refuge  that  is  the
support of conduct
(7) It follows that the Buddha Jewel is infeasible, due to  there  being  no
object to be realized that expands the awareness with respect to objects  of
knowledge.
(8) It follows that the Dharma Jewel is infeasible,  due  to  all  phenomena
just being merely imputed in name.
(9) It follows that the Sangha Jewel is infeasible, due to  the  observation
of forms and so forth, the bases for the imputed “Sangha,” being stopped.
The wrong conception with respect to the attribute of conduct
(10) It follows that skill in means is infeasible, due to generosity and  so
forth that are conjoined with not conceiving the  three  circles  not  being
observed.
The wrong conception with respect to clear realizations
(11)  It  follows  that  the  clear  realizations  of  the  tathagatas   are
infeasible, due to the realization of entities of  the  things,  non-things,
and both that are to be realized being stopped.
The wrong conception with respect to objects of abandonment
(12) It follows that the four  erroneous  conceptions  regarding  permanence
and so forth of the aggregates are  infeasible,  due  to  the  non-erroneous
conceptions regarding impermanence and so forth,  that  purify  elaborations
being infeasible. Here also the sign is not established.
The wrong conception with respect to the entity of the path
(13) It  follows  that  the  entity  of  the  path  is  infeasible,  due  to
enlightenment,  the  result  of  meditating  upon  the   path,   not   being
actualized.
The wrong conception with  respect  to  the  divisions  of  the  objects  of
abandonment and the antidotes
(14) It follows that the divisions of discordant classes and  antidotes  are
infeasible, due to the objects  to  be  discarded  and  the  objects  to  be
adopted not existing.
The wrong conception with respect to the divisions  of  the  characteristics
of phenomena
(15) It follows that the specific and general characteristics  of  phenomena
are infeasible, due to the lack of the property-possessors  that  are  bases
of characterization.
The wrong conception with respect to meditating upon  specific  and  general
characteristics
(16)  It  follows  that   meditation   upon   the   specific   and   general
characteristics of phenomena is infeasible,  due  to  specific  and  general
characteristics that are to be meditated upon being infeasible.
Instructions on generating the uninterrupted peak application  after  having
eliminated them
- One must have abandoned the 16 wrong conceptions in order to generate  the
uPA as they hinder the attainment of the excellent  quality  of  realization
of uPA.
-Through the process of abandoning many types of discordant classes, one  is
able to attain the uPA.
-The conception of true existence as the  main  hindrance.  There  are  also
many other types of hindrances, or wrong conceptions, some very  coarse  and
some very subtle.
-  An  example  of  a  wrong  conception:  the  conception  of   permanence.
Intellectually, we understand that death is definite but the time  of  death
is uncertain. However, deep in our hearts we have the  strong  wish  not  to
die. Because of this very strong desire not to die, there is a hindrance  to
our contemplating death and impermanence.
-Because we  do  not  like  to  think  about  death  and  impermanence,  our
conception of permanence is very forceful,  and  this  is  a  condition  for
wasting our time. This is one of the biggest obstacles that we have.  If  we
are not mindful of death and impermanence, there is no way  for  our  Dharma
practice to be of fine quality
-The  bodhisattvas  desiring  virtue  (fulfillment  of  one’s  and   others’
welfares) having been preceded by skill in the divisions of the two  truths,
should generate the uninterrupted meditative stabilization.
- Having perfectly generated in all ways the non-erroneous ascertainment  of
the objects of observation and aspects of the uPA and the EKAA that  precede
dispelling the wrong conceptions, through skill in means that is based  upon
the both truths, the objects of the two accumulations, they should  generate
the uninterrupted meditative stabilization.
-As a branch of completing the accumulations of merit  in  one’s  continuum,
it is appropriate to eliminate the wrong conceptions that apprehend the  two
truths as contradictory in others’  continua.  However,  mainly  one  should
extinguish the  manifest  conceptions  as  well  as  their  seeds  in  one’s
continuum.  [A  person  can  eliminate  the  wrong  conceptions  in  others’
continua by means of advising/teaching others, one causes others to  realize
the wrong conceptions in their continua so that they  can  abandon/eliminate
them.  One  cannot  directly  remove  the  wrong  conceptions  from  others’
continua.]
(i) The conception of the two truths as contradictory posited by  tenets  is
exhaustively abandoned on the PoS. [This refers to the  acquired  conception
of the two truths as contradictory]
(ii)  The  manifest   conception   of   true   existence   that   apprehends
contradiction with the conventional operates up to and including  until  the
7th ground, and its seeds are exhaustively abandoned by the uPA.
-In summary, suppose one
(i) refutes that the generation of a sprout by a seed  is  established  from
the side of the objects’ uncommon mode of subsistence without being  posited
through the force of appearing to an awareness, and
(ii) accepts that a seed produces a sprout from its own side
those propounders, having seen those two  as  contradictory,  dispute  that
they are infeasible.
-The ‘manifest conception’ refers to the manifest innate conception of  true
existence that apprehends contradiction  with  the  conventional.  They  are
exhaustively abandoned by the uPA at the end of the continuum of a  sentient
being.
-The innate conception of true existence does  exist  on  8th,  9th  &  10th
grounds but there is no manifest innate conception of true existence.
- On the  8th, 9th & 10th grounds there are conceptions, and  if  there  are
conceptions, there  are  appearances  of  true  existence.  On  the  3  pure
grounds, the conceptions of true existence  do  not  exist  manifestly,  but
there are conceptions of true existence.
- A conception during subsequent attainment of the  3  pure  grounds,  there
are appearances of true existence but at  the  same  time  phenomena  appear
like illusions, empty of true existence.
- There are conceptions of true existence, but they do not exist  manifestly
because if they exist manifestly, it is not possible  for  whatever  appears
to appear as illusions.
There are 3 types of 10th -ground bodhisattvas:
1. A 10th -grounder who will attain enlightenment in the next life. He  does
   not attain enlightenment in that life, but in the very next life.
2. The “last existence” 10th-grounder. In that same life  of  attaining  the
   10th ground, the bodhisattva will attain enlightenment.
3. A 10th -grounder at the end  of  the  continuum.  This  bodhisattva  will
   attain enlightenment in the next instant.
-Bodhisattvas do not have to die to attain  enlightenment.  The  bodhisattva
attains the uninterrupted path at the end of the continuum, and  from  there
passes to buddhahood.
-For the 1st type of bodhisattva who needs to take one more  rebirth  before
attaining enlightenment; this is “a bodhisattva who  is  obstructed  by  one
rebirth. It is not the case of taking rebirth through  the  force  of  karma
and afflictions, but rather through  the  force  of  prayers  and  roots  of
virtue. In that life, he does not attain buddhahood,  but  has  to  kind  of
die, not like ordinary beings, in order to take next  rebirth  in  which  he
attains buddhahood.
-How many years will this bodhisattva live before taking his  last  rebirth?
It is difficult to say definitively how long.
-  In  the  retinue  of  the  complete  enjoyment  body,  there   are   arya
bodhisattvas. So this bodhisattva probably has  the  support  of  Akanishta,
meaning he has taken re-birth in Akanishta pure land and  has  an  emanation
in the desire realm. He can take the form of  a  layperson  or  an  ordained
person. Since this emanation is in the desire realm,  he  must  display  the
behavior of someone of the desire realm, e.g. living up to 100  years.  This
emanation can be withdrawn from the desire realm, and be absorbed back  into
the emanator at  Akanishta.  For  example,  an  emanation  who  is  a  fully
ordained monk, although the emanation appears like a human being,  the  body
is actually of the nature of mind; it is a mental body. In  determining  the
lifespan of this bodhisattva, we would probably  use  the  lifespan  of  the
support of Akanishta; in that case, the bodhisattva has a  very,  very  long
lifespan.
- If a mind has the appearance of true existence,
     i) this mind does not have to be a conception of true existence
    ii) this mind does not have to strongly adhere to true existence
   iii) the conception of true existence does not have to exist  manifestly
        in the person’s continuum.
- A latency of the conception of true existence and  a  conception  of  true
existence that is not manifest are different.
- a latency  of  the  conception  of  true  existence  is  a  non-associated
compositional factor
- a conception of true existence that is not manifest is an consciousness.
-When the conception of true existence is manifestly present, there  is  not
the appearance of phenomena like illusions at all. But  this  conception  of
true existence that exists manifestly can weaken and eventually vanish.
-They  have  an  inversely  proportional  relationship—when  there  is   the
appearance of phenomena  like  illusions,  this  appearance  suppresses  the
conception of true existence i.e. the conception of true existence does  not
exist manifestly. Conversely, when the conception of true  existence  exists
manifestly, basically you cannot  have  the  appearance  of  phenomena  like
illusions.
- The appearances of true existence  are  the  results  of  the  small-small
knowledge obscurations that have not been abandoned on the 3 pure grounds.
- One difference between the  bodhisattvas  on  the  pure  grounds  and  the
buddhas is the appearance of true existence  for  the  bodhisattvas  on  the
pure grounds.
- Arguments arise in the 16 wrong conceptions is due to seeing  conventional
truth and ultimate truth as contradictory.
- Suppose one:
      -  (i)  refutes  that  the  generation  of  a  sprout  by  a  seed  is
established from the side of  the  objects’  uncommon  mode  of  subsistence
without being posited through the force  of  appearing  to  an  awareness  -
refers to ultimate truth
      -(ii) accepts that a seed produces  a  sprout  from  its  own  side  -
refers to conventional truth.
- Those propounders, having seen conventional truth and  ultimate  truth  as
contradictory and are infeasible, say if a seed produces a sprout  from  its
own side, it should be established from the side of  the  object’s  uncommon
mode of subsistence without being posited through the force of appearing  to
an awareness.
- Our system says actually these two points are not contradictory.
      - On the one hand, the generation  of  a  sprout  by  a  seed  is  not
established from the side of  the  object’s  uncommon  mode  of  subsistence
without being posited through the force of appearing to an awareness
      -On the other hand, a seed produces a sprout from its own side.
-So there is no contradiction since according to our system,  all  phenomena
exist from their own side.
- AMWS and CMWS assert that phenomena are merely imputed by  conception  but
they do not attach the  same  significance  to  the  word  “merely”  in  the
expression “phenomena are merely imputed by conception.”
- For CMWS, “merely”  eliminates  existence  from  the  object’s  own  side,
whereas for AMWS, “merely” eliminates true existence.
Q&A: The propounders see the two truths as  contradictory.  In  fact,  these
propounders are able to posit the two truths. The problem is that:
- if they refute that the generation of a seed is established from the  side
of the object’s uncommon mode of subsistence without being  posited  through
the force of appearing to an awareness, they  are  not  able  to  posit  the
generation of a sprout by a seed.
- if they accept that a seed produces a sprout, then they are  not  able  to
refute the generation of a sprout by a seed that  is  established  from  the
side of the object’s uncommon mode  of  subsistence  without  being  posited
through the force of appearing to an awareness.
- To the AMWS, existence from its own side and  existence  by  its  uncommon
mode of subsistence  have  the  same  meaning.  However,  existence  by  its
uncommon mode of subsistence without being  posited  through  the  force  of
appearing to an awareness does not exist, and existence from  its  own  side
without being posited through the force of appearing to  an  awareness  does
not exist.
- The example of the snake being  posited  upon  a  rope  is  related  to  a
specific setting: it is getting dark, and there is a  mottled  rope  in  the
corner. Someone may see this and become frightened, thinking,  “There  is  a
snake.” If the rope were in a brightly lit room, no one  would  think  there
was a snake. In general, we would not say that the mottled rope  is  posited
as a snake. However, we say that it is posited to be a snake  due  to  being
posited through the force of appearing to an awareness.
Q&A: The 4 concentrations and 4  formless  absorptions  within  the  leaping
absorptions are solely direct realizations of  emptiness.  Through  training
in the dexterity of meditative stabilization, the antidote becomes more  and
more powerful, so these antidotes are able to abandon more and  more  subtle
objects of abandonment. Without training  in  the  dexterity  of  meditative
stabilization, the antidotes are not powerful enough  to  abandon  the  very
subtle objects of abandonment. When we divide the  objects  of  abandonment,
we start from the great of the  great,  which  are  the  coarse  objects  of
abandonment. Moving up the list, we end  up  with  very  subtle  objects  of
abandonment. To abandon them, we need a very  subtle  mind,  a  very  subtle
antidote, which is more powerful than a very coarse antidote.
Q&A: The two levels of the small of the small PoM are called two  levels  of
the small of the small PoM. One that abandons the coarse great of the  great
objects of abandonment and one that abandons the subtle great of  the  great
objects  of  abandonment.  They  are   correlated   with   the   first   two
uninterrupted paths of the 10 grounds. There are  9  levels  of  objects  of
abandonment of the PoM, and 9 levels of the  path  of  meditation.  These  9
levels are correlated with the 10 grounds.
Q&A: In AMWS system, it is difficult to  say  definitively  whether  or  not
there is a union of calm abiding and special insight observing  impermanence
and selflessness before the PoP.  In  the  CMWS  there  is  a  yogic  direct
perceiver  observing  impermanence  and  coarse  selflessness   before   the
attainment of the arya paths. “Before the arya paths” means on the  PoA  and
PoP.

Summarizing the chapter
- Among the 4 applications, chapters 4 and 5 cover the AICA and PA.
-AICA is cultivated for the sake of gaining control over the aspects of  the
3EKs.
-PA is the control that is gained over the aspects of the 3EKs.
- The meaning of gaining  control  over  the  aspects  of  the  3EKs  is  as
follows:
      - the AICA cultivates the 173 aspects of the  3EKs  through  gathering
them together, which is done for the sake of gaining control over them,  and
when one attains the PA, one has gained control  over  the  173  aspects.  -
This means  that  there  is  no  need  for  one  to  cultivate  the  aspects
individually, one by one but rather one is able to gather  all  the  aspects
under one’s observation.
- Having heard this  explanation  regarding  how  one  gathers  the  aspects
together, how one does not need to cultivate them individually, and how  one
is able to cover them under one’s observation on the  occasion  of  the  PA,
the next application is the SA.
