Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/Personal notes/Personal notes- Uninterrupted Peak Application 7.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:11.636823
================================================================================


Topic 7  UNINTERRUPTED PEAK APPLICATION
- After having gone through the PA of the PoP, PA of  PoS  and  PA  of  PoM,
now we arrive at the topic: the uninterrupted peak application [UPA]
-After the PA of the PoM, the uninterrupted  meditative  stabilization  will
be explained, since this very peak is the uninterrupted path of  buddhahood.

- There are 2 differences between  the  PA  of  PoM  and  the  uninterrupted
meditative stabilization:
(1) The PA of the PoM is the generality and the UPA is  a  particularity  of
it
(2) On the occasion of the PA of  PoM  the  seeds  of  the  conceptions  are
present, whereas at the time of the UPA the  seeds  are  not  even  slightly
present.
-“uninterrupted meditative stabilization” means  that  it  is  a  meditative
stabilization that is without any interruptions. In other words, it is  free
from even the slightest obstacle.
5.37  Through analogies made of the virtues of setting
            The beings of the billionfold world  systems  in  the  excellent
realizations
            Of hearers and the rhinoceros-like
            And in the faultlessness of the bodhisattvas, {297}
5.38  By immense merit,
            That uninterrupted meditative stabilization,
            Is without interruption to buddhahood,
            The exalted knower of all aspects.
-The uninterrupted meditative stabilization at the end of the  continuum  of
a sentient being is the UPA because it is the final  direct  cause  that  is
without interruption to buddhahood, the nature of the EKAA.
- In brief, that uninterrupted meditative stabilization at the  end  of  the
continuum of a sentient being being the UPA because it is the  final  direct
cause of buddhahood.
- An analogy is used -if one were to  set  the  beings  of  the  billionfold
world systems  in  the  states  of  hearers,  solitary  realizers,  and  the
faultlessness of  bodhisattvas  (the  1st  bodhisattva  ground),  one  would
create immense merit. In comparison, the merit of the  resultant  buddhahood
is even greater. From this,  the  immense  merit  of  the  direct  cause  of
buddhahood is characterized.
-The immense merit of the direct  cause  is  characterized  by  the  immense
merit of the direct result.
-If the merit of the direct result is immense, this implies that  the  merit
of the direct cause must be immense. If  the  direct  cause  does  not  have
immense merit, it cannot give rise to  a  direct  result  that  has  immense
merit.
-The direct result of the UPA, buddhahood, is  of  more  merit,  since  that
which is the EKAA is buddhahood that is the direct result of the UPA.
- The uninterrupted meditative stabilization at the end of the continuum  of
a sentient being is called the uninterrupted meditative stabilization  here,
because it is the  final  application  that  will  attain  perfect  complete
buddhahood.
-  According  to  the  perfection  vehicle,  one   needs   to   gather   the
accumulations for 3 countless great eons  in  order  to  attain  buddhahood.
This time period starts from the time of having  generated  bodhicitta,  not
earlier than that, e.g. from the time of first  listening  to  the  Mahayana
Dharma!
- Saying that it takes 3 countless great eons is actually the  minimum  time
period. One can take up to 100 countless great eons to attain buddhahood!
-  In  the  sutra  system,  when  we  say  that  one  needs  to  gather  the
accumulations of 3 countless great eons, this means one must abide  for  the
period of 3 countless great eons to gather the accumulations.
- A bodhisattva at the  end  of  the  continuum  of  a  sentient  being  has
gathered  immense  accumulations,  because  through  being  conjoined   with
bodhicitta, he has gathered the accumulations for the period of 3  countless
great eons.

-Related to this point is tantra, which is known as being a quick path.  One
of the ingredients that make tantra a  quick  path  is  bodhicitta;  without
bodhicitta, it is not the quick path at all.
-In tantra, one utilizes a very, very subtle mind; we talk  about  the  mind
that is indivisible bliss and emptiness.  You  can  compare  this  with  the
sutra presentation, which talks about method and  wisdom.  Tantra  has  this
feature of indivisible bliss and emptiness, so by  using  this  very  subtle
mind, one is able to gather  the  accumulations  very  quickly.  You  should
examine whether you are able to practice tantra, based on this.

We are under the influence of very coarse states of mind. We sometimes  find
ourselves bound and blocked by coarse, unhappy  states  of  mind;  there  is
then no chance that we can utilize a very subtle mind! This  means  we  have
to start by working with coarse states of mind,  eliminating  their  faults;
in that way we can use more  and  more  subtle  states  of  mind,  and  will
eventually be able to use the subtle state of mind mentioned in  tantra.  As
much as we can pacify coarse states and bring about happier states of  mind,
that much will we be able to use subtler states of mind. We have to  try  to
pacify the coarse states of mind through understanding their faults, and  to
achieve subtler  states  of  mind.  This  can  involve  the  cultivation  of
meditative  stabilization  such  as  attaining  calm  abiding   and   actual
concentrations. There are subtler states of mind: for example, the  mind  of
definite emergence, great compassion, and bodhicitta.  As  soon  as  one  is
able  to  generate  renunciation,  one  will  experience  an   unprecedented
transformation of the mind. Through  renunciation,  one  attains  a  certain
degree of power over the afflictions.  Through  great  compassion,  one  has
even greater power over the afflictions, and if  one  generates  bodhicitta,
one has even greater control over  the  afflictions.  In  such  a  way,  one
generates subtler and subtler states of mind. In  the  sutra  system,  there
are these techniques for transforming and working with the mind.
      Based on these techniques, one can  go  on  to  practice  tantra.  One
needs to start by practicing what is taught in the  sutra  system.  On  that
basis, one can practice tantra. It is important to understand that  this  is
the procedure. If one does not proceed in this way,  but  immediately  tries
to practice tantra teachings, such as carrying  attachment  into  the  path,
one may make mistakes. The danger for misunderstanding  is  always  present,
especially if one misunderstands the meaning of  the  images,  such  as  the
father and mother deities embracing.  In  tantra,  a  very  subtle  mind  is
utilized, and on a very subtle level, there is  no  differentiation  between
male and female, and one does not rely on the  coarse  body.  Therefore,  in
the practice of tantra one is not influenced by  attachment.  Bearing  these
points in mind, you must make sure not to make mistakes  in  your  practice.
You may have noticed that when His  Holiness  the  Dalai  Lama  confers  the
Kalachakra  initiation,  many  people  come,  and  before   conferring   the
initiation His Holiness always gives teachings on, e.g.  the  Guide  to  the
Bodhisattva’s Way of Life, Lam Rim, or lo jong. There is great  significance
in this.

Questions and answers

Student: In the sutra teachings, we often need to have faith that cannot  be
established for a Westerner, e.g. scriptural authority, which is  not  valid
proof for many  Westerners.  However,  in  tantra,  there  are  explanations
closer to the explanations in physics, etc., and  it  is  possible  to  have
meditative experiences in tantra that bring about  greater  faith.  However,
there is a prohibition  in  relation  to  practicing  tantra,  so  this  can
prevent us from gaining greater conviction in the Dharma. What  does  Geshe-
la think about this?
Geshe-la: There are also some Tibetans who feel this  way.  The  way  things
are presented in the sutra system may  not  agree  with  the  mentality  and
dispositions of everyone. For this reason, it  is  important  to  understand
the essential meaning and  adapt  the  presentation  to  the  needs  of  the
audience.

Student: In relation to gathering the  accumulations  over  three  countless
great eons, are we talking about the measure of the merit, rather  than  the
actual time period? For example, one can create actions that  accumulate  an
immense amount of merit in a small amount of time.
Geshe-la: In the sutra system, we would say that there is  no  exception  to
this  need  to  abide  for  three  countless  great  eons  to   gather   the
accumulations. It is said that in tantra, one does not  need  to  abide  for
this length of time in order to gather the accumulations of three  countless
great eons. Sutra and tantra are the same in asserting the  need  to  gather
the accumulations of three countless great eons; in tantra, it is  said  you
do not need to abide for three countless  great  eons  in  order  to  gather
those accumulations.

Student: I have a doubt about  attachment.  Although  we  understand  it  is
necessary to abandon attachment, in practice it is difficult.  We  may  know
that a certain  object  may  not  bring  satisfaction,  but  we  deeply,  or
innately, believe that we have to find a better object of  attachment.  What
do we do about this?
Geshe-la: Indeed we have this tendency to search for different objects  with
which to achieve happiness. It is not sufficient to  simply  understand  the
faults of attachment, and how the object of attachment is not able to  bring
satisfaction. We need to think about this again and  again.  Merely  through
understanding that intellectually will not prevent us  from  expecting  that
there is an object that will bring us satisfaction. It is very important  to
contemplate faults of attachment again and again, but this must be  done  in
a moderate manner, otherwise we may fall into extremes, and  overdo  it.  It
must be done moderately and gently.

Student: In general (related to  the  earlier  question  about  accumulating
merit for three countless  great  eons),  it  is  said  that  there  are  no
exceptions, but in particular there seem  to  be  exceptions.  In  lam  rim,
there is the story of someone  (Sadaprarudita)  who  attained  enlightenment
more quickly through the practice of guru devotion  (some  say  he  attained
enlightenment in seven lifetimes, some say in seven  eons  less  than  three
countless eons).
Geshe-la: If he attained enlightenment in seven  lives  [through  the  sutra
system], then there is  not  need  to  practice  tantra!  Or  maybe  he  was
practicing tantra? Why is there the need  to  gather  the  accumulations  of
three countless great eons?  In  fact,  we  have  been  gathering  knowledge
obscurations and afflictive obscurations for many countless  great  eons,  a
period that is longer than three countless great eons, and even now  we  are
continuously accumulating such latencies and seeds. There is thus  the  need
to gather three countless great eons of merit to counter these.

Student: In relation to the passage discussed today, knowledge  obscurations
are likened to infectious  diseases.  Does  this  mean  we  can  spread  our
knowledge obscurations and afflictive obscurations like diseases?
Geshe-la: When you  have  attachment,  although  you  cannot  transfer  your
attachment to someone else, your having attachment can cause someone  else’s
attachment to increase. Likewise, when you are angry, you can  cause  others
to become angry.

Student: When one is  searching  for  an  object  of  attachment,  the  main
motivation is to counteract loneliness, not love for another person. If  one
were to meditate from the  beginning  on  the  shortcomings  of  attachment,
there would be fewer relationships,  fewer  families,  and  fewer  children.
What is the correct way to enter into relationship?
Geshe-la: If we contemplate the faults of attachment, there  will  be  fewer
families and children,  but  bodhisattvas  can  emanate  many  thousands  of
children! Even in relationships, we can see that  the  conflicts  between  a
husband and wife are due to attachment. But in response  to  your  question,
in practice, there is no beginner who, through contemplating the  faults  of
attachment, decides that there is no point in getting into a relationship.

Student: Is this because such a person is not able to overcome attachment?
Geshe-la: What I am saying is that it depends  on  the  individual.  If  you
just consider this present life, if a person who is completely  new  to  the
Dharma hears about the faults  of  attachment,  it  is  unlikely  that  this
person will not enter into a relationship. On the other  hand,  someone  who
has trained and has better understanding may enter into a  relationship  and
have  children  without  experiencing  complications.  You  talk  about  how
contemplating  attachment  can  prevent  one  from  having   children,   but
attachment can also cause one to not have children! One  may  have  a  child
and think, “This is very difficult,” etc., and then decide not to have  more
children, and this  is  due  to  attachment.  There  are  various  forms  of
attachment, such as attachment to sex. In this particluar case, the form  of
attachment did not prevent the person from not wanting to have children.


                                   ] END ]

