Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/Personal notes/Personal notes- Appln in Complete Aspects - knower of bases.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:11.659464
================================================================================


The Application in Complete Aspects – knower of based
Definition: A bodhisattva’s yoga conjoined with  a  wisdom  cultivating  the
aspects of the three exalted knowers through gathering them together.
Boundary: exists from the Mahayana path of accumulation through the  end  of
the continuum of a sentient being.

Qualm: What is the difference between  the  three  exalted  knowers  of  all
(3EKs) and the clear complete realization of all aspects [also refer  to  as
application in complete aspects (AICA)]?
Someone says: The 3EKs individually  ascertain  the  objects  that  are  the
aspects by way of the aspects that have been explained, whereas the AICA  is
an object-possessor of all aspects without exception.
Another person says: The  3EKs  are  presented  as  being  fully  qualified,
whereas the AICA is an applicator.
Another  person  says:  The  AICA  is  distinguished  by  the  positing   of
discordant classes and antidotal classes, whereas the  3EKs,  due  to  being
the very aspect of pacification by nature, are not like that.
Our system: All these are not correct.
- In these 4 chapters, AICA and the 3EKs have:
  - i. dissimilar modes of indication by means of their objects
  -ii. dissimilar modes of description by means of entity and  by  means  of
function.
Thus there is no fault of repetition in  explaining  the  3EKs  in  the  1st
three chapters, and explaining them again here.
- The controlling  cause  and  effect  refers  to  the  AICA  and  the  peak
application (PA).
  - cause refers to the AICA which is cultivated for  the  sake  of  gaining
control over the aspects of the 3EKs
  - effect refers to PA which has gained control over these aspects.
- The stabilizing cause and effect refers to  serial  application  (SA)  and
instantaneous application (IA).
  - cause refers to SA  which  is  cultivated  for  the  sake  of  attaining
stability in the aspects of the 3EKs
  - effect refers to IA which has attained stability in the aspects  of  the
3EKs.
- An application has gained control over the aspects of the 3EKs means  that
one does not have to meditate on them one by one. One is able to  cover  all
the aspects under one’s observation.
- An application has gained stability in the aspects of the 3EKs means  that
when one quality, e.g. one uncontaminated quality, whether ripened  or  non-
ripened, is actualized, those concordant in type are also actualized.
- The 4th chapter contains an explanation of how to practice by way  of  the
application that gathers all the 173 aspects of the 3EKs.
- In the 1st three chapters, the aspects of the  3EKs  have  been  indicated
individually.
- In the 4th chapter they are explained in a single chapter.
- “Having individually indicated the aspects of the 3EKs in  the  1st  three
chapters” simply means that the aspects of the EKAA  are  indicated  in  the
1st chapter, those of the knower of paths in the 2nd chapter, and  those  of
the knower of bases in the 3rd chapter.  The aspects of the  3EKs  indicated
in the 1st three chapters do not refer  to  the  173  aspects  of  the  3EKs
indicated in the 4th chapter.
- According to our own system, the aspects of the 3EK are gathered  together
and indicated in the 4th chapter. The  aspects  of  each  of  the  3EKs  are
indicated by dividing the 173 aspects.
- The complete knowing of the 3EKs that are  objects  to  be  cultivated  in
one’s  continuum  by  means  of  individually   ascertaining   the   aspects
previously is explained to be the AICA by means  of  further  gathering  all
the 110 aspects of an EKAA, the 36 aspects of a KP, the 27 aspects of  a  KB
and all aspects without exception, whereby  the  modes  of  description  and
purposes are dissimilar.
- Both the aspects of the 3EKs indicated in the 1st three  chapters  and  in
the 4th chapter are to be  known  by  way  of  hearing,  contemplation,  and
meditation.
- The indication in the 1st  three  chapters  is  for  the  sake  of  making
completely known the uncommon self-entities and characteristics of the  3EKs

- The indication in this 4th chapter is for the sake of  making  known  that
one cultivates all the aspects of the knowers of all aspects, of paths,  and
of bases without exception through the application that is a union  of  calm
abiding and special insight. Further, the purpose for  cultivation  in  this
manner is for the sake of gaining control over these aspects.
- The aspects of the 3EKs are indicated in the 1st three  chapters  for  the
sake of cultivation after  having  understood  the  characteristics  of  the
3EKs.
- The aspects of the 3EKs three exalted knowers are  indicated  in  the  4th
chapter  for  the  sake  of  cultivation   after   having   understood   the
applications that act to  cultivate  them.  The  passages  for  hearing  and
contemplation are also passages for practice.
- The  explanation  of  the  3EKs  in  this  chapter  is  for  the  sake  of
cultivating the antidotes by having understood the  classifications  of  the
discordant classes and the antidotes
- The 3EKs  is  indicated  in  the  1st  three  chapters  for  the  sake  of
cultivation by having fully understood the 3EKs that  are  distinguished  by
having pacified some objects of abandonment.
- Special purpose: Having understood the classifications of  the  discordant
classes and the antidotes, one cultivates the 3EKs  by  means  of  gathering
the knowers of all aspects, of paths, and of bases through  the  application
that is a union of calm abiding and special  insight.  By  doing  this,  one
would be able to gain control over the cultivation of  the  aspects  of  the
3EKs.
- In order to abandon the discordant classes, one needs to  have  the  union
of calm abiding and special insight. Examples of the discordant classes  are
laxity and excitement. In order to cultivate the 3EKs  well,  one  needs  to
have application that is a union of calm abiding and special insight. It  is
not the case that this union of calm abiding  and  special  insight  is  not
necessary to cultivate the  3EKs  that  were  explained  in  the  1st  three
chapters. Thus, we should not  think  that  the  passages  for  hearing  and
contemplation are different from the passages for cultivation, or  practice.

- Q&A: The  boundaries  for  the  AICA  begin  from  the  Mahayana  path  of
accumulation but since here we are talking about the application that  is  a
union of calm abiding and special insight,  then  shouldn’t  we  be  talking
about the path of preparation?
-On the basis of someone definite in the  Mahayana  lineage,  the  union  of
calm abiding and special insight observing emptiness exists  from  the  path
of preparation, but the union of calm abiding and special insight exists  on
the path of accumulation. The union of  calm  abiding  and  special  insight
even exists in persons who have not entered any path.

Someone says: The meaning of cultivating the aspects of the 3EKs is  through
gathering the 173 aspects into the three doors of liberation by way  of  the
application that is a union of calm  abiding  and  special  insight  is  the
meaning of cultivating the  aspects  of  the  3EKs  through  gathering  them
together.
There are 71 aspects that bear the aspect of being selfless and 102  aspects
of conventionalities.
- The three doors of liberation are:
(1) the emptiness door of  liberation  called  the  application  that  stops
abidance that realizes them to be empty of  true  existence  and  free  from
elaborations,
(2) the signlessness door of liberation  called  stopping  application  that
stops adherence to object-possessors as truly existent, and
(3) the wishlessness door of liberation that stops adherence to  results  as
truly existent
Therefore, cultivation through  gathering  them  into  the  three  doors  of
liberation by way of the application that is a union  of  calm  abiding  and
special insight in meditative equipoise is the meaning  of  cultivating  the
aspects of the 3EKs through gathering them together.
- Response: I do not think such an assertion can bear analysis. There are  2
possibilities:
1st possibility: one performs cultivation by having taken even  the  aspects
that  are  varieties  from  among  the  objects  of   knowledge,   such   as
impermanence and suffering, as the mode of apprehension  of  the  aspect  of
the AICA that is a union of calm abiding and special insight or
2nd possibility: one does not do so.
-  The 2nd possibility is unreasonable because:
    (i) it contradicts the proof by Arya Vimuktisena and  Acarya  Haribhadra
that, as the antidote to the conception of the aggregates as  permanent  and
so forth, one causes the aspects of impermanent aggregates and so  forth  to
dawn and cultivates them
   (ii) the divisions of the aspects which  are  173  that  have  been  made
would be meaningless
- As asserted by this scholar, if the meaning of cultivating the aspects  of
the 3EKs through gathering them together is  to  cultivate  the  aspects  by
gathering them into the three doors of liberation by way of the  application
that is a union of calm abiding  and  special  insight,  then  in  order  to
perform this cultivation, one must have attained a  union  of  calm  abiding
and special insight observing emptiness.
- Since one cultivates the  aspects  of  the  3EKs  through  gathering  them
together on the occasion of an AICA, and the boundaries for the  AICA  begin
from the Mahayana path of accumulation, this implies that there is  a  union
of calm  abiding  and  special  insight  observing  emptiness  even  on  the
Mahayana path of accumulation.
- The reason for this is that the boundaries of cultivation of  the  aspects
of the 3EKs through gathering them together are from the  Mahayana  path  of
accumulation through the end of the continuum of a sentient being.
- For the 1st possibility, if a bodhisattva causes all the  aspects  without
exception  to  dawn  and  cultivates  them  in  his  continuum  through  the
application of a  union  of  calm  abiding  and  special  insight,  this  is
unreasonable:
- (i) because it is inappropriate not to set down those divisions and
-(ii) because it is  inappropriate  for  Acarya  Haribhadra  to  refute  the
explanation that a knower  of  bases  includes  the  clear  realizations  of
solitary realizer aryas.
- If one cultivates the 173 aspects through gathering them  into  the  three
doors of liberation, this person says we just have  to  consider  the  three
doors of liberation, without considering the finer divisions.
Our system - the 173 aspects of the 3EKs are  cultivated  through  gathering
them together.
- There is also cultivation of the 173 aspects  individually.  For  example,
one  cultivates  the  aggregates  as  impermanent,  one  meditates  on   the
aggregates as suffering, as empty, as selfless, etc. When one  meditates  on
the  aggregates  as  impermanent,  one  cultivates  the  antidote   to   the
conception of the aggregates as permanent. Likewise, when one  meditates  on
the aggregates as suffering, one cultivates  the  antidote  that  apprehends
the aggregates as happiness.
- Without meditating individually on the aspects in this way,  there  is  no
way to attain a cultivation of the aspects through gathering them  together.

- According to our system, a knower of bases does include  the  realizations
of solitary realizer aryas, so it is inappropriate for Acarya Haribhadra  to
refute this explanation.
- For someone definite in Mahayana lineage, the attainment of the  union  of
calm abiding and special insight observing emptiness and the  attainment  of
the heat level of the path of preparation are simultaneous.
- The assertion that the aspects of the 3EKs are clearly presented  in  this
chapter but not clearly  presented  in  the  first  three  chapters  is  NOT
correct, because:
(i) in the 1st chapter the aspects that are  the  topics  of  the  principal
cause and result are clarified;
(ii) in the 2nd chapter the aspects of the three paths are clarified; and
(iii) in the 3rd chapter the aspects of a knower of bases are clarified.
- Therefore, the meaning of cultivation through  gathering  the  aspects  of
the 3EKs is, gathering all the aspects of the 3EKs in a practice that  is  a
yoga by way of a union of calm abiding and special insight.
Knower-aspect of the antidotal class explicitly indicated in this context
Definition: An exalted knower that is able to overcome its discordant
class.
Boundary: exists only on the buddha ground.
4.1         The instances that know the bases,
            Known as “aspects” are the characteristics.
            Because the exalted knowers of all are of three types,
            Those are asserted to be of three types.
- The instances of the exalted wisdom that know impermanence and  so  forth,
the bases included within the four noble truths, are  exalted  wisdoms  that
destroy the discordant classes by  means  of  the  dawning  of  the  aspects
opposite to the various discordant classes.
- Therefore, those known as “a bodhisattva’s exalted wisdoms  that,  through
the aspects of any of  the  3EKs  dawning  well,  cultivate  them”  are  the
antidotal characteristics in this context.
- Three types of knower-aspects:
   1. knower-aspects of the knower of bases (KB)
   2. knower-aspects of the knower of paths (KP)
   3. knower-aspects of the exalted knower of all aspects (EKAA)
- When we talk about there being 173 aspects, there are  173  object-aspects
and 173 knower-aspects.
- The 173  aspects  are  to  be  known  for  the  purpose  of  stopping  the
corresponding erroneous conceptions particularly  we  need  to  abandon  the
conception of permanence as this is a very great obstacle to practicing  the
Dharma. It serves as a great hindrance to realizing impermanence.  Therefore
this  conception  of  permanence  also  serves  as  a   hindrance   to   the
realizations of selflessness and of emptiness.
- The antidote directly damaging the seeds that are objects  of  abandonment
is the wisdom directly realizing emptiness. However, as the antidotes to  as
many superimpositions that have erroneously engaged the aspects of the  3EKs
as there are, one should cultivate  all  the  apprehender-aspects  that  are
opposite classes of the aspects of  the  objects  of  observation  of  those
superimpositions by means of a union of calm abiding and special insight.
- We still need to meditate on impermanence to counteract the conception  of
permanence.  If  we  do  not  counteract  this  conception,  we  will   have
hindrances to practicing the Dharma. So we need to cultivate the  individual
antidotes to the individual erroneous conceptions.
-  Our  own  system:  It  is  not  correct  to  say  that  the  aspects  are
characteristics because the  exalted  wisdoms  that  cultivate  the  aspects
through the aspects dawning well are the characteristics.
- Our system: If it is not correct to say that what  are  to  be  cultivated
through differentiation into the two (the  object-aspects  and  the  knower-
aspects) are discordant and separate. This is because, for example,  if  one
familiarizes with impermanence,  one  also  familiarizes  with  the  exalted
wisdom realizing impermanence and  if  one  familiarizes  with  the  exalted
wisdom realizing impermanence, one also familiarizes with impermanence.  The
two cannot be separated.
Q&A: When one newly attains the path of seeing, one is on the  uninterrupted
path. At that time, one is abandoning the  acquired  obscurations.  One  has
not  abandoned  the  acquired  obscurations.  The  direct   realization   of
impermanence and so forth when one attains the path of seeing is because  of
the  direct  realization  of  emptiness.  If  one  has   directly   realized
emptiness, there is no way that one does not  realize  the  selflessness  of
persons. When one newly attains the path  of  seeing,  one  has  the  direct
antidote to all the acquired obscurations that are to be  abandoned  by  the
path  of  seeing.  Due  to  this  direct  antidote,  one  directly  realizes
impermanence and so forth.
Q&A: On the path of accumulation and the path of preparation, a  bodhisattva
diligently cultivates the 16 aspects (impermanence  and  so  forth)  because
the afflictions are strong on those occasions. Upon attaining the  state  of
an arya, the afflictions are  weak,  so  there  is  no  need  to  diligently
cultivate the 16 aspects.
Although the 16 aspects are diligently cultivated by the bodhisattva on  the
paths of accumulation and preparation, they are not  the  principal  objects
of cultivation because the objects abandoned by  this  cultivation  are  not
the main object of abandonment.  If  one  takes  selflessness  as  the  main
object of cultivation, then the conception of self would be the main  object
of abandonment, but this is not the case for bodhisattvas.
If the bodhisattvas were to take the 16 aspects as  their  principal  object
of cultivation, there would be the danger of falling  into  the  extreme  of
peace.
The path bearing the aspects of  the  16  (impermanence  and  so  forth)  is
explicitly shown to be meditated on by  bodhisattvas  through  stopping  the
conception of true existence, on the occasion of the  path  of  preparation.
This implies that the paths of hearers and solitary realizers are  meditated
on without stopping the conception of true existence
The path of seeing that realizes the 16 aspects is to be passed through,  so
what is explicitly indicated is the path of seeing realizing  emptiness  and
what is implicitly  indicated  is  the  path  of  seeing  realizing  the  16
aspects. In the 3rd chapter, you must  say  that  the  knower  of  bases  is
mainly and explicitly indicated. The  path  of  seeing  that  is  explicitly
explained in the context of knower of bases is a path of seeing that is  not
a knower of  bases  is  explained  from  the  point  of  view  of  realizing
emptiness.
Q&A:  To  relate  “knower-aspect”  and  “object-aspect”  to  the  base,  the
superimposition, and the antidote.  For  example,  take  the  bases  as  the
aggregates. The aggregates are the bases upon which superimpositions are  to
be eliminated, e.g. the superimposition  of  permanence.  We  check  if  the
aggregates are permanent or impermanent. The mind realizing impermanence  is
able to eliminate the superimposition of the aggregates as permanent.
When we look at this mind realizing impermanence, it is the knower-aspect.
The mind realizes  impermanence,  and  impermanence  is  the  object-aspect.
[When we talk about the knower-aspect and object-aspect, we talk  about  the
knower-aspect and object-aspect of the antidote]. In this  context,  we  are
talking about the knower-aspect of the antidotal class. We do not posit  the
object-aspect corresponding to this antidotal class as the aggregates.
- There is a  purpose  for  extensively  explaining  the  divisions  of  the
aspects in this  chapter,  because  it  is  for  the  sake  of  knowing  the
antidotal characteristics.
The three  types  of  exalted  wisdoms  that  are  able  to  overcome  their
respective discordant classes are:
   1. knower-aspects of knower of bases
   2. knower-aspects of knower of paths, and
   3. knower-aspects of the exalted knower of all aspects.
The aspects of a knower of bases
4.2        Ranging from the aspect of non-existence through to
            The aspect of immovability,
            Those are explained as four with respect to each truth
            And as fifteen with respect to paths.
There are 27 aspects of a knower of bases that are composed of  the  aspects
of the four noble truths.
True sufferings: 4
True origins:      4
True cessations: 4
True paths:        15*
* 4 related to the exalted wisdom directly  realizing  the  emptiness  of  a
self of persons
  11 related to the exalted  wisdom  directly  realizing  the  emptiness  of
apprehenders and apprehendeds being different substances &  the  knowers  of
dualistic appearances as mistaken during subsequent attainment.
- There are 4 aspects with respect to each of the 1st three truths.  Through
these aspects, one should understand that the contemplations:
  a. on the drawbacks of  impermanent  aggregates  that  are  sufferings  of
cyclic existence and
  b. on the drawbacks of being tormented by the 3 types of sufferings and
the like are branches for training in the mentality of a being  of  middling
capacity.

Aspects of the first three truths
|Four aspects of true sufferings                                                |
|Sutra citation                                                |Aspect           |
|1. Not existing permanently                                   |Impermanence     |
|2. True sufferings are not produced ultimately                |Suffering        |
|3. Devoid of a self that is a different object                |Empty            |
|4. Not oppressed by a self that is its own entity             |Selfless         |
|Four aspects of true origins                                                   |
|1. Non-abiding in which craving, a cause of suffering does not|Cause            |
|exist ultimately;                                             |                 |
|2. Origins being like space ultimately                        |Origin           |
|3.The causes of sufferings not being expressible ultimately   |Strong production|
|through investigation and analysis                            |                 |
|4. Craving and feelings, the conditions for rebirth being     |Condition        |
|without name ultimately                                       |                 |
|Four aspects of true cessations                                                |
|1. Cessations being without progression ultimately            |Cessation        |
|2. The pacification of sufferings not being appropriated by   |Pacification     |
|conditions                                                    |                 |
|3. Sublime liberation not being exhaustible                   |Sublimity        |
|4. Cessations that is the dharmata free from stains being     |Definite         |
|without production                                            |emergence        |


- ‘Not oppressed by a self” it means that  it  is  selfless.  If  sufferings
were oppressed by a self, then a self  that  is  its  own  entity  would  be
established.
- The pacification of sufferings not being appropriated by  conditions  mean
the pacification of sufferings  is  forever.  If  it  were  appropriated  by
conditions, sometimes it would exist, and sometimes  not.  Here,  the  words
“not  being  appropriated  by  conditions”  mean  not  being   changed,   or
transformed,  by  conditions.  If  the  pacification  of   sufferings   were
appropriated by  conditions,  then  the  pacification  of  sufferings  could
become non-existent.
Syllogism
-The subject-the exalted wisdom of a  bodhisattva  directly  realizing  that
sufferings do not exist permanently-is an antidote  to  the  superimposition
that apprehends permanent sufferings (predicate), because it is  an  exalted
wisdom realizing that sufferings are impermanent (sign).
- The subject-the exalted wisdom of a bodhisattva  directly  realizing  that
true  sufferings  are  not  produced  ultimately-is  an  antidote   to   the
superimposition that apprehends sufferings as produced  ultimately,  because
it is an exalted wisdom realizing that  true  sufferings  are  not  produced
ultimately.
-The subject-the exalted wisdom of a  bodhisattva  directly  realizing  that
sufferings are devoid of a self that is a different  object-is  an  antidote
to the superimposition that apprehends sufferings  as  existing  as  a  self
that is a different object, because it is an exalted wisdom  realizing  that
sufferings are devoid of a self that is a different object.
-The subject-the exalted wisdom of a  bodhisattva  directly  realizing  that
craving, a cause of suffering, does not abide ultimately-is an  antidote  to
the superimposition that  apprehends  craving,  a  cause  of  suffering,  as
abiding ultimately, because it is an exalted wisdom realizing that  craving,
a cause of suffering, does not abide ultimately.
- The subject-the exalted wisdom of a bodhisattva  directly  realizing  that
cessations are without progression (or going) and  coming  ultimately-is  an
antidote to the superimposition that  apprehends  cessations  as  going  and
coming  ultimately,  because  it  is  an  exalted  wisdom   realizing   that
cessations are without going and coming ultimately.
- These points teach that  the  aspects  of  these  very  knowers  of  bases
indicated on the occasion of the 3rd chapter are cultivated by the  AICA  in
the continuum of a bodhisattva.

Aspects of true paths
- Three aspects of true paths of a knower of bases:
   1. The  uncontaminated  path  of  seeing  that  is  an  antidote  to  the
      afflictive obscurations
   2. The contaminated path of meditation that is an antidote to the  coarse
      knowledge obscurations
   3. The uncontaminated path of seeing that is an antidote  to  the  coarse
      knowledge obscurations
- The knowledge obscurations  of  the  solitary  realizers  are  the  coarse
knowledge obscurations.
- The main objects of abandonment  of  solitary  realizers  are  the  coarse
knowledge obscurations
- Because the paths of solitary realizers are included within the knower  of
bases, therefore the antidotes to the coarse knowledge obscurations are  the
contaminated path of meditation and the uncontaminated path of seeing.
- Coarse knowledge obscurations do not principally obstruct  the  attainment
of omniscience, but they abide in a class  that  principally  obstructs  the
attainment of omniscience.
- The antidotes to the coarse knowledge  obscurations  included  within  the
knower of bases because the solitary realizers’ paths  are  included  within
hearers’ paths, the reason being that hearers  and  solitary  realizers  are
similar from the point of  view  of  seeking  mere  liberation.  A  solitary
realizer’s path is included within the knower of bases; however it is not  a
knower of bases, and does not abide in a Hinayana class of realizations.
- In the Autonomy School,  the  word  “uncontaminated”  is  not  necessarily
associated  with  the  direct  realization  of  emptiness,  while   in   the
Consequence School, maybe there is such an  association.  In  this  context,
uncontaminated means non-conceptual, while contaminated means conceptual.
- Since the paths of solitary realizers are also included within the  knower
of all, it is necessary to  indicate  the  antidote  to  the  conception  of
apprehendeds as external objects [not to the conception of  apprehendeds  as
truly existent] which is a knowledge obscuration.
- Since all the aspects of a  knower  of  bases  are  to  be  cultivated  by
bodhisattvas, the true path  that  is  an  antidote  to  the  conception  of
apprehendeds as external objects,  which  is  a  knowledge  obscuration,  is
indicated in these true paths, and is explained here for the sake of  making
known that bodhisattvas generated it in their continua.
- However, for the sake of definitely  understanding  that  the  support  of
presentation of a knower of bases directly realizing that  apprehendeds  are
not external objects, solitary realizers are mentioned. It is  not  for  the
sake of indicating that it is only a clear realization in  the  continua  of
solitary realizers.
-  True paths have 15 aspects.
     - 4 related to the exalted wisdom directly realizing the  emptiness  of
a self of persons
    - 11 related to the exalted wisdom directly realizing the  emptiness  of
apprehenders and apprehendeds being different substances &  the  knowers  of
dualistic appearances as mistaken during subsequent attainment.
- The aspects of true paths are divided into three parts:
   1. Those related to the uncontaminated path of  seeing  (4  antidotes  to
      acquired afflictive obscurations)
   2. Those related to the contaminated path of meditation  (5  contaminated
      antidotes to innate coarse knowledge obscurations)
   3. Those related to the uncontaminated path of seeing  (6  uncontaminated
      antidotes to acquired coarse knowledge obscurations)
Uncontaminated  path  of  seeing  as  antidotes   to   acquired   afflictive
obscurations
- The 1st four aspects of true paths:
 1. lack of agent - the lack of a self of persons who is an agent
 2. lack of knower - the lack of a self of persons who is a knower
 3. lack of transferer - the lack of a self of persons who is  a  transferer
    from inferior states
 4. lack of subduing - the lack of a self of persons who  is  a  subduer  of
    afflictions
|The bodhisattva‘s path of seeing that  |…is the characteristic|
|directly realizes..                    |of..                  |
|lack of agent                          |path                  |
|lack of knower                         |suitability           |
|lack of transferer                     |achievement           |
|lack of subduing                       |deliverance           |


- The subject - the bodhisattva’s path of seeing that directly realizes  the
lack of a self of persons who is an agent is the  aspect  of  path  of  true
paths because it is a true path that proceeds to the city of nirvana.
- The subject - the bodhisattva’s path of seeing that directly realizes  the
lack of a self of persons who is a knower  of  objects-  is  the  aspect  of
suitability of true paths because it is a true path that places one  in  the
direct antidote to the afflictions.
- The subject- the bodhisattva’s path of seeing that directly  realizes  the
lack of a self of persons who is a transferer from inferior states-  is  the
aspect of achievement of true paths because it is a true path that  achieves
non-erroneously the mode of abidance  of  the  mind  [realize  the  mode  of
abidance of the mind].
- The subject- the bodhisattva’s path of seeing that directly  realizes  the
lack of a self of persons who is a subduer of afflictions- is the aspect  of
deliverance  of  true  paths  because  it  is  a  true  path  that   utterly
extinguishes suffering.
- Although the afflictive obscurations in the  continuum  of  a  bodhisattva
are abandoned by the wisdom realizing emptiness  rather  than  selflessness,
the above aspects have been explained for  the  sake  of  understanding  the
cultivation of the various divisions of the  classes  of  antidotes  to  the
afflictive obscurations that exist.
Contaminated paths of meditation as antidotes  to  innate  coarse  knowledge
obscurations
-The exalted wisdoms that are included  within  a  bodhisattva’s  knower  of
subsequent attainment of the path of meditation is the  exalted  wisdoms  of
subsequent attainment that are not direct  realizations,  because  they  are
contaminated paths of meditation which acts an  antidote  to  innate  coarse
knowledge obscurations.
- The subject- the exalted  wisdoms  realizing  that  apprehendeds  are  not
external objects  which  are  included  within  a  bodhisattva’s  knower  of
subsequent attainment of the path of meditation- are the  antidotes  to  the
coarse knowledge obscurations that adhere to external objects, because:
(a) they realize that:
1. forms and so forth not being external  objects  like  a  dream  bear  the
  characteristic  of  being  a  mere   appearance   that   is   a   complete
  transformation of latencies
2. forms and so forth, like an echo, bear  the  characteristic  of  external
  objects not having been produced [our system -  external  objects  do  not
  exist, they are not produced]
3. forms and so forth, like a  double  image,  bear  the  characteristic  of
  external objects not ceasing
4. forms and so forth, like a mirage, bear the  characteristic  of  external
  objects being pacified from the beginning
5.  forms  and  so  forth,  like  the  aspect  of  an  illusion,  bear   the
  characteristic of external objects having passed beyond sorrow by nature
(b) they realize through the force of  those  awarenesses  that,  while  the
objects do not exist, there are mere mistaken appearances as  objects.[While
external objects do not  exist,  there  are  mere  mistaken  appearances  as
external objects].
-Someone say: Why is this path of meditation realizing the lack of  external
objects indicated here?
- Our system responds: There is no  fault.  It  is  merely  explained  that,
although it is not familiarized with by means  of  diligent  familiarization
by a bodhisattva on the occasion of the path of  meditation,  that  path  is
produced in the continua of a bodhisattva  on  the  path  of  meditation  in
general.
- External objects do not exist from the beginning. It is not the case  that
they exist and then cease. They do not  cease  because  they  never  existed
from the beginning. Just as the double-image  does  not  exist  the  way  it
appears; it may appear like a man but there is no man.Likewise forms and  so
forth may appear as external objects but are not external objects.
Q&A: The point in which it is possible for a bodhisattva to  fall  from  the
Mahayana path is on the small level of the path of accumulation,  bodhicitta
can possibly degenerate. Once one has attained the  middling  level  of  the
Mahayana path of accumulation,  the  bodhicitta  cannot  degenerate  because
among the 22 types of bodhicitta, gold-like bodhicitta is attained  at  this
level. Gold is very  lasting,  and  not  easily  subject  to  change.  If  a
bodhisattva were to degenerate from the Mahayana path, he  would  definitely
enter either a  hearers’  or  solitary  realizers’  path,  because  although
bodhicitta has degenerated, renunciation has not degenerated.
Q&A: Great compassion – Kindness (or  mercy)  that,  through  observing  all
sentient beings who are tormented by suffering, its observed object,  wishes
them to be free from suffering. What is  important  in  this  definition  is
that it must have this qualification “tormented by  suffering.”  It  is  not
sufficient to say all sentient beings, because not all sentient  beings  are
tormented  by  suffering.  For  example,  Hinayana  foe-destroyers  are  not
tormented by suffering.
Immeasurable compassion and great compassion are different.
From  the  point  of  view  of  mind  support,  immeasurable  compassion  is
necessarily supported on an actual  concentration,  while  great  compassion
does not have to be.
From  the  point  of  view  of  observed  object,  the  observed  object  of
immeasurable compassion is immeasurable sentient beings, while the  observed
object of great compassion is all sentient  beings  [who  are  tormented  by
suffering]. The  expression  “all  sentient  beings”  seems  to  cover  more
sentient beings than “immeasurable sentient beings.”
Great compassion induces the “exceptional  resolve”(extraordinary  thought),
while immeasurable compassion  does  not  necessarily  do  so.  Immeasurable
compassion can be found in the continua of hearers and solitary realizers.
Within the prayer “May all sentient beings be free from  suffering  and  the
causes of suffering,” both great compassion and immeasurable compassion  are
indicated.
Q&A:  If  one  has  attained  the  great  level  of  the  Mahayana  path  of
accumulation, one is pervaded by having attained  an  actual  concentration.
One has the meditative stabilization called “the stream of Dharma,” and  can
receive teachings from the supreme  emanation  body.  For  example,  if  the
Buddha is giving teachings in Bodhgaya now,  such  a  bodhisattva  can  hear
those teachings directly, and can travel to various buddha lands to  receive
teachings from buddhas.
Uncontaminated antidotes to  the  knowledge  obscurations  as  antidotes  to
acquired coarse knowledge obscurations
- For the 3rd path of uncontaminated path of seeing, that is related to  the
explanation of the antidotes to the afflictive  obscurations  above,  the  6
are  respectively   the   individually   ascertaining   antidotes   to   the
conceptualizations of apprehendeds.
- In the 1st path, it looks at the antidotes to the conceptions  of  a  self
of persons. In the 3rd it looks at  the  antidotes  to  the  conceptions  of
external objects.
- The subject -the exalted wisdoms directly realizing that apprehendeds  are
not external objects in the continuum  of  a  bodhisattva  on  the  path  of
seeing  -abandon  the  knowledge  obscurations  that  are   conceptions   of
apprehendeds: having observed apprehendeds  as  external  objects,  adhering
to:
1. the thoroughly afflicted due to grasping and so forth
2. the completely pure due to faith and so forth
3. the latencies of afflictions
4. the elaborations that are divisions of external  objects,  forms  and  so
  forth
5. clinging that relishes the taste of one’s own  realization  that  adheres
  to them as external objects
6. that very realization that was attained but has fully degenerated,
respectively
(i)  because  they  directly  realize  (1)  the  lack  of  being  thoroughly
afflicted due to external objects, and
(ii)because they are aspects that newly directly realize:
  (2) the lack of being completely pure due to external objects,
  (3) the lack of being sullied by the latencies that  are  included  within
  external objects,
  (4) the lack of elaborations that are divisions of external objects,
  (5) the lack of clinging that relishes the taste  by  a  realization  that
  adheres to them as external objects,
  (6)  the  lack  of  external  objects,  immovable  apprehendeds  in  which
  realizations attained do not degenerate.
-because they [the exalted wisdoms] directly realize (1) the lack  of  being
thoroughly afflicted due to external objects means - one can  observe  forms
as external objects,  and  due  to  that  kind  of  observation,  thoroughly
afflicted phenomena can arise. As a result of realizing that  there  are  no
external objects, the thoroughly  afflicted  that  are  based  on  observing
forms as external objects do not arise.
- because they are aspects that newly  directly  realize  (2)  the  lack  of
being completely pure due to  external  objects  means  -  as  a  result  of
observing forms as external  objects,  completely  pure  phenomena  such  as
faith, can arise. If one realizes that there are no external objects,  faith
and so forth that arise due to observing forms as external objects will  not
arise.
- In fact, there are no external objects. Although there are  no  forms  and
so forth that are external objects, one can observe forms, and due to  their
appearing as external objects, one can  generate  grasping,  faith,  and  so
forth. Do the objects that are observed exist or not? The  external  objects
do not exist, but the forms and so forth that appear as external objects  do
exist.
- Q&A: When we speak of forms being empty of existing by way  of  their  own
character as the bases of adherence of conceptions apprehending  form,  this
emptiness of duality is actually established by way of a conceptual  exalted
wisdom refuting the existence of external objects. If one holds that a  form
is established by way of its own character as a basis of adherence  for  the
conception  apprehending  it,  then  one  apprehends  external  objects.  By
refuting this using a conceptual exalted  wisdom,  one  is  able  to  refute
external objects. If one were to apprehend a form as it  is  apprehended  by
the conception apprehending it, one would  apprehend  external  objects.  By
stopping or  negating  that  kind  of  apprehension,  one  refutes  external
objects.
- For (2) “the lack of being completely pure due to external objects”  -  as
Lama Tsongkhapa’s Golden Rosary says “the  lack  of  being  completely  pure
things due to external objects.” In other words, it means the  non-existence
of completely pure things due to external objects. You  need  to  understand
this to be saying that completely pure things that are external  objects  do
not exist.
For (5) - clinging that relishes the taste of  one’s  own  realization  that
adheres to them as external objects. Due to adherence to forms and so  forth
as external objects, there is the clinging that relishes the taste of  one’s
own realization.
For (6) ‘that very realization that was attained but has fully degenerated’-
 Lama Tsongkhapa’s Golden Rosary says this  means  that  one  has  initially
realized that forms, etc. do not exist ultimately, but later one  apprehends
them as existing ultimately, as a result of which  the  initial  realization
that was attained degenerates.
- For (6) ‘Immovable apprehendeds’ are the apprehendeds or  the  objects  of
apprehensions of the realizations. Because the realizations attained do  not
degenerate,  we  say  that  the  apprehendeds  of  these  realizations   are
immovable.
- The corresponding antidotes are: One realizes with direct cognition:
  -(5) the lack of clinging that relishes the taste by  a  realization  that
adheres to them as external objects, and
   -(6)the  lack  of  external  objects,  immovable  apprehendeds  in  which
realizations attained do not degenerate.
Due to the antidotes, there is no clinging that  relishes  the  taste  by  a
realization that adheres  to  forms,  etc.  as  external  objects,  and  one
realizes that there are no external objects that are immovable  apprehendeds
in which realizations attained do not degenerate.
-  “clinging  that  relishes  the  taste  by  a  realization…”-   here   the
realization is the agent of the clinging, whereas  “clinging  that  relishes
the taste of one’s own realization…” is the object of this clinging.
- “clinging that relishes the taste  of  one’s  own  realization…”  -   this
means that in  a  person’s  continuum,  there  are  realizations  of  forms,
sounds, smells, etc. The person clings to these realizations  of  forms  and
so forth; there is clinging that relishes the taste  of  these  realizations
in one’s continuum.
- “the lack of clinging that relishes the taste by a realization…” There  is
a realization that adheres  to  forms,  sounds,  odors,  etc.,  as  external
objects. Then there is the relishing of the taste by this  realization  i.e.
to say that there is the lack of clinging that relishes the taste by such  a
realization.
- the phrase “adhering to clinging that relishes  the  taste  of  one’s  own
realization that adheres to them as external objects”  should  be  taken  as
the reason. You should understand that due to adhering  to  forms,  etc.  as
external objects, there is clinging that relishes the  taste  of  one’s  own
realization.
- Similarly, the phrase “the lack of clinging that relishes the taste  by  a
realization that adheres to them as external objects”  should  be  taken  as
the reason. Due to adhering to forms, etc. as  external  objects,  there  is
clinging that relishes the taste by a realization. As  the  antidote,  there
is this realization of the lack of clinging that relishes the taste.
- Because  there  is  adherence,  therefore  there  is  clinging.  There  is
clinging due to adhering to external objects. As the antidote to  that,  one
realizes with direct cognition the lack of clinging.
- Due to being bound by adherence to forms, etc. as  external  objects,  one
has the clinging that relishes the taste of  one’s  realizations  of  forms,
sounds, etc.; one has clinging that relishes the taste  of  realizations  as
they appear. As the antidote to that, one  realizes  with  direct  cognition
that this clinging does not exist.
- Clinging that relishes the taste by a realization does not exist. It  does
not make sense because a realization is a valid cognition. It does not  have
clinging that relishes the taste. This is why we say  there  is  a  lack  of
clinging by this realization, because  a  realization,  a  valid  cognition,
does not cling. There is this antidote that realizes with  direct  cognition
the non-existence of clinging by such a realization.
The point is that this realization is a  valid  cognition.  If  it  were  to
relish the taste, it would not be a valid cognition. We are saying there  is
this antidote that realizes the lack of clinging that relishes the taste  by
a realization. There  is  clinging  by  this  realization.  What  does  this
clinging do? It relishes the taste.
- There are no external  objects,  but  a  realization  that  there  are  no
external objects exists. Form does not exist  as  an  external  object,  but
form not existing as an external object exists.
- The meaning of form not existing as an external object  exists:  Forms  do
not exist truly. Forms’ not existing truly exists.  Another  example:  Peter
is not a millionaire, so Peter’s not existing as a millionaire exists.
- Is it true that forms are not established as external objects  YA?  It  is
true, so forms not being established as external objects exists.
- We are negating the  whole  thing,  saying  “the  lack  of  clinging  that
relishes the taste by a realization…” In the context of the antidote,  there
is no adherence to  forms,  etc.  as  external  objects.  The  phrase  “that
adheres to them as objects”  does  not  refer  to  a  consciousness  in  the
continuum of the person who is applying this antidote. We  are  saying  that
this person realizes that there is no “clinging that relishes the  taste  by
a realization…” We are not saying that there is adherence in  the  continuum
of the person who has the antidote in his continuum. So the whole  thing  is
negated.
- For 6, realizations are subject to degeneration because they need  not  be
“fully qualified” realizations. They can be forgotten, and as a result  they
degenerate. Therefore antidotes need to be reapplied.
-  For  (6)  “that  very  realization  that  was  attained  but  has   fully
degenerated”. We can posit realization such as realization of  emptiness,  a
realization of lack of nature ultimately.
Here as the antidote, it says “realizations  attained  do  not  degenerate.”
Suppose one initially realizes that phenomena do not  exist  ultimately.  If
somehow phenomena were to become  ultimately  existent,  there  would  be  a
valid cognition realizing that phenomena are ultimately existent;  thus  the
initial realization of phenomena as lacking ultimate  existence  would  have
degenerated.
- However, phenomena cannot become  ultimately  existent.  They  are  always
empty of ultimate existence, so this initial  realization  of  phenomena  as
lacking ultimate existence cannot degenerate. Because this realization  does
not degenerate, the objects apprehended do not exist  as  external  objects.
The  antidote  is  thus  the  direct  realization  that   the   objects   of
apprehension of this realization do not exist as external objects.
Q&A: Forms can appear clearly to this eye consciousness, but this  does  not
mean that forms  appear  as  they  are,  because  they  appear  as  external
objects, but they do not exist as external objects. They are  not  known  as
they are, although they appear clearly. When forms appear, they appear  very
clearly as external objects; however, forms are not established as  external
objects.
Q&A: Conception of true existence is an example of ignorance. When  we  talk
about this ignorance that is the conception of true  existence,  its  object
of adherence, true existence, appears very clearly. The problem is  that  we
are unable to  identify  this  true  existence.  If  we  can  identify  true
existence, then we have identified the object of negation.
The Emptiness of Duality
-AMWS is divided into two: Sutra Autonomy (SA) and Yogic Autonomy (YA).
-SA does not accept the emptiness of duality. YA does  assert  emptiness  of
duality.
-The reason SA does not accept the emptiness  of  duality  is  because  they
assert external objects, whereas YA does not  accept  external  objects.  In
this respect, YA is similar to the Mind-Only school (MOS), but  in  general,
they are very different.
- MOS asserts that imputational factors do not exist by  way  of  their  own
character, but YA says that if it is an established base, it is pervaded  by
being established by way of its own character. Based on  these  differences,
the way in which they refute external objects is also different.
- The view of emptiness  of  duality,  the  emptiness  of  apprehendeds  and
apprehenders being different substances, in which the existence of  external
objects is refuted, is well known as being asserted by  the  MOS  &  YA.  In
order to understand the assertions well, we need  first  to  understand  MOS
assertion of the three characters:
1. other-powered natures,
2. imputational natures [or imputational factors], and
3. thoroughly established natures.
- 1. Other-powered natures - an example is form.
- 2. Imputational natures - there are two types:
   (a) An imputational nature that is a superimposition by  way  of  entity-
e.g. form being established by way of its  own  character  as  a  basis  for
applying/engaging the term “form aggregate.”
   (b)  An  imputational  factor  by  way  of  attribute-  e.g.  form  being
established by way of its own character as  a  basis  for  applying/engaging
the term “the production of form.”
- Both of these are imputational factors that are objects to be negated.
- These two divisions in turn have their sub-divisions:
- form being established by  way  of  its  own  character  as  a  basis  for
applying/engaging the term “form aggregate” is an imputational  factor  that
is an object to be negated. However, the basis for engaging the  term  “form
aggregate” is a basis of emptiness.
- form being established by  way  of  its  own  character  as  a  basis  for
applying/engaging the term “the  production  of  form”  is  an  imputational
factor that is an object to be negated. However, the basis for engaging  the
term “the production  of  form”  is  a  basis  of  emptiness.  This  is  the
explanation in terms of terms.
- form being established  by  way  of  its  own  character  as  a  basis  of
adherence of the conception apprehending  form  is  an  imputational  factor
that is an object to be negated. The basis of adherence  of  the  conception
apprehending form is a basis of emptiness.
[The terms engaging the form aggregate and the conception apprehending  form
are very similar, except that the 1st set involves terms or sounds, and  the
2nd set involves conceptions.
When we talk about form, we are talking about  other-powered  natures.  When
we talk about “objects to be negated”  and  “bases  of  emptiness,”  we  are
talking about imputational factors].
- Form aggregate is the basis for engaging the  term  “form  aggregate”  but
the basis for engaging the term “form aggregate” is not form  aggregate.  It
is an imputational factor. The basis for engaging the term “form  aggregate”
is an imputational factor.
3. Thoroughly established natures - Using the  other-powered  nature,  form,
its emptiness of being established by way of its own character as the  basis
of  adherence  of  the  conception  apprehending  form   is   a   thoroughly
established  nature,  which  itself  is  established  by  way  of  its   own
character.
- In other words, this other-powered nature’s lack of being  established  by
way of its own character  as  the  basis  of  adherence  of  the  conception
apprehending form is established by way of its own character.
- In MOS, thoroughly established natures are established  by  way  of  their
own character, imputational factors  do  not  exist  by  way  of  their  own
character, and other-powered natures are established by  way  of  their  own
character.
- For MOS, “established by way of its own character” means if  something  is
merely imputed by conception, then it is not established by way of  its  own
character.  If  it  is  not  merely  imputed  by  conception,  then  it   is
established by way of its own character.
Therefore  for  MOS,  other-powered  natures  are  not  merely  imputed   by
conception i.e. they are established  by  way  of  its  own  character.  The
object-possessor is involved, but they are not merely imputed. They do  have
some establishment by way of their own character.
- For MOS, being truly existent and being established  by  way  of  its  own
character are the same. But to AMWS, the meanings of these  two  expressions
are different.
- For MOS, the criterion for being established by way of its  own  character
is existence from its own side without being merely imputed by conception.
- For CMWS, the criterion is that when the imputed object  that  is  imputed
conventionally is sought, it is found.
- For AMWS, establishment by way of its own character is not  an  object  of
negation because if it is an established  base,  it  is  pervaded  by  being
established by way of its own character.
- If you were to look at the criteria for true existence according to  AMWS,
you find that it coincides with the criteria for being  established  by  way
of its own character according to the MOS.
 -To MOS, if it is merely imputed by conception, it is not  truly  existent.
If it is not merely imputed by conception, it  is  truly  existent.  To  the
CMWS, if it is an established base, it is pervaded by being  merely  imputed
by conception.
- To AMWS, if it is an established base, it  is  pervaded  by  being  merely
imputed by conception, and it is pervaded by being  established  by  way  of
its own character, but it is not truly existent.
-Q&A: A yogic direct perceiver is a consciousness  realizing,  for  example,
selflessness, emptiness  of  duality,  subtle  impermanence,  etc.,  in  the
continuum of an arya. Such a yogic direct perceiver  necessarily  arises  in
dependence on a meditative stabilization.
-Q&A: It is possible to have one single consciousness realizing 173  aspects
at the same time in the  continuum  of  a  sentient  being.  Whether  it  is
possible to have 173 different minds realizing the 173 aspects, this is  not
definite.
Summary
The 3 groups of antidotes that are covered under the aspects of  true  paths
are
   1. The uncontaminated path of  seeing  (PoS)  that  is  the  antidote  to
      afflictive obscurations,
   2. The contaminated path of meditation (PoM) that is an antidote  to  the
      coarse knowledge obscurations,
   3. The uncontaminated path of seeing that is an antidote  to  the  coarse
      knowledge obscuration.
-For the PoM, both the contaminated and uncontaminated paths are mentioned
-For the PoS only the uncontaminated PoS is mentioned, not the  contaminated
PoS. This is due to the length of PoS.
-The PoS begins with one session of meditative equipoise  (ME)  composed  of
an uninterrupted path (UP) followed by a liberated  path  (LP).  After  that
session, one arises in subsequent attainment (SA). Eventually the  PoS  ends
[without another UP occurring].
- PoM consists of many sessions of ME and SA: UP ( LP ( SA after  which  one
again enters an UP ( LP ( SA and so on.
- Because PoM is longer, the uncontaminated PoM is posited.
- The PoS is short: it begins with just a single session of ME [of UP &  LP]
followed by SA,  and  it  eventually  ends  without  another  UP  occurring.
Therefore the contaminated PoS is not posited. However, this does  not  mean
that a contaminated PoS does not exist.
- In  fact  regardless  of  whether  we  talk  about  the  antidote  to  the
afflictive obscuration or the antidote to the coarse knowledge  obscuration,
there are four types of antidotes:
   1. Contaminated path of seeing
   2. Uncontaminated path of seeing
   3. Contaminated path of meditation
   4. Uncontaminated path of meditation
-For the antidotes to the afflictive obscurations,  the  uncontaminated  PoS
is presented.
-For the antidotes to the coarse knowledge  obscurations,  the  contaminated
PoM and the uncontaminated PoS are posited.
- Although this is presented in this  way,  there  is  an  antidote  to  the
afflictive obscurations that is a contaminated PoM. - The reason  there  are
two groups is because the  knowledge  obscurations  are  more  difficult  to
abandon than the afflictive obscurations.
-There is  a  contaminated  PoM  that  is  an  antidote  to  the  afflictive
obscurations, as well as an uncontaminated PoM that is an  antidote  to  the
afflictive obscurations.
The Path of Seeing
- When a person  who  is  definite  in  the  Mahayana  lineage  attains  the
Mahayana PoS, he attains the UP of PoS. Upon entering the PoS,  this  person
abides in single-pointed ME.  This  acts  as  the  direct  antidote  to  the
acquired conception of true existence.
- This UP also acts as the antidote to the acquired conception of a self  of
persons.  It  also  acts  as  antidote  to  the   acquired   conception   of
apprehendeds and apprehenders being different substances.
-After this UP of PoS, one  attains  the  LP  in  which  these  3  kinds  of
acquired conceptions have been abandoned. Without staying long,  one  arises
into SA. There is no need to  stay  long,  because  one  has  abandoned  the
objects that are to be abandoned and has done the  work  that  needs  to  be
done. So one promptly arises in subsequent attainment.
- The period in which one abides in SA and in the ME that is neither UP  nor
LP lasts a very long time.  This  does  not  mean  being  a  single  session
lasting a long time. There may be many different sessions. One is in SA  and
then one enters ME that is neither an UP nor a LP and then again one  arises
into SA and so on. There are many such alternations. This period of  various
sessions of SA & ME that is neither UP nor LP lasts a very long time.
- Eventually, one manages to collect sufficient merit and due to this,  when
one enters ME on emptiness.
- At the beginning although this ME is a ME that is neither UP nor LP.  When
it becomes stronger, this ME becomes a direct antidote to the coarse of  the
great-great innate  conception  of  true  existence.  As  soon  as  this  is
attained, one attains the UP of the 1st ground of PoM.
- Arising from this UP, one enters the LP of the 2nd ground. When one  newly
attains the 1st ground, one attains an UP. When one newly attains  the  PoM,
one is on an UP. When one attains the remaining grounds—2nd  ,  3rd  ,  etc.
through the 10th , as well as the buddha ground, one is on a LP.
- When one newly attains the 2nd ground, one is on a LP. After this LP,  one
enters SA. This period consists of various parts: ME that is neither UP  nor
LP and so on.  Eventually,  when  the  mind  becomes  powerful  enough,  one
attains the UP of the 2nd ground at the end of the 2nd ground.  After  that,
one attains a LP upon which one enters the 3rd ground.
- If you understand the procedure for  passing  from  the  1st  to  the  2nd
ground, and from the 2nd to the 3rd you will understand  the  procedure  for
passing through the remaining grounds. Passing through these  various  paths
and grounds, one is able to abandon the various obscurations.
- On  the  PoS,  one  abandons  the  acquired  afflictive  obscurations  and
acquired knowledge obscurations.  One  then  passes  to  the  PoM  with  the
various grounds and one abandons  the  innate  afflictive  obscurations  and
innate knowledge obscurations. There are many phases in this process:  there
is ME (composed of UP & LP), there is ME that is neither, and there is SA.
-  The  point  is  that,  although  as  the  antidote  to   the   afflictive
obscurations, only one uncontaminated path of  seeing  is  posited  in  this
section. You should understand that the path of meditation  can  also  serve
as an antidote to the afflictive  obscurations.  For  the  coarse  knowledge
obscurations, both the path of seeing  and  path  of  meditation  have  been
posited. Likewise you should understand that as antidotes to the  afflictive
obscurations, there are both the path of seeing and the path of  meditation.

- There are various divisions of path of seeing:
   1. exalted wisdom of ME which is subdivided into three:
        a. exalted wisdom of UP
        b. exalted wisdom of LP
        c. exalted wisdom of ME that is neither UP nor LP
   2. exalted wisdom of SA
   3. exalted wisdom of PoS that is neither ME nor SA
- When one enters the UP of PoS, one progresses to LP of  PoS.  After  this,
one arises in SA. One can enter ME again. When one  initially  enters  this,
it is an exalted wisdom of ME that is neither an UP nor LP.
- An exalted wisdom of PoS that is neither ME nor SA is  bodhicitta  in  the
continuum of a person on  the  occasion  of  ME  of  PoS.  Or  an  awareness
directly realizing emptiness during the occasion of SA of PoS.
-  After the LP of PoS one  needs  to  collect  the  accumulation  of  merit
before entering the  PoM.  One  also  needs  to  work  on  training  in  the
dexterity of meditative stabilization in order to be able  to  generate  the
direct antidote to the innate knowledge obscurations.
 - One can have  many  occasions  of  ME  in  which  emptiness  is  directly
realized in this period, after LP of PoS and before  UP  of  PoM.  In  fact,
during this period,  it  is  possible  to  have  many  occasions  of  direct
realizations  of  selflessness  of  persons,  of  non-duality,  of  [subtle]
impermanence, and so forth. This would actually constitute the  accumulation
of exalted wisdom  rather  than  the  accumulation  of  merit.  During  this
period, one can accumulate merit by doing prostrations,  offering  mandalas,
practicing generosity, practicing patience, etc.
