Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/Personal notes/Personal notes- Path of Meditation.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:11.736314
================================================================================


FUNCTION (ACTIONS) OF A PATH OF MEDITATION
 - Definition: A benefit attained through the force of cultivating the
Mahayana path of meditation that is the method for attaining it.
- Boundary: Exists from the second instant of cultivating the Mahayana path
of meditation through the buddha ground.
- Six actions of the path of meditation
1) To act with self-power with respect to generating  higher  paths  in  the
   mind in all ways
2) by destroying all pride and arrogance, to bow down  to  all  beings,  the
   spiritual guide and so forth
3) without coming under the control of afflictions, to  overcome  attachment
   and so forth instead
4) just not being an  object  for  subsequent  accomplishment  of  harms  of
   poisons, weapons, spells, and the like by antagonists
5) to accomplish perfect complete enlightenment by one’s own strength
6) to take the place of support where a bodhisattvas who has cultivated  the
   path of meditation has stayed at as the very thing to be worshipped
- 1st four - results created by beings,
- 5th - result which is concordant with the cause- One cultivates  the  path
and through the force of cultivating  the  path,  one  accomplishes  perfect
complete enlightenment.
- 6th - environmental result. This has to do with the environment, or  place
which becomes an object of worship.

Mahayana Path of Meditation of Belief
- Definition: A Mahayana subsequent clear realization convinced that the
Mothers are the source of the three welfares.
- Boundary: Exists from the first ground through the end  of  the  continuum
of the sentient being.
- This Mahayana path of meditation of belief exists on the  1st  ground  but
only becomes manifest on the subsequent attainment of the 2nd  ground.  This
is because on the 1st ground, there  is  no  exalted  wisdom  of  subsequent
attainment of the path of meditation.
-  The boundaries are said to be “from the 1st ground  through  the  end  of
the continuum” means the 1st ground of the path of  meditation  through  the
end of the continuum.  The  contaminated  paths  of  meditation  are  mainly
described in relation to subsequent attainment  because  they  are  manifest
during subsequent attainment.
- Two types of path of meditation:
 1. A contaminated path of meditation (with conceptuality)
 2. An uncontaminated path of meditation (without conceptuality)

Contaminated path of meditation has 3 divisions:-
   1. Path of meditation of belief
   2. Path of meditation of dedication
   3. Path of meditation of rejoicing

Uncontaminated path of meditation has 2 divisions:-
   1. Path of meditation of achieving
   2. Path of meditation of purity
- A contaminated path  of  meditation  is  a  path  of  meditation  that  is
together with conception.
- The contaminated path of meditation is with a conception  that  apprehends
a sound-generality and meaning-generality as suitable to be mixed.
- “that which is together with conception” does not  mean  that  the  person
has conceptions.
- It means that the path of meditation is conceptual.
- These are not contaminateds  that  are  included  within  the  objects  of
abandonment because,
 (i) it is that which a bodhisattva repeatedly generates with effort on  the
occasions of subsequent attainment of the path of meditation as a branch  of
completing the accumulation of merit, and
 (ii) no arya would generate an object that is to be abandoned by  the  path
of meditation with effort.
- If it were an object of abandonment, it must be taken as an object  to  be
abandoned by the path of meditation. No one  would  assert  a  common  locus
between an object of abandonment of a Mahayana arya and a Mahayana  path  of
meditation.
- If there were no  conceptions  [which  apprehend  a  sound-generality  and
meaning-generality as suitable to be mixed] on the  8th  ground  and  above,
then one would  not  realize  hidden  phenomena.  There  would  not  be  the
slightest need for hidden phenomena to be taken as objects.
- In fact there are conceptions on the 8th ground and above.
- If there were no conceptions, then during  subsequent  attainment  on  the
8th ground and above, minds realizing hidden phenomena such as  impermanence
and emptiness, would not be able to become manifest.
- For example, a mind directly realizing emptiness is  not  able  to  become
manifest during subsequent attainment.
- If such a mind were to  become  manifest,  then  it  would  be  meditative
equipoise.
- During subsequent attainment there is no manifest  of  direct  realization
of emptiness.
- If a direct realization of emptiness were to become  manifest,  then  that
would be meditative equipoise, not subsequent attainment.
- There are three types of Mahayana path of meditation of belief:
   1. Mahayana path of meditation of belief of one’s welfare
   2. Mahayana path of meditation of belief of one’s and others’ welfare
   3. Mahayana path of meditation of belief of others’ welfare
- Each of these has 3 divisions: small, middling, and great give a total  of
27 types.
- Small belief means weak belief
- Middling belief is of middling strength
- Great belief is of great strength. The 27th, the great of  the  great,  is
actually the strongest.
- Belief is a mind that seeks a certain goal. At that point,  the  goal  has
not been actualized.
- The belief of one’s welfare, others’ welfare,  and  belief  of  one’s  and
others’ welfare refers as the goals.
- Explanation from the point of view of the display to  corresponding  types
of trainees.
   - One’s own welfare: truth body (Dharmakaya)
   - Others’ welfare: emanation body (Nirmanakaya)
   - One’s own and others’ welfare: complete enjoyment body (Sambhogakaya)
- Emanation body - there are very coarse form bodies  such  as  the  supreme
emanation body. That is displayed for all types of trainees.  The  emanation
body can be seen by even ordinary beings.
- Complete enjoyment  body  is  posited  as  both  welfares  because  it  is
displayed to trainees who are bodhisattva aryas. It is not as coarse  as  an
emanation body and not all trainees  are  able  to  perceive  it.  For  this
reason, it is said to be not entirely for others’ welfare. It is said to  be
for both welfares.
The very fact that it does not entirely enact others’ welfare  implies  that
there is some element of one’s own welfare.
- In order to be posited as completing others’ welfare, the  form  body  has
to be in a coarse form that can be perceived by all types of beings.
- The complete enjoyment body can be  seen  only  by  a  limited  number  of
trainees- bodhisattva aryas. So from that point of view it is  not  entirely
for others’ welfare.
- When we talk about the emanation body, we are not talking about  only  the
supreme emanation body, with all the signs and exemplifications such as  the
ushnisha (crown protrusion). Not all sentient beings  have  the  ability  to
perceive the supreme emanation body.
- Actually, emanations bodies can also  include  more  ordinary  forms,  for
example in the aspects of monks and nuns. They can appear  in  the  form  of
laypeople and these can be seen by ordinary sentient beings.
- The subject - the Mahayana path of meditation  of  belief  -  there  is  a
reason for not actualizing it at the beginning of the arya paths,
- because, although being the support of the perfection  of  wisdom  itself,
the object of belief, the virtuous qualities which are  seen  in  accordance
with how the Mothers are believed as the source of the three welfares, -  it
is a path that  is  attained  from  having  mastered  the  mundane  path  of
meditation that is pure subsequent attainment.
- When we talk about belief, this  is  just  the  start.  From  belief,  one
generates aspiration and engages in methods to actualize the  goals  or  the
objects of belief.
- One has to collect the two accumulations in order to attain the  goals  of
belief. They are not actualized at the beginning of the arya paths.
- In terms of the procedure for attaining the Mahayana  path  of  meditation
of belief, even at the stage of an ordinary being, one can  have  belief  in
the three welfares: one’s own, others’, and both.
- This belief is trained in, and one eventually attains  the  Mahayana  path
of meditation of belief.
- This Mahayana  path  of  meditation  of  belief  is  not  manifest  during
meditative equipoise. It is only manifest during subsequent attainment.
- The object of belief is the perfection of wisdom itself, the Mothers.
- The objects of the path of meditation of belief  are  the  textual,  path,
and resultant perfections of wisdom.
- The textual and path perfections of wisdom are the ordinary objects
- The resultant perfection of wisdom is the principal object.
- The boundaries of the textual perfection of wisdom  are  from  not  having
entered the path through the buddha ground.
- The boundaries of the path perfection of  wisdom  are  from  the  Mahayana
path of accumulation through the end of the continuum of a sentient being.
- The boundary of the resultant perfection of wisdom is only on  the  buddha
ground.
- Its entity is the faith of conviction and lucid faith,  which  are  faiths
attained by way of the conviction that the  three  types  of  perfection  of
wisdom  are  the  source  of  the  three  welfares,  during  the  subsequent
attainment that is attained  from  the  force  of  meditating  on  the  path
perfection of wisdom during meditative equipoise.
- The three types of perfection of  wisdom  are  the  source  of  the  three
welfares:
 - In dependence on  the  textual  perfection  of  wisdom,  one  listens  to
explanations on it and contemplates its meaning.
 - For the path perfection of wisdom, one practices the path  perfection  of
wisdom and this will lead to the three welfares.
- The resultant perfection of wisdom involves the three welfares.
- In dependence on hearing and contemplation with  respect  to  the  textual
perfection of wisdom, one will attain the path perfection of wisdom.
- In dependence on practicing  the  path  perfection  of  wisdom,  one  will
attain the resultant perfection of wisdom.
- In terms of (i) the occasion of  not  having  abandoned  the  pride  of  I
[posited on 7 impure ground]
  (ii) the occasion of having realized that oneself  and  others  are  equal
[posited on 8th and 9th grounds]
  (iii) the occasion of  engaging  only  in  others’  welfare  in  all  ways
[posited on 10th ground]
- In terms of the  principal  ones,  they  exist  during  all  9  subsequent
attainments of the path of meditation
- On the path of meditation, why there only nine subsequent attainments?
- This is because is that there is  no  subsequent  attainment  of  the  1st
ground of the path of meditation [because the subsequent attainment  of  the
1st ground is on the path of seeing.]
- The 1st subsequent attainment of the path of meditation is the  subsequent
attainment of the 2nd ground, so we have nine subsequent attainments of  the
path of meditation.
- When one newly attains the 10th ground, one attains the liberated path  of
the 10th ground. Then one arises from that in the subsequent  attainment  of
the 10th ground and, later, one enters the uninterrupted path at the end  of
the continuum of a sentient being.

The benefits of a Mahayana Path of Meditation of Belief
-  Definition: An excellent quality attained through the force of
cultivating the path of meditation of belief that is the method for
attaining it.
-  Boundary: Exists from the second instant of cultivating the path of
meditation of belief through the buddha ground
- There is a purpose for the buddhas and so forth to  make  praises  and  so
forth towards meditating on belief in that way, because it is in order  that
the bodhisattvas who meditate on that belief generate enthusiasm -  praises,
eulogies, and laudations.
1) Praise is correlated with the path  of  meditation  of  belief  of  one’s
welfare,
2) Eulogy is correlated with the  path  of  meditation  of  belief  of  both
welfares, and
3) Laudation is correlated with the path of meditation of belief of  others’
welfare.
- There are 3 sets of nine: 9 praises, 9 eulogies, and  9  laudations.  This
gives a total of 27.
- These  praises,  eulogies,  and  laudations  are  not  in  the  entity  of
flattery, because they express facts as they really are.
- These three words – praise, eulogy, and laudation  –  are  not  different.
They are posited from the point of view of the way of making praise:-
 -Praises - due to belief in one’s welfare being praised.
- Eulogies - due to belief in both welfares being praised
- Laudations - due to belief in others’ welfare being praised.
- These praises become superior as we move from  our  own  welfare  to  both
welfares, and then to others’ welfares.
- One’s welfare refers to the truth body
- Both welfares refers to the complete enjoyment body
- Others’ welfare refers to the emanation body.
- Actualization of the  truth  body  is  wonderful  or  amazing,  so  it  is
praised.
- Actualization of the complete enjoyment body is even more amazing  because
besides benefitting oneself (the element of one’s welfare), it is also  able
to benefit other sentient beings (the other element of others’ welfare).  So
it is even more worthy of praise. [When the complete  enjoyment  bodies  are
displayed, the welfare of the bodhisattva aryas is enacted.]
- Actualizing the emanation body is even more amazing because it is able  to
benefit many sentient beings with pure karma.
- In that way, the praises become stronger  and  stronger  with  respect  to
these various states of buddhahood.
- Another way of explaining  the  distinctions  among  praise,  eulogy,  and
laudation is as follows:
- Due to belief in the three Mothers, one practices the path  of  meditation
of belief. This practice is something amazing and worthy of praise.
- In dependence on this practice of the path of meditation  of  belief,  one
places sentient beings in the states of stream-enterer, once-returner,  non-
returner, and foe-destroyer, and this is even more amazing.
- On top  of  that,  one  also  places  sentient  beings  in  the  state  of
unsurpassable enlightenment.
- So in this way there are three  stages,  and  these  three  correspond  to
praises, eulogies, and laudations.

Path of Meditation of Dedication
- Definition: A conceptual Mahayana subsequent clear
realization—apprehending sound-generalities and meaning-generalities as
suitable to be mixed—that acts to transform either one’s own or others’
roots of virtue into a branch of complete enlightenment.
- Boundary: From the first ground through the end of the  continuum  of  the
sentient being.
- There is a difference between dedication and  prayer.  In  order  to  make
prayers, one does not need a  substance,  but  to  make  a  dedication,  one
necessarily needs the substance of dedication.
- Therefore, dedication is a prayer, but  a  prayer  is  not  necessarily  a
dedication.
- Dedication requires a substance of dedication which is virtue.
- If you pray, “May all sentient beings  be  healthy,  free  from  sickness,
happy” This is prayer and is not dedications.
- However, if you add this qualification, “In dependence on my  virtue  from
having practiced generosity,  ethics,  etc.,  may  all  sentient  beings  be
happy, may they attain liberation, buddhahood, etc.” Then  this  is  both  a
dedication and a prayer.
-  The  purpose  of  making  the  12  twelve  types  of  dedication  towards
unsurpassable perfect complete enlightenment is in  order  to  make  virtues
inexhaustible for the benefit of all sentient beings.
- They are dedications by means of being conjoined with special  method  and
wisdom, because they are dedications:-
 (i) conjoined with the wisdom realizing the corresponding  objects  to  not
be  observed  as  truly  existent,  and  that  observe  them   as   existing
conventionally
(ii) conjoined with those methods possessing the  action  of  causal  entity
that show the path to sentient beings who are to be  subdued  by  the  three
vehicles in accordance with their fortunes.
- Dedication -not just of one’s own  roots  of  virtue  but  also  those  of
others towards unsurpassable enlightenment.
- In this way, these roots of virtue are transformed into a branch of  great
enlightenment.
-  In  dependence  on  rejoicing  in  the  virtues  created  by  others,  we
accumulate virtue as well.
- If the other person is of a lower realization than us, we  create  greater
virtue than this other person.
- If the person is equal in  realization  to  us,  we  create  equal  virtue
through our rejoicing
- If the person has a higher  realization  than  us,  by  our  rejoicing  we
create half of the virtue that this person has created.
- This also applies to dedication. - If we  dedicate  someone’s  virtue,  we
also create virtue.
- If this person is of a  lower  realization  than  us,  we  create  greater
virtue through our dedication.
- If this person is equal in realization to us, we create equal virtue.
- If the person has a higher realization than us,  we  create  half  of  the
virtue that this person has created.
- When someone creates virtue and we  rejoice,  we  create  great  waves  of
virtue  without  having  to  experience  hardship.  Instead,  if  we  become
jealous, we accumulate non-virtue.
- Anger is very negative. It is said that there is no negativity worse  than
anger.
- Anger is sometimes compared to fire. Although we may start  with  a  small
flame, it can become a big blaze. Likewise, small anger can destroy  a  huge
amount of merit.
- It is said that when one makes a long prostration, one accumulates  a  lot
of virtue.
- If we consider the support who is a  pure  fully  ordained  monk  doing  a
single  full-length  prostration,  he  accumulates  the  amount   of   merit
necessary for taking as many rebirths as a wheel-turning king as  there  are
the number of particles covered by his body, from between the  ground  below
him until the foundation of the earth mandala.
- However this monk may not necessarily attain  enlightenment  very  quickly
because if he becomes angry in the second instant,  he  will  destroy  those
merits.
- It is said that one instant of  anger  can  destroy  the  accumulation  of
merit of 100 eons. It may not be able to damage the accumulation of  wisdom,
but it is able to damage the accumulation of merit of 100  eons.  This  last
statement  is  made  by  considering  the  case  of  getting  angry  with  a
bodhisattva.
- Twelve types of dedication:
 1. The action of that special thorough dedication is superior.
 - The action of that dedication of an arya on the path of  meditation,  the
special thorough dedication, is superior to  the  other  dedications—because
it is an unsurpassable dedication that  transforms  all  one’s  and  others’
roots of virtue into the branches of enlightenment.
2. Bearing the aspect of not observing
3. The characteristic of not being erroneous
4. Devoid.
 - The nature of dedication, the stopping of adherence to:
   (i) the substance that is to be dedicated
  (ii) the mind that acts to dedicate
  (iii) the dedicator
   - as truly existent
5. Bearing the object of utilization  that  recollects  the  nature  of  the
buddhas’ accumulation of merit
 -the stopping of strong adherence to one’s  own  virtue  and  the  buddhas’
virtue as good or bad.”
6. Together with means - the stopping of adherence to the virtue of the  six
perfections as good or bad.
7. Signless - the stopping of adherence to the three  spheres  with  respect
to all dedications as truly existent.
8. Rejoicing by  the  buddhas  -  having  understood  dependent-arisings  as
illusions conventionally, dedicating towards buddha ground
9. Not included in the three realms - not dedicating towards the  causes  of
cyclic existence
10,11,12 - The other dedications are the three  types  of  small,  middling,
and great dedication with the nature of being a source of great merit.

- Examples of the  correlation  between  the  attentions  imputed  with  the
various names and the corresponding dedications are:
1. Superior to the virtues of hearers and  solitary  realizers  respectively
with being whatever dedication, for instance is a dedication that  does  not
observe unsurpassable enlightenment as existing ultimately but  observes  it
as existing conventionally.
2. The dedication that does not observe the object  to  be  dedicated  is  a
dedication that does not observe the aggregates of morality and so forth  as
existing ultimately but observes them as existing conventionally.
3. The dedication bearing the name “not  erroneous”  is  a  dedication  that
does not observe the mind that acts to dedicate as existing  ultimately  but
observes it as existing conventionally.
4. The  dedication  ultimately  devoid  of  a  dedicator  because  it  is  a
dedication that does not observe the thing that is the dedicator  possessing
a self and so forth as existing  ultimately  but  observes  it  as  existing
conventionally.
5.  The  dedication  bearing  the  name  “recollecting  the  nature  of  the
tathagatas’ accumulation of  merit”  is  a  dedication  conjoined  with  the
wisdom that does not observe the virtues of the buddhas of the  three  times
as  existing   ultimately   but   dedicates   them   towards   enlightenment
conventionally.
6. That bearing the name “together with skill  in  means”  is  a  dedication
that does not observe generosity and so forth  as  existing  ultimately  but
observes them as existing conventionally.
7. That bearing the name “signless” is a dedication  that  refutes  ultimate
signs.
8. That bearing the name “permitted by the buddhas”  does  not  observe  all
paths as  existing  ultimately  and  dedicates  them  towards  enlightenment
conventionally.
9. That bearing the name  “not  included  in  the  three  realms”  does  not
observe the desire realm and so forth as existing ultimately  and  dedicates
all roots of virtue towards enlightenment conventionally.
10. Small dedication giving rise to great merit is a  dedication  that  does
not observe the virtues  of  placing  sentient  beings  of  the  billionfold
systems in the paths of action of the ten virtues and so forth  as  existing
ultimately  and   transforms   them   into   a   branch   of   enlightenment
conventionally.
11. Middling dedication giving rise to great merit with virtues  of  placing
sentient beings in the states of stream-enterers and so forth.
12. Great dedication giving rise to great  merit  with  virtues  of  placing
sentient beings in unsurpassable enlightenment.

Path of Meditation of Rejoicing
- Definition: A conceptual Mahayana subsequent clear
realization—apprehending sound generalities and meaning generalities as
suitable to be mixed—that cultivates joy in either one’s own or others’
roots of virtue.
- Boundary: From the first ground through the end of the  continuum  of  the
sentient being.
- The things that are virtues of oneself and others  which  have  been  well
dedicated towards unsurpassable enlightenment in  that  way,  due  to  being
objects to be increased higher  and  higher,  the  so-called  “attention  to
rejoicing”:
- When we create virtue, it is important to dedicate. If we do not  dedicate
the virtue we have created, it is  uncertain  that  it  will  ripen  into  a
result.
- By the act of rejoicing, this virtue becomes more powerful.
-  Comparing two situations:
  1. The entire earth being filled with hearer and  solitary  realizer  foe-
destroyers and each of them meditating on emptiness for 100 eons.
  2. A bodhisattva meditating on emptiness for one instant.
- The bodhisattva will create greater merit than all  those  foe-destroyers.
This is due  to  the  power  of  the  motivation  of  the  bodhisattva:  the
bodhisattva meditates on emptiness for the benefit of all  sentient  beings,
while the foe-destroyers are motivated by the wish for their own welfare.
- The quality of the virtue is contingent on the purity of our motivation.
- Regardless of whether we perform a small or great virtue,  the  motivation
must be pure. If we find the motivation is not pure, we must try to make  it
pure.
- The contaminated paths of meditation have the three kinds of attention:
Attention to belief, composes  extensive  merit  newly,  like  finding  gold
nuggets from a mine.
Attention to dedication,  accomplishes  special  action,  because  it  makes
virtues  into  the  limbs  of  perfect  complete  enlightenment,  like   the
transforming of the gold nuggets into ornaments by a goldsmith.
Attention to rejoicing, accomplishes special action, because it attains  the
equality of the produced merit of oneself and others as if  oneself  created
the virtues that have been established in others’  continua.  [i.e.  viewing
the virtues that have been established in others’  continua  as  if  oneself
created them.] Without jealousy and unhappiness, one rejoices.
-  When we see others accumulating merit, such as studying, practicing,  and
so forth, we should not become jealous, because there is no benefit  at  all
in becoming jealous. Besides making us unhappy, it has no advantage.
- These three kinds of path of meditation: path  of  meditation  of  belief,
path of meditation of dedication, and path of meditation  of  rejoicing  are
not on the path of meditation. We can try to engage  in  belief,  dedication
and rejoicing, thus we can practice similitudes of these now.
- The uncontaminated path of meditation has two divisions:-
 1. Path of meditation of achieving
 2. Path of meditation of purity.

Path of Meditation of Achieving
-  Definition: An uncontaminated Mahayana subsequent clear realization  that
deposits an  imprint  of  the  final  realization  that  is  its  object  of
attainment.
-  Boundary: From the first ground through the tenth ground.
-  Mutually inclusive with path of meditation of purity.
- There are 5 types of path of meditation  of  achieving  because  they  are
related to:
 1. Entity
 2. Distinguished result
 3. Function
 4. Temporal excellent qualities
 5. Final excellent qualities

1. Related  to  entity:  The  subject  -the  exalted  wisdom  of  meditative
equipoise of the 2nd ground-is the very entity of the path of meditation  of
achieving, because, as it says in sutra, “The perfection of wisdom  is  very
pure, therefore it illuminates.”
- It is a subsequent clear realization that sees the  mode  of  abidance  of
forms and so forth non-erroneously.
- This sign needs to be annotated because  a  subsequent  clear  realization
that sees the mode of abidance of forms and so forth non-erroneously is  not
pervaded by being a path of meditation. This  subsequent  clear  realization
can be a hearers’ or solitary realizers’ clear realization.
- To ensure that there is  pervasion,  it  should  say  it  is  a  “Mahayana
subsequent clear realization that sees the mode of abidance of forms and  so
forth non-erroneously.”
- Related to supreme method: Here the result has been indicated.It  is  just
the supreme method, because, while buddhahood is  not  attained  by  others,
such as generosity that is not  conjoined  with  wisdom  directly  realizing
emptiness. It is attained through the force of being conjoined  with  wisdom
directly realizing emptiness.
- Related to function: Because the application realizes the  lack  of  truly
existent production, an attribute of all phenomena,  it  does  not  strongly
compose all phenomena as truly existent.
- Related to the temporal excellent  qualities:  A  path  of  meditation  of
achieving possesses a special temporal result because it bestows  a  special
temporal result in the continua of yogis.
- That follows, because it  generates  a  special  temporal  result  in  the
continua of yogis by means of being  conjoined  with  the  wisdom  realizing
that phenomena are just not observed by the paths which  possess  attributes
of such entity itself, result, action, and so forth. [This phrase refers  to
the previous three divisions: entity, result and function (action)].
- Related to the final excellent qualities: It enacts the final result,  the
great aim itself, because it enacts the buddhahood.  This  talks  about  the
path of meditation attaining  buddhahood,  the  final  result.  It  has  not
attained buddhahood yet.

Path of Meditation of Purity
- Definition: An uncontaminated Mahayana subsequent clear  realization  that
deposits an  imprint  of  the  final  abandonment  that  is  its  object  of
attainment.
- Boundary: From the first ground through the tenth ground.
- Mutually inclusive with “path of meditation of achieving.”
- The three causes of belief in the path of meditation of purity:
   1. Outer condition of devotion to the buddhas,
   2. Inner condition of generosity and so forth,
   3. Inner condition of any skill in means of union  of  calm  abiding  and
      special insight.
- The three conducive conditions are the causes for  generating  a  path  of
meditation of achieving:
   1. To please the buddhas for the sake of fully completing  the  qualities
      of a buddha
   2. To complete the perfections of generosity and so forth
   3.  Skill  in  calm  abiding  that  has   attained   special   meditative
      stabilization.
- The main way to please the buddhas is to have a pure motivation.
- If one makes a small offering, with a pure motivation,  the  buddhas  will
be pleased.
- If one makes extensive offering with an unclean motivation, this will  not
please the buddhas.
 -The best offering is the offering of one’s body, speech,  and  mind.  This
means to offer the practice of one’s body, speech, and mind to the buddhas.
-The  four  adverse  conditions  (hindrance)  to  generating  the  path   of
meditation:
 1. Due to not having collected virtue in the past, being harmed  by  maras.
This means that if we have not collected virtue in the past and  being  poor
in merit, there is the danger of receiving harm from  the  maras.  Therefore
it is very important for us to collect merit.
2. Not believing in the profound Dharma
3. Strongly adhering to the aggregates and so forth i.e. to hold  to  things
as truly existent. This refers to someone who assents to the  appearance  of
true existence and apprehendeds things as truly existent.
4. To keep company with non-virtuous companions. If  we  keep  company  with
negative companions, we risk becoming like  them.  Of  course,  if  we  have
control over our minds, there is no danger  in  keeping  company  with  non-
virtuous companions because  rather  than  being  harmed  by  them,  we  can
actually benefit them.
- In fact, a person on the path  of  meditation  has  discarded  these  four
adverse conditions.
- if the results of the mode of a  trainee-in-virtue  are  free  from  their
corresponding stains, then during subsequent attainment, dependent  arisings
(the objects) will appear as  illusions  [for  a  person  who  has  realized
dependent-arisings to be empty of true existence]. This mean that forms  and
so forth are just pure in being free of stains.
- During  subsequent  attainment,  one  will  have  an  appearance  that  is
different from previous appearances.
- When we purify the stains from the mind, then forms and  so  forth  appear
differently to the mind.
- It is not that when the mind becomes free from stains, then forms  and  so
forth become free from stains.
- If that were the case, then when a person exhausts all stains and  attains
buddhahood, then all his objects would  become  free  from  stains,  and  it
would follow that  all  sentient  beings  would  attain  buddhahood  without
having to make effort.
- Due to the mind becoming purified, forms and so forth appear  differently.
The mode of  appearance  of  forms  and  so  forth  is  dissimilar  to  that
previously. This occurs through the mind becoming pure. It is not  that  the
forms and so forth become pure.
- The path of meditation of achieving is explained from the  point  of  view
of realizations.
- The path of meditation of purity is explained from the point  of  view  of
being free from obscurations.
- Hearers, solitary realizers, and bodhisattvas on the  path  of  meditation
have a purity that is the purity in being free of  some  stains.  There  are
four types of purities being described here:
1. Purity of hearers is posited from the point of view  of  the  abandonment
  of the afflictive obscurations [free from afflictive obscurations].
2. Purity of solitary realizers is posited from the point  of  view  of  the
  abandonment  of  the  coarse  knowledge  obscurations  [being  free   from
  knowledge obscurations that adhere to  forms  and  so  forth  as  external
  objects].
3. Purity of bodhisattvas on the path of  meditation  is  posited  from  the
  point of view of the  abandonment  of  some  of  the  three  obscurations,
  meaning  some  of  the  afflictive  obscurations  and  the  two  knowledge
  obscurations [being free from some seeds  that  are  obscurations  of  the
  three paths:  hearers  paths,  solitary  realizers’  paths,  and  Mahayana
  paths.]  This means that some of each type of the three  obscurations  has
  been abandoned. For example, on the 1st  ground,  the  three  obscurations
  that are objects of abandonment of the 1st  ground  are  being  abandoned;
  some of each type has been abandoned.
4. Purity of buddhas is posited from the  point  of  view  of  their  having
  completely abandoned all obscurations without  exception  [free  from  all
  obscurations, without exception.]
- The purity of buddhas is  exceptionally  pure,  whereas  the  purities  of
hearers and solitary realizers are not exceptionally pure.
-  The antidotes to the stains, (that act to destroy stains from  the  great
of  the  great  through  to  the  small  of   the   small   and   so   forth
conceptualizations of apprehendeds  and  apprehenders,  the  objects  to  be
abandoned by the path of meditation that exist on the  nine  levels  of  the
three realm, the paths that are the small of  the  small  Mahayana  path  of
meditation and so forth) are paths that act to purify both obscurations.
- The conceptualizations of apprehendeds and apprehenders is  the  knowledge
obscurations, i.e. the conceptualizations of apprehendeds as truly  existent
and the conceptualizations of apprehenders as truly existent.
-  The  Mahayana  path  of  meditation  has  the  ability  to  purify   both
obscurations,  while  the  paths  of  meditation  of  hearers  and  solitary
realizers do not have this ability.
- The  sequence  of  abandonment  of  the  objects  of  abandonment  by  the
antidotes is that the objects of abandonment  are  abandoned  starting  from
the great of the  great  objects  of  abandonment,  and  the  antidotes  are
generated from the  small  of  the  small.  In  this  way,  the  objects  of
abandonment are abandoned by the antidotes.
- A great object of abandonment means a coarse  object  of  abandonment.  It
does not mean a powerful object of abandonment.
-A coarse object of abandonment is an object of abandonment that is easy  to
recognize; in contrast.
-A subtle object of abandonment is difficult to identify.
- For example, coarse pride is easy  to  recognize  while  subtle  pride  is
difficult to identify. We may not even be able to see that pride is  present
when it is subtle.
- The nine levels of the three realms have two interpretations:
 -1st interpretation:  (1) the mind of desire realm
                       (2-5) the four form realm absorptions
                       (6-9) the four formless realm absorptions.
 -2nd interpretation:  (1) The preparation “Not Unable”
                       (2) the mere actual first concentration
                       (3) the special first concentration
                       (4-6) the second, third, and fourth concentrations
                       (7-9) the first three formless absorptions.
- the (1–6) being the “six concentrations”
- The nine levels of the three realms refers to:-
       - the mind of the desire realm,
       - 4 form realm absorptions, and
       - 4 formless realm absorptions.
- Hearers and solitary realizers are not able to generate the paths  on  the
support of the nine levels of the three realms, whereas  the  Mahayana  path
of meditation can be supported on the nine levels of the three realms
- Hearers’ and solitary realizers’ paths cannot be generated  in  dependence
on the nine levels of the three realms -this  does  not  mean  hearers’  and
solitary realizers’ paths cannot be generated on any of the nine  levels  of
the three realms. They can be generated in dependence on the  first  4  form
realm concentrations and first 3 formless absorptions.

Question: How is the purity of the complete buddhas exceptional?
- Someone says:  In  your  system,  it  follows  that  impure  other-powered
phenomena  are  truly  existent  because  the  objects  to  be  damaged  are
established as the 9 divisions of objects of abandonment.
It follows  that  real  other-powered  phenomena  also  are  truly  existent
because those which act to damage are established  as  the  9  divisions  of
antidotes.
Our system: That is a dispute that holds the two  truths  as  contradictory.
In fact, the two truths are contradictory. There is no common locus  between
the two truths.
     - In general, the two truths are contradictory but the entities of  the
two truths are not contradictory because the two truths are one entity.
     - The antidotes are generated starting from the  small  of  the  small,
whereas the objects of abandonment are ceased beginning from  the  great  of
the great.

|Path of       |Objects of         |
|meditation    |abandonment        |
|Small-small   |Great-great        |
|Middle-small  |Middle-great       |
|Great-small   |Small-great        |
|Small-middle  |Great-middle       |
|Middle-middle |Middle-middle      |
|Great-middle  |Small-middle       |
|Small-great   |Great-small        |
|Middle-great  |Middle-small       |
|Great-great   |Small-small        |


- Someone says: The objects of abandonment  are  ceased  starting  from  the
great of the great, and the antidotes thus have to  be  generated  from  the
great of the great as well.
This is because a strong slayer is needed for a strong enemy.  In  order  to
handle a strong enemy, we need a strong slayer. Likewise, if  the  enemy  is
weak, we need a weak  opponent  to  handle  this  weak  enemy  as  a  strong
opponent would not be beneficial. [This person interpreted the meaning of  a
“great” object of abandonment as meaning a  strong  or  powerful  object  of
abandonment.]
Our system: Our  interpretation  on  the  meaning  of  “great”  and  “small”
objects of abandonment:
         - a great object of abandonment is a coarse object of abandonment
         - a small object of abandonment is a subtle object of abandonment.


  Example: A washerman cleaning stains in a piece of cloth.  If  the  stains
are coarse, by shaking the piece of cloth will get rid of the  dust  on  the
cloth.If the stains are subtler, he needs to wash  the  cloth  in  water  in
order to remove the stains. If the stains are even subtler, he needs to  use
detergent to remove the stains.
From this example, we understand  that  the  coarse  stains  are  easier  to
purify, while the subtle ones require more effort.  Just  as  with  external
stains, the stains that are the  objects  of  abandonment  of  the  path  of
meditation are like that: the great of the great objects of abandonment  are
coarse and easy to abandon. The small of the small  objects  of  abandonment
are subtle and is more difficult to purify.

- Someone asserts: If the antidotes to the objects  of  abandonment  do  not
exist truly, then the objects of abandonment exist  truly.  The  two  truths
are contradictory. [If one basis is refuted as being  truly  existent,  then
other bases are established as being truly existent.]

- There are two arguments here: one based on the conventional, one based  on
the ultimate.
  - The argument based on the conventional is the argument on  the  sequence
of generation of the antidotes and the sequence of cessation of the  objects
of abandonment.
  - The argument that is based on the ultimate is that if the  antidotes  do
not exist truly, then the objects of abandonment exist truly.
Our system: This is not our system’s assertion.
- The purity of the complete  buddhas  is  presented  as  being  exceptional
because that exceptional path of meditation of  the  Mahayana  aryas  itself
which  has  been  shown  is  the  very  entity  of  the  antidotes  to   all
obscurations.
- Even though the objects of abandonment and  the  antidotes  do  not  exist
ultimately, the sequences of the objects of abandonment  and  the  antidotes
are  correct  because  the  path  of  meditation  destroys  the  objects  of
abandonment   by   means   of   realizing   with   direct   cognition   that
consciousnesses and the objects to be  known  bearing  the  aspects  of  the
three realms are just equal in being empty of true  existence  through  just
not observing them as existing ultimately.
-  When the emptiness of true existence is  established  by  reasoning,  one
should not think that there was true existence at the beginning and  through
applying reasoning, this true existence then becomes non-existent.
- This is what the disputant thinks; “If something is  not  truly  existent,
why is there a need to negate its existing truly? There is no need,  because
it is not truly existent.”
- The very fact that one negates its true existence means that it  is  truly
existent. The reason for establishing the lack of true existence is  posited
with regard to the person. Emptiness, or the  lack  of  true  existence,  is
established for the person.
- A person, due to the appearance of true existence,  adheres  to  phenomena
as truly existent. In order to counteract this wrong conception, we need  to
prove that phenomena do not exist truly.

- On the Mahayana paths of accumulation and  preparation,  one  has  belief.
That  belief  that  existed  on  the  Mahayana  paths  of  accumulation  and
preparation has not degenerated even on the Mahayana path of meditation.  In
fact it has been increased.
- Belief even exists prior to the attainment of the arya path,  so  it  also
exists on the path of meditation.
- If it is an arya’s path, it is pervaded by being a supramundane path.
- A mundane path of meditation is not a path of meditation.
- The mundane path of meditation is not  the  path  of  meditation  that  is
preceded by the path  of  seeing  and  followed  by  the  path  of  no-more-
learning.
- A mundane path of meditation does not have to  be  a  path.  It  can  even
exist in non-Buddhists.
- A  mundane  path  of  meditation  that  bears  the  aspect  of  peace  and
coarseness abandons the manifest afflictions of the desire realm.
- The mundane path of meditation abandons the manifest  afflictions  of  the
desire realm, and the supramundane path of meditation abandons the seeds  of
the afflictions of the desire realm.
- The path of meditation can be generated on a desire realm mind. We do  not
say that the Mahayana path of meditation can be generated  on  the  supports
that are the 9 mental abiding.
-  It is not generated on the 9 mental abiding because in the  continuum  of
a bodhisattva on the path of  meditation,  the  9  mental  abiding  are  not
present. This is because he has already achieved calm abiding -  the  result
has already been accomplished.
- However, the  desire  realm  mind  can  be  present  because  there  is  a
bodhisattva on the path of meditation who has a desire realm  support.  This
bodhisattva can be a person of the desire realm and in his  continuum  there
is a desire realm mind. Therefore, he is able to generate the Mahayana  path
of meditation on the support of a desire  realm  mind.  Such  a  bodhisattva
needs to engage in activities, such as buying food, going shopping,  etc.  -
If the minds that engage in these  activities  are  not  the  minds  of  the
desire realm, what kind of minds are they? Does this  bodhisattva  have  the
attachment of the desire realm? We say that this attachment  of  the  desire
realm serves as a branch of enacting others’ welfare.
- In general, someone who has attained the first concentration  is  pervaded
by  having  abandoned  the  afflictions  of  the  desire  realm.  However  a
bodhisattva for having trained very well  in  the  dexterity  of  meditative
stabilization and in bodhicitta, he has a  very  pacified  mind.  Therefore,
even if the afflictions were to manifest, they do not harm the  bodhisattva.
He has attained self-power (control or freedom) over these  afflictions.  He
will not come under the influence of the afflictions. This is  an  excellent
quality of having trained the mind.

