Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/Personal notes/Personal notes- Objects of intent.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:11.683759
================================================================================


The reason for the bodhisattva’s achievings observing the eleven objects of
observation is for the sake of the three objects of intent:
1. Great heroic mind - this refers to the great exalted  compassion  in  the
   continua of buddhas.
2. Great abandonment - this refers to the  true  cessations  or  non-abiding
   nirvana in the continua of buddha aryas.
3. Great realization – refers  to  the  omniscient  exalted  wisdom  in  the
   continua of buddhas.

- “The bodhisattvas engaging in the achievings” means that all the
discordant classes are abandoned without exception, all the objects to be
attained are attained without exception, and the supremacy of all is
enacted.
Both buddhas and bodhisattvas work for the welfare of sentient beings; not
only do they want to place them in liberation, they also want to place them
in buddhahood. So for the sake of achieving the three greatnesses, the
achievings are engaged in.
- The achievings through taking the three exalted knowers as objects and
the achievings that are particular applications are mutually inclusive.
This is because when the applications are practiced, there is pervasion
that the aspects of the three exalted knowers are practiced.
- The expression “achievings through taking the three exalted knowers as
objects” is related to the way the first three chapters are presented in
which the exalted knower of all aspects, the knower of paths, and the
knower of bases are presented.
-  The achievings that are particular applications are the achievings that
are four types of applications: 1.application in complete aspects, 2. peak
application, 3. serial application, and 4. instantaneous application.
- The achievings that are particular applications are presented in the
fourth through seventh chapters in which the four applications are
presented.

Someone’s opinion is differentiating between the achievings in relation to
the three exalted knowers and the achievings that are particular
applications says:
- If, during these achievings, hearing and contemplation are principal,
then those achievings are achievings by way of the three exalted knowers
taken as objects.
- If, during the time of achievings, deeds of generosity and so forth are
principal, then those achievings are particular applications.

Our system says: This is inappropriate.
-  If we take the meaning of hearing and contemplation being principal to
refer to the occasions in which objects of knowledge are determined without
practice by way of the applications in generosity and so forth being
principal, then, since the practice of generosity exists even previously
prior to entering the path, you have not answered the question. This is
because your explanation basically just applies to the occasions of having
entered the path; it does not address these occasions before entering the
path.
-  If we were to consider the occasions during which one contemplates the
meaning that has been determined and familiarizes with it, there is not
even the slightest reason for the practice of the deeds of generosity and
so forth not being principal then.
-  When one practices generosity, one contemplates again and again. For the
sake of familiarizing with generosity and for improving the practice of
generosity, one needs to familiarize again and again. Therefore, to
describe those occasions of familiarizing again and again through
contemplating the very meaning that has been determined, there is no reason
to say that during those occasions, the practice of generosity and so forth
are not principal.
-  If one were to assert that the four applications are the practice of
view and the activities of practice of the three exalted knowers are the
practice of deeds, then we could not explain this expression “the
applications of those three exalted knowers.”

Past scholar says: “whether or not one is focused on the beginning of the
six perfections, generosity and so forth” - this means that whether or not
one has the intention engaging on the beginning of the six perfections and
so forth.

Our system say: This is not correct because if that refers to whether or
not there is activity of contemplation of the practice of the six
perfections, then it follows that this first achieving would be an
achieving prior to entering the path of accumulation, because, having
initially attained the achieving of armor, there is activity of the
practice of contemplation which observes the six perfections.

Our system say: Upon attaining the path of accumulation, there is the
achieving of armor and the practice of contemplation that observes the six
perfections. Prior to the path of accumulation, there is no contemplation
of the six perfections, because prior to the path of accumulation there is
no achieving of armor.
Our system responds: You assert that if there is no activity of
contemplation of the practice of the six perfections, then this refers to
the activity of the practice of the three exalted knowers, and if there is
activity of contemplation of the practice of the six perfections, then this
refers to the practice of the four applications.
The consequence would be that prior to entering the path of accumulation,
there is activity of the practice of the three exalted knowers, because
after attaining the path of accumulation, there is activity of the practice
of contemplation that observes the six perfections. There is no activity
that does not involve the practice of contemplation that observes the six
perfections.
If you want to posit the absence of the activity of contemplation that
observes the six perfections, then you would have to posit it prior to the
path of accumulation.

Our system respond to the past scholar: if you accept that this first
achieving is an achieving before entering the path of accumulation, there
would be a contradiction according to my own system because in my system,
it is not possible to have this achieving prior to entering the path of
accumulation.

Later achieving refers to the achieving of definite issuance (or definite
emergence) – the fourth of the four achievings.
There are four achievings: 1. achieving of armor, 2. achieving of
engagement, 3. achieving of accumulation, and 4. of definite issuance. The
four applications do exist on the occasion of this fourth achieving.

Differences between the six perfections and the practice of the six
perfections: The six perfections exist only on the buddha ground, while the
practice of the six perfections can exist even prior to entering the path.

If you assert that:-
1. “the six perfections are not attained in the continuum” refers to the
achievings of the three exalted knowers, and
2. “the six perfections are attained in the continuum” refers to the
achievings that are the particular applications,
- this would contradict the four applications posited on the occasion of
the achieving of definite issuance.

The achieving of definite issuance is defined as a yoga of the pure grounds
that undoubtedly issues forth an exalted knower of all aspects.
 - On the occasion of the achieving of definite issuance, one has not yet
   attained an exalted knower of all aspects; one is not yet on the buddha
   ground.
 - the achieving of armor exists from the path of accumulation through the
   end of the continuum of a sentient being;
 - the achieving of engagement from the heat level of path of preparation
   through the end of a sentient being’s continuum;
 - the achieving of accumulation from the great level of the supreme mundane
   quality of the path of preparation through end of a sentient being’s
   continuum; and
 - the achieving of definite issuance on the three pure grounds.
We say that all four achievings exist on the occasion of the achieving of
definite issuance, the last of the four achievings.

When we consider the four applications posited on the achieving of definite
issuance, among the applications, serial application and instantaneous
application do not have a common locus.
 - the boundaries of the serial application are from the Mahayana path of
   accumulation through just prior to the end of the continuum of a sentient
   being,
 - the boundaries of instantaneous application are only at the end of a
   sentient being’s continuum.
 - the application in complete aspects and achieving in definite issuance
   have a common locus,
 - the peak application and achieving of definite issuance have a common
   locus,
 - the serial application and achieving of definite issuance have a common
   locus, and
 - the instantaneous application and achieving of definite issuance have a
   common locus.
   Although all four applications do not have a common locus with the
   achieving of definitive issuance, individually, each of the four
   applications has a common locus with the achieving of definite issuance.

-According to the past scholar’s assertions, this common locus would not
exist, and would contradict the four applications being posited on the
later achieving.

-  When a bodhisattva enters the path of accumulation, he attains the
application in complete aspects and serial application; afterwards, he will
attain the peak application and the instantaneous application. What is the
sequence of the four achievings? On the path of accumulation, one attains
the achieving of armor, then the achieving of engagement, then the
achieving of accumulation, and then the achieving of definite issuance.

The expressions “achievings through the three exalted knowers taken as
objects” and “achievings that are particular applications,” seem
contradictory, because one refers to the three exalted knowers, the other
to the applications.
 - some people think they refer to contradictory objects;
 - Our system says: we have to look at what the expressions refer to. We
   should not just consider the mode of expression. If we just apply these
   expressions and conclude they are contradictory, because one is a
   generality and one a particularity, this is a mistake. Because the mode
   of expression of terms and what they refer to in fact are different.
 - For example, in the expression “vase,” we see a case of engagement
   through an eliminative expresser -“vase” eliminates those that are not
   vase and engages “vase.”
 - In reality, a vase is impermanent, it is an existent, it is a functioning
   thing, it is not permanent, etc. These properties are not expressed by
   the term. The mode of expression of the terms and the existence in
   reality are different.

What is the self-entity of the achievings?
- Except for the section in the first chapter on the achieving of armor, in
the first three chapters it is explained that one takes the three exalted
knowers as objects. In the context of the achieving of armor in the first
chapter, it was mentioned that the practice of the six perfections is
possessed in their entirety, but in the remaining parts of the first three
chapters, the possession of the six perfections is not clearly indicated.
- In the next four chapters, on the four applications, the practices of the
six perfections were clearly indicated.

Let us look at the two syllogisms
1) “The subject – the Mahayana path of accumulation –  is  an  achieving  of
   the objects, the exalted knowers, because it is an activity  of  practice
   of meditation having taken some  aspect  of  the  three  knowers  as  its
   object.” The reason is that some aspect of the three exalted knowers  has
   been taken as the object in the practice of meditation.
2) “The subject –the Mahayana path of accumulation– is an achieving  of  the
   applications because it is an activity of practice that is conjoined with
   either attitude or application possessing the six perfections.”  Example,
   if there is the attitude possessing the perfection  of  generosity,  then
   one has the thought to engage in any of the three  types  of  generosity:
   the generosity of material gifts,  the  generosity  of  Dharma,  and  the
   generosity of  protection  or  fearlessness.  There  is  the  thought  to
   practice any of these three, and then there can be application  following
   the  attitude:  engaging  in  giving  material  gifts,   Dharma,   and/or
   protection. Along with the practice of  generosity,  there  is  also  the
   practice of the perfection of ethics, and so forth; the practices of  the
   six perfections are complete in their entirety.

2B2C-1A2C-4A2A. Meaning of positing the achievings as the entity  of  joyous
    effort

Four types of joyous effort that are correlated with the four achievings:-
     i) the joyous effort of armor,
    ii) the joyous effort of engaging in the practice of the applications,
   iii) the joyous effort that is undiscouraged regarding all of the
        Mahayana qualities, and is undisturbed by discordant classes, and
    iv) the joyous effort that is not complacent

-  There is no pervasion that if it is the entity of the achievings, then
it must be joyous effort. The correct meaning is that if one has joyous
effort, then one would have the achievings.
-  if one does not initiate joyous effort after having generated
conventional bodhicitta, then this is just a noble thought; one will not be
able to attain enlightenment.
- At the very beginning, we must have a very strong desire to practice all
the Mahayana qualities. If we do not have this kind of thought wishing to
practice all the Mahayana qualities, then no real practice of the extensive
achievings will develop.
- Suppose there are two people who do not have this extensive attitude, one
may be very learned, having heard these teachings and contemplated them
with reasoning, and so forth, while the other person has not done any of
this learning of the scriptural baskets. In the end, they will be about the
same, because of not having the desire to practice; no practice will occur.

- “Such bad systems will occur” means that if one who is learned in the
Dharma but does not practice were to explain the Dharma. People may
generate faith in that person, but because this person tries to explain the
Dharma without having practiced it, then bad systems will occur.
- First there is the achieving of the extensive attitude, which refers to
(1) the achieving of armor.
- From this extensive attitude or thought, extensive practice of the
applications will arise; this refers to (2) the achieving of engagement,
where one has strong engagement in the applications.
- From those two achievings, extensive accumulations become complete, so
then we have (3) the achieving of accumulations.
- In dependence on that, omniscience will definitely arise; this refers to
(4) the achieving of definite issuance (achieving of definite emergence).
- In this way, there are exactly four achievings; more are not needed.
- The activities of extensive attitude or the achieving of armor, actually
exists from the path of accumulation through the end of a sentient being’s
continuum. It is necessary to generate it at the beginning, but this does
not mean it is not needed or present later.
- a citation from Asanga says that;
      - the achieving of armor is included in the path of accumulation,
      - the achieving of engagement is included in the path of preparation,
and
      - the achieving of accumulation is included within the supreme mundane
quality level.
The explicit wording seems to indicate that the achieving of armor exists
on the path of accumulation and not beyond, the achieving of accumulation
exists on the path of preparation and not beyond, and so forth. This should
not be taken literally as stating the exact boundaries of the achievings.
If it is taken literally, then we cannot explain the phrase “exactly in
that manner” which appears in the commentary. The explanation that relates
to the citation from Asanga indicates the divisions and examples; they do
not indicate the exact boundaries of the four achievings.
- Exact sequence of the achievings:
  ­ the achieving on the path of preparation is  the  achieving  of  armor,
    because it is an achieving bearing the extensive attitude  of  practice
    possessing the six perfections.
  ­ the achieving included within the path of seeing is  the  achieving  of
    engagement, because it is an achieving distinguished by  joyous  effort
    that directly  engages  the  Mahayana  which  destroys  the  discordant
    classes of the six perfections.
  ­ the Mahayana path of meditation of the seventh ground and below is  the
    achieving of accumulation because it is an achieving  distinguished  by
    joyous  effort  which  completes  the  extensive  army   of   the   two
    accumulations.
  ­ the characteristic of the achieving of the very entity of the  path  of
    distinction of the eighth ground and above is the achieving of definite
    emergence, because it is a yoga of the pure grounds that  issues  forth
    omniscience without doubt.

2B2C-1A2C-4B1. The extensive thought: the achieving of armor

- being conjoined with the mind of enlightenment he fully performs those
full performances of generosity; the acts of generosity and the roots of
virtue of performing generosity are shared with all sentient beings and
dedicated to unsurpassable complete enlightenment. This kind of practice is
both the practice of the Perfection of Wisdom and the armor of the
perfection of generosity which fully performs generosity of a great
bodhisattva.
- In each of the six perfections, the six perfections are complete in their
entirety; these six sets of six make thirty-six.
The six related to the perfection of generosity:
   1) Generosity of generosity
   2) Ethics of generosity
   3) Patience of generosity
   4) Joyous effort of generosity
   5) Concentration of generosity
   6) Wisdom of generosity
And similarly, the other five are  also  to  be  practiced,  (2)  safeguards
ethics, (3) completes patience, (4) initiates joyous  effort,  (5)  achieves
concentration, and (6) cultivates wisdom.

-  At the time of practicing generosity, a bodhisattva includes the six
perfections in their entirety within the practice of generosity.

-  Armor of generosity. There are three types of generosity:
  1. Material generosity
  2. Generosity of Dharma
  3. Generosity of fearlessness
 - material generosity is posited as a practice of laypeople;
 - generosity of Dharma is posited as practiced by the ordained;
 - generosity of fearlessness is posited as being practiced by both
   laypeople and ordained.
-  The main point when practicing generosity is the motivation. If we have
a bodhicitta motivation, the practice becomes a practice of the perfection
of generosity. Without such a motivation, our practice of generosity can
become a practice for oneself alone.
-  When performing material generosity, one’s giving should not be mixed
with miserliness.
-  The generosity of fearlessness involves protecting life.
-  The generosity of Dharma - when we associate with friends and we speak
with a good motivation, our friends may generate good attitudes.
-  When we practice the six perfections in their entirety while practicing
generosity, this does not mean that we first practice the generosity of
generosity, then the ethics of generosity, then the patience of generosity,
etc. In fact, all six occur simultaneously with the practice of giving.
-  Ethics of generosity is not generosity. However, at the time of the
ethics of generosity, the ethics benefits the enhancement of the intention
to give. In that way, it becomes an armor of generosity. Although the
ethics of generosity is not generosity, it is concordant in property with
the armor of generosity.

Someone think: the armor of generosity and generosity are one
- In fact, the armor that is included within the achieving of armor of
generosity and generosity are not one.
Someone think:  The proof for there being thirty-six is the fact that the
six generosities are concordant in property as generosity, and the six
wisdoms are concordant in property as wisdom. This is the proof that there
are thirty-six
Our system:  The six generosities are concordant in property as generosity,
and the six wisdoms are concordant in property as wisdom; according to our
system, this is not the proof.
 - The expression “the six generosities being concordant in property as
   generosity” means that not all these generosities are generosity,
   although they are concordant in property as generosity.
 - The ethics of generosity is not generosity, but is concordant in property
   as generosity. In order to enhance generosity, ethics is practiced.
 - These six generosities are practiced to enhance generosity. Although they
   are not generosity, they approach generosity, or go in the direction of
   generosity, and are thus known as the armor of generosity. The generosity
   of generosity is generosity, but the other five are not generosity.
 - When a bodhisattva practices ethics, his practice should not be
   influenced by the intention to seek liberation for oneself alone. A
   bodhisattva needs to stop the seeking of liberation for himself alone.
   This kind of abandonment is an uncommon branch of bodhisattva’s ethics.
 - With respect to the pratimoksa (individual liberation) vows, the
   intention to abandon harming others as well as the bases is an uncommon
   branch. There are seven main ways of harming others: three non-virtues of
   body, and four of speech. There are three non-virtues of mind:
   covetousness, harmful intent, and wrong view. These three are said to be
   the cause for harming others through body and speech.

THE ACHIEVING OF ENGAGEMENT
-  After the achieving of armor, there is the achieving of engagement.
Using an analogy to explain the sequence: before we go to war, we have to
put on armor; then we are ready to engage in war.
-  The nine divisions of the achieving of engagement are:
  1. Achieving of the concentration and formless absorptions
  2. Achieving of the six perfections
  3. Achieving of the superior paths: path of seeing, path  of  meditation,
     path of no-more-learning
  4. Achieving of the four immeasurables
  5. Achieving in the non-observable
  6. Achieving of the three pure spheres
  7. Achieving of the objects of intent
  8. Achieving of the six clairvoyances
  9. Achieving of the exalted knower of all aspects
- The nine types of achieving of engagement are further subsumed into  two:-

      (i) Engagement in the causes, the Mahayana paths, and
      (ii) Engagement in their results.

The way these divisions relate with the nine divisions of achieving of
engagement is as follows:
(1) Engagement in the causes is divided into three categories:
      1.      Engagement in the concentrations and formless absorptions;
the mundane paths included within the Mahayana support
      2~5  Engagement  in  the  supramundane  paths,  which  has  four  sub-
divisions
      6~8  Qualities that differentiate both  of  them  from  the  Hinayana,
which has three sub-divisions.
(2) Engagement in the results,
      9.     The exalted knowers of all aspects

Engagement in the supramundane paths
   1. The six perfections, generosity and so forth, which act to attain the
      fulfillment of (one’s) realization
   2. The paths of seeing, meditation, and no-more-learning, which act to
      attain the fulfillment of one’s abandonment.
   3. The four immeasurables, love and so forth, the method to accomplish
      others’ welfare
   4. The possession of non-observation that realizes emptiness” purifies
      others’ welfare.
-  These first two have to do with one’s own welfare.
-  The next two have to do with others’ welfare.

There are three qualities that differentiate them from the Hinayana:
 1. the three completely pure spheres in which the action, object and  doer
    are realized to be empty of true existence regarding all things of  the
    six perfections;
 2. transformation into the purpose of the three objects of intent in which
    one dedicates roots of virtue to unsurpassable enlightenment, and
 3. the activity of practice with the characteristic of  perfectly  abiding
    through observing engagement in the six clairvoyances, the  method  for
    quickly completing the accumulations. We have the achievings of the six
    clairvoyances that enable one to quickly complete the accumulations.
-  Engagement in the exalted knower of all aspects does not  mean  that  the
exalted knower of all aspects is generated in  one’s  continuum.  Engagement
here refers to engaging in the aspect.

Calm abiding and special insight
- If one has not become skilled in the sequence and entity of calm-abiding
and special-insight that are included within the preparations of the first
concentration at the start, one will not understand the general
presentation of the mundane path.
-  One needs to attain calm abiding before attaining special insight.
Without attaining calm abiding there is no attainment of special insight.
However, after having attained special insight, the sequence is not
definite. This means that it is possible that special insight comes before
calm abiding. At the beginning the sequence is definite, but after having
attained special insight, there is no certainty.
- Our system - one first attains calm abiding within the preparations of
the first concentration. In dependence on that, one attains a similitude of
special insight, and later an actual special insight included within the
preparations of the first concentration. After passing through the seven
preparations, one attains an actual first concentration. Having done that,
it is possible to attain the calm abiding included within the actual first
concentration in dependence on the special insight included within the
preparations of the first concentration.
- After achieving calm abiding, one makes effort in  cultivating  the  seven
types of attention:
    1. Attention of a mere beginner.
    2. Attention of individual knowledge of character
    3. Attention arisen from belief
    4. Attention of thorough isolation
    5. Attention of joy-withdrawal
    6. Attention of analysis
    7. Attention of final application
    8. The result of final application – this is not a preparation but it is
       the actual first concentration.
 - Text says - having generated the bliss of pliancy of the body and mind by
  having initially achieved a single-pointed mind by way of the nine steps
  of mental abiding, a fully qualified calm-abiding is achieved. One has
  then attained (1) the attention of a mere beginner, which is calm abiding.
  When calm abiding is first attained, that calm abiding is solely calm
  abiding.
- On the basis of that calm abiding, one engages in the practice having the
  aspect of coarseness and peace. One views the desire realm in the aspect
  of coarseness and the first concentration in the aspect of peace.
- One thinks about the undesirable aspects of the desire realm, one
  generates the understanding of the desire realm as undesirable. One then
  views the first concentration as peaceful. In this way, one undergoes
  analysis of the desire realm and the first concentration.
- Through the force of this analysis, one attains a similitude of special
  insight. Upon attaining this, one attains the attention of the individual
  knowledge of character. At the point of attaining this individual
  knowledge of character, one has a similitude of special insight.
- One continues analyzing, viewing the desire realm in the aspect of
  coarseness and the first concentration in the aspect of peace. As soon as
  one is able to induce the bliss and pliancy of body and mind through this
  analysis, then special insight is attained; one simultaneously also
  attains a union of calm abiding and special insight. This is the attention
  arisen from belief. At this point, one has attained the meditative
  stabilization that is a union of calm abiding and special insight.
- One then goes on to abandon the afflictions of the desire realm. There
  are nine rounds or levels of afflictions: three great, three middling, and
  three small. When one has the actual antidote to the three great
  afflictions, one has attained the attention of thorough isolation.
- When one has the direct antidote to the three middling afflictions, one
  has the attention of joy-withdrawal.
- The attention arisen from thorough isolation consists of six steps: Three
  mundane uninterrupted paths and three mundane liberated paths. These
  abandon the three great afflictions of the desire realm. The corresponding
  objects of abandonment for the attention of thorough isolation are the
  three great afflictions of the desire realm.
- The attention of joy-withdrawal also consists of six steps: three mundane
  uninterrupted paths and three mundane liberated paths. These abandon the
  three middling afflictions of the desire realm.
- Having abandoned the three great and three middling afflictions of the
  desire realm, most of the manifest afflictions of the desire realm have
  been abandoned. This practitioner sees that the manifest afflictions of
  the desire realm do not occur, and wonders, “Have I abandoned all the
  afflictions of the desire realm without exception?” With that doubt, he
  then investigates to see whether or not the afflictions of the desire
  realm have been completely abandoned by paying attention to the signs of
  occurrence of these afflictions. He individually investigates the signs of
  occurrence of the afflictions, and this is the investigation of analysis.
- He finds that there are still the three small afflictions of the desire
  realm that have not been abandoned, and seeks to abandon them. When he
  generates the antidote to these, then he has the attention of final
  application. This consists of three mundane uninterrupted paths and two
  liberated paths.
- When the third uninterrupted path gives rise to a liberated path, that
  liberated path is the attention of the final result of application. That
  is the attainment of the actual first concentration.
- The attention of a mere beginner, fully-qualified calm-abiding acts to
  separate from the attachment to the lower levels. This means that before
  the afflictions are abandoned, they need to be subdued, or suppressed. At
  the point of calm abiding, having overcome laxity and excitement, one has
  suppressed the afflictions to some degree, although they have not been
  abandoned. As a result of this suppression, the abandonment takes place
  later.
- The antidotes that abandon the afflictions of the desire realm begin at
  the attention arisen from thorough isolation. Abandoning the three great
  afflictions is done by the attention arisen from thorough isolation. The
  attentions before that – the attention of a mere beginner, the attention
  of individual knowledge of character, and the attention arisen from belief
  do not act as antidotes to the afflictions.
- Explicitly we do not see the first three levels explained as abandoning
  the afflictions; abandoning the three great afflictions is done by the
  attention arisen from thorough isolation. Before the afflictions are
  abandoned, they need to be subdued or suppressed. If one has not subdued
  them, there is no way to abandon them. At the point of calm abiding,
  having overcome laxity and excitement, one has suppressed the afflictions
  to some degree, although they have not been abandoned. As a result of this
  suppression, the abandonment takes place later.

 - Acarya who composed the commentary does not accept a mind-basis-of-all
   that is separate from the six collections: the eye, ear, nose, tongue,
   mind, and body primary consciousnesses.
 - If we add the mind-basis-of-all and the afflicted mentality, there are
   eight collections. This is an assertion of the Cittamatra school. They
   say the mind-basis-of-all is the final illustration of the person. The
   afflicted mentality views the mind-basis-of-all as a self-sufficient,
   substantially existent self.
 - Vasubandhu’s text, Thirty Stanzas, is cited to prove the point.
 - The afflicted mentality being included in whatever level the support is.
   According to the Cittamatrins, when one is reborn in the desire realm,
   the afflicted mentality in his continuum is included in the level of the
   desire realm. When this person has attained the first concentration, all
   the manifest afflictions of the desire realm have been abandoned, but the
   afflicted mentality has not been abandoned. It has been explained that,
   with the exception of three occasions, manifest afflicted mentality is
   not ceased.
 - The three occasions are:
1) The occasion of a foe-destroyer
2) The occasion of an absorption of cessation
3) The occasion of a bodhisattva who has attained mastery

2B2C-1A2C-4B2C-2B. Entity

- There are two types with respect to concentrations:
  1) Causal absorption
  2) Resultant rebirth
1. A concentration that is a causal absorption is concomitant with a single-
pointed mind that has transcended the lower levels by means of branches.
Example: the eight attentions.
2. A concentration that is a resultant rebirth is a fruition of having
cultivated the concentration that is a causal absorption in another
rebirth, and is a result concordant with the cause. Example: the aggregates
of that rebirth, the actual absorption or concentration of that rebirth.
The actual or direct cause of the resultant rebirth is an actual
concentration. Without having attained an actual concentration, even if one
has attained the preparations, one will not take rebirth in that level. For
example, if one has attained the actual first concentration, this serves as
a cause for a resultant rebirth in the first concentration. If one has not
attained an actual first concentration, even if one has attained many of
the preparations for that concentration, one will not be reborn in the
first concentration.
- A formless absorption that is a causal absorption is concomitant with a
single-pointed mind that has transcended the lower levels by means of the
object of observation.
- A formless absorption that is a resultant rebirth is either a fruition  of
having cultivated that in another rebirth, or a result concordant  with  the
cause. It is a property attained from birth in  the  continuum  of  sentient
beings who are born in the four types of formless realms.
-  In order to attain the concentrations, one has to purify or abandon the
afflictions of the lower levels by means of branches. In contrast, the
formless absorptions do not have dissimilar branches; one attains the
formless absorptions by means of the objects of observation.
- Division of Concentrations & Formless Absorption
The four concentrations of the form realm
   1. 1st concentration
   2. 2nd concentration
   3. 3rd concentration
   4. 4th concentration
The four formless absorptions:
 1. Infinite Space
 2. Infinite Consciousness
 3. Nothingness
 4. The Peak of Existence
-  1st to 7th levels are each of three types: afflicted, pure, and
uncontaminated.
-  Only 8th level, Peak of Existence, has afflicted and pure, not
uncontaminated. This is because the Peak of Existence is unclear; its
object of observation and aspect are unclear, so it is not suitable as a
support for supramundane paths.
- The Hinayana says that there are no uncontaminated types for the Peak of
Existence.
- Because bodhisattvas are skilled in means, they can generate supramundane
paths based on a desire realm mind and on the Peak of Existence.
-  The preparations of the 2nd concentration, 3rd concentration, and so
forth, including the preparations of the four formless absorptions are only
of pure ones. There are no afflicted preparations, because they would be
unable to act to separate from the attachment to the lower levels.
- A preparation of the 1st concentration is of two—pure and  uncontaminated.

- There are uncontaminated preparations of  the  1st  concentration  because
stream-enterers and so forth who have not attained an  actual  concentration
generate a supramundane path only in dependence on a preparation of the  1st
concentration.
-  An uncontaminated path does not needs to be supported  on  the  remaining
preparations (2nd concentration, 3rd concentration, etc) because if one  has
attained a preparation of the 2nd concentration, this  means  that  one  has
definitely attained an actual 1st concentration. Since one has  attained  an
actual 1st  concentration,  which  is  easy  to  use  compared  to  using  a
preparation, there would be no reason to use a preparation.
- A  stream-enterer  does  not  need  to  generate  an  uncontaminated  path
supported on a preparation of the 2nd concentration and above, because  this
stream-enterer can attain the state of a foe-destroyer on  the  basis  of  a
preparation of the 1st concentration.
- A stream-enterer would not need to separate from attachment to the lower
levels by using an actual concentration, because such a person has already
separated from afflictions by way of the preparations of the 1st
concentration.
-  What actually acts to separate from attachment to the lower levels is a
preparation; thus there is no need to separate from attachment using the
actual concentrations.
-  Contaminated actual concentrations do not act as antidotes for their own
level and higher levels.
Uncontaminated ones act as antidotes for their own level and higher levels,
whereby they are paths that separate from attachment, manifestly achieve
excellent qualities and are also paths that abide happily in the present
life.
-  The 1st concentration is two types:
      1. a mere 1st actual concentration and
      2. a special 1st actual concentration.
- A mere 1st concentration is:
(i) that concomitant with a single-pointed mind distinguished by having
separated from the attachment to the desire realm through the antidotal
branches of investigation and analysis,
(ii) which possesses the benefit branch of joy and happiness generated from
isolation.
- A special first actual concentration is:
(i) that concomitant with a single-pointed mind distinguished by having
separated even from the attachment to investigation through the antidotal
branch of analysis,
(ii) which possesses equanimity feeling.
- The difference between a mere 1st actual concentration and a special 1st
actual concentration is that the special 1st concentration has separated
from even the attachment to investigation, through the antidotal branch of
analysis.
- For the 1st concentration, the special actual 1st concentration has
separated even from attachment to investigation, and for this reason it is
called “special.”
- For the 2nd concentration and above, there are no divisions into mere and
special because they do not separate from any of the branches of their own
level; there is only the mere type.
-  The  2nd  concentration  acts  to  separate  from   the   attachment   to
investigation  and  analysis  through  the  antidotal  branch  of   internal
clarity, and possesses the benefit branch of  joy  and  happiness  generated
from meditative stabilization.
-  The  3rd  concentration  is  distinguished  by  having   separated   from
attachment  to  joy  through  the   antidotal   branches   of   mindfulness,
introspection,  and  equanimity,  and  possesses  the  benefit   branch   of
happiness that is isolated from joy.
-  The  4th  concentration  is  distinguished  by  having   separated   from
attachment to happiness through the  antidotal  branch  of  completely  pure
mindfulness and equanimity, and possesses the benefit branch  of  equanimity
feeling.
- For each of the four concentrations, we can posit the (1) antidotal, (2)
benefit, and (3) basis branches.
For the mere 1st actual concentration has five branches:
    • Antidotal branches: investigation and analysis
    • Benefit branches: happiness and joy generated from isolation
    • Basis branch: meditative stabilization
For the special 1st actual concentration,
    • Antidotal branch: analysis
    • Benefit branch: equanimity feeling.
    • Basis branch: meditative stabilization
For the 2nd concentration has four branches:
    • Antidotal branch: Internal clarity
    •  Benefit  branches:  joy  and  happiness  generated  from   meditative
      stabilization
    • Basis branch: meditative stabilization
For the 3rd concentration has five branches:
    • Antidotal branches: mindfulness, introspection, equanimity
    • Benefit branch: happiness isolated from joy
    • Basis branch: meditative stabilization
For the 4th concentration has four branches:
    • Antidotal branches: mindfulness and equanimity
    • Benefit branch: equanimity feeling
    • Basis branch: meditative stabilization
- The four concentrations are discussed in terms of their branches:
   - the antidotal branches which abandon harm,
   - the benefit branches which achieve benefit, and,
   - basis branches; the branches of abidance which are both of them.
- The formless absorptions, in contrast, are discussed  in  terms  of  their
objects of observation, not in terms of branches.
-  The source Infinite Space: This first of the four formless absorptions,
having seen the discrimination of form and obstruction as coarse,
repeatedly destroys this discrimination. Instead of this discrimination, it
familiarizes with the discrimination that thinks, “space is infinite.” By
repeatedly familiarizing with this discrimination, one generates a single-
pointed mind in which this thought, “space is infinite,” is manifest at the
time of the actual absorption.
- For formless realm, it actually has no physical location.
- Normally, a person has five aggregates: form, feeling, discrimination,
compositional factors, and consciousness.
- For a person of the formless realm, there is no form aggregate, although
there are the four non-physical aggregates. So, a person of a particular
level among the four levels of the formless realm is distinguished by his
object of observation.
-  In the 1st formless absorption, one repeatedly familiarizes with the
thought, “space is infinite,” whereby one generates this “Infinite Space”
that is concomitant with a single-pointed mind in which this discrimination
“space is infinite” is manifest.
-  For the next level, Infinite Consciousness, one views the attention that
thinks “space is infinite” as something to be stopped, and takes to mind
the thought, “that very attention is infinite,” and manifests that thought.
One manifests the discrimination, “consciousness is infinite.”
-  For the next level, the source Nothingness, one views the discrimination
“consciousness is infinite” as something to be ceased, and thinks “There is
no object to be apprehended below that.” By repeatedly familiarizing with
that thought, one is able to manifest this thought and generate a mind
which is concomitant with a meditative stabilization.
- With respect to the source Not Without Discrimination, discrimination
refers to disease, boils, and pain
- Without Discrimination refers to thorough confusion.
- Without Discrimination Not Without Discrimination means without coarse
discrimination, not without subtle discrimination.
- By taking to mind the thought, “peace is sublime,” one generates that
concomitant with a single-pointed mind that is able to set in equipoise on
that discrimination, “peace is sublime.” One familiarizes with the
discrimination that thinks, “there is no coarse discrimination, but it is
not that there is no subtle discrimination”; in that way, one generates the
thought, “peace is sublime.”
- On this 4th level, one views the discrimination on the previous level
-“there is nothing” as something to be ceased. One familiarizes with the
discrimination, “there is no coarse discrimination, but there is subtle
discrimination.” On the basis of that, one generates a mind concomitant
with a meditative stabilization in which that discrimination is manifest.
-  Four types of afflicted concentrations:
 1. Predominance of craving
 2. Predominance of view
 3. Predominance of pride
 4. Predominance of doubt
-  When a concentration is newly generated, it is a pure concentration.
-  Predominance of craving - Due to relishing the taste of happiness in the
concentration, craving can be generated. Due to the increase of craving,
craving becomes concomitant with the mind, and in that way a pure
concentration becomes an afflicted concentration. Initially, the
concentration is not afflicted, but later, due to the generation of
craving, it becomes an afflicted concentration.
-  Predominance of view - Having attained a concentration, with
clairvoyance, one looks at the past and future. Seeing no limit to the past
and future, one develops a view of the self as permanent. As this view
becomes stronger, a mind concomitant with this bad view is generated and
the concentration becomes an afflicted concentration. At this point, the
absorption has degenerated.
-  Predominance of pride - Having generated a concentration, one thinks “I
have achieved a special concentration, and others haven’t.” Thus there is
generation of pride, and when this pride becomes stronger, the mind becomes
concomitant with pride, and the concentration becomes an afflicted
concentration.
- Predominance of doubt - Having generated a concentration, one generates
doubt thinking, “Is that which has been attained by me a path to liberation
or not?” As that doubt becomes stronger, the absorption becomes concomitant
with this doubt,   whereby the concentration becomes an afflicted
concentration. Some texts talk about a predominance of ignorance, rather
than doubt.  There is a factor of ignorance when one thinks, “Is that which
I have attained a path to liberation or not?” As that becomes stronger, the
absorption becomes concomitant with ignorance.
- Four types of pure concentrations:-
 1. partial concordance with degeneration,
 2. partial concordance with abidance
 3. partial concordance with enhancement
 4. partial concordance with definite discrimination
- The partial concordance with degeneration is a pure concentration which
is concordant with the generation of afflictions of its own level or a
lower level afterwards. As above it is possible for craving, bad views,
pride, doubt, or ignorance to be generated. In this first type, the
generation of afflictions of either its own or a lower level afterwards is
possible.
- The partial concordance with abidance is a pure concentration that
induces another pure level of the same level as itself afterwards.
- The third type, the partial concordance with enhancement, induces a pure
concentration of a higher level than itself afterwards.
- The partial concordance with definite discrimination is a pure
concentration that induces a supramundane path afterwards.

- We should apply the above explanation to the three other concentrations
  and to the first three formless absorptions.
- The Peak of Existence has no partial concordance with enhancement,
  because there is no other level higher than it. For the partial
  concordance with enhancement, we have a pure concentration that induces a
  pure one of a higher level afterwards; since for the Peak of Existence,
  there is no higher level, there is no partial concordance with
  enhancement.
- According to the common presentation, i.e. the Hinayana, the Peak of
  Existence also has no partial concordance with definite discrimination. An
  arya who has attained a mind of the Peak of Existence generates an
  uncontaminated path by actualizing the mind of Nothingness.
- the reason for the formless absorptions not being presented in terms of
 branches because in the formless absorptions, special insight is present,
 but calm abiding is predominant. The formless absorptions are of the same
 taste in calm abiding, therefore the branches are not presented
 differently.
- those who have attained a concentration seek definite emergence from
 coarse and subtle manifest feelings of happiness and suffering; they do not
 seek definite emergence from equanimity because it is difficult for
 heedless ordinary beings to realize that compositional suffering is in the
 nature of suffering.
- We need to try to identify the pervasive compounded suffering, or
 compositional suffering and generate the mind that wishes to separate from
 it.
- The four concentrations are presented respectively by way of the stages
  of acting to separate from attachment to the various objects.
- For the 1st concentration, by way of the stages of separating from
  attachment to coarse suffering feelings and mental unhappiness, the 1st
  concentration is attained.
- After having attained the 1st concentration, one tries to separate from
  subtler forms of suffering; by way of acting to separate from attachment
  to unfortunate states that are subtle suffering feelings, one attains the
  2nd concentration.
- By way of acting to separate from attachment to coarse happy feelings and
  mental happiness, one attains the 3rd concentration.
- By way of acting to separate from attachment even to subtle happiness,
  one attains the 4th concentration. As we go up, more and more subtle forms
  of suffering are separated from. At the 4th concentration, one even
  separates from subtle happy feelings, and the branch, equanimity feeling,
  is attained.
- When one attains a lower concentration, e.g. a 1st concentration, after
  abiding in it for some time, one eventually generates a feeling of
  aversion towards it. You feel you’ve had enough of it, and you try to
  attain a higher level, e.g. a 2nd concentration. The fact that one
  develops aversion towards one of these levels after abiding in it for a
  long time is a sign that such a level is not perfect.
- The four formless absorptions are generated by way of stages of definite
  emergence from the four.
- In order to attain the 1st formless absorption, Infinite Space, one stops
  the discrimination of forms and obstructions.
- For the 2nd level, Infinite Consciousness, one stops the discrimination
  of Infinite Space
- For the 3rd level, one stops the discrimination of Infinite Consciousness
- For the 4th level, one stops the discrimination of Nothingness.
- That is how the four formless absorptions are posited. To attain a higher
  level, you stop the discrimination of the lower level.
- By way of cultivating the preparations, one will attain the various
  concentrations and formless absorptions. This will lead to rebirth in the
  form realm or formless realm. This is the presentation in general.
- In this context, there is mention of each of the four concentrations
  being divided into small, middle, and great. This is the case for the four
  concentrations, and there are thus twelve levels of the form realm.
- In the most general context, we talk of eight levels of the 4th
  concentration, because on top of the three levels there are five levels of
  arya beings. If we include these five, there are seventeen levels of the
  form realm. Here, just the twelve levels are mentioned.
- From cultivating the small, middle, and great levels of the 1st
  concentration, one will accomplish the rebirths of the concentrations of
  the three other abodes of the 1st concentration; by cultivating the small,
  middle, and great levels of the 2nd concentration, 3rd concentration and
  4th concentration, one will accomplish the rebirths of the concentrations
  of Little Light, and so forth.
- By cultivating the formless absorptions one will accomplish the
  aggregates of the four names- feeling, discrimination, compositional
  factors, and consciousness at that location where one dies and
  transmigrates - this refer to the formless realms.
- Know that although the formless realms do not have divisions of higher or
  lower levels that are ‘other abodes’, due to cultivating small, middle,
  and great levels, one will accomplish high or low rebirths, and bad or
  good rebirths of the formless realms. There are no specific locations of
  the formless realms, therefore there are no higher or lower levels that
  are other abodes.
- What do we mean by small, middle, and great levels? There are two
  factors: continuous application and respectful application.
- If neither of those is strong, then it is a small level
- If one of those is strong, it is a cultivation of the middle level
- If both are strong, the cultivation is of the great level.
- In the formless realm, there are no divisions that are higher or lower
  abodes. The high or low rebirths and bad or good rebirths of the formless
  realms refer to long or short life span, many or few afflictions, and so
  forth.
- The four immeasurables are:
1. “may all sentient beings have happiness and its causes” is immeasurable
  love;
2. “may all sentient beings be free of suffering and its causes,” is
  immeasurable compassion;
3. “may all sentient beings never be separated from the happiness that is
  free from suffering,” is immeasurable joy;
4. “may all sentient beings abide in equanimity, free from attachment and
  anger that hold some close and other distant,” is immeasurable equanimity.


-  The four immeasurables are pervaded by being attained in dependence on
  an actual concentration.
