Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/Personal notes/Personal notes- Appln in Complete Aspects - EKAA CPoM.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:52:11.749796
================================================================================


Aspects of an exalted knower of all aspects (EKAA).
-There are 3 types of EKAA:
   1. EKAA that are in the entity of KB.
   2. EKAA that are in the entity of KP.
   3. EKAA that are in the entity of EKAA
-The reason these EKAA are divided into 3 types is because the  aspects  of
the EKAA that are:
      - those concordant in type with those existing in learner hearers;
      - those concordant in type with those existing in bodhisattvas; and
      - those concordant in type with those existing in buddhas.
- One attains an EKAA by way of having cultivated the KB as well as the KP.

- In order to attain an EKAA one has to cultivate the KP as well as the KB.
- The culminated exalted wisdoms  ranging  from  the  close  placements  of
mindfulness (CPoM) through to the final aspects of a buddha,  by  means  of
being paths of the 3 types of EKAA, are asserted to be in  accordance  with
the existence of:
- 37 aspects for hearers,
- 34 for bodhisattvas, and
- 39 for buddhas
- Total 110 aspects of an EKAA
- EKAA is divided into the 3 types of EKAA because  the  EKs  of  all  arya
persons are included within the  EKAA,  in  the  manner  of  possession  of
progressive excellent qualities. This means that  the  lower  arya  persons
have certain excellent qualities and,  through  these  excellent  qualities
having progressed, one attains the EKAA. So from that point of view we  say
that “all the EKs of arya persons are included within the EKAA.”
- Qualm: Are not the CPoM and  the  like  explained  to  be  the  excellent
qualities of the Mahayana PoA in the context of the extensive  explanation?
Why are the aspects of an EKAA divided into 3 types, those concordant  with
hearers, etc.?
- Response: There is no  fault.  The  37  harmonies  of  enlightenment  are
posited for the sake of understanding that these are  in  common  with  the
hearers, since they are concordant in property in  being  paths  of  the  7
sets:

|37 harmonies with enlightenment: Aspects of a knower of|
|bases concordant with those of hearers                 |
|1.    Close placements of mindfulness|4                 |
|2.   Correct abandonings             |4                 |
|3.   Legs of magical emanation       |4                 |
|4.   Powers                          |5                 |
|5.   Strengths                       |5                 |
|6.   Branches of enlightenment       |7                 |
|7.   Branches of aryas' paths        |8                 |
|                                     |37                |


- The 6 sets, the path of antidotes and so forth, are posited  as  KP  from
the point of view of bodhisattvas for the sake of understanding  that  they
are concordant in property with bodhisattvas.
1. Paths of antidotes
2. Paths of emanation
3. Paths of abiding happily in the present life
4. Supramundane paths
5. Paths of abandonment
6. Paths of buddhas
- These aspects are common with hearers  because  they  are  concordant  in
property. For this reason, the aspects concordant with  those  existing  in
hearers are posited. Likewise,  those  aspects  concordant  with  those  of
bodhisattvas are posited so as to understand that they are concordant  with
those of the bodhisattvas’ path.
- Due to the 110 aspects having been divided in accordance with  lower  arya
persons, one will understand that for a  person  definite  in  the  Mahayana
lineage:
        - the KP and KB are attained on the Mahayana PoS, and
        - the EKAA is attained on the buddha ground.
In the case of someone not definite in the Mahayana lineage,
    - the KB is attained on the Hinayana PoS,
    - the KP on the Mahayana PoS and
    - the EKAA on the buddha ground.
- For these two types of persons, they attain the 3 EKs at different  points
in time, so the presentations are not identical.
- All 173 aspects of the 3 EKs are cultivated on the Mahayana  PoA,  so  the
boundaries begin from the Mahayana PoA.
- A bodhisattva on the  PoA  cultivates  these  aspects  starting  from  the
Mahayana PoA. Of course, for someone definite in the  Mahayana  lineage,  on
the occasion of the PoA, none of the EKs have been  attained,  although  one
cultivates the aspects of the 3 EKs.
Aspects of a knower of bases concordant with those existing in hearers
Close placements of mindfulness (CPoM)
- The four close placements of mindfulness:
   1. CPoM on the body
   2. CPoM on feelings
   3. CPoM on minds
   4. CPoM on phenomena
- Each of these  four  CPoM  is  to  be  meditated  on,  or  cultivated,  by
examining the specific characteristics and the general characteristics:
       (i)         Specific characteristics:
            a.   the body being unclean
            b.   feelings being suffering
            c.   minds being impermanent, and
            d.   phenomena being selfless, and
       (ii)        General characteristics:
            a.   impermanence
            b.   suffering
            c.   emptiness
            d.   selflessness
            e.   and emptiness of true existence,
- Definition of a CPoM: an EK of one  who  has  entered  the  path  that  is
included within either mindfulness or wisdom  that,  through  examining  the
specific and general characteristics of each of the four  -  body,  feeling,
minds, and phenomena - meditates on them.
|By closely placing   |One will      |Because...                               |
|oneself through      |engage...     |                                         |
|mindfulness on...    |              |                                         |
|Body                 |True          |having understood that the body is in the|
|                     |sufferings    |nature of pervasive compounded suffering |
|                     |              |through that, one will generate the wish |
|                     |              |to be free from it.                      |
|Feelings             |True origins  |having seen that craving is induced by   |
|                     |              |feelings, one will generate the wish to  |
|                     |              |abandon craving.                         |
|Mind                 |True          |having realized that the mind (that is   |
|                     |cessations    |free from a self) is produced and ceases |
|                     |              |momentarily through that, one will not   |
|                     |              |have the fear that the self will be      |
|                     |              |severed, so one will generate the wish to|
|                     |              |actualize cessations.                    |
|Phenomena            |True paths    |having realized that phenomena  of the   |
|                     |              |thoroughly afflicted class are to be     |
|                     |              |abandoned and                            |
|                     |              |phenomena of the completely pure class   |
|                     |              |are to be relied upon, one will develop  |
|                     |              |the wish to cultivate the paths          |
Objects of observation of the CPoM:
* Body: outer, inner, outer/inner
* Feelings: pleasant, unpleasant, neutral
* Minds: Primary consciousnesses
* Phenomena: (1) All mental factors that are not feelings;
                     (2) all non-associated compositional factors and
 unproduced phenomena.
-Non-associated compositional factors are  impermanent  phenomena  that  are
neither form nor consciousness, e.g. person, time, impermanence.
-Unproduced    phenomena    =    permanent    phenomena,  e.g.   cessations,
emptiness, uncompounded space.
-By closely placing oneself  through  mindfulness  on  the  body,  one  will
engage true sufferings because having understood that the  body  is  in  the
nature of pervasive compounded suffering, through that,  one  will  generate
the wish to be free from it.
- By closely placing oneself  through  mindfulness  on  feelings,  one  will
engage true  origins  because,  having  seen  that  craving  is  induced  by
feelings, one will generate the wish to abandon craving.
- By closely placing oneself through mindfulness on minds, one  will  engage
true cessations because, having realized that the mind that is free  from  a
self is produced and ceases momentarily through that, one will not have  the
fear that the self will be  severed,  so  one  will  generate  the  wish  to
actualize cessations.
- By closely placing oneself through  mindfulness  on  phenomena,  one  will
engage true paths because, having realized that phenomena of the  thoroughly
afflicted class are to be abandoned and phenomena  of  the  completely  pure
class are to be relied upon, one will develop  the  wish  to  cultivate  the
paths.
- The reason for observing these, the body and so forth, at  first  is  that
childish beings conceptualize:
    1. the body as a thing which is the abode of a self,
    2. feelings as the utilizations of a self,
    3. minds as a thing that is a self, and
    4. phenomena  as  the  bases  of  a  thoroughly  afflicted  self  and  a
       completely pure self.
- Therefore, for the sake of overcoming these, they-  having  realized  with
wisdom the specific characteristics, the body being unclean  and  so  forth,
and the general characteristics, the body being impermanent  and  so  forth,
and empty of true  existence-  place  themselves  single-pointedly  on  them
through mindfulness.
- These are cultivated by bodhisattvas beginning from the  occasion  of  the
small level of the PoA.
- Since the culmination of these is the aspects of an EKAA, there  are  many
purposes for positing the CPoM:
 i. to make known that the 37 harmonies with enlightenment are generated  in
    the continua of bodhisattvas;
ii. to make known that they belong to the class of hearer’s realizations  at
    the time of differentiating among the classes of clear realizations from
    the point of view of the persons who are the supports; and
iii. having known that they transform into EKAA at the time  of  culmination
    due to cultivation concordant with those  by  bodhisattvas,  to  realize
    that in an EKAA there is a KB concordant with that generated in hearers.


- If one does not closely placing oneself through mindfulness  on  the  body
and understands that the body is  in  the  nature  of  pervasive  compounded
suffering repeatedly, one will instead grasp, or adhere  to  the  body.  One
will not be able to remember that the  body  has  the  nature  of  pervasive
compounded  suffering.  Due  to  adherence  to   the   body,   one   creates
negativities. Due to creating negativities, one will again  and  again  take
on an unclean body that is in the nature of pervasive compounded  suffering.

- To generate the  wish  to  be  free  from  the  body  means  that  through
understanding that this body is in  the  nature  of  suffering,  we  try  to
separate from the karma and afflictions that cause this body.
- By thinking about the faults of suffering, we try  to  destroy  the  karma
and afflictions that bring about this suffering.  By  destroying  the  karma
and afflictions that result in this body, we are able to put a stop  to  the
process of taking on this kind of suffering body again and again.
 - “wishing to be separated from the body” means not wanting to  take  on  a
body again and again, forever.
- We have already taken rebirth in this contaminated, unclean body,  but  we
should take care of it and make use of it, while at the same time we  should
generate the wish not to be born in such a body in the future.
- Although we may not be able to attain liberation  and  enlightenment  with
this body, it is useful while we have it. We  have  perfect  conditions  for
creating merit and for receiving a good human support in the next  life.  It
is important to contemplate how the body is unclean and  in  the  nature  of
suffering. By repeatedly contemplating  these  points,  we  can  reduce  our
grasping and attachment to this body.
- Here we talk about an EK of someone who has entered the path,  but  before
entering the path,  one  has  trained  in  dexterity  in  these  factors  of
mindfulness and wisdom. When one enters the path, one has the EK that  is  a
CPoM. Due to having trained before entering the  path,  one  does  not  come
under the control of laxity and excitement.
- By closely placing oneself through mindfulness on  contaminated  feelings,
one will engage true origins, because, having seen that craving  is  induced
by such contaminated  feelings,  one  will  generate  the  wish  to  abandon
craving.
- When we have a happiness feeling, this induces craving that does not  wish
to be separated from  the  happiness  feeling.  When  we  have  a  suffering
feeling,  this  induces  craving  that  wishes  to  be  separated  from  the
suffering feeling. So  we  see  that  craving  is  induced  by  contaminated
feelings, and having seen that, we generate the wish to abandon craving.
- One understands that the mind is impermanent,  and  subject  to  momentary
disintegration. This mind transforms over time  and  it  can  transform  for
better or worse. In any case,  the  mind  abides,  and  the  person  who  is
supported on this mind also abides. Although there is disintegration, it  is
not as though the mind and the person go  out  of  existence.  So  when  one
realizes that, one will not have the fear that the self or  person  will  be
severed, so one will generate the wish to actualize cessations.
- The existence of past and future lives is established  by  the  fact  that
the mind has a continuous nature. It is not severed.  By  understanding  the
continuous nature of the mind, one will not be  afraid  that  the  self,  or
person, who is supported on this mind will be severed, and one develops  the
wish to actualize cessations.
- This practice of the CPoM is performed by hearers and solitary  realizers.
It is also performed by bodhisattvas in an even more profound and  extensive
manner.

Four correct abandonings
-  The  reason  for  explaining  the  4  correct  abandonings  after  having
explained the 4 CPoM is that after contemplating the 4  CPoM  on  the  body,
feelings, minds, and phenomena, one understands:
   -that true sufferings and true origins are to be discarded, and
   -that true cessations and true paths are to be adopted.
By understanding this, one generates joyous effort that  is  enthusiasm  for
discarding the objects  of  abandonment  and  adopting  the  antidotes  with
respect to the four noble truths. Because joyous effort will  arise,  the  4
abandonings are explained after the CPoM.
- The 4 abandonings are:
   1. Abandoning non-virtue that has been generated
   2. Not generating non-virtue that has not been generated
   3. Increasing virtue that has been generated
   4. Generating virtue that has not been generated
The 4 correct abandonings are two sets of 2.
- The 1st set is in relation to non-virtue
1) if non-virtue has been generated, we must apply some  method  to  abandon
   it;
2) if there is non-virtue  that  has  not  been  generated,  we  must  apply
   methods to not generate it in the future;
- The 2nd set has to do with virtue:
3) if we have virtue that has been generated, we should try to increase  it;


4) if there is virtue  that  has  not  been  generated,  we  should  try  to
   generate it.
-  Regarding  non-virtues,  we  have   created   many   negativities   since
beginningless time. It is not wise to ignore  them,  leaving  them  as  they
are. We must engage in a  method  to  counteract  them.  If  we  do  not  do
confession,  purification,  and  restraint  from   repeating   them,   these
negativities will not be purified  and  they  will  definitely  issue  forth
their results. Therefore it is very important  for  us  to  contemplate  the
nature of the 10 non-virtues and to think about what kind  of  results  they
will bring, and on the basis of that, generate a very strong mind of  regret
for the negativities we have performed. Then we can do  confession  practice
such as the confession to the 35 buddhas, the confession of  downfalls,  the
recitation of Vajrasattva’s hundred-syllable mantra and practice  restraint.

- “Aspiration” is the cause of joyous effort. When one has aspiration,  this
leads to the generation of joyous effort.
- “Effort” refers to joyous effort that pays attention to  the  reasons  for
calm abiding, strong holding  of  the  mind  and  equanimity.  This  is  the
“effort” that is referred to in the sutra just after aspiration.
-This effort, referring to the joyous effort  that  pays  attention  to  the
reasons for calm abiding, strongly holding of the mind, and  equanimity,  is
thus of 3 types:
   1. joyous effort that pays attention to the reasons for calm abiding;
   2. joyous effort that pays attention to the reasons for strong holding of
      the mind; and
   3. joyous effort that pays attention to the reasons for equanimity.
-A bodhisattva tries to  practice  a  union  of  calm  abiding  and  special
insight.
  - If, from between these two, special insight  becomes  predominant,  then
  the bodhisattva needs to contemplate, or pay attention to, the reasons for
  calm abiding. By doing so, the  bodhisattva  will  reduce  the  factor  of
  special insight. Therefore, calm abiding and special insight  will  become
  balanced.
  - If, from between the two, calm abiding and special insight, calm abiding
  becomes predominant, the bodhisattva needs to pay attention to the reasons
  for strongly holding the mind.
  - If the two factors of calm  abiding  and  special  insight  are  equally
  strong, the bodhisattva pays attention to the reasons for  equanimity  and
  leaves calm abiding and special insight as they are.
   -  Even when calm abiding and special insight are balanced,  there  is  a
need to pay attention to the reasons for equanimity. If one does not  do  so
there is the danger that one of the two will become stronger, and  then  the
balance  will  become  upset.  By  paying  attention  to  the  reasons   for
equanimity,  one  prevents  the  balance  from  becoming  upset,   and   one
stabilizes this balance so that it becomes stronger.
-Since we talk about the union of  calm  abiding  and  special  insight,  if
either becomes stronger than the other, this would not allow for a union  of
calm abiding and special insight.
- This mental contemplation, or attention to the reasons for  calm  abiding,
special insight, and equanimity,  actually  takes  place  during  subsequent
attainment. To give an example of how this works: if  one  has  a  union  of
calm abiding  and  special  insight  observing  emptiness,  and  if  special
insight becomes predominant and calm abiding degenerates, one can  stop  the
meditation and pay attention to the  reasons  for  calm  abiding,  and  then
afterwards one enters meditation.  It  is  not  that  during  meditation  on
emptiness, one pays attention to the reasons for this and that.
-  “Initiating  joyous  effort”  refers  to  initiating  joyous  effort   in
generating the antidotes that act to eliminate laxity  and  excitement.  The
main antidotes to laxity and excitement are  strongly  holds  the  mind  and
sets the mind.
-When there is laxity within the mind, as  an  antidote  to  that,  one  can
contemplates the excellent qualities of  the  buddha  to  uplift  the  mind.
Other examples of antidotes to laxity would be to contemplate  the  precious
human rebirth with its freedoms and endowments,  or  contemplating  how  one
has attained the great fortune to study the Dharma and the great  texts.  In
this way, one attempts to uplift the mind.
- “strongly holding the  mind”  which  involves  holding  an  uplifted  mind
through  an  attention  that  has  become  lucid.  Basically,  it   involves
uplifting the mind and making the mind clear.
- When there is excitement, the mind becomes outwardly  scattered,  and  one
has to draw it inwards by an attention that has become despondent,  such  as
the contemplation on the drawbacks of samsara.
- If the mind has became outwardly scattered, one needs  to  draw  the  mind
inwards by setting the mind on the object  of  observation.  Basically,  one
needs to set the mind on a single object of observation.
- For the sake of understanding
  (i) the gaining of the  four  correct  abandonings  that  have  a  special
potency and
  (ii) the results of cultivating the CPoM,
the four correct abandonings are correlated with the middling level  of  the
PoA. However, the fully qualified correct abandonings are generated even  on
the small level of the PoA.
Definition of a correct  abandoning:  an  exalted  knower  of  one  who  has
entered a path that is a joyous effort that is an enthusiasm for  discarding
the objects of abandonment and adopting the antidotes.

Four aspects of the legs of magical emanation
- The paths that thoroughly train in  meditative  stabilization  are  the  4
aspects of the legs of magical emanation.
- The reason for explaining them after the correct  abandonings  is  because
possessing joyous effort  in  discarding  the  objects  of  abandonment  and
adopting  the  antidotes  makes  the  mind  serviceable  through  meditative
stabilization.
-Definition of a leg of magical emanation: An exalted knower of one who  has
entered  a  path  that  is  a  meditative  stabilization  based  on  the   8
applications that abandon, these being the antidotes to the 5 faults.
- The 4 legs of magical emanation are:
      1. Aspiration
      2. Joyous effort
      3. Intention
      4. Analysis
- In the context of the 4 legs of  magical  emanation,  “magical  emanation”
means, for example, to emanate one as many, many  as  one,  etc.  There  are
different kinds of emanation. The emanator  can  emanate  his  own  body  in
various ways, he can also emanate other kinds of bodies.
- There are 4 legs of magical emanation, because,  as  antidotes  to  the  5
faults,  there  are   meditative   stabilizations   possessing   the   eight
applications that abandon the 5 faults: the meditative stabilizations of -
1. contact with a  single-pointed  mind  in  dependence  on  the  meditative
   stabilization of aspiration,
2. contact with a single-pointed mind in dependence on joyous effort,
3. contact with a single-pointed mind in dependence on  that  attained  from
   birth due to having previously cultivated meditative  stabilization,  the
   meditative stabilization of intention, and
4. contact with a  single-pointed  mind  in  dependence  on  discernment  of
   phenomena that have been taught by others, the  meditative  stabilization
   of analysis.
- Meditative stabilization is a single-pointed mind, but we  can  also  have
meditative  stabilization  that  contacts  a   single-pointed   mind.   When
meditative stabilization is advanced or developed, it can contact a  single-
pointed mind, because it has this single-pointed mind.
-  Here  if  you  look  at  all  four  points,   they   involve   meditative
stabilization   that   arises   in   dependence   on   another    meditative
stabilization.
-  the  meditative  stabilization  of  aspiration  refers  to  a  meditative
stabilization  that  is  attained  in  dependence  on  aspiration,  i.e.   a
meditative  stabilization  that  is  based  on  aspiration,  because  it  is
difficult  to  say  that  there  is  an  aspiration  that  is  a  meditative
stabilization.
- The 2nd “in dependence on  joyous  effort”  means  in  dependence  on  the
meditative stabilization of joyous effort.
- For someone who has attained a meditative stabilization, he  improves  his
meditative stabilization in dependence on meditative stabilization, i.e.  he
attains a higher meditative stabilization in dependence  on  the  meditative
stabilization that he has already attained. So we see  this  progression  of
meditative stabilizations.
-  the  meditative  stabilization  of  aspiration  refers  to  a  meditative
stabilization  that  is  attained  in  dependence  on  aspiration,  i.e.   a
meditative  stabilization  that  is  based  on  aspiration,  because  it  is
difficult  to  say  that  there  is  an  aspiration  that  is  a  meditative
stabilization.
- The 8 applications that abandon the 5 faults are:
|Five faults                  |Eight applications           |
|1.    Laziness               |1.    Faith                  |
|                             |2.   Aspiration              |
|                             |3.   Exertion                |
|                             |4.   Pliancy                 |
|2.   Forgetting the          |5.   Mindfulness             |
|instructions                 |                             |
|3.   Laxity and excitement   |6.   Introspection           |
|4.   Not applying the        |7.    Intention              |
|antidote                     |                             |
|5.   Applying the antidote   |8.   Equanimity              |


- From among the 5 faults, that which acts as  the  hindrance  to  initially
applying oneself in cultivation is  laziness.  Hence,  the  actual  antidote
acting to eliminate that is exertion.  Its  foundation  is  aspiration.  The
cause of aspiration is faith; and the result of exertion is pliancy.
- At  the  time  of  applying  oneself  in  the  cultivation  of  meditative
stabilization, since there is the fault of forgetting the  instructions,  as
antidote to it, there is mindfulness.
- When one engages in the actual cultivation, since there are the faults  of
laxity  and  excitement,  as  the  antidote  to  them,   mainly   there   is
mindfulness. However there is introspection which realizes the presence  of]
laxity and excitement.
- When laxity and  excitement  occur,  since  there  is  the  fault  of  not
applying the antidote, as antidote to it, there is intention.
- When one engages in meditative stabilization naturally without needing  to
employ exertion, since there is the  fault  of  applying  the  antidote,  as
antidote to it, there is equanimity,  in  which  the  mind  is  set  without
exertion.
-  Since  these  meditative  stabilizations   are   the   main   bases   for
accomplishing magical emanation, they are  known  as  the  legs  of  magical
emanation.
- For the sake of understanding that these become more and more  outstanding
progressively over the 3 levels of the PoA, they  are  correlated  with  the
great level of the PoA. However, know that they are accomplished  even  from
the occasion of the small level of the PoA.
- The more non-virtuous the mind is, the greater the degree  of  laxity  and
excitement. There  is  a  correlation  between  non-virtue  and  laxity  and
excitement. When we can make the mind virtuous,  there  is  a  corresponding
reduction in laxity and excitement, and the mind becomes  more  serviceable.

- To make the mind serviceable means that the mind is able  to  go  wherever
you want it to go, and it is able to be set on whatever object you  want  it
to be set upon.
- Meditative stabilization is related to the cultivation  of  calm  abiding.
Without calm abiding,  you  cannot  generate  uncontrived  renunciation  (or
definite emergence), bodhicitta, or the right view of emptiness.
- The lam rim explains the small scope, then  the  middle  scope,  then  the
great scope, and at the end, there is the discussion on how to develop  calm
abiding and special insight. Calm abiding and special insight are  discussed
at the end because one cultivates calm abiding  and  special  insight  after
having understood the three scopes.
- If one engages in the development of calm abiding, one can generate it  in
the entity of the path. Otherwise,  with  mere  calm  abiding,  and  special
insight based on that, one can only attain rebirth in the form and  formless
realms. This calm abiding and special insight  do  not  become  a  cause  to
become liberated from samsara, but instead become a cause of taking  rebirth
in samsara.
-When we cultivate calm abiding, it is a meditative stabilization  that  can
serve as a support for a path.
- The 8 applications  are  complete  in  each  of  the  4  legs  of  magical
emanation.
- In the CPoM on minds, “minds” does not refer to any mind, but  to  primary
consciousnesses, or main minds.
- The CPoM on phenomena refers to:
(1) all mental factors except feeling,
(2) non-associated compositional factors, i.e.  impermanent  phenomena  that
are neither mind nor matter, and (3) uncompounded phenomena.
- In the context of the CPoM on the body, “body”  actually  includes  forms,
sounds, odors, tastes, and objects of touch. Those are like the outer  body.

Five aspects of the power
- The reason that after the legs of magical emanation, regarding  the  paths
that prepare for clear realization of the truth, there are the five  aspects
of the powers  because,  having  thoroughly  trained  the  mind  by  way  of
meditative stabilization, the preparations of the heat  and  the  peak  that
empower one with respect to the clear realization of the truth will arise.
- The powers exist on the heat and peak levels of the  path  of  preparation
and they are the power of:
(1) faith of conviction in the truths;
(2) joyous effort that is  an  enthusiasm  for  discarding  the  objects  of
abandonment and adopting the antidotes (3) mindfulness that does not  forget
the object of observation and aspect;
(4) meditative stabilization that is a single-pointed mind; and
(5) wisdom that acts to discern the mode of abidance of the truth. The  rest
will be explained below.
- The five powers are:
The power of faith
The power of joyous effort
The power of mindfulness
The power of meditative stabilization
The power of wisdom
- The five powers presented in this context are those  included  within  the
37 harmonies with enlightenment.
- The five powers are presented in a definite sequence:  at  the  beginning,
there is faith;  in  dependence  on  this,  joyous  effort  will  arise;  in
dependence on this, there is mindfulness that does not forget the object  of
observation and aspect, thus it repeatedly brings the  object  to  mind;  in
dependence on this mindfulness, meditative stabilization will  be  attained;
and in dependence on meditative stabilization, one will be able to  generate
wisdom.
- In the context of the 37 harmonies with  enlightenment;  they  are  powers
because  they  empower  with  respect  to  generating  aryas’  paths,  their
results.
- Definition of a power within  the  37  harmonies  with  enlightenment:  An
exalted knower that independently produces a superior’s path, its result.
- The boundaries of a power that is included within the  37  harmonies  with
enlightenment are from the heat level of the Mahayana  path  of  preparation
through the buddha ground.
Aspects of the strengths
The reason that  after  the  powers  there  are  the  five  aspects  of  the
strengths because, having attained the heat and so forth  that  are  in  the
entity of the powers, the entity of the strengths, the forbearance  and  the
SMQ will arise. They are the 5 strengths of:
(1) faith of conviction in the truth;
(2) joyous effort for the sake of quickly realizing the truth;
(3) mindfulness that does not forget the objects of observation and  aspects
of the truth;
(4) meditative stabilization that is a single-pointed mind; and
(5) wisdom that individually discerns the aspects of the truth.
- These five are governing factors that empower one with  respect  to  clear
realization of the truth.
- Definition of a strength within the 37 harmonies  with  enlightenment:  An
exalted knower that cannot be overcome by its discordant class.
- The word “strength” has the  connotation  of  force.  It  means  that  one
cannot be harmed by the discordant classes. In fact, one is able  to  damage
the discordant classes due to these strengths.
- The strengths presented here are those included in the 37  harmonies  with
enlightenment.  The  boundaries  are  from  the  forbearance  level  of  the
Mahayana path of preparation through the buddha ground.
- The difference between the 5 strengths and the 5 powers is:
  -The 5 discordant classes (manifest  non-faith,  laziness,  forgetfulness,
distraction, and corrupt wisdom), which are suppressed on the  occasions  of
the forbearance and SMQ levels of the path of preparation.
  - Even during subsequent attainment, when one  does  not  cultivate  faith
and so forth,  strong  manifest  non-faith  and  so  forth  (the  discordant
classes) will not arise.
  - In contrast, before the forbearance level, on the heat and peak  levels,
although the discordant classes (non-faith and so forth) will not  arise  at
the time when the 5 powers are manifest  but  during  subsequent  attainment
they manifest frequently.
-On the heat and peak levels of  the  path  of  preparation,  a  bodhisattva
cannot be harmed by the discordant classes, non-faith,  etc.,  but  has  not
attained the ability to outshine non-faith, etc.;  on  the  forbearance  and
supreme mundane quality levels, a bodhisattva has attained  the  ability  to
outshine these discordant classes, and as a result, they do not manifest.
- If faith manifests during the  forbearance  and  supreme  mundane  quality
levels, it is faith that is both power and strength. This faith  that  is  a
power becoming more potent, and thus it becomes able to outshine non-faith.
- During subsequent attainment, one can cultivate faith and  so  forth,  and
then they can be manifest. So faith  and  so  forth  are  mainly  cultivated
during  subsequent  attainment.  Are  they  cultivated   during   meditative
equipoise?  That  depends;  if  you  are  meditating  on  emptiness   during
meditative equipoise, of course you are not cultivating faith.

Aspects of the branches of enlightenment
- The reason that after the powers and strengths,  regarding  the  paths  of
clear realization of the truth, there are the 7 aspects of the  branches  of
enlightenment because, having realized and attained the four, the  heat  and
so forth, the entities of the powers and the strengths, the path  that  sees
the truths, the entity of the branches of enlightenment will arise.
- The 7 branches of enlightenment of :
1. perfect  mindfulness,  the  branch  of  abidance  that  acts  not  to  be
   distracted to anything other than the observation of the truth;
2. perfect fine discernment of phenomena that  newly  realizes  with  direct
   cognition selflessness, the branch of nature;
3. perfect joyous effort, the branch of definite emergence;
4. perfect joy, the branch of benefit; benefiting the body and mind;
5. perfect pliancy, the branches of basis, foundation, and entity  that  are
   without affliction
6. perfect meditative stabilization, the branches of basis, foundation,  and
   entity that are without affliction
7. perfect equanimity, the branches of basis, foundation,  and  entity  that
   are without affliction
- By way of the branch of perfect enlightenment of perfect mindfulness:
(i) through observing sufferings, one seeks to become  devoid  of  them  and
abides in mindfulness without forgetfulness;
(ii) through observing origins, one seeks to  be  free  from  attachment  to
them and abides in mindfulness without forgetfulness;
(iii) through observing cessations, one seeks to actualize them  and  abides
in mindfulness without forgetfulness; and
(iv) through observing paths that act to  cease  sufferings,  one  seeks  to
cultivate them and abides in mindfulness without forgetfulness.
- Understand that, through observing the four noble truths by means  of  the
7 branches in that manner, the branches  that  are  the  causes  for  hearer
lineage-bearers and so forth to achieve their respective  enlightenment  are
of seven  types.  Here,  however,  they  are  mainly  to  be  cultivated  by
bodhisattvas.
The seven branches of enlightenment are:
   1. The branch of enlightenment of mindfulness
   2. The branch of enlightenment of fine discernment of phenomena
   3. The branch of enlightenment of joyous effort
   4. The branch of enlightenment of joy
   5. The branch of enlightenment of pliancy
   6. The branch of enlightenment of meditative stabilization, and
   7. The branch of enlightenment of equanimity
-Definition of a branch of enlightenment: an exalted  knower  in  an  arya’s
continuum that serves as a cause for enlightenment, its result.
- Q&A:  External  objects  are  refuted  not  only  with  respect  to  sense
consciousnesses,   but   also   with   respect    to    conceptual    mental
consciousnesses. E.g. when a form  appears  to  the  eye  consciousness,  it
appears clearly as an external object. When it appears to a conception  that
is a mental consciousness, it appears mixed with  a  meaning-generality;  it
does not appear as clearly as it does to  a  sense  consciousness,  but  the
modes of appearance as external objects  are  the  same  to  both  types  of
consciousness.

Aspects of the branches of aryas’ paths
The reason that  after  having  explained  the  branches  of  enlightenment,
regarding the paths of pure deliverance, the 8 aspects of the 8 branches  of
aryas’ paths will be explained because, having thoroughly known  the  seeing
of the truth newly with  direct  cognition,  the  path  of  meditation  will
arise.
The 8 branches of aryas’ paths of:
 1. correct view, affirmation during subsequent attainment of  the  dharmata
    realized during meditative equipoise;
 2. correct thought, the motivation for speech that reveals to  others  that
    which one has realized;
 3. correct speech, teaching others  the  realizations  as  they  have  been
    realized by oneself, pure actions of speech;
 4. correct aim of actions, pure actions of body, abandoning killing and  so
    forth;
 5.  correct  livelihood,  pure  actions  of  body  and  speech,  abandoning
    hypocrisy, flattery, and so forth;
 6. correct exertion, exertion in the antidotes that abandon the objects  to
    be abandoned by the path of meditation;
 7. correct mindfulness that does not forget the reasons for  calm  abiding,
    strong holding and equanimity; and
 8. correct meditative stabilization, cultivation for the sake of  achieving
    special excellent qualities, the clairvoyances and so forth.
-Definition of a branch of an arya’s paths: an exalted knower in  an  arya’s
continuum that serves as a cause for an arya’s path, its result.
- Definition of a branch of enlightenment: an exalted knower  in  an  arya’s
continuum that acts as a cause for enlightenment, its result.
- A branch of an arya’s paths is mainly posited on the path  of  meditation,
but it also exists on the path of seeing.
- The branch of aryas’ paths of correct view here serves as an  antidote  on
many levels. However, in  this  context,  correct  view  is  posited  during
subsequent attainment. Dharmata was realized  during  meditative  equipoise,
and during subsequent attainment, there  is  affirmation  of  that  dharmata
that was previously realized.
- The branch of aryas’ paths of correct thought, this is a  motivation  i.e.
the motivation for  speech  that  reveals  to  others  that  which  one  has
realized.
- The branch of aryas’ paths of  correct  speech  is  an  actual  action  of
speech i.e. pure actions of speech.
- We need to distinguish between speech and action of speech:
  - Speech is that which teaches others what one has realized
  - The action, or karma, of speech - the intention for speech
- The branch of aryas’ paths of correct speech is an exalted knower,  so  it
is the mental factor of intention.
- Compare the 2nd (the branch of aryas’ paths of correct  thought  which  is
the motivation for  speech  that  reveals  to  others  that  which  one  has
realized) and the 3rd which is posited  as  karma  that  is  intention  -  a
mental factor that causes the uttering of speech.
- The 2nd is the motivation that causes one to wish to  speak,  whereas  the
3rd is the intention of speech.
- The 2nd motivation for speech actually precedes speech, whereas  the  3rd,
the intention of speech, occurs at the time of speech. This intention  moves
one to speak. The 3rd one is action, or karma.
- The 4th the branch of aryas’ paths of correct aim  of  actions  refers  to
pure actions of body, or karma of the body.
- The 5th the branch of aryas’ paths of correct livelihood which is  a  pure
action of body and speech.
- 3rd, 4th and 5th are thus karmas in the sense  of  action.  These  actions
are said to be intention. Through these intentions, or  karmas,  an  imprint
is deposited on the  mind.  The  intentions  are  consciousnesses,  but  the
imprints  that  are  deposited  are  not  minds:  they  are   non-associated
compositional factors.
- These 8 branches are subsumed under:
  - (i) the four branches  of  affirmation,  engendering  of  understanding,
engendering of belief in others, and antidote  to  the  discordant  classes,
and
 - (ii) also the three: training  in  ethics,  training  in  the  mind,  and
training in wisdom.
- The first way of subsuming the 8 branches into 4 groups is:
   1. Branch of affirmation:
            (1) the branch of aryas’ paths of correct view is subsumed under
      this
   2. Branch of engendering of understanding:
            (2) the branch of aryas’ paths of correct  thought  is  subsumed
      here
   3. Branch of engendering of belief in others:
            the branches of aryas’ paths of:
            (3) correct speech,
            (4) correct aim of actions, and
            (5) correct livelihood are subsumed here
   4. Branch of antidote to the discordant classes:
            the branches of aryas’ paths of:
            (6) correct exertion,
            (7) correct mindfulness, and
            (8) correct meditative stabilization are subsumed here.
-  The second way of subsuming the eight branches into 3 groups:
   1. Training in ethics:
            the branches of aryas’ paths of:
            (3) correct speech,
            (4) correct aim of actions, and
            (5) correct livelihood are subsumed here
   2. Training in the mind, or training in meditative stabilization:
             (8)  the  branch  of  aryas’  paths   of   correct   meditative
      stabilization is subsumed here
   3. Training in wisdom:
            the branches of aryas’ paths of:
                 (1) correct view,
                 (2) correct thought,
                 (6) correct exertion, and
                 (7) correct mindfulness are subsumed here.
- In that way, these are the 37 (i) aspects of an EKAA,  the  final  exalted
wisdoms concordant with the true paths existing in the learners in terms  of
the supports of presentation, and (ii) aspects that bear the support of  the
paths of the knower of all that are to be cultivated  also  by  bodhisattvas
temporarily.

Aspects of a knower of paths concordant with those existing in bodhisattvas
- In the previous section, the 37 harmonies with enlightenment  are  divided
into 7 groups.
- Here the aspects of a knower of paths are divided into 6 groups


|Aspects of a knower of paths         |       |
|concordant with those existing in    |       |
|bodhisattvas                         |       |
|Paths of antidotes                   |3      |
|Paths of emanation                   |3      |
|Paths of abiding happily in the      |5      |
|present life                         |       |
|Supramundane paths                   |9      |
|Paths of abandonment                 |4      |
|Paths of Buddhas                     |10     |


 Paths of antidotes
-  Paths of antidotes that have 3 aspects of the 3 doors of  liberation  and
also 3 antidotes:
   1. The door of liberation of emptiness: this refers to the  entity  being
      empty of true existence.
   2. The door of liberation of signlessness: this refers  to  causes  being
      pacified of signs of true existence. “Pacified” here means  “lacking,”
      i.e. causes lacking signs of true existence.
   3. The door of liberation of wishlessness: this refers to the lack  of  a
      wish for a truly existent result. Actually, this qualification  “truly
      existent” can also be applied to the wish, i.e. the lack  of  a  truly
      existent wish for a result. You can apply it to either the wish or the
      result.
- In that way:  (1)  the  entitinesses  of  the  aspects  of  emptiness  and
selflessness,
-  the exalted wisdom directly realizing selflessness in the continuum of  a
bodhisattva arya are the 1st door of liberation
      - because they are (1) the direct antidotes to that  produced  by  the
view of self by means of realizing with direct cognition  the  non-existence
of a self that is a different entity and object [i.e. the  lack  of  a  self
that is a different entity.] View of self can be interpreted as  either  the
view of a permanent, unitary, independent  self  or  the  view  of  a  self-
sufficient, substantially existent self.
- the exalted wisdom directly  realizing  (2)  the  8  entitinesses  of  the
aspects of true cessations and paths are the 2nd door of liberation
      - because they are (2)  the  direct  antidotes  to  conceptualizations
that are improper apprehensions of the signs that bear the  reason  of  that
view of self [i.e. pacification of these signs.]
- the exalted wisdom directly realizing (3) impermanence  and  suffering  of
true sufferings and the four entitinesses of the  aspects  of  true  origins
are the 3rd door of liberation,
      - because they are (3) the antidotes to wishing for the  three  realms
as final objects [results] to be attained.
- Although the three doors of liberation are final exalted wisdoms that  are
exalted  knowers  of  all  aspects  concordant  with  the  true   paths   of
bodhisattvas, their classes exist in hearers and  solitary  realizers.  They
are  included  in  the  knower  of  paths  for  the  sake  of   bodhisattvas
cultivating the fully complete path.
-Explanation:
  - “the entitinesses of the aspects of emptiness and selflessness”
            - emptiness is the lack of  a  permanent,  unitary,  independent
self
            - selflessness is the lack of a  self-sufficient,  substantially
existent self
  -“the 8 entitinesses of the aspects of true cessations and paths”  -  true
cessations and true paths are a pair of cause and result.
   -  “impermanence  and  suffering  of  true  sufferings   and   the   four
entitinesses  of  the  aspects  of  true  origins”-  the  aspects  of   true
sufferings and true origins which form a pair of cause and effect.
- the 1st door of liberation talks about the lack of a  self  of  a  certain
entity, focusing on the entity
-  the   2nd   door   of   liberation   talks   about   the   antidotes   to
conceptualizations of the signs that bear the reason of the self,  i.e.  the
signs, or reasons, being pacified
- the 3rd door of liberation refers to antidotes to the wish.
-  Definition of path of antidote: An exalted knower  distinguished  by  the
ability to quell the superimposition that is its  object  to  be  eliminated
through  realizing  the  non-existence  of  the  referent  object   of   the
superimposition that is its object to be eliminated.

|Three Aspects of the three doors of liberation         |
|Door of libration        |directly realizes..          |
|1. Emptiness             |True sufferings              |
|(non-existence of self   |emptiness                    |
|that is a different      |selflessness                 |
|entity)                  |                             |
|2. Signlessness          |True  cerssations            |
|(Non-existence of signs  |-      Cessation             |
|that bear                |Pacification                 |
|the reason of that view  |Sublimity                    |
|of self)                 |Definite emergence           |
|                         |       True path             |
|                         |Path                         |
|                         |Suitability                  |
|                         |Achievement                  |
|                         |Deliverance                  |
|                         |                             |
|3.   Wishlessness        |      True suffering         |
|(Antidote  to  wishing   |Impermanence                 |
|for three                |Suffering                    |
|realms   as   final      |True origins                 |
|objects   to   be        |Cause                        |
|attained, i.e. results)  |Origin                       |
|                         |Strong production            |
|                         |Condition                    |


Paths of emanation
- Paths of emanation that have 3 aspects of the doors of liberation:
   1. liberation in which that having form views forms
   2. liberation in which that not having form views forms
   3. liberation of the attractive that eliminates obstacles
- The liberation in which  that  having  form  views  forms:  the  yogi,  in
dependence on either  a  concentration  or  a  formless  absorption,  places
himself in the discrimination of himself having form, and then  generates  a
meditative stabilization that imagines in accordance  with  his  desires  to
emanate whatever forms -good, bad, big, small, etc.-as he wishes.
- The liberation in which that not having form views forms: the yogi  places
himself in the discrimination of  himself  not  having  form,  in  which  he
thinks that he himself has just the aggregates of the  4  names,  which  are
the 5 aggregates excluding the form aggregate: the aggregates  of  feelings,
discrimination, compositional factors, and consciousness. He  then  emanates
external forms in accordance with his desires, and views them.
- These 1st two  liberations  are  supposed  to  be  the  antidotes  to  the
obscurations to emanation, which prevent one  from  emanating  according  to
one’s desires. By cultivating these  two  liberations,  one  cultivates  the
antidotes to the obscurations to emanation.
-  The  liberation  of  the  attractive  that  eliminates  obstacles:  is  a
liberation that also  depends  on  either  a  concentration  or  a  formless
absorption. This serves as an antidote to those  afflictions  of  liking  to
emanate attractive forms and disliking to emanate unattractive forms.
- One undergoes contemplation of  how  attractiveness  and  unattractiveness
are relative, and not established by way of their own entity.  There  is  no
unattractiveness  without  relying  on  attractiveness,  and  there  is   no
attractiveness without relying on unattractiveness,  thus  attractive  forms
and  unattractive  forms  are  relative.  We  say  that  attractiveness  and
unattractiveness are established relatively, in reliance.
- A yogi is able to generate the paths of  emanation  in  dependence  on  an
actual concentration or formless  absorption.  This  is  related  to  twenty
sangha. If you understood that presentation, you can understand that a  yogi
who is able to generate the path of emanation, from the  point  of  view  of
the Hinayana, must be a non-returner or foe-destroyer who  has  attained  an
actual concentration. This non-returner or foe-destroyer may also have  gone
beyond that and attained a formless absorption.
- Definition of path  of  emanation:  An  exalted  knower  distinguished  by
freedom from certain types of obstructions to absorption in dependence on  a
final concentration that is its empowering condition and by the  ability  to
display various transformed manifestations.

Paths of abiding happily in the present life
There are 5 paths of abiding happily in the present life:
 - 1st – 4th : Four liberations of  the  formless  absorptions  (4  formless
liberations),
 - 5th : The absorption of cessation (liberation of cessation)
- The distinction between  bodhisattva  and  hearer  and  solitary  realizer
aryas from the point of view of entering these absorptions
      - Bodhisattvas practice these paths of abiding in  happiness  in  this
present life i.e. they practice these paths  in  which  the  body  and  mind
abide happily in this present life but they do so for others’ welfare.  They
do not practice such  absorptions  because  of  hoping  for  the  fruitional
results of these absorptions because bodhisattva aryas have fully  exhausted
the branches for taking rebirth in cyclic existence  through  the  force  of
the contaminated karma of the formless realm, and the formless realm is  not
a place for subduing sentient beings.
.     - In contrast, hearers and solitary realizer  aryas  enter  these  not
for the sake of  others.  Hearer  and  solitary  realizer  aryas  enter  the
absorption only for the sake of abiding happily in the present life.
- These paths of abiding happily in the present life are such  that  in  the
continuum of the person who practices them, the  mind  is  not  polluted  by
afflictions. As a result of the mind  not  being  polluted  by  afflictions,
one’s body and mind are able to abide in happiness in the present life.
- Through our own experience, when the mind is polluted by  afflictions,  we
experience unhappiness. If we are not able to subdue the  afflictions,  then
this mental unhappiness causes the winds in our body to go out  of  balance;
the winds either become too strong or too weak. As a  result  of  this,  the
body becomes disturbed.
- Within our body,  there  are  various  kinds  of  elements.  The  body  is
composed of earth, water, fire, and wind elements.  When  the  mind  becomes
disturbed, these elements go out of balance, and it is possible  for  us  to
fall ill. For instance, if the fire element is strong,  we  will  experience
heat illness and if the wind is strong, a cold illness. If the mind  is  out
of balance, this will also affect our body.  When  the  mind  is  disturbed,
this will disturb the body, and of course if our body is unwell,  this  will
shorten our lifespan.
- The 5th: the liberation of cessation refers to a  state  in  which  coarse
feeling  and  discrimination  are  ceased  with  respect   to   the   mental
consciousness.
Definition of a path of abiding happily in this life: An exalted knower  not
polluted by coarse  afflictions  in  the  continuum  of  a  person  who  has
attained a liberation.

|Paths of abiding happily in the present life                                      |
|1. Infinite space     |Regarding the nature of the path that acts as the cause for|
|                      |a path of liberation and abides in accordance with         |
|                      |uncontaminated liberation without being polluted by the    |
|                      |afflictions of its own level, there are four formless      |
|                      |liberations, because they are objects that are freed from  |
|                      |the obscurations to relishing the taste of their own       |
|                      |levels.                                                    |
|2. Infinite           |                                                           |
|consciousness         |                                                           |
|3. Nothingness        |                                                           |
|4. Peak of cyclic     |                                                           |
|existence             |                                                           |
|5. Liberation of      |Regarding the nature of the path that abides in peace by   |
|cessation             |having pacified coarse discrimination and feeling, the one |
|                      |liberation that ceases discrimination and feeling is       |
|                      |actualized for the sake of becoming free from the          |
|                      |obscurations to ceasing discrimination and feeling.        |


Supramundane paths
- The supramundane paths, there are 9 serial absorptions:
    - the 4 concentrations,
    - the 4 formless absorptions, and
    - the absorption of cessation
- Note that this is actually just a terminological explanation, because  the
absorption of  cessation  is  not  a  supramundane  path  as  it  cannot  be
transformed into the entity of a supramundane path, but it is posited  as  a
supramundane  path  because  it  is  attained  through  the   force   of   a
supramundane path.
- In contrast,  the  liberation  of  cessation,  as  explained  in  previous
section, can be transformed into the entity of a supramundane path.
- “nine serial absorptions” - In fact, a person  who  has  attained  any  of
these  9  serial  absorptions  is  pervaded  by  having   attained   all   8
concentrations and formless absorptions.
- serial absorptions are called such  because  one  enters  absorption  into
each of the later ones after having entered into the earlier ones; so  these
absorptions are attained  in  a  serial  manner.  Later  on,  when  one  has
attained mastery over them, one enters into them also in  a  leaping  manner
i.e.  when  one  has  attained  mastery  over  them,  one  can   skip   some
absorptions, e.g. one can enter the first concentration,  skip  the  second,
enter the third, skip the fourth, and enter into the absorption of  Infinite
Space. This is just an example. There are many ways to do this in a  leaping
manner, such as in a forward order, in a reverse order, etc.
- In this system, the first 8 of these supramundane paths are in the  entity
of supramundane paths, but the 9th (the absorption of cessation)  is  not  a
supramundane path.
- There are different views presented on what  an  absorption  of  cessation
is.
  - the view of CMWS that says the absorption of  cessation  is  an  exalted
wisdom of meditative equipoise on emptiness  but,  it  is  clear  that  both
Acarya Haribhadra and Arya Vimuktisena assert that it is an  attribute  that
is a non-associated compositional factor, in  which  the  6  collections  of
coarse primary consciousnesses along with their retinues have been  stopped.
This presents AMWS’ position as they say the absorption of  cessation  is  a
non-associated compositional factor.
- Definition of an absorption of cessation: a  non-associated  compositional
factor that is an absorption in an  arya’s  continuum  abiding  in  a  class
distinguished by having ceased the coarse concomitants that are  objects  to
be ceased with respect to  the  subtle  mental  primary  consciousness,  the
basis of cessation. This definition is in accordance with AMWS.
It is then said that “someone’s assertion that it is the [state  of]  having
stopped the seven collections upon the mind-basis-of-all  is  unreasonable…”
This is according to a
- the MOS  who  asserts  a  mind-basis-of-all  say  that  an  absorption  of
cessation is the state of having stopped the 7 collections  upon  the  mind-
basis-of-all.  This  assertion  is  said  to  be   unreasonable   based   on
Haribhadra’s commentary.

Paths of abandonment
- The paths of abandonment, there are  4  aspects,  because  there  are  the
aspects  of  the  uninterrupted  path,  dharma  forbearance,   the   object-
possessors included within the objects, the 4 truths, the 4  characteristics
that do not possess thorough afflictions.
   1. Dharma forbearance of true sufferings
   2. Dharma forbearance of true origins
   3. Dharma forbearance of true cessations
   4. Dharma forbearance of true paths
Paths of buddhas
- The paths of buddhas, there are the ten perfections:
    1. Perfection of Generosity
    2. Perfection of Ethics
    3. Perfection of Patience
    4. Perfection of Joyous effort
    5. Perfection of Concentration
    6. Perfection of Wisdom
    7. Perfection of Method (skillful means)
    8. Perfection of Power (strength)
    9. Perfection of Wishes (prayers)
   10. Perfection of Exalted wisdom
- In that way, there are thirty-four aspects  bearing  the  support  of  the
paths of  the  knower  of  paths  concordant  with  those  existing  in  the
bodhisattvas.
- Q&A: The realization of selflessness in the continuum of a hearer arya  is
not the same as the realization  of  selflessness  in  the  continuum  of  a
buddha arya because the realization of selflessness in the  continuum  of  a
hearer  does  not  realize  all  phenomena.  The  object   of   observation,
selflessness, does not change but the realization  is  greatly  improved  in
the continuum of a buddha arya.
- If we have a mind realizing  emptiness  on  the  1st  ground  and  a  mind
realizing emptiness on the 2nd  ground,  from  the  point  of  view  of  the
object, the emptiness realized by the consciousness of the  1st  ground  and
by that of the 2nd ground is the same, the same emptiness.  In  fact,  these
two consciousnesses also see emptiness clearly in an equal manner.  However,
they differ in their strength  and  capacity.   Due  to  having  trained  in
meditative  stabilization  and  improved   the   dexterity   of   meditative
stabilization, the mind of the 2nd ground is more powerful than that of  the
1st ground. There are no objects of abandonment that  can  be  abandoned  by
the 2nd ground that can be abandoned  by  the  1st  ground,  and  there  are
objects of abandonment that cannot be abandoned by the 1st  ground  but  can
be abandoned by the 2nd ground. The excellent qualities have  improved.  The
way in which they directly realize selflessness is the same, but you  cannot
say they do not differ in terms of excellent qualities.  There  is  a  great
difference between them.
- The way in which the 1st ground sees emptiness is as clear as the  way  in
which the 2nd  ground  sees  it.  The  strength  or  capacity  of  the  mind
increases, which is an excellent quality.   When  we  went  through  the  10
grounds in chapter 1, there was a section on the excellent qualities of  the
10 grounds, for example, seeing 100 buddhas on the 1st ground,  seeing  1000
buddhas on the 2nd ground, and so on, and  an  explanation  of  the  various
trainings of the 10 grounds. There, the increase of excellent qualities  was
explained. It was  mentioned  that  a  bodhisattva  could  shake  100  world
systems, and one on the 2nd ground  could  shake  1,000  world  systems,  so
their ability has increased. If a bodhisattva on the 1st  ground  wanted  to
shake our planet, he would just have to use his finger!
- There are exalted knowers of lower  and  higher  aryas,  which  differ  in
terms of their excellent qualities. Compared to the excellent  qualities  of
the higher aryas, the exalted knowers of the lower aryas  can  be  improved,
in the sense that they can progress in terms of  true  cessations  that  are
separations from  their  respective  discordant  classes.  Compared  to  the
exalted knower of the 2nd ground, the exalted knower of the 1st  ground  can
be  improved.  There  is  room  for  improvement,  which  means  that  their
excellent qualities of  true  cessations,  that  are  separations  from  the
various discordant classes, can be improved.
Definition of a path of buddhahood: An exalted knower abiding in a  type  of
path that is a means for progressing to the buddha ground.

Uncommon aspects of an exalted knower of all aspects
- The 39 aspects of an EKAA are only unique paths not in common  with  lower
aryas, because they are magnificent aspects and there are  no  aspects  that
are more outstanding than them.
-  The 10 aspects of the strengths that know:
  1. sources and non-sources,
  2. the fruition of actions,
  3. the varieties of interests,
  4. the many world systems,
  5. superior and inferior faculties,
  6. the paths that proceed everywhere
  7. the thoroughly afflicted and the completely pure,
  8. the memory of former states,
  9. death-transference and rebirth, and
 10. the exhaustion of contaminations.
- As Haribhadra’s commentary, the ten strengths are:
 1. the strength that knows sources and non-sources, the arisal of happiness
    and suffering results from actions of virtue and non-virtue,
 2. the strength that knows the fruition of actions, the direct  realization
    of all results without exception of minute actions,
 3. the strength that knows the varieties of interests: interests  regarding
    high status and interests regarding the paths of the 3 vehicles,
 4. the strength that knows the many classes that abide  naturally  and  are
    transformed through accomplishment the world systems,
 5. the strength that knows superior and inferior  faculties  that  are  the
    best, the middling, and trifling powers of faith and so forth,
 6. the strength  that  is  a  knower  that  engages  without  grasping  and
    obstruction in
  -  (i)  the  paths  that  proceed  everywhere  to  high  status,  such  as
    meritorious and immovable actions, and to definite goodness, such as the
    3 vehicles, and
  - (ii) that which is opposite to those,
 7. the strength that is a knower  without  grasping  and  obstruction  with
    respect to
  - (i) the thoroughly afflicted that are obscurations to the absorptions in
    the concentrations, liberations, and so forth, and
  - (ii) the completely pure, definite emergence from those,
 8. the strength that remembers former states, all the past lives of oneself
    and others,
 9. the strength that knows death-transference and rebirth that engages  the
    future birth places of all sentient beings,
10. the strength that knows the exhaustion of  contaminations  that  is  the
    hearers’ and solitary realizers’ exhaustion of  afflictive  obscurations
    and the buddhas’ exhaustion of all stains.
- Explanation
 -On the 1st strength,  “the strength that knows sources  and  non-sources”:
“sources” refers to virtue  being  the  source  of  happiness,  i.e.  virtue
giving rise to happiness, and non-virtue  giving  rise  to  suffering;  from
virtue comes happiness, and from non-virtue comes  suffering.  “Non-sources”
means that from virtue, unhappiness, or suffering,  arises,  and  from  non-
virtue, happiness arises.
- When we see someone  who  is  dishonest  and  cheats,  but  enjoying  good
fortune, wealth, etc., we should understand that this fortune is not due  to
their having been dishonest and having cheated. Rather, their  good  fortune
and wealth are due to the good karma that they previously  accumulated,  and
that the cheating and dishonest actions will bring  about  their  respective
results in the future.
- In our lives, if something good happens  to  us  such  as  we  enjoy  good
fortune, there is no reason to be elated because it is a sign  that  we  are
exhausting virtuous karma that we have created in  the  past.  Likewise,  if
something unfortunate happens to  us,  there  is  no  reason  to  be  upset,
because it is a sign that non-virtuous karma that we  have  created  in  the
past is being exhausted and purified.
- On the 4th strength, in the world systems, there are  many  objects;  some
of these belong to classes that abide naturally, and some  to  classes  that
are transformed from  establishment.  The  examples  of  things  that  abide
naturally are trees, mountains, fields, etc.  Things  that  are  transformed
from establishment would  be,  for  example,  buildings,  telephones,  etc.,
things that are created by mankind. We  are  not  just  talking  about  this
world system, but about all  the  various  world  systems  pervading  space.
There are many world systems that we cannot see, and  there  are  also  many
things in these  world  systems  that  we  cannot  see.  “Transform  through
accomplishment” mean establishment has the sense of creation;  it  does  not
exist naturally, but it is established due to human effort and  is  created.
Honey created by bees, nests created by birds,  anthills  created  by  ants;
these  are  all  examples  of   classes   that   are   transformed   through
accomplishment.
-On the 7th strength “without grasping” should be correlated with “it  is  a
knower without grasping with respect to the thoroughly afflicted.”  “Without
obstruction” is correlated to “it  is  a  knower  without  obstruction  with
respect to the completely pure.”
- “Without grasping” refers to the absence of afflictive obscurations
- “Without obstruction” refers to the absence of knowledge obscurations.
- Definition of a strength of a buddha: A final exalted knower dependent  on
a  final  concentration,  which  is  its  empowering  condition,   that   is
distinguished by the ability to overcome its discordant class.

Four fearlessnesses
There are four aspects of the fearlessnesses:
 1. in terms of  one’s  own  welfare,  the  fearlessness  regarding  perfect
    realizations, oneself attesting “I am manifestly completely  enlightened
    in all ways with respect to all phenomena” in the midst  of  a  retinue,
    without there being a dispute concordant with the  Dharma  stating  “You
    have not realized this phenomenon,”
 2. in terms of others’ welfare, the fearlessness  regarding  revealing  the
    hindering  phenomena,  stating   that   the   afflictive   obscurations,
    attachment  and  so  forth,  and  the  knowledge  obscurations  act   as
    hindrances to liberation and omniscience, without there being a  dispute
    concordant  with  the  Dharma  stating  “Even  though  this  object   of
    abandonment is relied upon, it will not become a hindrance,”
 3. in terms of others’ welfare, the fearlessness  regarding  revealing  the
    path of definite emergence, fully revealing the paths of the  knower  of
    all, the knower of  paths,  and  so  forth  as  definitely  emerging  to
    liberation and omniscience, without there  being  a  dispute  concordant
    with the Dharma stating “Even though this path is  relied  upon,  it  is
    unable to cause definite emergence,” and
 4. in terms of  one’s  own  welfare,  the  fearlessness  regarding  perfect
    abandonment, attesting that all  of  one’s  own  contaminations  without
    exception have been exhausted, since there is no dispute concordant with
    the Dharma;
-A dispute concordant with the Dharma means a dispute in which the  opponent
is able to follow reasoning, and if something is explained in a  proper  way
concordant with reality, this person accepts that i.e. someone for  whom  it
is possible to understand proper reasoning and accept what is correct.
- If there is a dispute not concordant with  the  Dharma,  we  will  have  a
disputant who is very unreasonable, arguing  “It  is  right”  for  something
that is wrong, or “It is wrong” for something that  is  right,  without  the
ability to follow reasoning and to accept what is.
- For each of  these  fearlessnesses,  we  say  that  there  is  no  dispute
concordant with the Dharma that can occur.
-For example, in the fearlessness regarding perfect  realizations:  one  has
perfect realizations and has the fearlessness of  disputes  concordant  with
the Dharma, i.e. one does not have any fear that there  will  be  a  dispute
concordant with the Dharma stating “You do not  have  perfect  realizations;
you have not realized this phenomenon.”
- Definition of a fearlessness: A final exalted knower dependent on a  final
concentration, which is its empowering condition that is distinguished by  a
lack of anxiety while teaching the holy Dharma in the midst of a retinue.

Four individual correct knowledges
The four individual correct knowledges are:
  1. The individual correct knowledge of phenomena: this is  a  realization
     of  the  many  enumerations  of  names  of  thoroughly  afflicted  and
     completely pure phenomena;
  2. The  individual  correct  knowledge  of  meaning:  this  realizes  the
     specific and  general  characteristics  of  phenomena;  it  knows  the
     individual characteristics of phenomena;
  3. The individual correct knowledge of terminology: we have a realization
     that knows the various languages of all sentient beings, and  is  able
     to utter, or  speak,  whatever  terminology  that  is  suited  to  the
     trainees;
  4. The individual  correct  knowledge  of  confidence:  here  we  have  a
     realization that is not discouraged with respect to the objects of the
     classification of the entities and aspects of phenomena, and  is  able
     to explain them confidently. Confidence is very important; it is  also
     very important not to have pride.
Q&A: The cultivation of the five powers and  the  cultivation  of  the  five
strengths  are  the  not  the  same  for  a  bodhisattva  on  the  path   of
accumulation. Let’s take mindfulness as an example: when  a  bodhisattva  on
the path of accumulation  cultivates  the  power  of  mindfulness,  this  is
cultivated from the point of view of that which  empowers  with  respect  to
the attainment of aryas’ paths, their results - this is the definition of  a
power. When a bodhisattva cultivates the strength of  mindfulness,  this  is
cultivated from the point of view of not being able to be  overcome  by  its
discordant class. Of course, from  the  point  of  view  of  the  object  of
cultivation, mindfulness, that is the  same,  but  the  cultivation  of  the
power of mindfulness and the cultivation of the strength of mindfulness  are
different.
- Definition of an individual correct knowledge that is a  knower-aspect  of
an exalted knower of all aspects: A final  exalted  knower  dependent  on  a
final  concentration,  which  is   its   empowering   condition,   that   is
distinguished by  having  abandoned  obstructions  and  impediments  to  the
subject to be explained and the means of explaining it.



Eighteen unmixed qualities of a buddha
- The purities that are the 18 qualities of  a  buddha  unmixed  with  lower
supports are
    - 6 included within behavior,
    - 6 included within realizations,
    - 3 included within exalted activities
    - 3 included within exalted wisdom.
The first 6 included within behavior are:
   1. Not possessing mistakes
   2. Not possessing senseless sounds
   3. Not possessing the degeneration of mindfulness
   4. Not possessing non-equipoise of mind
   5. Not possessing the discrimination of difference
   6. Not possessing the indifference of not examining individually
- The 6 aspects of a tathagata:
-The 1st quality “a tathagata not  possessing  mistaken  behavior  of  body,
such as keeping company with a fierce elephant.” This is  just  an  example;
it can be any kind of an animal, such as a deer. Such animals are unable  to
harm a buddha, and a buddha does not harm such  animals.  It  is  said  that
when a buddha walks, the soles  of  his  feet  do  not  actually  touch  the
ground. Shakyamuni Buddha does not appear  to  be  very  tall.  One  of  his
disciples, maybe Sariputra or Maudgalyana, wanted to  see  the  tip  of  his
ushnisha, so using his powers of magical emanation he travelled very far  up
in order to see the top of the crown protrusion, but no matter  how  far  up
he flew he could not see it, so it is really inconceivable.
-The 2nd quality “not possessing senseless sounds regarding speech, such  as
uttering meaningless noises in a thick forest.”  The  essence  is  that  the
buddha does  not  make  senseless  sounds.  The  Buddha  never  talks  in  a
meaningless way.
-The  3rd  quality  “A  tathagata  not  possessing   the   degeneration   of
mindfulness, such as missing out on certain tasks or exceeding a time  limit
due to forgetfulness.” If we examine our behavior, we very  often  miss  out
on certain tasks or exceed a time limit due to  forgetfulness,  for  example
not meeting a deadline, so that we cannot finish  a  task  today,  tomorrow,
next month, etc. A buddha does not  have  this  type  of  forgetfulness,  or
degeneration of mindfulness.
-The  4th  quality  “A  tathagata  not  possessing  non-equipoise  of   mind
regarding the meaning of emptiness.” A tathagata is always in  equipoise  on
the meaning of emptiness.
-The 5th quality  “A  tathagata  not  possessing  the  discrimination  of  a
difference between samsara and nirvana that is their  being  established  by
way of their  entitiness  as  objects  to  be  adopted  and  objects  to  be
discarded.” Samsara is an object to be  discarded,  and  nirvana  is  to  be
adopted, but they are not established by way of their entitiness as  objects
to be adopted and objects to be discarded. In fact, samsara and nirvana  are
of one  taste;  a  tathagata  does  not  possess  the  discrimination  of  a
difference between samsara and nirvana.
-The 6th quality  “A  tathagata  not  possessing  the  indifference  of  not
examining individually whether or not the time has arrived to enact  exalted
activities in the continua of trainees.” This means that  a  tathagata  does
not neglect trainees. If a tathagata knows  it  is  time  to  enact  exalted
activities for a trainee, he will enact that exalted activity, but if it  is
not time to help directly, the buddha will try to help in  other  ways,  and
when the time comes to help directly, he will help immediately.  The  buddha
does not just leave them alone without helping them.
- The 6 included within realizations:
  7. Not possessing degeneration from aspiration
  8. Not possessing degeneration from joyous effort
  9. Not possessing degeneration from mindfulness
 10. Not possessing degeneration from meditative stabilization
 11. Not possessing degeneration from wisdom
 12. Not possessing degeneration from liberation
- The 6 aspects of not possessing degeneration from
  (7) aspiration that seeks to enact the welfare of sentient beings  and  so
  forth;
  (8) joyous effort that is enthusiastic about going to places  where  there
  are trainees
  (9) mindfulness that does not forget  the  method  for  subduing  sentient
  beings;
  (10) meditative stabilization that is set in equipoise on the thusness  of
  phenomena;
  (11) wisdom that finely discerns all phenomena;
  (12) liberation in which the obscurations have been abandoned.
The 3 included within exalted activity:
 13. the exalted body
 14. the exalted speech
 15. the exalted mind
- The exalted activities of a perfect complete buddha are superior to  those
of hearers and solitary realizers, because
(13) the exalted activities of the exalted body, subduing  trainees  through
the four types of behavior (standing, sitting, walking and lying down),
(14) the exalted activities of  the  exalted  speech,  speaking  that  which
possesses the Dharma and is meaningful, and
(15) the exalted activities of the exalted mind, love,  compassion,  and  so
forth, are preceded by exalted wisdom and followed by exalted wisdom due  to
moving along together with exalted wisdom in the middle.
- On 14th  “that which possesses the Dharma and  is  meaningful.”  The  main
mode in which buddha transmits blessings to trainees is by means of  speech.
If one receives this speech from the buddha and practices it,  then  one  is
able to receive the blessings. If one merely listens to the  speech  without
putting it into practice, then it is  difficult  for  the  blessings  to  be
transmitted to oneself. If  one  is  able  to  put  into  practice  what  is
instructed, one receives all the blessings  of  the  exalted  body,  exalted
speech, and exalted mind of the buddha.
- On 15th “are preceded by exalted wisdom and  followed  by  exalted  wisdom
due to moving along together with exalted  wisdom  in  the  middle”  -  this
means that there is the exalted wisdom truth body that acts  as  the  cause,
the empowering condition,  for  the  exalted  activities.  So  this  exalted
wisdom precedes the exalted activities. Due to acting as a  cause/empowering
condition, exalted activities arise. When these activities arise,  they  are
accompanied by exalted wisdom.
The 3 included within exalted wisdom:
16. Exalted wisdom that does not grasp and is not obstructed  regarding  the
    arising of the past
17. Exalted wisdom that does not grasp and is not obstructed  regarding  the
    arising of the future
18. Exalted wisdom that does not grasp and is not obstructed  regarding  the
    arising of the present
- They are exalted wisdoms  unmixed  with  those  of  hearers  and  solitary
realizers, because, regarding the arising of the
  (16) past,
  (17) future, and
  (18) present
a tathagata possesses exalted knowers that are exalted wisdoms that  do  not
grasp due  to  engaging  in  knowing  through  mere  thinking  and  are  not
obstructed due to directly knowing all aspects.
- The sense is that simply by thinking about something, a buddha  knows  it.
So there is an exalted wisdom that does not  grasp  because  of  that.  This
exalted wisdom that does not grasp  because  through  merely  thinking,  one
engages in knowing. That they are not obstructed  due  to  directly  knowing
all aspects since one directly knows all objects,  one  is  not  obstructed.
These two aspects of exalted wisdom should be  applied  to  all:  the  past,
future, and present.
- “they are exalted wisdoms unmixed  with  those  of  hearers  and  solitary
realizers.” These qualities are not even slightly mixed with the  types  and
classes of excellent qualities of hearers and solitary  realizers.  This  is
the reason for saying that these qualities are unmixed.
-Definition of an unmixed quality  of  a  buddha:  A  final  exalted  knower
dependent on a final concentration, which is its empowering condition,  that
is distinguished by types and classes of excellent qualities  that  are  not
even slightly shared with lesser superiors.
Entity
-The dharmata in the continua of the perfect complete buddhas is the  aspect
of thusness, because the thusness explained by all the buddhas of the  three
times is distinguished by having extinguished all stains.
- In terms of the object-possessors,  the  exalted  wisdom  that  knows  the
modes in the continuum of a buddha is the aspect of thusness, because it  is
an exalted wisdom that is set in equipoise on thusness in a  manner  of  not
arising again. Since a buddha’s coming into the world is  for  the  sake  of
clarifying the suchness of things to trainees, a buddha who does  not  teach
thusness does not exist at all. Therefore thusness is “explained by all  the
buddhas.”
- There are 2 aspects of thusness:
   - one explained from the point of view of the  object-  the  dharmata  in
the continua of the perfect complete buddhas is the aspect of thusness
   - the other from the point of view of the object-possessor  -   in  terms
of the object-possessors, the exalted wisdom that knows  the  modes  in  the
continuum of a buddha is the aspect of thusness.
- Definition of an aspect of thusness that is a knower-aspect of an  exalted
knower of  all  aspects:  An  exalted  wisdom  of  meditative  equipoise  on
thusness in a manner of not arising again.
Support
- The very culminated principal perfection of wisdom is the  aspect  of  the
self-arisen that has mastered all Dharma, because it is  an  exalted  wisdom
that has attained mastery over turning all  the  wheels  of  Dharma  without
exception to trainees.
-  this  “culminated  principal  perfection  of  wisdom”  is  the  resultant
perfection of wisdom. It is the aspect of the self-arisen that has  mastered
all Dharma/phenomena.
- Those excellent qualities, the strengths and so forth explained above  are
not based upon just anything that is self-arisen because they are  excellent
qualities   based   upon   the   self-arisen   that   has    mastered    all
Dharma/phenomena. In other words, these excellent  qualities  are  supported
on the self-arisen that has mastered all Dharma. The support  is  the  self-
arisen that has mastered all Dharma.
- self-arisen is  the  omniscient  mind  because  the  omniscient  mind  has
mastered all Dharma and is unobstructed with respect to all phenomenon.   It
is without grasping and without obstruction regarding all phenomena.
- Definition of the aspect of the self-arisen that is a knower-aspect of  an
exalted knower of all aspects:  A  final  exalted  wisdom  distinguished  by
having  attained  mastery  over  turning  the  wheels  of   Dharma   without
exception.
Objects of intent
- The EKAA is the aspect of buddha itself, because it is the realization  of
manifest  complete  enlightenment  in  all  aspects  with  respect  to   all
phenomena.
- The 3 aspects are:
The aspect of thusness
The aspect of the self-arisen
The aspect of buddha
- Definition of the aspect of buddha itself indicated here: A final  exalted
wisdom that is the realization  of  manifest,  fully  actualized,  complete,
perfect enlightenment regarding all phenomena, the modes and  varieties,  in
all ways.
|39 aspects of the exalted knower of |
|all aspects                         |
|1.    Strengths         |10         |
|2.   Fearlessnesses     |4          |
|3.   Individual correct |4          |
|knowledges              |           |
|4.   Unmixed qualities  |18         |
|of a buddha             |           |
|5.   Entity             |1          |
|6.   Support            |1          |
|7.   Objects of intent  |1          |
|                        |39         |


- In that way, the aspects that bear the support of the paths  of  the  EKAA
of the buddhas are 39.
Summary of the entities
- The 27 aspects of a knower of all, by the instances of those  existing  in
the continua of hearers and solitary realizers and  those  existing  in  the
continua of bodhisattvas, are respectively without the  contaminations  that
are afflictions (due to hearers and solitary realizers  having  deliberately
sought out the afflictive obscurations and intended  to  abandon  them)  and
also with contaminations (due to the  opposite  of  the  reason  above).  In
other words:
- Those in the continua  of  hearers  and  solitary  realizers  are  without
contaminations
- Those in the continua of bodhisattvas are with contaminations.
-  The  contaminations  here  refer  to  the  afflictions,   or   afflictive
obscurations
- The aspects  in  the  continua  of  hearers  and  solitary  realizers  are
“without  the  contaminations  that  are  afflictions  due  to  hearers  and
solitary  realizers  having   deliberately   sought   out   the   afflictive
obscurations and having intended to abandon them.”
- Those existing in the continua of  bodhisattvas  are  with  contaminations
due to bodhisattvas  not  having  deliberately  sought  out  the  afflictive
obscurations.
- “without contaminations that are afflictions”  mean  that  the  afflictive
obscurations have been deliberately  sought  out  and  abandoned.  They  are
taken as the principal object of abandonment.  Being  “with  contaminations”
means the opposite:  the  afflictions  have  not  been  taken  as  principal
objects of abandonment.
      “Regarding the above explanation of the solitary realizers’  paths  as
contaminated,  they  are  with  the  contaminations  of  the  conception  of
apprehendeds that are knowledge obscurations during  subsequent  attainment.
Bodhisattvas also cultivate in accordance with those” When it is  said  that
solitary realizers’  paths  are  contaminated,  it  is  in  the  context  of
describing the state  during  subsequent  attainment.  “The  conceptions  of
apprehendeds that are  knowledge  obscurations”  means  the  conceptions  of
apprehendeds as external objects  that  are  coarse  knowledge  obscurations
during subsequent attainment.  Bodhisattvas  also  cultivate  in  accordance
with  those,  i.e.  they  also  cultivate  antidotes   to   conceptions   of
apprehendeds that are knowledge obscurations.

-The 36 aspects of  the  KP  are  only  with  the  contaminations  that  are
categories of afflictions is presented, because it is  very  much  the  case
that bodhisattvas have not abandoned the afflictions by way  of  taking  the
afflictions as the principal objects of abandonment.
- Since hearers  and  solitary  realizers  take  the  afflictions  as  their
principal objects of abandonment and abandon them, the KB in their  continua
are said to be uncontaminated.
- The aspects of the  KP  are  only  with  the  contaminations  because  the
bodhisattvas do not  take  the  afflictions  as  the  principal  objects  of
abandonment. The 36 aspects of a KP are only with the  contaminations.  This
does not mean that the aspects of  a  KP  are  only  contaminated.  Although
bodhisattvas have not abandoned the afflictions, they do not  generate  even
the slightest fault of afflictions. Therefore they are presented or  imputed
as being with the contaminations that are afflictions.

-All  the  110  final  aspects  of  the  paths  of   the   EKAA   are   only
uncontaminated. The reason is because  the  perfect  complete  buddhas  have
abandoned in all ways the afflictive and knowledge obscurations  along  with
their latencies; therefore, they have mastery over all Dharma.

Summary of the enumeration
If the aspects are added together, there are 173.
|Aspects of an EKAA                                 |
|1. Aspects of a KB concordant with those|27       |
|in hearers                              |         |
|2. Aspects of a KP concordant with those|36       |
|in bodhisattvas                         |         |
|3. Uncommon aspects of an EKAA          |110      |
|                                        |173      |

Q&A: High-level bodhisattvas  do  not  have  degeneration  from  aspiration,
joyous  effort,  mindfulness  etc.  There  is  a   direct   realization   of
selflessness is a knower of bases, and an  omniscient  mind  is  an  exalted
wisdom directly realizing selflessness, because it is an exalted wisdom  and
it directly realizes selflessness. This omniscient mind/EKAA is  an  exalted
knower directly realizing selflessness, however, this EKAA is not a KB.
