Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/Master/Transcript pdf/Summary 1.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:51:56.797553
================================================================================


Masters Program 2008: Ornament - Notes: 22-25 January 2008

                               Masters Program
                       Ornament for Clear Realization
            Notes on the Oral Commentary by Geshe Tenzin Tenphel1

Tuesday, 22 January, 2008 Opening comments

& Study is important for both teaching and understanding. Important not  to
   lose our practice and study, despite outside circumstances; keep this  in
   mind.  Good   motivation   and   dedication   for   all   living   beings
   important—merit,  etc.,  dedicated  for  them,  helps  us  make  positive
   connection with them, decrease anger, jealousy, etc.; develop ability  to
   think of others.

Teaching

We won't start immediately with the text; some people  here  are  new,  some
have studied on weekends, etc., which is not  enough  to  really  understand
Ornament; we need a basis.

Main text: Ornament for Clear Realization by Maitreya; then Ornament of the
Essence by Gyeltsab; in essence, these  are  based  on  the  Perfection  of
Wisdom sutras.

Ornament for Clear Realization:
Divided into eight chapters; principal subject of text = 8 categories o
   three exalted knowers:
       * exalted knower of all aspects
       * knower of paths
 * knower of bases
   o   four applications:
       * application in complete aspects
       * peak application
       * serial application
 * instantaneous application
   o   final result:
       * resultant truth body

Everything in the Ornament boils down to these eight  categories.  Remember
that main  subject  of  1st  chapter  =  exalted  knower  of  all  aspects.
Regardless of number of details, we need to remember this; otherwise, we'll
get confused.

1 These notes are merely intended as an aid to study, not as exhaustive,
fully edited transcripts, and may contain slight errors. Any errors are the
fault of the transcriber.

                  Masters Program 2008: Ornament - Notes: 22-25 January 2008

THE EIGHT CATEGORIES2 1. Exalted knower of all aspects

Definition: "A culminated exalted wisdom directly realizing the ten topics,
generated mind and so forth."

There can be many points of doubt, but there is a danger  that  your  heads
will "explode" if we go into them!

One doubt: what if this definition was just  "A  culminated  exalted  wisdom
directly  realizing  all  phenomena."  There  is  no  fault.  However,   the
definition specifies "directly  realizing  the  ten  topics…"  and  mentions
"generatedmind”3 specifically.

(1) Generated mind needs to be produced first. In dependence on  this,  (2)
instructions (the second of the ten topics) are received.  Then  comes  (3)
the Mahayana path of preparation, in order to improve the  generated  mind.
In order to proceed, one needs to awaken (4) the  Mahayana  lineage.  After
awakening lineage, we need to  understand  the  mode  of  abidance  of  all
phenomena [(5) the observed objects] and eliminate  superimpositions.  Why?
For three greatnesses, (6) the objects of intent of Mahayana  achievements.
For these to go well, we need to  practice  four  topics—(7)  achieving  of
armor, (8) achieving of engagement, (9)  achieving  of  accumulation,  (10)
achieving of definite issuance. These ten include all objects  of  Mahayana
practice. To attain the exalted knower of all aspects, we need to  directly
realize the ten topics.
   o   "Culminated wisdom" = culminated practice of the ten topics. Boundary
of exalted knower of all aspects: buddha ground
   o   "Buddha ground" is not ordinary ground, but in continuum of buddha.
mutually inclusive with exalted knower in continuum of buddha arya

The ten topics characterize the exalted knower of all aspects.  (This  will
come in more detail in Gyeltsab's explanation.)

1st chapter  mainly  discusses  exalted  knower  of  all  aspects,  without
discussing  other  two  knowers.  Indicated  first  in  order  to  generate
enthusiasm in  trainees  to  attain  result.  Then  they  seek  method  for
attaining it, hence knower of paths in next chapter.

2. Knower of paths

Definition: "A Mahayana arya's clear realization conjoined with a wisdom
directly realizing emptiness in the continuum of the person who possesses
it in his continuum."

Mutually inclusive with a Mahayana arya's exalted knower.

2     For the definitions, topics, and boundaries of these eight
categories, see Chart 1 ("The Definitions, Boundaries, and
Topics of the Eight Categories According to Seventy Topics").
3     "Generated mind," a term used frequently in this text, refers to what
we normally call bodhicitta, the mind of
enlightenment, mind generation, etc.
                  Masters Program 2008: Ornament - Notes: 22-25 January 2008

Boundary: Mahayana path of seeing through buddha ground.

Knower of paths is not  necessarily  wisdom  directly  realizing  emptiness,
because it is  conjoined  with  wisdom  realizing  emptiness.  For  example,
Mahayana conventional generated mind of path of seeing: it is  a  knower  of
paths but is not wisdom directly realizing emptiness, but is conjoined  with
it.
   o   Conjoined with wisdom realizing emptiness: they assist each other.
   o   Conjoined = assisting, accompanying.

3. Knower of bases

Definition: "An exalted wisdom—conjoined with a  wisdom  directly  realizing
selflessness in the  continuum  of  the  person  who  possesses  it  in  his
continuum—that abides in a Hinayana class of realizations."

Boundary: in continuum of all aryas.

Important to understand meaning of "conjoined with:" knower of bases is  not
necessarily wisdom realizing selflessness.

An exalted knower  directly  realizing  selflessness  in  the  continuum  of
bodhisattva on path of seeing is knower of  bases  and  abides  in  Hinayana
class  of  realization.  It  has  a  similar  aspect  to  an  object  mainly
cultivated by a learner hearer. The object  of  observation  and  subjective
aspect are similar for this bodhisattva and a hearer.

   o   Tenet system of this text = mainly Middle Way Autonomist (Svatantrika-
      Madhyamika). If thinking of Prasangika-Madhyamika view, some
      difficulty comes up.

Boundaries of the three exalted knowers:
   o   exalted knower of all aspects: only in buddhas' continuum
   o   knower of paths: from Mahayana path of seeing through buddha ground
   (i.e. path of seeing,
      path of meditation, path of no-more-learning) o   knower of bases: all
   aryas.

4. Application in complete aspects

Definition: "A bodhisattva's yoga conjoined with a wisdom cultivating the
aspects of the three exalted knowers through gathering them together."
Mutually inclusive with a bodhisattva's exalted knower.
Boundary: path of accumulation through end of continuum of sentient being.
To understand this definition, we need to understand the fourth chapter
well. Much to discuss.

4 i.e. a hearer still on a learner path, who has not yet achieved his final
result.

                                      3

                  Masters Program 2008: Ornament - Notes: 22-25 January 2008

5. Peak application

Definition:  "A  bodhisattva's  yoga  conjoined   with   a   wisdom   highly
transformed from the Mahayana  path  of  accumulation  that  cultivates  the
three exalted knowers through gathering them together."

Mutually inclusive with achieving of engagement

Boundary: heat level of Mahayana path of preparation through end of
continuum of sentient being.

This  is  similar  to  definition  of  fourth  category,  but  boundary  is
different.  The  difference  is  in  terms  of  the  force  of   meditative
stabilization. Of path  of  preparation,  meditative  stabilization  arises
through union of calm abiding and special insight, thus  there  is  control
over aspects.

   o   application in complete aspects = to gain control over three exalted
   knowers o   peak application = has gained control over three exalted
   knowers.

On path of  accumulation,  meditative  stabilization  based  only  on  calm
abiding. The bodhisattva subsequently attains special insight, then attains
Mahayana heat level of path of preparation, and gains control over  aspects
of three exalted knowers.

Debates ("tiny doubts")

Boundary of application in complete aspects = Mahayana path of  accumulation
through buddha ground, and is mutually inclusive with bodhisattva's  exalted
knower.  So  peak  application  is  also  application  in  complete  aspects
(because it fulfills  that  definition).  But  does  peak  application  gain
control over three exalted knowers (or has it gained control)?  We  can  say
the application in complete  aspects  is  to  gain  control  in  context  of
Mahayana path of accumulation;  at  path  of  preparation,  one  has  gained
control.

Exalted knower of all aspects exists only on buddha ground. Is it a  knower
of paths? If it is, it is a  Mahayana  arya's  exalted  knower.  Therefore,
exists in continuum of  Mahayana  arya.  One  might  (wrongly)  think  that
therefore, it is not only in the continuum of a  buddha.  Mahayana  exalted
knower does not necessarily need to be exalted knower of all aspects.

Are the three exalted knowers contradictory, or is there a  common  locus?5
Is there something that is all three? (An exalted knower of all aspects  is
necessarily exalted knower in continuum of buddha arya, and vice versa.)

o   meaning of "ground:" context = inclusive.

context = paths and grounds (sa lam).6 Ground, path, and exalted knower are
mutually

Is  conventional  generated  mind  (i.e.  conventional  bodhicitta)  in  the
continuum of a bodhisattva on the path of seeing a  knower  of  paths?  Yes,
why? Because it fulfills the definition of  knower  of  paths:  "A  Mahayana
arya's clear realization..."

5     This is a method used in Buddhist logic to determine the "pervasions"
between different things, i.e. if there is
something that is both, or there is a "common locus."
6     Refers to a genre of texts that specifically discusses the Buddhist
paths and grounds.
                  Masters Program 2008: Ornament - Notes: 22-25 January 2008

Knower of bases in continuum of  bodhisattva  on  path  of  seeing  is  both
knower of bases and knower of paths. If  we  posit  knower  of  bases  of  a
buddha arya, it is exalted knower of  all  aspects,  knower  of  paths,  and
knower of bases.

Exalted knower of all aspects in continuum of  a  buddha  arya:  is  exalted
knower of all aspects, knower of paths, but not knower  of  bases.  Directly
realizes all phenomena,  but  is  not  knower  of  bases.  Why?  Because  it
directly realizes selflessness, but doesn't  "abide  in  Hinayana  class  of
realization."

How is knower of  bases  initially  attained?  There  are  three  lineages:
hearer, solitary realizer, and Mahayana. A person can be definite in any of
the three.
   o   When any of these attains path of seeing, knower of bases is
   attained.
   o   As soon as anyone attains Mahayana path of seeing, he/she attains
   knower of paths.
   o   When one attains buddhahood, one attains exalted knower of all
   aspects.

Mahayana path of seeing, Mahayana path of meditation, and Mahayana path  of
no-more-learning are all knowers of  paths.  All  bodhisattva  grounds  are
knowers of paths. All exalted knowers on Mahayana path of seeing and  above
are knowers of paths.

& This may be confusing, but when you go to a place the first time, it's
   difficult, confusing, but becomes easier each time you go.

Relationship between definition and definiendum—there are eight pervasions7
(with exalted knower of all aspects and its definition):
   1. If it is exalted knower of all aspects, it is a culminated exalted
      wisdom directly realizing the
      ten topics, generated mind and so forth (i.e. the definition of
      exalted knower of all aspects).
   2. If exalted knower of all aspects exists, a culminated exalted wisdom
      directly realizing the
      ten topics, generated mind and so forth exists.
3. If it is not exalted knower of all aspects, it is not culminated exalted
   wisdom…..
4. If exalted knower of all aspects does not exist, culminated exalted
   wisdom….. does not exist
5. If it is culminated exalted wisdom….., is exalted knower of all aspects
6. If culminated exalted wisdom….. exists, exalted knower of all aspects
   exists.
7. If it is not culminated exalted wisdom….., it is not exalted knower of
   all aspects.
8. If culminated exalted wisdom….. doesn't exist, exalted knower of all
   aspects doesn't exist.

   o    "Knowers" are not "beings," they are consciousnesses.  (This  refers
      to the difference between shespa (knower, i.e.  a  consciousness)  and
      shespapo (one who knows).

Application in complete aspects is mutually inclusive with a  bodhisattva's
exalted knower. Exalted knower in continuum of bodhisattva  is  necessarily
an application in complete aspects.

   o   We don't have to memorize the definitions,  but  need  to  know  what
      categories are mutually inclusive  with  and  their  boundaries,  i.e.
      their intersections, or common loci.

Wednesday, 23 January, 2008 (morning)

Yesterday we discussed the first through fifth topics, today we'll discuss
the sixth through eighth topics.

7 Again, these are logical techniques used in Tibetan debate; we will
discuss in more depth as we go along.

                                      5

                  Masters Program 2008: Ornament - Notes: 22-25 January 2008

6. Serial application

Definition: A bodhisattva's yoga conjoined with a wisdom that progressively
cultivates the aspects of  the  three  exalted  knowers  for  the  sake  of
attaining stability in the aspects of the three exalted knowers.

Boundary: exists from the Mahayana path of accumulation through just  prior
to the end of the continuum [of a sentient being]

Meaning of "…progressively cultivates the  aspects  of  the  three  exalted
knowers for the sake of attaining stability:"
   o   Attaining stability = attain self-power, e.g. if one actualizes an
      uncontaminated quality, similar type is also actualized

Bodhisattva cultivates aspects of three exalted knower in progressive  way,
to attain stability in future. In future, can actualize quality in shortest
moment.
   o   Length of time of "shortest moment" = strong person's finger snap
   divided into 65 parts;
      1/65 = "shortest moment"
   o   If you have a stack of 65 sheets of paper, when you cut through it,
      it seems that all are cut at same time, but it is progressive. Time is
      like a cutter cutting one sheet.

7. Instantaneous application

Definition: A bodhisattva's final yoga that has attained stability in the
aspects of the three exalted
knowers.
Boundary: exists only at the end of continuum [of a sentient being]

8. Resultant truth body

Definition: A final result attained by the strength of cultivating the
aspects of the three exalted knowers, which is the method for attaining it.
Boundary: exists only on the buddha ground

   o   Method for attaining resultant truth body = cultivating the aspects
      of the three exalted knowers on four occasions of the applications.

These eight categories are the principal subject of the eight chapters in
the Ornament. If you know them well, you understand the eight chapters
well.

We will look at the relationship between exalted knower of all aspects and
knower of paths in
terms of four possibilities:8
1. exalted knower of all aspects but not knower of paths
2. knower of paths but not exalted knower of all aspects
3. that which is both
4. that which is neither

8 These refer to a way of comparing two phenomena in terms of pervasion in
philosophical debate. It is something like "there is something that is (1)
something that is A but not B; (2) something that is B but not A; (3)
something that is both A and B; (4) something that is neither."

                  Masters Program 2008: Ornament - Notes: 22-25 January 2008

1.    Is there something that is exalted knower of all aspects but not
knower of paths?

   o Exalted knower of all aspects is necessarily knower  of  paths  because
      exalted knower of all aspects is Mahayana arya's exalted knower,  i.e.
      is exalted knower in continuum of buddha arya.
   o Exalted knower in continuum of arya buddha is Mahayana  arya's  exalted
      knower because an arya buddha is a Mahayana arya.  Exalted  knower  of
      all aspects is necessarily a  knower  of  paths;  nothing  is  exalted
      knower of all aspects but not knower of paths.

2.    Knower of paths, but not exalted knower of all aspects?

   o e.g. knower of paths on path of seeing, path of meditation,  etc.  Many
      examples, which we can know just by comparing the boundaries.

3.    Both exalted knower of all aspects and knower of paths?

Illustrations of something that is both: o   Knower of paths on buddha
   ground o   Knower of bases in continuum of buddha arya o   Conventional
   generated mind in continuum of buddha arya

4.    Neither exalted knower of all aspects nor knower of paths?

Something that is neither:
   o   A conventional generated mind in continuum of bodhisattva on path of
   accumulation o   In debate, we should posit something specific, such as a
   path, otherwise we could say something absurd, e.g. Geshe-la's watch, any
   one of us, etc.

   -> So in the end, there are three possibilities, because there is nothing
      that is exalted knower of all aspects and not knower of paths

Q: Is an exalted knower of all aspects one consciousness or all
consciousnesses of a buddha? A: Shakyamuni Buddha has many exalted knowers
of all aspects in his continuum—one realizing emptiness, one realizing
impermanence, etc.—as many as there are objects of knowledge. All are
exalted knowers of all aspects. Any exalted knower in continuum of arya
buddha is an exalted knower of all aspects, e.g. five consciousnesses, etc.

All these ten topics characterize an exalted knower of all aspects—we are
not saying they are an exalted knower of all aspects; we speak of
1. what is characterized (the exalted knower of all aspects) and
2. that which characterizes the exalted knower of all aspects (i.e. the ten
   topics).

   ->   The ten topics are not divisions of an exalted knower of all
   aspects.
   ->   Etymology of knower of paths: a knower that directly knows that the
   three paths do not truly
      exist. ->   Meaning of "exalted knower" (mkhyen pa): in context of
   buddha arya, a knower is exalted
      knower, and an exalted knower is a knower. In general, "knower" =
      consciousness, not
      exalted knower; for example, mind grasping at true existence is a
      knower but not an exalted
      knower.
                  Masters Program 2008: Ornament - Notes: 22-25 January 2008

   -> Definition of exalted knower: not explicitly defined, but  in  context
      of texts on sa lam, ground, path,  and  exalted  knower  are  mutually
      inclusive, and definition of ground is given. "Exalted knower" is used
      from path of accumulation through buddha ground.

Relationship between knower of bases and exalted knower of all aspects:
four possibilities
1. something that is exalted knower of all aspects but not knower of bases
2. something that is knower of bases but not exalted knower of all aspects
3. something that is both
4. something that is neither

1.    something that is exalted knower of all aspects but not knower of
bases

Direct  realization  of  emptiness  in  continuum  of  arya  buddha,   great
compassion in continuum of buddha arya, great love in  continuum  of  buddha
arya, conventional generated mind in continuum of  buddha  arya,  etc.  They
are exalted knower of all aspects but not knower of  bases.  Any  knower  in
continuum of buddha is exalted knower of all aspects.

Why isn't conventional generated mind in continuum of buddha arya a  knower
of bases? Definition of knower of bases specifies  "abides  in  a  Hinayana
class of realizations." Conventional bodhicitta does not abide in  Hinayana
class of realization.

   -> Abiding in Hinayana class of realization = it is principal  object  of
      cultivation in continuum of learner hearer; similar in terms of object
      of observation and subject aspect. This is not true  for  conventional
      generated mind in continuum of buddha arya, which is  cultivated  only
      on Mahayana path.

   o Illustration of knower of  bases:  exalted  knower  directly  realizing
      selflessness in continuum of  bodhisattva  arya;  abides  in  Hinayana
      class because it is similar to  principal  object  of  cultivation  in
      continuum of learner hearer, etc. That which is similar to this is the
      principal object of cultivation of learner hearer.
   o Subjective aspect of knower  of  bases:  has  aspect  of  selflessness.
      Selflessness of persons = principal object of cultivation  by  learner
      hearer.

Exalted knower directly realizing selflessness in continuum of  bodhisattva
and realization of selflessness of persons in learner hearer  are  similar,
because object of observation and subjective aspect are same.  Selflessness
that appears to both is the same. But what  "assists"  the  realization  is
different, e.g. bodhicitta conjoined with mind of arya bodhisattva.

Q: meaning of "emptiness" vs. "selflessness"?
A: Depends on tenet system. From point of  view  of  Svatantrika-Madhyamikas
(which this  text  is  based  on),  big  difference  between  emptiness  and
selflessness. In Prasangika-Madhyamika system, they can be the same.
   o   In Svatantrika-Madhyamika, selflessness refers to selflessness of
   persons, i.e. lack of self-sufficient, substantially existent person,
   emptiness = lack of true existence. o   True existence = existing from
   own side without being merely imputed by conception. Comes later.

2.    something that is knower of bases but is not exalted knower of all
aspects

ex.: realization of selflessness in continuum of Hinayana arhat. Knower  of
bases exists in continuum of all aryas, but it  is  not  that  anything  in
continuum of all aryas is knower of bases.

                  Masters Program 2008: Ornament - Notes: 22-25 January 2008

"Abiding in Hinayana class" doesn't mean is Hinayana realization, so
doesn't exclude Mahayana arya.

Wednesday, 23 January, 2008 (evening)

& Discussion is very important; we need to discuss definitions and
   definienda, etc. For ex., we need to understand emptiness well in order
   to meditate on it. This gets easier day by day.

Continued discussion of relationship between knower of  bases  and  exalted
knower of all aspects: four possibilities

3.    Something that is both knower of bases and exalted knower of all
aspects

   o   Realization of selflessness in continuum of buddha arya is both.
   o   Many other examples, e.g. realization of impermanence in continuum of
      a buddha arya, direct realization of 16 attributes of four noble
      truths in continuum of buddha arya, etc.

4.    Something that is neither knower of bases nor exalted knower of all
aspects

   o   Wisdom realizing emptiness in continuum of arya bodhisattva is
   neither.

Q: Does the knower of paths realize the 11 topics of knower of paths?
A: Yes, but we don't really talk about it this way. Also,  knower  of  paths
in general realizes ten topics, generated mind, etc., but exalted knower  of
all aspects is culminated with respect to those, while knower  of  paths  is
not

Relationship between knower of paths and knower of bases: four
possibilities
1. knower of paths but not knower of bases
2. knower of bases but not knower of paths
3. both
4. neither

1.    knower of paths but not knower of bases

   o   Direct realization of emptiness in arya bodhisattva o   Bodhicitta in
   continuum of bodhisattva arya

2.    Knower of bases that is not knower of paths

   o   Realization of renunciation in continuum of Hinayana arhat—this is
   okay, but we could also
      debate this. o   Knower of bases in continuum of Hinayana arhat.

3.    knower of paths and knower of bases

   o   student: knower of paths knowing solitary realizers' paths.
      GTT: this knower of paths is an arya bodhisattva's exalted knower that
      realizes  that  apprehenders  and  apprehendeds  are  empty  of  being
      different substances (i.e. realizes non-duality), so is not knower  of
      bases; but knower of paths knowing hearers' paths is both.
                  Masters Program 2008: Ornament - Notes: 22-25 January 2008

   ->  Here,  abiding  in  Hinayana  class   mainly   refers   to   hearers'
      realizations, not solitary realizers' realizations. Knower  of  bases:
      "bases"  can  be  interpreted  as  referring  to  "selflessness"   (of
      aggregates, constituents, etc.). This is the subject of much debate in
      the monasteries, and is  because  of  a  doctrinal  assertion  of  the
      Yogachara-Svatantrika school, which this text follows principally.
   o Knower of bases on 1st ground, 2nd ground, etc. are all both knower  of
      paths and knower of bases

In chapter three, the knower of bases, regarding the 1st two topics:

   1. knower of paths not abiding in cyclic existence through knowing
        ->   Refers to knowing selflessness, not to the emptiness of being
        different substances.
   2. knower of paths not abiding in solitary peace through compassion
        ->   Through compassion, doesn't abide in solitary peace.

Realization of apprehenders/apprehendeds being different substances  is  not
main object of cultivation for attainment of  liberation.  Then  why  is  it
cultivated by solitary realizers?  Solitary  realizers  are  higher  faculty
than hearers; their result is slightly superior to "mere"  liberation  (this
assertion is according to the Yogachara-Svatantrika school).

   -> Svatantrika-Madhyamika is divided into two  groups:  Yogic  Autonomist
      (Yogachara-Svatantrika)    and    Sutra    Autonomist    (Sautrantika-
      Svatantrika);    Yogic     Autonomists     assert     emptiness     of
      apprehenders/apprehendeds   being    different    substances,    Sutra
      Autonomists don't. It is easier to explain this from the point of view
      of Sutra Autonomists.
   -> Difficult to say following this  view  that  solitary  realizers  have
      Hinayana view, but also difficult to say they don't.
   ->   Yogic Autonomists deny external objects, Sutra Autonomists accept
   external objects

4. Neither knower of paths nor knower of bases

   o   Compassion of ordinary being.
   o   Also, hearers' path of accumulation, hearers' path of preparation.
   These are neither.

Solitary  realizer  path  of  accumulation,  solitary   realizer   path   of
preparation,  Mahayana  path  of  accumulation,   and   Mahayana   path   of
preparation are definitely not knower of  paths,  but  are  they  knower  of
bases?

   ->   Someone who first enters Hinayana path, then attains arhat state,
   then enters Mahayana path
      is an arya, and therefore has the knower of bases. ->   Someone
   definite in solitary realizer lineage on first two paths (accumulation,
   preparation)
      is neither knower of paths nor knower of bases.9 ->   Someone definite
   in Mahayana lineage on first two paths is neither knower of paths nor
      knower of bases. ->   An indefinite solitary realizer could meet
   hearer teacher and enter hearer vehicle. When
      attains hearer path of seeing, might meet solitary realizer teacher
      and switch vehicles.

9 These examples are related to the assertion that some people are definite
to attain the goal of a particular lineage without changing vehicles, while
others are indefinite, i.e. they may change vehicles before obtaining their
goal.

                                     10

                  Masters Program 2008: Ornament - Notes: 22-25 January 2008

New attainment of knower of paths and new attainment of knower of bases:
four possibilities

1. New attainment of knower of paths but not new attainment of knower of
   bases
2. New attainment of knower of bases but not new attainment of knower of
   paths
3. Both
4. Neither

   -> What does "newly attain" mean? It mains to attain  something  for  the
      first time, i.e. attain the path of seeing for the first time.
   -> When someone attains Mahayana path of seeing, one newly attains knower
      of paths; one then goes on to  attain  liberated  path,  which  is  no
      longer a "new attainment" of knower of paths.
   -> Newly attained = 1st moment of path of seeing, i.e.  after  completing
      path of preparation. New attainment can refer to any path,  i.e.  path
      of preparation, or new attainment of bodhicitta.
   -> How does someone know he has realized a certain level/path?  Knows  by
      comparing to past experience and  by  comparing  to  others  of  lower
      level, but cannot perceive realizations of  those  on  higher  levels.
      Mind becomes clearer and clearer due to  higher  level  of  meditative
      stabilization, special  insight,  calm  abiding,  etc.  As  meditative
      stabilization becomes more stable, obstacles and afflictions decrease,
      mind becomes clearer and clearer.

1.    New attainment of knower of paths but not new attainment of knower of
bases

   o Someone who previously went through  Hinayana  vehicle  (i.e.  attained
      arhat state), then enters Mahayana vehicle and attains  Mahayana  path
      of seeing—attained knower  of  bases  previously,  and  newly  becomes
      Mahayana arya.

2.    New attainment of knower of bases but not new attainment of knower of
paths

This is easy! [Geshe-la didn't finish talking about these pervasions. Guess
we'll have to think about it!]

Thursday, 24 January, 2008

   Now we're just doing preliminary explanation; later, actual explanation
   of these topics will follow, and things will become clearer.

THE FOUR APPLICATIONS

We have discussed the three exalted knowers; now we will discuss the four
applications. It's important to discuss divisions between them, pervasions,
etc.

Application in complete aspects

Definition: A bodhisattva's yoga conjoined with a wisdom cultivating the
aspects of the three exalted knowers through gathering them together.

                                     11

                  Masters Program 2008: Ornament - Notes: 22-25 January 2008

Boundary: exists from the Mahayana path of accumulation through the end of
the continuum [of a sentient being]

Peak application

Definition: A bodhisattva's yoga conjoined with a wisdom highly transformed
from the Mahayana path of accumulation that cultivates the three exalted
knowers through gathering them together.

Boundary: exists from the heat level of the Mahayana path of preparation
through the end of the continuum [of a sentient being]

Serial application

Definition: A bodhisattva's yoga conjoined with a wisdom that progressively
cultivates the aspects of  the  three  exalted  knowers  for  the  sake  of
attaining stability in the aspects of the three exalted knowers.

Boundary: exists from the Mahayana path of accumulation through just  prior
to the end of the continuum [of a sentient being]

Instantaneous application

Definition: A bodhisattva's final yoga that has attained stability in the
aspects of the three exalted knowers.

Boundary: exists only at the end of continuum [of a sentient being]

   ->   Notice that "aspects of the three exalted knowers" appears in all
   four definitions.10 ->   Three exalted knowers are explained in first
   three chapters; next four chapters explain applications, how to cultivate
   aspects, and how to gain stability in them.

Application in complete aspects and Peak application

   -> The meaning of "gathering them together" in definition of  application
      in complete aspects: to think about, contemplate, and include in  your
      observation; aspects are  not  cultivated  individually,  but  through
      contemplating and gathering them.

All aspects are covered by observation: some people are  intelligent,  some
dull—more intelligent ones can think of many things at once.  Sharp-faculty
bodhisattvas observe three exalted  knowers  by  gathering  them  together.
Aspects are cultivated for sake of gaining control over them.

When bodhisattva attains path of preparation, he has  gained  control  over
aspects. On path of accumulation,  bodhisattva  can  cultivate  aspects  of
three exalted knower by force of calm abiding (zhi gnas); when attains heat
level of path of preparation (1st of four levels of path  of  preparation),
also has special insight (lhag mthong)  and  attains  power,  control  over
aspects.

10 Although the word "aspects" doesn't explicitly appear in the definition
for peak application, it is implied.

                                     12

                  Masters Program 2008: Ornament - Notes: 22-25 January 2008

   -> Application  in  complete  aspects  cultivates  for  sake  of  gaining
      control; peak application has attained control.  They  are  cause  and
      result.

Serial application

   -> "Progressively cultivates the aspects of the three exalted knowers for
      the sake of attaining stability in the aspects of  the  three  exalted
      knowers:" cultivates for sake of attaining stability.
   -> Stability is attained at occasion of instantaneous application  (which
      is only at end of continuum of sentient being).

Instantaneous application

   -> Criteria for attaining stability: if uncontaminated  ripened  or  non-
      ripened quality and others of similar type are actualized in  shortest
      moment, then one has attained stability in aspects  of  three  exalted
      knowers.
   ->   Difference between ripened and non-ripened: o   non-ripened =
         uninterrupted path o   ripened = liberated path
      o   Liberated path has separated from objects of abandonment, so is
   ripened. ->   Serial application and instantaneous application are cause
   and effect in terms of attaining stability.

Notice boundaries:
 * Serial application: from Mahayana path of accumulation through end of
   continuum
    * Peak application: from heat level of Mahayana path of preparation
      through end of the
      continuum [of a sentient being]
    * Application in complete aspects: from Mahayana path of accumulation
      through the end of
      the continuum [of a sentient being]
 * Instantaneous application: only at end of continuum.

First  two  applications  are  for  sake  of   gathering   aspects;   serial
application for sake of attaining stability; instantaneous  application  has
attained stability.

Q: What's the difference between the three exalted knowers and  the  aspects
of  the  exalted  knowers?  A:  There  are   knower   aspects   and   object
aspects—object aspects are related to objects,  not  object-possessor  (i.e.
consciousness); knower aspect refers to knower, or consciousness.

"Tricky points:" Comparing application in complete aspects and serial
application

   ->   Definition of application in complete aspects says "…cultivating the
   aspects…through
      gathering them together" and the boundary = from Mahayana path of
      accumulation through
      the end of the continuum. ->   Definition  of serial  application
   says  "progressively  cultivating…"  and boundary  =
      Mahayana path of accumulation through the end of the continuum (i.e.
      same as for
      application in complete aspects). ->   So,   on  path   of
   accumulation,   there   is   both   "cultivating   through   gathering"
   and
      "progressively cultivating," for sake of "gaining control," and for
      "attaining stability." These
      do not take place simultaneously, although they both occur on occasion
      of path of
      accumulation.

                                     13

                  Masters Program 2008: Ornament - Notes: 22-25 January 2008

   ->  Cultivating  aspects  through  gathering  together  and   cultivating
      progressively are very different.

On path of accumulation, is application in complete aspects a serial
application, and vice versa (since boundaries are same)?

   ->   Definition of application in complete aspects talks of bodhisattva's
   yoga "conjoined with
      wisdom….," serial application says "conjoined with a wisdom… ”." ->
   Serial application doesn't itself have to progressively cultivate,
   because is conjoined with
      that wisdom; likewise, application in complete aspects doesn't itself
      have to cultivate
      through gathering, because it is conjoined with that wisdom.

   -> Serial application  is  pervaded  by  being  application  in  complete
      aspects, because definition of  application  in  complete  aspects  is
      mutually inclusive with "bodhisattva's exalted knower."
   -> Instantaneous application, peak application,  and  serial  application
      are all pervaded by being application in complete aspects.

Bodhisattva's yoga
   ->   "Yoga" (rnal 'byor) means "connecting to what is authentic, or
   genuine."
   ->   For someone definite in Mahayana lineage, bodhisattva's yoga = calm
   abiding on path of
      accumulation ->   On paths of preparation, seeing, and meditation,
   bodhisattva's yoga is a union of calm
      abiding and special insight.

Do these four applications have a common locus?

   ->   Application in complete aspects and peak application have common
   locus; peak application
      is necessarily application in complete aspects (it is a "bodhisattva's
   exalted knower"). ->   Application in complete aspects and peak
   application: cause/effect relationship, because
      application in complete aspects precedes peak application, but they
      also have a common
      locus. -»   Application in complete aspects on occasion of path of
   accumulation is cause of peak
      application.  On path of preparation,  application in complete
      aspects  becomes peak
      application, but is still application in complete aspects. ->   As one
   proceeds, it becomes instantaneous application; instantaneous application
   is still
      peak application and application in complete aspects, but is not
      serial application (because is
      not for sake of attaining stability).

      Side discussion:
      o When first trying to attain calm abiding, we use  single  object  of
        observation, then one can  switch  objects  and  cultivate  single-
        pointed  mind  observing  all  173  aspects.11  Before   generating
        bodhicitta, one definitely has attained  calm  abiding.  Bodhicitta
        must be attained on basis of calm abiding.
      o In first chapter, when conventional  generated  mind  is  explained,
        mental support for bodhicitta = calm abiding.  Bodhicitta  will  be
        generated in entity of calm abiding, or  if  one  has  generated  a
        concentration, bodhicitta is generated in entity of  concentration.
        First, we will need to understand  concentrations  and  absorptions
        (this comes later).

11 This refers to the 173 aspects of the exalted knower of all aspects,
which will be expanded upon in the fourth chapter.

                                     14

                  Masters Program 2008: Ornament - Notes: 22-25 January 2008

   -> Cannot say application in complete aspects is serial  application  (on
      all occasions), because boundaries are different.  You  can  say  that
      from Mahayana path of  accumulation  through  just  prior  to  end  of
      continuum, application in complete aspects is serial application.  You
      can say that serial application is application in complete aspects.
   -> Application in complete aspects is not  an  instantaneous  application
      because prior to the end of the continuum,  it  is  not  instantaneous
      application.
   -> Application in complete aspects, from path of preparation through  end
      of continuum of sentient being, is peak application. We know  this  by
      looking at their boundaries.

   o If it is application in complete aspects, is it  pervaded  by  existing
      from Mahayana  path  of  accumulation  through  end  of  continuum  of
      sentient being? If you say application in complete aspects exists from
      Mahayana path of accumulation through end  of  continuum  of  sentient
      being, this is fine.  But  application  in  complete  aspects  is  not
      pervaded by existing from Mahayana path of accumulation through end of
      continuum of sentient being.  For  example,  application  in  complete
      aspects in continuum of bodhisattva on Mahayana path  of  accumulation
      does not exist after path of accumulation.
   o Another ex.: knower of bases exists in continua of all aryas; but if it
      is knower of bases, does it  necessarily  exist  in  continua  of  all
      aryas? No. (i.e. the knower of bases in one arya's continuum does  not
      exist in the continuum of another arya)
   o Consciousness exists in all our continua; but if it is a consciousness,
      does it exist in all our continua?
Tomorrow, more discussion of boundaries… Friday, 25 January, 2008

$• Through discussing (debating) "tricky points," we eliminate many doubts.
   Very beneficial, both from point of view of those  asking  and  answering
   questions. Just reading, many doubts can  remain.  Important  to  discuss
   these ideas with friends, etc. to eliminate doubts.

Addressing some doubts

   o Exalted knower of all aspects: Only exists on buddha  ground,  i.e.  in
      continua of all buddha aryas. Doesn't mean specific exalted knower  of
      all aspects, e.g. of Buddha Shakyamuni, exists in  all  buddha  aryas,
      e.g. Manjushri,  Maitreya,  Vajrapani,  Chenrezig,  Vajrayogini,  etc.
      Exalted knower of all aspects exists in continuum of all buddha aryas,
      but a specific exalted knower  of  all  aspects  is  not  pervaded  by
      existing in all buddha aryas. Apply this to all categories: knower  of
      paths, knower of bases, four applications, etc.

   o Knower of paths: Does what is known by knower of paths  have  to  be  a
      path? No. Knower of paths is conjoined with wisdom directly  realizing
      emptiness  of  three  types  of  paths  (hearer,  solitary   realizer,
      bodhisattva).

   o   Application in "complete aspects" (etymology):
      ->   "Aspects" = aspects of three exalted knowers
      ->   "complete" = all aspects in entirety
      ->   Application in complete aspects doesn't have to cultivate
      aspects, but must be conjoined
        with wisdom cultivating aspects ->   also possible for it to
      progressively cultivate aspects of three exalted knowers.

                                     15

                  Masters Program 2008: Ornament - Notes: 22-25 January 2008

   o   Serial application: "Serial" = progressive, gradual
      ->   serial application does not necessarily progressively cultivate
        aspects, but must be conjoined with wisdom cultivating aspects.

Relationship between knowers and applications

   o   Who is "cultivator" of aspects of three exalted knowers? Mainly four
   applications.
      -»   Three exalted knowers = objects to be cultivated
      ->   four applications = agents that cultivate (object-possessors). o
    However,   "knower"  and  "application"  are  not  necessarily  mutually
    exclusive;   e.g.
      application in complete aspects from path of seeing and above is
      necessarily knower of
      paths.
    * It is not correct to think that exalted knowers and applications are
      totally separate.
    * e.g. knower of bases in continuum of bodhisattva on Mahayana path of
      seeing:
           ->   Is knower of paths and knower of bases
           ->   Is also application in complete aspects, peak application,
   and serial application. o   There is common locus between knower and
   application. o   Knowers can be objects of cultivation, can also be agent
   that cultivates.

Two types of aspects:
   1. knower-aspects:
      ->   = consciousness
      ->   Knower-aspect of knower of paths is knower of paths
   2. object-aspects:
      ->   Object-aspect of knower of paths = object cultivated (e.g.
      emptiness)

   o   Peak application must be conjoined with wisdom that cultivates
   through gathering, but does
      not necessarily cultivate through gathering. o   Serial application
   and peak application become the same from path of preparation through
      prior to end of continuum of sentient being.

More on the significance of "conjoined with:"
   o   serial application = conjoined with bodhisattva's yoga that
   progressively cultivates o   is also application in complete aspects and
   benefits cultivation of three exalted knowers through gathering them
   together, while gathering is benefited by progressively cultivating.

"Cultivating" vs. "being"
   o   That which cultivates knower of paths does not have to be knower of
   paths, for ex.,
      Mahayana path of accumulation, Mahayana path of preparation: both
      cultivate knower of
      paths, but are not knower of paths. o   Meditative  equipoise  of
   Hinayana path  of seeing:   this  exalted  wisdom  cultivates
      selflessness. Selflessness is aspect of knower of bases, as well as of
      knower of paths and of
      exalted knower of all aspects, but this meditative equipoise of
      Hinayana path of seeing is not
      knower of paths.

Why does Mahayana path of seeing cultivate aspects of all three exalted
knowers?
   o   Why does it cultivate aspects of knower of bases? In order to take
   care of those in hearer
      lineage. o   Why does it cultivate aspects of knower of paths? In
   order to separate from afflictive
      obstructions and knowledge obstructions.

                                     16

                  Masters Program 2008: Ornament - Notes: 22-25 January 2008

   o   Why does it cultivate exalted knower of all aspects? In order to
      obtain final result (buddhahood).

      ->   Mahayana path of seeing cultivates selflessness of persons to
      take care of those in hearer
        lineage -»   Emptiness of apprehendeds and apprehenders being
      different in order to take care of
        solitary realizer lineage ->   Emptiness of true existence in order
      to care for Mahayana trainees.

   o   Two purposes: ->   to care for others ->   to improve one's
      realizations.

Eighth category: resultant truth body

Definition: A final result attained  by  the  strength  of  cultivating  the
aspects of the three exalted knowers, which is the method for attaining it.

Difference between buddha and buddha arya
In eighth category, resultant truth body = mutually inclusive with
"buddha." Each of the four topics
(which in this case are the same as its divisions) is buddha.
   -> However, a buddha arya is necessarily a buddha, but a  buddha  is  not
      necessarily a buddha arya.

Relationship between the two:
   1. Something which is buddha, but not buddha arya
      o   Ex. Nature body (svabhavikakaya; ngo bo nyid sku)
   2. Something which is both buddha arya and buddha
      o   Ex. Shakyamuni Buddha
   3. Something which is neither
      o   Many examples
4. There is nothing which is buddha arya but not buddha

   -> An arya buddha is necessarily a person while buddha is not necessarily
      a person. "Buddha" can also refer to excellent qualities of a  buddha,
      or an exalted knower.
   -> A buddha arya is not a sentient being. Is an arya  a  sentient  being?
      Some yes, some no. Those who are not: buddha arya.
   -> Sentient being (Tib. sems can) = "bearer of mind;" refers to bearer or
      possessor (can) of mind (sems) that is together with stains. Refers to
      person who has not abandoned stains.
   ->   Therefore a buddha, who has abandoned all stains, is no longer a
   sentient being

Q: How can a knower be cultivated, but also be a cultivator?
A: Great compassion can be cultivated; this means to generate  it  in  your
continuum. It is object of cultivation and  cultivator,  i.e.  it  is  also
cultivated by great compassion. When compassion is generated in  continuum,
compassion becomes stronger. Compassion is a mental factor.

On newly attaining Mahayana path of seeing
   o When someone definite in Mahayana lineage newly attains  Mahayana  path
      of seeing, newly attains knower of paths and knower of bases, but this
      is not a knower of bases.

                                     17

                  Masters Program 2008: Ornament - Notes: 22-25 January 2008

   o   Before attaining Mahayana path of seeing—on path of preparation—one
   does not have
      direct realization of selflessness, impermanence, emptiness
   o   On path of seeing, these are directly realized, but these
      realizations do not have to be manifest at time of attainment of
      Mahayana path of seeing. ->   When one transfers from Mahayana path of
      preparation to Mahayana path of seeing, one
        has realization of emptiness
      ->   On uninterrupted path of path of seeing this becomes direct
      realization of emptiness ->   This is the same for the realization of
      selflessness, impermanence, but they are not
        manifest. ->   In subsequent attainment, these realizations become
      manifest, although they were
        realized at uninterrupted path.

Explanation of terms:
   o   Existent = established by a valid cognizer o   Pervasion (there are
   four types):
   1. pervasion of existence
   2. pervasion of being
   3. pervasion of non-existence
   4. pervasion of non-being
   o Abide = e.g. abide in Hinayana class, means to  abide  in  this  class,
      e.g. being a similar class. "Abide  in  similar  class"  =  to  be  of
      similar type

[Here, long discussion about meaning of "similar class," and whether "same"
means the same thing as "similar."]

   -> Ex.: A knower of bases of a Mahayana arya abides in a similar class to
      Hinayana realization, but is not a Hinayana  realization,  because  is
      not in continuum of Hinayana person. Hinayana realization only  exists
      in a Hinayana person, but that which abides in Hinayana class is found
      in all three lineage bearers.

                                     END

                                     18
