Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/37 Aspects of Path to Enlightenment/TAES_CommGChonyi_ABC08.pdf
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:50:56.302728
================================================================================

 
 
 
FPMT  BASIC PROGRAM  
 
Sublime Continuum of the Mahayana: 
 The Tathagata Essence 
 
 
 
Oral Commentary 
 
by 
 
Geshe Thubten Chonyi 
 
 
 
 for the Basic Program at  Amitabha Buddhist Centre 
 
 
 
 
 
The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the Sublime Continuum Differentiating the Lineage of the 
Three Jewels  translated by Jeffrey Ho pkins and Joe B. Wilson 
The Tathagata Essence, Commentary to the First Chapter by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen,  translated by Gavin Kilty  
Oral commentary translated by  Venerable Tenzin Sherab  
Transcribed & edited by Phuah Soon Ek , Vivien Ng, Alison Wong, Angie Xiao, 
 Cecilia Tsong and Yap Siew Kee 
 
 
The oral commentary  
© Geshe Chonyi and Amitabha Buddhist Centre, 2008 
 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence  
Lesson 1 
Page 1 of 5 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating the Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra-ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation Jeffrey 
Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and Wilson, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
Commentary from The Tath›gata Essence, Commentary to the First 
Chapter by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen, translation Gavin Kilty, © FPMT, Inc. 
January 2007, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
 
Root verses are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added 
 
Lesson No: 1                     Date:22th January 2008  
 
Today we will divide the class into eight groups. This grouping  will be for a 
year as we had feedback a longer duration would be better than changing the 
groups for each module.  The groups will hold discussions and get to know 
each other. Whenever you need help, you don’t understand or need to review 
the teachings, you should tell your leader.  The group is for the purpose of 
helping each other to study better.   
 
We will divide the groups by giving out numbers. Whatever number you pick,  
please don’t change. Last time I heard students saying, “Oh! This is my friend 
and we want to be together.” It should not be like that. Here, everyone must be 
friends with each other. You do not need to come here if you only want to be 
with your friend. The whole point is to get to know each other.  
 
If you are unhappy with each other, please say “Hello” and make up. Don’t 
keep a grudge in your heart where, until you die, you are still angry with that person. At the time of death, you might regret it, thinking, “I had treated that 
person so badly. I was so angry with him or her. I shouldn’t have done that.” 
But it will be too late as we can no longer see each another again.  
 
The whole point is to get to know one another. My request to everyone is to 
talk, smile at and help one another. After all, we come to the centre to improve ourselves, to learn to be kinder, better people, able to help others and to learn 
the Dharma.  
 
For ourselves, there is one thing that is good for us to know.  Everyone has 
been told that the motivation is important. It is therefore very important to ask 
yourself, “Why am I coming to the centre?” We come to the centre not for 
entertainment, not because of our friends, to look at other people’s problems, 
the new building, the fact it is located in Geylang or even the teacher.  
 
It is very important you know clearly in your own minds why you come to ABC.  
The main reason for coming here must be to study and learn the 
buddhadharma. Why is it so important to learn the buddhadharma and what 
would be the problem if you don’t learn it? What is the benefit of learning the 
buddhadharma? We should know these answers in our hearts. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence  
Lesson 1 
Page 2 of 5  
Most of you would be familiar with this outline from the Lamrim Chenmo:1
 
Showing the greatness of the teaching in order to engender respect for the 
instructions 
A. The greatness of enabling one to know that all of the teachings are free of contradiction. 
B. The greatness of enabling one to understand that all of the scriptures are instructions for practice 
C. The greatness of enabling one easily to find the Conqueror’s intent 
D. The greatness of enabling one to refrain automatically from great wrongdoing. 
  
The fourth greatness says that through practising the Lamrim , all the great 
misdeeds will naturally cease. This is due to the three preceding greatnesses 
because when we practise them, the fourth greatness will naturally occur.   
 
The most serious or heaviest of negative actions are called heinous crimes 
such as killing one’s father and so on. From the sutric point of view, one of the 
heinous crimes is causing disunity in the sangha community. From the tantric 
perspective, this heinous crime is replaced with abandoning the Dharma, 
which is considered to be an extremely serious negative action.   
 
How does this negativity, created in relation to the holy Dharma, come about? 
It is explained in the  White Lotus Sutra  that abandoning the holy Dharma 
happens when one discriminates between the Buddha’s teachings saying some 
are good, others are bad; the teachings of the lower vehicle are inferior to those 
of the Mahayana vehicle; some teachings are supported by reasonings while 
others are not and that some teachings are useful and others are useless. 
Judging the Buddha’s teachings in this way with a strong sense of 
discrimination from the depths of one’s heart and choosing to disregard some of the Buddha’s teachings as useless or inferior quality – that is abandoning 
the Dharma.  
 
What are the consequences of abandoning the Dharma? As explained in the 
King of Concentration Sutra: 
 
“The wrongdoing of one who abandons the collections of sutras is far greater than of one who causes the destruction of all of the stupas here in Jambuvipa. The wrongdoing of one who abandons the collections of sutras 
is far greater than that of one who kills arhats equal in number to the 
sands of the Ganges.”
2.  
 
It becomes very clear that abandoning or rejecting the holy Dharma is a very 
negative action and we have either knowingly or unknowingly created this 
misdeed.  
 
How can we prevent ourselves from committing this misdeed? The answer is 
we need to study the Dharma  in the form of the great scriptures and philosophical texts to understand the different ways of avoiding generating  
such negativities.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence  
Lesson 1 
Page 3 of 5 We need to have realisations  of all the greatnesses within ourselves for when 
this happens, we will naturally prevent ourselves from creating such negativities. This is the main reason for the need to study the great 
philosophical texts. By doing so, we will realise that there are no contradictions 
within the teachings of the Buddha, which actually complement one another.   
 
During the course of one’s studies, if there is no proper understanding of the 
texts, when one compares the teachings of the lower and higher vehicles, one may think there are superficial differences and that there are contradictions in 
the Buddha’s teachings. When one doesn’t study the complete teachings of the 
Buddha but only has partial understanding of what the Buddha taught, then such misconceptions will arise – that the teachings are contradictory, invalid, illogical or useless. To avoid this, we need a complete understanding of the 
Buddha’s teachings.  
 
When we feel there are contradictions in the Buddha’s teachings, it becomes 
extremely difficult for us to see those teachings as our personal instructions 
and to trust that, in dependence upon them, we can achieve enlightenment. 
When that happens, then it becomes very difficult for us to realise the intent of 
the Buddha as contained in his teachings. Failing to see the teachings as personal instructions and not understanding the actual intent of the Buddha 
means that we will continue to create non-virtuous actions such as 
abandoning the Dharma. Since that is such a heavy negative action, we will 
end up taking rebirth in the hell realms for a long period of time. 
 
They appear only as four lines but if we reflect deeply on the four greatnesses, 
they have great power to direct us towards leading better lives. To summarise, 
the  purpose of explaining the four greatnesses is to remind us that we have to 
abandon creating negative karma and the way to learn the methods for doing 
this is through studying the buddhadharma.  
 
Especially during the course of studying the great treatises, sometimes, we 
may question the relevance or helpfulness of the teachings for oneself. But if we think carefully, recalling that all the teachings were explained and taught 
for our benefit, then all the teachings of the Buddha are relevant, necessary 
and beneficial. Otherwise, there will be no reason for the Buddha to give the 84,000 heaps of teachings. If we don’t need those teachings, who does?  
 
Our minds are filled with doubts, confusion, ignorance and conceptual 
thoughts. In order to dispel particularly the negative conceptual thoughts, we need to apply the antidotes. We need to know what the antidotes are and such 
knowledge comes only through studying.  
 
It is therefore extremely important to study the scriptures.  Simply  engaging in 
practices such as prostrations and making offerings alone cannot clear  negative emotions. We need to study and to apply whatever we have learnt. 
That is the way to improve ourselves. The importance of practising in this way 
is clearly seen in our daily lives – we need to go to school and study in order to 
gain knowledge and to clear our doubts in order to achieve our goals. It is the same in relation to achieving our spiritual goals. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence  
Lesson 1 
Page 4 of 5 You should see how important it is then to study Buddhist philosophy. When 
you don’t study, then the tendency is to take sides - this is Hinayana, that is Mahayana, this is tantra and they are not related to one another. For those 
who have not studied the Dharma, they assert that the Buddha did not teach 
tantra. This lack of understanding comes about due to the failure to study the 
complete teachings of the Buddha.  
 
When we have this opportunity to study the Dharma, we should start and 
continue our studies. Come to class when you are healthy; when you are 
young and when you have the time. I think we all have the perfect conditions  
to study. I want to encourage everyone to commit to coming to class and to 
study.  
 
Don’t procrastinate and postpone this. That’s very important. If you keep 
procrastinating, next year never comes. Before next year arrives, you may fall ill, you may even die or because of a change in jobs, you become extremely 
busy and there is no time for you to come. When you are seriously ill, it 
becomes impossible for you to come to class no matter how much you may 
wish it.  
 
I think it is very important that everyone should make their own decision to 
come to class to study. We all know the Lamrim . We know what the precious 
human rebirth means, we know that death is certain but the time of death is 
uncertain. For example, we know how difficult it is for us to listen to teachings 
when we simply have a headache. It is good to remind ourselves that while we have time, we should come to class to study. 
  
As I had mentioned earlier, studying is extremely important. Sometimes, we 
forget and don’t see the reason for studying. I had heard some people say, “Studying the tenets was not useful to me. The ‘Mind and Cognition’ module 
was not relevant to me.” When we think like this, from the depths of our hearts, 
then like I have mentioned, the heaviest karma is being created. Sometimes we 
don’t know how heavy the negative karma of abandoning the Dharma is. What does “abandoning the Dharma” mean? How heavy is the  karma of saying that? 
We don’t know.  
 
So, it is extremely important to think about this again and again. “Why is 
studying important to me? Is this the right time or not? If this is not the right time, then when is the right time for me?” We should question ourselves in this 
way. Here, everyone is educated, having gone to university and so forth. So I 
don’t need to tell you this like kindergarten children. Everyone is old enough to think for themselves.  
 
For the next two to three months, those who are in the Basic Program should 
not miss class. That is important. For the newcomers, it is best to commit 
yourself to continuing your attendance over the next two to three months to 
complete the module. This is my request to the newcomers. The topic is not 
difficult. We will be talking about the Three Jewels, the objects of refuge and  
buddha nature. It is good to commit yourself when you have the time, when 
you are healthy, when you are young. This is very important. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence  
Lesson 1 
Page 5 of 5 I bought some postcards (of the Boudhanath stupa in Nepal) for everyone as 
presents. They are the cheapest presents I can find but most valuable. I bought them for those who are studying in the Basic Program to create the 
cause for gaining enlightenment more quic kly.  As mentioned by Rinpoche, we 
create a lot of merit and purify a lot of negative karma by simply seeing the 
holy objects and making offerings to them. For those of you who haven’t been to Nepal, you create some cause to visit this holy place. When studying, we 
need prayers as they are important for our studies to succeed. So this is the purpose of this present.  
 
Group discussion questions: 
 
1. What are the objects of refuge? What differences do we find between a 
person who knows the presentation of refuge and a person who does not i.e. 
what are the benefits of knowing about refuge?  
2. What does refuge mean? Will one be able to be free from the fears of the three lower realms and cyclic existence if one practises refuge properly? 
3. What is buddha nature? Does every sentient being possess buddha nature? 
If we all have buddha nature, why do we have to work so hard?  
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Sherab  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng & Alison Wong, Angie Xiao, 27th January  
2008  
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong, 16th February 2008 
 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee, 17th February  2008 
 
 
                                                           
1 The Great Treatise of the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment  by Tsong-kh-pa (hereinafter 
referred to as the Lamrim Chenmo),  Volume One, translated by the Lamrim Chenmo 
Translation Committee, Joshua W.C. Cutler, Editor-in-Chief, Guy Newland, Editor, © 2000 
Tibetan Buddhist Learning Center, First Edition USA 2000, published by Snow Lion Publications, pg. 45.   
2 Lamrim Chenmo , pg. 54  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 2 
Page 1 of 8 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating the Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra-ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation Jeffrey 
Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and Wilson, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
Commentary from The Tathagata Essence, Commentary to the First 
Chapter by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen, translation Gavin Kilty, © FPMT, Inc. 
January 2007, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
 
Root verses are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added 
 
Lesson No: 2                     Date:24thJanuary 2008  
Chapter One: The Essen ce of a One Gone Thus 
Verses 1-2  
 
What does actual practice mean? Sitti ng in a remote cave somewhere for 
three, ten, twenty  years? We know the prelimin ary practices, such as 
100,000 prostrations, are very importa nt but do they help our actual 
practice? It is important  to think about this. 
 
There are different levels of preliminar y practices. The lowest level are the 
six preliminary practices such as the 100,000 prostrations, mantra 
recitations and so forth. The medium level is reading the 80,000 verses of 
the Prajnaparamita  text for 100 times. The best preliminary practice is 
studying the five major tr eatises: the Parmanvartika  (study of logic),  
Prajnaparamita , Madhyamika, Abhidharma Kosha , and Vinaya which 
amounts to studying all the Buddhist te xts. We should understand why this 
is so.   
 
When we refer to actual pr actice, such as going into  long retreat, what are 
we doing during th e retreat? What preliminary practice helps to prepare us 
for retreat? That is the ma in point. It is extremely important to study all the 
Buddha’s teachings in order to be able to do retreat. Without studying, how 
beneficial can the retreat be, how much reflection and meditation will you 
be able to do? I thin k it would be difficult. If you hadn’t stud ied much or 
you do not know anything at all, then what are you going to  do in the cave? 
Simply counting the numb er of mantra recitati ons? Is that all?  
 
If we really want to do retreat and want  to achieve some realisations, then I 
think we need to study. That is why the best preliminary practice is to study. 
If you put in a lot of effort  in your studies and can endure a lot of hardship 
in the course of your studies, that wo uld be equal to doing another set of 
preliminary practices and I don’t thin k you need to do another round of 
them. Studying is better than doing ma ntra recitations, making offerings, 
etc. 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 2 
Page 2 of 8 My point is to encourage everyone to study. Studying is extremely important. 
So I am giving you some reasons as to  why this is so. I had mentioned this 
on Tuesday and again today because to many people, studying does not 
seem to be so important. I want people to see that studying is important. 
That is my main point. It is extremely im portant to put in the effort to study.  
 
I am not sure when  Lama Tsong Khapa performe d his 100,000 prostrations 
- after he had completed his studies? I am not sure. Does that mean that,  
having studied, you do not need to do the 100,000 prostrations? It is not 
like that. If that were the case, then Lama Tsong Kh apa would not have 
done the prostrations. But af ter he had completed his studies, he went into 
retreat where he did his 100,000 prostrations. I am not sure but there  
must be some reason for this.  
 
Doing the 100,000 prostrations afte r you have completed your studies 
makes a big difference in the way you think. Your mind becomes very strong 
and the purification be comes very powerful.  
 
Doing 100,000 prostrations or offeri ngs without studying will generate a 
great deal of merit. But who is greater: Lama Tsong Khapa who knew 
everything and then did his 100,000 pros trations or those people who don’t 
study and just do 100,000 physical prostrations? I think the answer has to 
be Lama Tsong Khapa. The person who ha s studied can reflect more deeply, 
generate more merit and gain enlightenment fast er. That is the big 
difference. Therefore, it is extremel y important to study and to see the 
importance of doing so.  
 
When you are in class, I would like to encourage you to be attentive. Do not 
let your mind wander outside when you co me to class. It is  only a two hour 
session and is not that long. Try to pay as much attention as you can. I will 
talk about the objects of refuge in th e next few classes and after that, we 
will go on to the sect ion on buddha nature.  
 
*************************  
This treatise, composed by Ma itreya Buddha, is called the 
Mahayanuttaratantrashastra  in Sanskrit. In Tibetan, it is called Thekpa 
Chenpo Gyu Lamä Tenchö  and in English, the Mahayana Sublime Continuum  
 
In the Tibetan text, the title of the treatise appears first in Sanskrit because 
when the Buddha first taught this text, he did so in that language. It also 
serves the purpose of leaving an imprint in our minds to enable us to 
understand Sanskrit in the future. Thekpa  in Tibetan literally means 
“having the ability to carry.” Thekpa chenpo refers to the ability of being 
able to carry something that is very big or great.  
 
When we talk about the vehicle, they can be classified into the causal  
vehicle and the resultant vehicle. The causal vehicle primarily refers to the 
stages of the path, specifically the path of accumulation up to the tenth 
ground of the bodhisattva path, that is, the causes leading to the 
attainment of full enlightenment.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 2 
Page 3 of 8 The resultant vehicle refers to the result, buddhahood.  
 
“Tantra ” is translated as “ gyu” in Tibetan which, literally means, 
“continuity.” “Uttara ” is translated as “ lama” i n  T i b e t a n .  “ Lama ” means 
different things depending on the context and here, in the context of time, 
it refers to a later time. “ Shastra”  translates into “ tenchö” in Tibetan 
meaning “treatise.” “Tenchö”  refers to the cutting of something which gives 
protection. The afflictions are being cut or eradicated and the protection is 
from falling into the lower realms in particular and the suffering of cyclic 
existence in general. Therefore, it gives protection in  both spheres.1  
 
The continuum in “Sublime Continuum ,” refers to the continuity of 
something as well as the subject matter of the text. Here, it refers 
specifically to the buddha nature that has existed in the mental continua 
of sentient beings since beginningless time. 
 
Homage to all Buddhas and Bodhisattvas.  
 
This salutation from the translator serves both temporal and ultimate 
purposes. By paying homage to the Th ree Jewels as he embarks on the 
translation of this text from Sanskrit  to Tibetan shows the importance of his 
undertaking. As the text is related to Buddhist practice, it begins with the 
taking of refuge. This re minds us of the need to remember the three objects 
of refuge whenever we begin any work. 
 
Almost all treatises begin in this  style: “ In Sanskrit, it is called (name of text)  
and in Tibetan it is called (name of text).”  In the same way, it is important that 
we generate a good motivation befo re engaging in any activities.  
 
(1,1) 
Buddha, doctrine, community, ba sic constituent, enlightenment, 
Qualities, and finally, Buddha activities— 
The body of the entire treatise is in brief 
These seven diamond topics. 
 
This verse introduces the seven diamond topics which are the main subject 
matter of this text:- 
1. Buddha 
2. Doctrine  
3. Community  
4. Basic constituent 
5. Enlightenment 
6. Qualities 
                                                           
1  
Sanskrit Tibetan English 
 thekpa  ability to carry  
 thekpa chenpo  the ability to carry something great 
tantra gyu continuity 
uttara lama at a later time  
shastra tenchö treatise 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 2 
Page 4 of 8 7. Buddha activities 
 
1.  The first topic, Buddha  (or Buddha Jewel) has two aspects:- 
(a) Ultimate Buddha Jewel 
(b) Conventional Buddha Jewel 
 
The Ultimate Buddha Jewel refers to an individual who has completely 
abandoned all negativities and has ac hieved excellent qualities and all 
knowledge. This state of perfection whic h is the ultimate state of realisation 
of qualities and abando nment is the Ultimate Buddha Jewel. We can 
understand the truth body of the Budd ha (the dharmakh aya) to be the 
Ultimate Buddha Jewel. The Convention al Buddha Jewel refers to the form 
body of the Buddha (the rupakaya).2
 
2.  The doctrine (or Dharma Jewel) also has two aspects:- 
(a) Ultimate Dharma Jewel 
(b) Conventional Dharma Jewel 
 
The Ultimate Dharma Jewel here, in this text, refers to the true cessation and 
true path in the mental continuum of a Mahayana superior  being while the 
Conventional Dharma Jewel refers to the teachings of the Buddha such as 
the twelve categories of the great scriptures and their commentaries.  
 
3.  The community  (or Sangha Jewel) also has two aspects:- 
(a) Ultimate Sangha Jewel 
(b) Conventional Sangha Jewel 
 
Here, in this text, the Ultimate Sangha Jewel refers to the true cessation and 
true path in the continuum of a Ma hayana superior being while the 
Conventional Sangha Jewel refe rs to an arya  bodhisattva. 
 
Our discussion of the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha jewels is based on the  
Mahayana vehicle and not th e three jewels in general, in line with the three 
jewels as explained in the Sublime Continuum.   
 
4.  The basic constituent (or buddha nature) is divided into:- 
(a) Ultimate buddha nature 
(b) Conventional buddha nature 
 
The ultimate buddha nature refers to th e emptiness of sent ient beings’ minds 
which possess defilem ents and stains.  
                                                           
2 dharmakaya (Skt)  The "buddha-body of reality." The omniscient mind of a fully enlightened 
being, which, free of all coverings, remains medi tatively absorbed in the direct perception of 
emptiness while simultaneously cognizing all ph enomena. The result of the complete and 
perfect accumulation of wisdom. One of the holy bodies of a buddha  
 
rupakaya (Skt)  The “buddha body of form” of a fully enlightened being; the result of the 
complete and perfect accumulation of merit. It has two aspects— sambhogakaya , or “buddha-
body of perfect resource,” in which the enlight ened mind appears to benefit highly realized 
bodhisattvas, and nirmanakaya , or “buddha-body of perfect emanation,” in which the 
enlightened mind appears to  benefit ordinary beings  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 2 
Page 5 of 8 The conventional buddha nature refers to the power or energy in the minds of 
sentient beings which has the ability to develop the transcendental 
knowledge.  
 
For example, conventional buddha nature is the bodhicitta which is the 
mental quality that can be  fully developed in our minds while the emptiness 
of inherent existence of that bodhicitta is the ultimate buddha nature. 
5.  Enlightenment is divided into:- 
     (a)  Ultimate enlightenment 
     (b)  Conventional enlightenment 
 
Ultimate enlightenment is the same as the Ultimate Buddha Jewel and refers 
to the state of dharmakaya. Conventional enlightenment refers to the form 
body (or rupakaya) of the Buddha and is the sa me as the Conventional 
Buddha Jewel. 
 
Enlightenment is jang chub in Tibetan. Since ultimate and conventional 
enlightenment is the same as the Ulti mate and Conventional Buddha Jewels, 
why the repetition? This is because the Buddha Jewels are explained in 
terms of the result that one will achieve in the future while enlightenment is 
explained from the perspective of the achievement in the mental continuum 
of someone else. 
 
In the same way, when we talk about resultant refuge, that is the Buddha, 
Dharma and Sangha that  oneself will achieve in the future while 
enlightenment is explained in causal  terms, that is, the enlightenment 
achieved by someone else, for instance, Shaky amuni Buddha.3
                                                           
3 There's another way to talk about the objects of refuge, one that has two parts to it: the 
causal refuge and the resultant refuge . The causal refuge  refers to other beings, people outside 
of ourselves, who have already done what we want to do. It refers to the Buddha, Dharma and 
Sangha that already exist—all the different beings who are Buddhas, all the Dharma, the 
different realizations and cessations on their mind, all the beings who are already arya 
bodhisattvas with direct perception of emptiness. 
Because these beings have attained what we want to develop, they become reliable guides to 
show us the way. 
If you want to go to Delhi, it's good to talk to somebody who's been ther e, because th ey  
know exactly how to get there, what planes to catch, how to do it and what things you're going 
to bump into along the way. Because they've done  it, we can really rely on them. So in the 
same way, the causal refuge are those who've already done what we want to do, who are 
instructing us through their own experience, and who are very reliable. At the beginning of your prayers, when you're doing the refuge—"I take refuge in the Buddha, Dharma, Sangha"—you can think in this way: all those beings, all the Dharma, and all the Sangha who are 
already there. 
Another way of taking refu ge is thinking about the resultant refuge . In other words, when 
we take refuge, we think of the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha that we will become. We take 
our future Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha and we proj ect it outside of us and we take refuge in 
that. The Buddha becomes the omniscient mind that we're going to attain, the continuity of 
our own present mind stream in its fully enlightened form. The Dharma becomes the true 
paths and true cessations that we're going to ha ve on our mind stream when we follow the 
path and develop them. And the Sangha becomes the being that we will become who has 
direct perception of emptiness. When we think about the resultant refuge, we're thinking 
about what we can become and really imagining it already there. That's our real refuge. With 
the resultant refuge, we’re really  taking refuge in our own ability, in the Buddha, Dharma and 
Sangha that we will become. (Extract from 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 2 
Page 6 of 8 6.  Qualities  are divided into:- 
(a) Ultimate qualities 
(b) Conventional qualities 
The ultimate qualities refer to the 32 qualities of the Buddha – the ten 
powers, four perfect know ledges and 18 unshared qual ities. The conventional 
qualities  refer to the 32 major marks of the Buddha. 
 
7.  Buddha activities  are divided into:- 
(a) Ultimate Buddha activities 
(b) Conventional Buddha activities 
 
The ultimate Buddha activities refers  to the wisdom truth body of the 
Buddha and the convention al Buddha activities ar e the teachings of the  
Buddha  teachings such as the tw elve categories of  scriptures.  
 
 
Seven diamond topics  
Ultimate  
Conventional 
1. Buddha Jewel An individual who has 
completely abandoned all  negativities and has 
achieved the excellent 
qualities and all knowledge. 
The dharmakaya The form body of the Buddha 
(or rupakaya) 
2. Dharma Jewel True cessation and true path 
in the continuum of a 
Mahayana superior being. 
 The teachings of the Buddha 
such as the twelve categories 
of the great scriptures and the commentaries on the 
teachings 
3. Sangha Jewel True cessation and true path 
in the continuum of a 
Mahayana superior being. An arya bodhisattva  
4. Basic constituent           
    (Buddha nature) The emptiness of sentient 
beings’ minds which possess 
defilements and stains .  
 The power or energy in the 
minds of sentient beings which has the ability to 
develop the transcendental 
knowledge. 
5. Enlightenment The state of dharmakaya 
 The form body (rupakaya) of 
the Buddha 
6. Qualities The 32 qualities of the 
Buddha – the ten powers, 
four perfect knowledges and  
18 unshared qualities. The 32 major marks of the 
Buddha. 
 
7. Buddha activities The wisdom truth body The collection of the 
teachings of the Buddha  
such as the twelve categories  
of scriptures.  
 
(1,2) 
These [seven] in connection are to be  known by way of their own natures 
In this order in the [Questions of] King Dharanishvara Sutra— 
The [first] three from the introduction 
                                                                                                                                                                                          
http://www.thubtenchodron. org/GradualPathToEnlightenment/LR_022_Refuge_92.pdf
 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 2 
Page 7 of 8 [And the other] four from the divisions of the attributes of the intelligent 
[Bodhisattvas] and of Conquerors. 
 
Verse 2 explains why there are seven topics.   
 
What is the ultimate goal that one wants to achieve? That would be the three 
final Buddha, Dharma and Sangha jewels because at that stage, one would 
have completely eradicated and overcome all faults and one would have perfect 
knowledge and qualities. One would also have achieved the final purpose for 
oneself and others.  
 
What are the causes that will bring about such an achievement? There are two 
types of causes:- 
1. the substantial cause and  
2. the co-operative (or empowering) cause 
 
The substantial cause is the tathagata essence, the basic constituent or  
buddha nature, which will help us to achieve the three resultant refuges. The 
cooperative causes or the empowering conditions that will help us achieve the 
desired result are enlightenment, qualities and buddha activities.  
 
Question from student : Since buddha nature, the emptiness of the mind, is 
permanent, how could that be the substantial cause for our desired result of 
the three jewels? 
 
Answer: I t  i s  n o t  t h e  actual  substantial cause but it is imputed as such. 
Buddha nature acts as the substantial cause because the mind is empty of 
inherent existence. Since that is so, the actual nature of the mind is not 
polluted but clean and clear.  Therefore, one can overcome all defilements and 
adventitious afflictions and buddha nature is imputed as the substantial 
cause for achieving the resultant refuges.  
 
As explained earlier, the Ultimate Bu ddha Jewel is the dharmakaya and the 
Conventional Buddha Jewel is the rup akaya (form body of  the Buddha).  
 
There are two types of buddha nature. The naturally abiding buddha nature 
is imputed as the substantial cause for the attainment of the dharmakaya 
and the developmental buddha nature is the actual substantial cause for 
achieving the form body. 
 
The ultimate buddha nature mainly re fers to the emptiness of the mind, 
which is necessarily a permanent phenomenon. How can a permanent thing  
act as a substantial cause?  
 
Although the ultimate buddha nature is said to be the substantial cause for 
achieving the result of the refuge jewels, it is not the actual substantial cause 
but the imputed one. The actual substantial cause is the conventional 
buddha nature.  
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 2 
Page 8 of 8 What are the cooperative (empowering) conditions? They are enlightenment, 
qualities and Buddha acti vities within the continuum  of someone other than 
oneself. When this person (who is a buddha) turns the wheel of Dharma, one 
receives the teachings and the practices  that will help one to achieve the 
desired goal of the resultant state of the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha.  
 
In the context of the Sublime Continuum , the first three diamond topics – 
buddha (Buddha), doctrine (Dharma) and community (Sangha) are the 
resultant jewels to be achieved by oneself.   
 
The basic constituent is the buddha nature that is the basis for one to 
achieve the desired goal of Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. 
 
The enlightenment, qualities and Buddha activities (which pertain to the 
enlightenment of another person) explain the cooperative conditions that help 
one to achieve the desired goal.  
 
Question from student :  
Is there any difference between the fina l three jewels and the ultimate three 
jewels? If there is a difference, what is the definition of the three final jewels? 
 
Answer: All enlightened beings are the Final Buddha Jewels but are not 
necessarily the Ultimate Buddha Jewels . The form body is the Final Buddha 
Jewel but is not the Ultimate Buddha Jewel. 
 
Question from student : Are the Ultimate Dharma Jewel and the Final Dharma 
Jewel the same? 
Answer: The Ultimate Dharma Jewel is not necessarily the Final Dharma 
Jewel. For example, the true cessation and true path in the continuum of an 
arya bodhisattva are Ultimate Dharma Jewels but they are not Final Dharma 
Jewels. The Final Dharma Jewel must be enlightenment. 
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Sherab  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng & Alison Wong, Angie Xiao, 29th January  
2008  
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong, 18th February 2008 
 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee & Benny Law, 19th February 2008 
 
Vetted by Geshe Chonyi, 21st February 2008 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10  
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 3 
Page 1 of 10 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating the Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra-ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation Jeffrey 
Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and Wilson, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
Commentary from The Tath›gata Essence, Commentary to the First 
Chapter by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen, translation Gavin Kilty, © FPMT, Inc. 
January 2007, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
 
Root verses are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added 
 
Lesson No: 3                     Date:29thJanuary 2008  
Chapter One: The Essen ce of a One Gone Thus 
Verses 3-5  
Geshe-la:  From Thursday, we will start doing some meditation for about ten 
minutes before class. I strongly request that, for that duration of time, we 
observe total silence. Latecomers should  wait outside and not come in until 
the meditation has ended. If you wish to meditate, be punctual.  
  
A long time ago, I started this silent period but, somehow, after just two 
minutes, everyone was making noise. This time, I will be stricter so 
latecomers, please wait outside. I am not sure what type of meditation we 
will do but the main thing is to ob serve silence and meditate. We have 
studied for three, four years now so you should know what to do. I don’t need 
to guide you. I think we will try this for this module – ten minutes of silent 
reflection after a busy day. This is important. 
 
Once you are in here, keep silent. I mentio ned this last time but people didn’t 
listen. So now, if you cannot keep quiet , I will tell you to go outside. I am 
telling you this in advance, so don’t be upset or angry.  Those who don’t like 
to meditate, who feel this is not important, you can remain downstairs for ten 
minutes.  
 
I had mentioned in the previous two clas ses why it is so important to study.  
Someone had asked me what made me st udy, what had really motivated and 
encouraged me to study? I thought then it would be good to tell you a little bit 
about my personal experience.  
 
Actually, when I was young, I didn’t have  much interest in studying. As is the 
case for everyone, when one is young, one is only interested in playing and I 
had no interest in studying.  
 
What really encouraged me to study was observing my teachers. I couldn’t 
believe and I realized how much they knew when they taught me - all the 
various topics and the texts that they had read and learnt. That is the only 
reason for me to study. I thought, “How wonderful if I also knew all these 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10  
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 3 
Page 2 of 10 topics.” At that time, I didn’t have the wish to teach others. I never thought of 
studying in order to be able to teac h other people. I didn’t have that kind of 
motivation. The main reason was this wish to know the texts on the teachings 
of the Buddha, thinking it would be so good if I knew all the topics. I didn’t 
know why I needed to know them but I just had this wish to know them.  
 
From my side, I thought I couldn’t learn philosophy as it was so complicated. I 
said, “It is almost impossible to underst and the philosophy texts.” I had this 
strong belief in my mind. But then Ge she Jampa Gyatso, th e geshe in Italy  
who had just passed away this year told  me, “Go and study in Sera.” I said,  
“It is impossible to understand Buddhist  philosophy. I can’t go. I don’t have 
the strong wish to understand all th is Buddhist philosophy. It is too 
complicated. It is impossi ble.” Geshe Jampa Gyatso re plied, “It is possible.” 
But I couldn’t believe that so it went back and forth between us, “Yes.” “No.” 
“Yes.” “No.”  
 
There were so many doubts. You lear n something and then another doubt 
would arise.  It seemed never ending. Different scholars have different views. 
It was so complicated. It was extremel y difficult to understand the logic of 
how  Buddhist philosophy worked. It  was very difficult to understand. 
 
But, after a while, somehow, from my heart, the feeling came that I wanted to 
understand these Buddhist texts. I would be happy when I read and was 
able to understand them. That was one of the reasons why I had the strong 
wish.  
 
Somehow I had the chance to go to Sera but it was not easy. When I attended 
the philosophy class, I coul dn’t understand a single word of what the teacher 
was saying. Then I went to the debate class. Everybody was debating very 
well but I didn’t know what they were  debating about. I had no idea but 
somehow I went through all that.  
 
What pushed me was the thought, “I want to know. I want to know.” That’s 
all. That was only the wish I had that pu shed me to study. Even after  three, 
six months, it was still extremely difficult.  I really didn’t understand and I felt 
discouraged but as time passed, I di d put in some effort and began to 
understand a little bit. Once you understand a little bit of how the logic works, 
then you will have some interest and that will encourage you to study more. 
When you read and understand one sentence that will make you very happy. 
Somehow, I studied and understood mo re. Once I understood, it encouraged 
me to study more and more.  
 
After I had completed my studies at Sera, I still did not have the wish to teach 
other people. I didn’t have th is kind of thought. I thought only of  knowing the 
texts and understanding the Buddhist teachings. My idea was, wherever I 
may be staying, to spend my lifetime reading the texts and thinking and 
reflecting on their meaning. I thought it  would be very good to understand, to 
read, to know. I would be happy. I thought it would be wonderful to pass the 
time like that whether one was living in the cave, in the monastery or any 
place where one could spend one’s time reading the texts. My wish was that. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10  
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 3 
Page 3 of 10 I have this strong wish and that is wh at  pushed me to complete my studies. 
For me, once I understood the Buddhist  philosophy and the meaning of the 
texts, it made me extremely happy because that was what I wanted to know. 
If you want to know and then you understand the texts, that would make you 
extremely happy. That will encourage you. Like that. This is just to share.  
 
Of course, once you start to study, it is  not easy. Life is not comfortable. When 
I was at Sera, there weren’t 5-star conditions. It was not that easy. If we talk 
about the rooms, you have to share the ro om with two to three people. If we 
talk about the food, you do not have much  choice as you have to eat the same 
kind of food everyday. But I knew very clearly that I had not gone there for 
the food. I had not gone there for the room. I had gone there to study.  
 
So the period when I was pursuing my studies was difficult. There were 
problems. There weren’t mental problems but I was physically sick. It was 
difficult but, nevertheless, it did not make me sad because of my wish to 
study. Understanding that, I was happy. I was able to complete my  study 
because of that.  
 
What I am saying here is this. This is  my message: “What is your wish? If 
that is your wish, you can make it.” What  is your wish? Is your wish to learn 
the buddhadharma? Why do you want to  learn the buddhadharma? You have 
to see the point of doing so. Does learning the buddhadharma make you 
happy? It definitely makes me happy. I want it. I like it. Here, everyone 
should know why studying is import ant and whether studying makes you 
happy or not? The reason for this should  be very clear in your mind. Once you 
are clear about that – “I really want to study. I want to know Buddhist 
philosophy texts. I want to know everything.” – and have the strong wish to 
do so, you can make it. You can come to  class no matter how busy you are.  
 
If you do not have this strong wish and think, “Studying is not so important. 
It is OK whether I study or not,” and Buddhist philosophy is not so important 
in your life, then it will become difficult because you are not sure about your 
studies. You do not see the point or the benefit of studying. The strong 
determination to come to class or to read the text will not arise and it becomes 
extremely difficult.  
 
The point is to understand that studying  is important. How much you  study, 
that much wisdom you have. How much  your wisdom, that much wiser you 
become. You are more flexible and not narrow-minded.  
 
Once you study, it is not 100% certain yo u will not be narrow-minded. It is 
possible that you remain narrow-minded even when you study. Of course, to 
study Buddhist philosophy and texts is wonderful but as Nagarjuna 
mentioned, “Do not get attached to that.” You should not have strong 
attachment to that because if that is the case, it will make you narrow- 
minded. We shouldn’t become too attach ed to even a good thing because 
when that happens, we will see the o pposing side as negative and begin to 
criticize and look down upon it. Becaus e of attachment, you will think, “Only 
my view is right.” Sometimes, it is possible to become narrow-minded. But, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10  
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 3 
Page 4 of 10 generally speaking, once you study,  you will have more wisdom, become 
wiser and more flexible and have an easier life. You can think in a hundred 
different ways. I think that is the big difference on whether you study or you 
don’t study. Even for meditation. If you do not study, what are you going to 
meditate on? How long can you meditate? If you study, I think you can 
meditate as long as you wish, in many different ways and from many 
different angles. I say it is extremely important to study. 
 
When you look at the texts and amongs t all the purification methods, as 
mentioned in the Lam Rim, the best purification is to meditate on emptiness. 
In order to know emptiness, you must study. If you do not study, I don’t think 
you can understand emptiness.  
 
As mentioned previously, if you want to do actual retreat, the main thing is 
that you have to study. Many meditators  mentioned that it is easy to keep 
your body in retreat, easy to keep your speech in retreat but it is extremely 
difficult to put your mind in retreat. Yo ur body is in the ca ve but your mind is 
running around in the city. I saw in an  interview, some meditators mentioned 
that it is extremely difficult to subdue the mind or change the mind. To train 
the mind is the most difficult thing.  
 
Clearing the doubts, the wrong views and the ignorance can only come 
through studying, through understanding. Those things are not achieved 
through recitations or through prostrations alone. Without studying, I think it 
is difficult to cut through the wrong views.  
 
This is the main point I want to mentio n here. Always keep this in mind while 
studying. If it is your wish  to study, then that will make you make the time to 
come to class. It is difficult if you do n’t see the point of studying. One obstacle 
is doubt: doubting the import ance of studying.  With this kind of doubt, that’s 
why it does not make you go to class or study.  
 
Another obstacle is going to the wrong path. We believe something else is 
better than studying. We believe that something that is related to non-Dharma 
is more important than the Dharma. We believe in the wrong way. Because of 
that, we have no time to practise Dharma and no time to study.  
 
Another obstacle is fear. “Oh! If I go to class, I will lose my friend/ my 
business/ my job.”  
 
We face many obstacles - wrong view, wrong path, doubts, fear, believing 
myself and other, truly existent there, cannot separate, if I go there, may 
disappear like that and so on. There are many obstacles to studying. The 
point is to see the importance of studying. It is extremely important.  
 
For my case, I do not know why, I just have the thought: “I want to know.” 
That was all. Once you have a strong mind, somehow it will keep pushing 
you to continue studying. I do not know whether this is beneficial but I just 
talk. May be good, may be not good - I do n’t know. My job is to talk. I did not 
plan for this but somehow my job is talking. (Laughter)  Since I was young 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10  
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 3 
Page 5 of 10 until I completed my studies, I didn’t have the thought to teach. It is the same 
thing for everyone. Some people study un til their Ph.Ds and then choo se some 
job that is totally different from the field they had studied.  Something like 
that also happened to me. (Laughter) 
 
It is also not easy to teach but it is defi nitely good for me to teach. I definitely 
have more time to read, more time to think as I need to teach. It is wonderful 
for me to give teachings because I have a lot of time to study and this 
benefited me a lot. Teaching is not easy. Listening is not easy. Translating is 
not easy. Ven Sherab and I have somethin g in common - al ways keeping so 
much stress. He has a lot of white hair and I also have a lot of white hair. 
Whatever I do, I enjoy myself. I don’t know how well I can teach and how 
much I can benefit you all. I am not really sure.  
 
When I read the text, it is difficult. It is not easy. But it is wonderful to spend 
your life reading the texts. Sometimes, when you read a book, you can read it 
ten times and still not understand a part icular sentence. This  happens. You 
read ten commentaries and yet you ar e still confused. That happens. But 
somehow you don’t give up. You read th e next day and the day after that. At 
some point, you will understand that line in  some way.  At that time, you will 
feel extremely joyful in your heart. You can’t believe you understand that. 
First day you tried so hard, you don’t understand. Second day you try again, 
you still don’t understand. The third day, you understand and you can feel 
the joy. That is one joy that you can get in your heart when you read the 
Buddhist philosophy texts.  
 
From my own experience, this also applies to the teacher who teaches 
Buddhist philosophy. You read the text ten times and yet you don’t 
understand. If you really want to know the meaning, you go to the teacher 
and ask him. The teacher then explains it very clearly to you and you finally  
understand. That is another joy you can have. How wonderful your teacher is. 
How clearly he explains it to you. How kind he is. How knowledgeable he is. 
If he is not Buddha, then  who is Buddha? This is an individual experience. 
That is the kind of jo y that you can feel. 
 
You need to know the point.  You try so hard, like a beggar who has nothing to 
eat. Then you ask one person and chase him around for an hour. At the end, 
that person gives you $10. You are to tally happy because you got what you 
wanted. You think that person is so kind to you.  It is the same thing with  the 
teacher.  
 
When I talk about guru devotion, it to tally relies on st udying. Once you study 
and you learn so much from your teacher, you have some kind of Dharma 
connection. Not only that. From your he art, there is some kind of joy. That 
makes for a totally different kind of devotion towards your  teacher. When 
you talk about guru devotion, it is not easy. Guru devotion should come from 
the heart.  
 
I also want to mention something here. We need to see why guru devotion is 
so important if we want to learn the buddhadharma. We do have this doubt  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10  
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 3 
Page 6 of 10 thinking, “I don’t need to be so devoted to the teacher.” We do think like  that.  
 
At one level, it is true that we do not need to depend so much on the guru. We 
don’t need so much devotion towards the guru but that there is a big 
difference depending on how much devotion we have towards the guru. It 
makes a big difference. When we have strong devotion towards the teacher, 
of course, the teachings will bring ab out big changes within our minds. For 
the same teaching, same topic and same words, it makes a big difference 
within your mind whether you have devotion or not towards that particular 
guru. If you have devotion, the teachings and his advice can totally change 
your life. If you do not have devotion towards that particular guru, no matter 
how many teachings you receive from him, you may learn something here 
and there but there is not that much benefit and effect on transforming your 
mind.  
 
If guru devotion is not important, Lama Tsong Khapa would not have 
mentioned it in the beginning. I think there is a big difference. If you want to 
learn, if you want to practise, if you want to change, then guru devotion is 
important. If guru devotion does not come about, then it is not easy. Seeing an 
ordinary person as a buddha is extremely difficult. It is almost impossible. 
The main thing is to train and change our minds.  
 
The point is when you have that kind of  faith and devotion, the teachings will 
really change your heart. If you don’t, then it is extremely difficult to change 
no matter how many teachings you have received. It is just knowledge. 
Through studying, you can talk about gu ru devotion. But through studying, 
definitely you can get that kind of exp erience of how wonderful the teacher is. 
It is most difficult to practise gu ru devotion but when you study the 
buddhadharma, you definitely can have this  kind of realization in your heart. 
Even if Buddha came into this world, what  more can he do? If your goal is to 
learn the buddhadharma, even if Buddha Sh akyamuni comes in front of you, 
what more can he do? When we see it in that way, then guru devotion is not 
so difficult.   
 
What I am trying to say here is that st udying is important for the practice, for 
going into retreat, for changing our hear ts, for us to become a wiser and not 
narrow-minded person. Having a happy life depends on how wise you are, 
and how flexible you can be. Wiser and more flexible you are, that much 
happier you will be. When you are smal l-minded and trapped in a hole, you 
become so unhappy. The whole point is to study to change our minds. 
 
*************************************** 
 
After identifying what the seven diamond (or vajra) topics are, there follows a 
presentation on the causal relationship between those points which results in seven becoming the definitive number of topics. 
1
 
                                                           
1 Hereinafter, doctrine and community are referred to as Dharma and Sangha respectively.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10  
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 3 
Page 7 of 10 Amongst the seven, the first three (Buddha, Dharma and Sangha) are to be 
understood as the result or goal that we will be achieving in the future. The next four topics (basic constituent, enlightenment, qualities and the Buddha 
activities) are the causes and the conditions for achieving that goal. The causes 
are divided into substantial cause and the cooperative conditions.  
 
(1, 3) 
From Buddha, the doctrine. From the doctrine, the community of Superiors. 
From the community, the ba sic constituent of essent ial exalted wisdom is 
attained. 
Finally from exalted wisdom is attained the supreme enlightenment endowed 
with the qualities. 
Of the powers and so forth and effecting the welfare of sentient beings. 
 
Verse 3 explains the sequential order of the seven topics. 
 
“From Buddha, the doctrine. From the doctrine, the community of Superiors”: 
When someone who has achieved enlightenment begins to turn the wheel of 
Dharma, it shows the Dharma comes from a buddha. This is then followed by 
the assembly of superiors who gain realisations on the basis of having heard 
and actualised the teachings.  
 
The Buddha , the Dharma and the Sangha are the three Final Mahayana 
Jewels aspired to by someone who has generated bodhicitta and the wish to 
become a buddha. That person will have a desire to achieve that goal through 
the resultant state. 
 
“From the community, the basic constituent of essential exalted wisdom is 
attained”: When someone aspires to achieve the three Final Refuge Jewels, that person will seek the means to do so. Then  comes the understanding that if one 
purifies all the defilements that cover the buddha nature ( basic constituent ) 
that one has within oneself,  one can attain that goal. 
 
What is the boundary of buddha nature and who possesses it?  Buddha nature is possessed only by sentient beings, the unenlightened ones. Once one purifies all the obscurations that envelop the buddha nature, then one would 
have achieved buddhahood (full enlightenment ) and, at the same time, the 
buddha qualities which would give one the power and ability to work for the 
benefit of all sentient beings. There are many unique buddha qualities such as 
the ten powers, the 18 unshared qualities, the four perfect knowledges and so 
on. Having achieved those qualities, the Buddha’s activities become 
spontaneous and effortless. That is why the seven diamond topics are in that 
particular sequence.  
 
Verses 4 - 8 explain the eight qualities of the Buddha which are enumerated in 
Verse 5.  
(1,4) 
Obeisance to the one who has no beginning, middle, or end 
Who is quiescent, who through buddhificat ion became buddhified in self-arisen 
aspect 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10  
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 3 
Page 8 of 10 And having become buddhified, taught the path of fearlessness and 
permanence so that those who had no t realized it might realize it, 
And who, carrying the supreme sword and diamond of knowledge and mercy, 
cuts the sprouts of suffering and destroys the walls of doubt that are 
surrounded by the darkness of various views. 
 
(1, 5)  
Buddhahood has [the eight qualities of] being uncompounded, 
Spontaneous, not being realized through the cause of others, 
Knowledge, mercy, and power, 
As well as being [the fulfillment of] the two aims [of oneself and others]. 
 
The eight qualities of the Buddha are:  
1. The quality of being uncompounded 
2. The quality of spontaneity  
3. The quality of not being realised through the cause of others 
4. The quality of knowledge 
5. The quality of mercy (or compassion)   
6. The quality of power 
7 The quality of having fulfilled one’s purpose 
8. The quality of having fulfilled the purposes of others 
 
1. The quality of being uncompounded: 
The nature truth body of the Buddha is divided into two: 
(i) the nature truth body that is pure from the beginning and  
(ii) the nature truth body that is free from adventitious defilements.  
This quality refers to the nature truth body of the Buddha that is pure from 
the beginning and which is not produced by depending on causes or something that disintegrates. As mentioned in verse 4, “ Obeisance to the one 
who has no beginning, middle, or end,” this nature truth body has no 
beginning, middle or end. 
 
2. The quality of spontaneity: 
This quality is refers to the nature truth body which is free from adventitious defilements.  
 
3. The quality of not being realised through the cause of others: 
What is this quality referring to? It is referring to the exalted wisdom of the Buddha which directly realises emptiness. Why is this quality so named? Just before attaining enlightenment and that exalted wisdom, the bodhisattva on 
the tenth ground remains in meditative equipoise apprehending emptiness in a 
non-dualistic manner. On the basis of such single-pointed meditation, the bodhisattva achieves enlightenment without relying on the instructions of others or in dependence on other conditions.   
4. The quality of knowledge: 
This refers to the knowledge which has realised the three preceding qualities. It  
also refers to as the knowledge which realises phenomena in their diverse forms or conventionalities and the knowledge of the situation of sentient 
beings - being trapped within cyclic existence and suffering, completely 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10  
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 3 
Page 9 of 10                                                           controlled by the darkness of ignorance and so forth. In order to liberate 
sentient beings from that state, the fifth quality is generated.  
 
5. The quality of mercy (or great compassion): 
 
6. The quality of power (or ability): 
This quality is a combination of the preceding two qualities - the quality of knowledge and the quality of great compassion . The quality of power is the 
abilities of those two qualities. What can this quality do? Depending on the 
power of knowledge and great compassion, it can completely remove and 
destroy suffering and its causes.  
The above six qualities can be divided into two groups: 
(1) The first three qualities belong to the qualities that are the fulfilment of the 
purpose of oneself.  
(2) The next three (knowledge, great compassion and power) are the qualities that lead to fulfilment of the purposes of others. 
 
Verse 5 clearly states that the first quality of the Buddha is the quality of being uncompounded. Why is it called uncompounded? Because it is not produced 
and does not disintegrate, i.e., it has no end. If we probe further as to what 
this quality is exactly, then we have to say this quality refers to the nature 
truth body that is pure from the beginning. 
 
What is the meaning of the quality of spontaneity?  This refers to the fact that 
the Buddha neither needs to depend on effort nor the intention to act when he is carrying out his enlightened activities, which happen spontaneously and 
naturally. This quality explains the true cessation of the Buddha and is the 
nature truth body that is free from adventitious defilements. 
 
Why is the true cessation of the Buddha said to be spontaneously 
accomplished? Because true cessation at the level of buddhahood is a quality 
where there is a complete pacification of the subtle motivational effort. This 
subtle motivational effort is a type of obscuration to omniscience. Because of 
having completely overcome this subtle motivational effort, a buddha’s actions become spontaneous. In other words, the main obstacle to such actions being spontaneous is due to having this obscuration called subtle motivational effort. 
True cessation is thus a quality whereby the individual has completely 
overcome that subtle motivational effort. When that happens, whatever activities one engages in become spontaneous. Due to this reason, true cessation is said to be spontaneously accomplished.
2
 
2 The Buddha potential of every livi ng being has two aspects: the developing potential  
and the natural potential .  
The developing potential is virtuous minds. It is the continuum of those virtuous 
minds that, when fully developed, turn into the omniscient mind of a Buddha. For example, 
every living being has at least some trace of compassion. As that compassion is developed 
step by step through the practice of the path to enlightenment, it will finally, in its fullest 
development, become the compassion of a Buddha—likewise with generosity, patience, 
concentration and so on.  
The natural potential  is the emptiness of inherent existence of the virtuous minds. It is 
called the natural potential because it is the nature of those virtuous minds . Their true 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10  
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 3 
Page 10 of 10                                                                                                                                                                                           
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Sherab  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng & Alison Wong, Angie Xiao, 3rd February 
2008  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong, 18th February 2008  
Checked by Yap Siew Kee, 19th February 2008 
Vetted by Geshe Chonyi, 21st February 2008 
 
 
nature is their lack of inherent existence. 
W h en  pur ifi cat i on i s compl et e y ou becom e a Buddha and attain the four bodies of a 
Buddha. The four bodies are:- 
1  the nature body, 
2. the wisdom truth body,  
3. the complete enjoyment body and 
4. the emanation body.  
The developed potential  becomes the Buddha's wisdom truth body , or the omniscient 
mind.  
The natural potential  becomes the Buddha's nature body : that is, at the point of 
enlightenment, the emptiness of the last mome nt in the continuum of a sentient being's 
mind becomes the emptiness of a Buddha's mind.  
The Buddha's nature body  and wisdom truth body  are the mental bodies of a Buddha  
and together are called the truth body.  
The enjoyment body  and the emanation body  are the two  form bodies of a Buddha  and 
together are called the form body. 
Maitreya's Ornament for Clear Realisation tells us: 
Nature, complete enjoyment, 
Likewise, emanating as others, 
And the truth body's activities,  
Are expressed as the four aspects . 
The nature body is defined as a final state endowed with the two purities:  
1. purity from the adventitious defilements and  
2. the natural purity.  
It is both a Buddha's cessation and pure nature.  
It is a Buddha's cessation  in that the nature body is free of the adventitious defilements : 
that is, the obscurations to liberation and the obscurations to omniscience. This aspect of 
the nature body allows the actions of a Buddha's complete enjoyment body and emanation 
body to occur spontaneously , without effort.  
The nature body is the Buddha's pure nature  because it is the emptiness of inherent 
existence of the Buddha's omniscient mind and this has always been the pure nature, or 
true nature of the mind. It is this nature that, with regard to the continuum of a sentient 
being, is known to be the natural potential,  and with regard to the continuum of a 
Buddha is known to be the nature body. It has always been the nature of mind and  is not 
produced as it has no origination, duration or disintegration . It is a permanent phenomenon, 
an emptiness and an ultimate truth. Because the Buddha's omniscient mind pervades all 
phenomena, so too does its nature. The nature body is therefore said to pervade all 
phenomena. 
The wisdom truth body is defined as a final wisdom consciousness  perceiving all modes and 
varieties of objects of knowledge. It also has two aspects. It is the Buddha's wisdom 
directly perceiving ultimate truths , or the true nature of all phenomena: their emptiness of 
inherent existence. It is also the Buddha's wisdom perceiving all conventional truths  and 
simultaneously knows all objects of knowledge: past, present and future. Because the 
wisdom truth body perceives all phenomena, it engages them and is therefore said to 
pervade all phenomena. ( Meditations on the Path to Enlightenment  by Geshe Archarya 
Thubten Loden, pages 175~178)  
 
 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 4 
Page 1 of 8 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating the Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra-ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation Jeffrey 
Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and Wilson, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
Commentary from The Tath›gata Essence, Commentary to the First 
Chapter by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen, translation Gavin Kilty, © FPMT, Inc. 
January 2007, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
 
Root verses are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added 
 
Lesson No: 4                     Date:31st January 2008  
Chapter One: The Essen ce of a One Gone Thus 
Verses 4-7 
 
(Geshe-la advises on what to meditate on for the preliminary meditation). 
Geshe-la: We always recite before class the refuge and bodhicitta prayer. You 
can reflect on what it means to take refuge from the heart and generate 
bodhicitta. You can check your level of understanding of refuge and the refuge 
objects and how they and taking refuge in them help you. That’s one option. 
 
You can also meditate on how the afflictions – anger, attachment, jealousy, pride 
- harm you and others. Are these afflictions beneficial or harmful? 
 
You may wish to meditate on Shakyamuni  Buddha as a purification practice, 
like the Vajrasattva practice. You can also  meditate on the pure land, meditating 
on what it is like to be there. You can meditate on the Lamrim. There are so 
many topics there – guru devotion, the precious human rebirth, death and 
impermanence, renunciation, emptiness, bodhicitta.  
 
I think we should learn how to meditate on our own. For myself, I do not like 
guided meditations. Hearing the words of the guided meditation only distracts my mind. Then when no one guides you,  you are unable to meditate so you 
become dependent on a guide all the time. That is not right.  
 
Also, you can check your mind. We ta lk of the mindfulness of the body, 
mindfulness of feeling, mindfulnes s of the mind and mindfulness of 
phenomenon. 
  
Choose your own object, be it breathing or the refuge object and try to focus and concentrate on that. Sometimes, it is good to contemplate what we have learnt so 
far in class. Meditate on that. Check how much you know. For example, how do 
the seven diamond topics relate to one another? Having some understanding of 
that in our minds is also meditation. So meditation is not confined to just 
focussing on an object and having an undisturbed mind.  Familiarity with the 
object is also meditation.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 4 
Page 2 of 8 I am just giving some general advice here. You are free to meditate on whatever 
subject you wish but the best meditation would be to meditate on something that 
would really make your mind change, make your mind happy. We are going to 
meditate now for ten minutes so I request ever yone to observe silence, as if there 
was no-one else here. 
 
(Meditation break of 10 minutes). 
 
Geshe-la: Sometimes, we think meditation is easy. It is not. But it is good to try. 
So we will try this out for this module. If it is beneficial, we will continue and if it is not, we will stop.  
*********************** 
Geshe-la: When we talk about receiving blessings from the guru, the Buddha, 
Dharma and Sangha, what does that me an? How do you rece ive the blessings 
and how do they work for you?   
 
What does it mean to receive blessings from the Dharma? We have learnt that there are two kinds of Dharma Jewel - the Conventional and Ultimate Dharma 
Jewels. I believe the Conventional Dharma Jewel grants blessings to me through 
my interest in studying the Dharma texts. Not every one has this kind of interest 
so, to me, I think simply having this inte rest is a blessing of the Dharma Jewel.  
 
In the beginning, when we study the Buddha’s teachings, there may be words 
we do not understand. But after some time and having read the text over and over again, understanding comes. The joy we experience from such 
understanding that too is a blessing of the Dharma Jewel. After that, our level of 
understanding deepens and becomes more  profound with each subsequent 
reading of the text. The happiness that accompanies this deeper understanding 
is also a blessing from the Conventional Dharma Jewel. 
 
There are 100 volumes of the Kangyur (the teachings of the Buddha) and 236 
volumes of the Tengyur (the commentarie s on those teachings). One may feel 
discouraged thinking one will not be able  to complete one’s studies in a single 
lifetime. But the good thing is that when  one begins studying in earnest and one 
has strong interest in the teachings, somehow one does not feel discouraged. 
Rather one is happy and feels joyful to be able to study more and more. 
  
One does not feel discouraged or bored bu t rather, one’s interest will sustain one 
through repeated re-reading of the texts. As one’s understanding deepens, so does the joy that comes with such improved understanding and one’s interest in 
the teachings will also increase. That is the special quality of the Buddha’s 
teachings. Other books or subjects do  not yield deeper meaning beyond one 
reading. The Buddha’s teachings are different.  
 
For myself, I feel that there is a differen t level of understanding each time I read 
the texts. There is a special joy that comes in the heart that is difficult to 
describe.  
 
It is the same with regards to your te acher. How do the bl essings com e? I think 
it works the same way. There is a special kind of joy that comes from devotion to 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 4 
Page 3 of 8 the guru. Based on your faith in the gur u and following his advice, you see how 
your guru’s instructions really touch your heart and help to change your life for 
the better. That is the blessing.  
 
Normally for blessings, some holy object is placed on your head but how much 
can that bless you and change your mind? Even if Shakyamuni Buddha were to come in front of you and put his hand on your head, how much can you change? 
It is difficult to say. Even if you were  to stay together with Buddha Shakyamuni 
for 80, 100 years and you don’t change yo ur mind, then there is nothing much 
the Buddha can do for you.  
 
Here the whole point is to change our mi nds and attitude - how we look at the 
teacher, the Dharma, our Dharma friends and classmates. When we talk about 
the Buddha, Dharma, Sangha, we do not n eed to look so high and so far. They 
are around us. The Dharma Jewel refers to the text we are studying now. The 
Sangha Jewel are our Dharma friends in class. The Buddha Jewel is the teacher teaching the text.  
 
When we change our outlook and attitude, our practice will also change and 
improve. Otherwise, no matter how much we  learn, it remains difficult to change 
our minds. We may learn the words but how much they benefit our hearts and 
how much we benefit other people totally depends on our devotion.  Without 
devotion, we cannot benefit others much. It is extremely important to have some 
kind of devotion. With regards to our teacher and our Dharma classmates, we should be close to each other, talk to each other, share knowledge with each 
other, to be kind to each other and to love each other. This way, definitely, we 
can improve.  
 
We shouldn’t consider only the sangha to be the Sangha Jewel, only the true 
path and true cessation to be the Dharma Jewel and only enlightened beings to 
be the Buddha Jewel.  The Refuge Jewels are around us. We should look at 
things that way. That would help to improve  our minds.  
 
My point is the blessing from the Dharma is the joy we experience when we read 
the Dharma and understand it. That is the blessing of the Dharma. Each time 
we read the text, if we put in the effort, we will understand it in a different way. 
That is the benefit and make s for a meaningful life. Otherwise, our lives are 
spent simply on the pleasure s of this life alone. We work so hard, day and night, 
to survive, just for this life but our life is short. What will happen after we die? 
We should think about that. Sometimes we  think, “I don’t care what happens 
when I die.” 
 
There is definitely some relationship between our past and our future. For 
example, some people find it very ea sy to study Buddhist philosophy while 
others find it so difficult to understand. Some have interest in their studies and 
others don’t. Yet they have the same type of body, are also  Singaporean, same 
gender be it male or female, same age, eating the same food but somehow, the 
level of interest is different. There must be  some reason for this. It is not because 
of having different parents. There must be  some good cause, created in our past 
that makes it possible for us to come and study together. Some people try so 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 4 
Page 4 of 8 hard to come to class but somehow they  never make it. So, the opportunity we 
have to study and come to class together, that must have been due to some 
relationship in the past. We should take  care of and communicate with each 
other when we come to class.  
 
It is good to study because it will bring you both joy and benefit. There are some 
who are never discouraged by their studies and are encouraged by learning the 
Buddhadharma. Studying the Dharma takes a lot of effort and time but once you 
have the interest to study Buddhist philo sophy, no one can stop you. But it 
really takes time to generate this type of interest from your heart. Once you have 
the interest, it becomes ver y easy to decide how you should spend your time, 
how you should lead your life.    
 
Otherwise you have a hard time thinking of how to spend your time, having  
nothing to do and feeling bored no matter where you go and what you do. Once you have interest in Buddha’s philosophy  and teachings, even if you understand 
just a little bit, that is extremely important and extremely joyful. You can spend 
your time happily at home.  
 
I saw how one of my teachers spends his time from morning till night. He does 
some short prayers in the morning. After that, he reads Buddhist philosophy for 
almost 10 hours, resting only  for lunch and toilet breaks. He said he enjoys this 
so much. At that time, I couldn’t understa nd how he can enjoy that – just sitting 
there without moving, reading all day long. But he found that very enjoyable, 
understanding in detail the commentaries of the great scholars. From that, he developed strong devotion to all the scho lars up to Shakyamuni Buddha. That 
kind of faith is indestructible and unwavering.  
 
Otherwise, our faith fluctuates up and down and remains unstable. Studying 
helps to stabilise our faith. Joy comes from studying. From that, one knows how 
one’s life should be spent. I am just talking here about the benefit for this life. I 
don’t need to talk about the benefit for future lives since everybody only believes 
in the benefit for this life. People don’t think about working for the benefit of 
future lives. Therefore I talk only about benefiting this life – how you can enjoy 
your life by studying the buddhadharma. So metimes, it is difficult to understand 
but don’t give up. It takes a lot of effort and it is not easy and it takes time to 
develop interest in the subject matter.  
 
******************************** 
 
In the last lesson, we had completed discussing two out of the eight qualities of 
the Buddha: the quality of being uncompounded and the quality of spontaneity.  
 
(1, 5) 
Buddhahood has [the eight qualities of] being uncompounded, 
Spontaneous, not being realized through the cause of others, 
Knowledge, mercy, and power, 
As well as being [the fulfillment of] the two aims [of oneself and others]. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 4 
Page 5 of 8 (1, 6) 
Because of having a nature without beginning [i.e., without production], 
Middle [abiding], or end [cessation], it is uncompounded. 
Because of possessing the quiescent Truth Body, 
It is said to be spontaneous. 
(1, 7) 
Because of being realized by oneself individually, 
It is not realized through the cause of others. 
Because of realizing [those] aspects in that way, it is knowledge. 
Because of teaching the path, merciful 
 
3. The quality of not being realised through the cause of others:  
This quality refers to the way in which the Wisdom Truth Body, i.e., the 
wisdom that realises emptiness within the continuum of a buddha, is attained 
by the bodhisattva in the final stages of the tenth ground. He is not dependent 
on other conditions and the instructions of others at this stage. Within the 
state of meditative equipoise focussing on emptiness, that bodhisattva realises 
the exalted wisdom of a buddha and becomes enlightened.   
 
Question from student:  
How is that possible? Doesn’t a practitioner have to receive teachings and 
instructions before being able to practise and attain enlightenment?   
 
Answer:: 
Generally speaking, a practitioner will receive a lot of instructions and needs to 
depend on others before attaining buddhahood. In this instance, we are referring to that specific time when the bodhisattva is on the brink of becoming 
a buddha.  He does not depend on others at that moment when he realises the 
Wisdom Truth Body of a buddha.  
 
4. The quality of knowledge :  
This is the ability to realise conventionalities. In Tibetan, ‘jinyedpa’  means the 
varieties of things or conventionalities. A sentient being is unable to 
simultaneously  realise conventional and ultimate truths. When  in meditative 
equipoise focussing on emptiness, at that time, there is no appearance of 
conventional phenomena to the meditator. But when one becomes a buddha, then even while one is single-pointedly meditating  on emptiness, at the same 
time, one is able to apprehend the appearance of  conventional phenomena, 
that is, both truths appear simultaneously. This is the unique quality of a buddha.  
 
Geshe-la: Actually I had explained this  earlier but you all didn’t seem to 
understand so I read more, I understand it in different ways, which for me is 
quite interesting. Sometimes, when I am re ading, I feel I am getting closer to the 
meaning but then that feeling disappears and I can’t catch the real meaning. So I 
try again. It can be tiring. Sometimes I get some kind of understanding but how 
accurate and correct it may be, I am not sure. I need to think some more. 
  
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 4 
Page 6 of 8 5. The fifth quality is mercy (or great compassion): 
Whilst in meditative equipoise focussing on emptiness, the Buddha realises 
that there is buddha nature (or the tathagata essence) within the continua of all sentient beings although it is temporarily obscured by defilements which 
cause them great suffering. Such defilements can be removed upon application 
of the appropriate antidotes. Realising this, the Buddha, out of his great compassion for sentient beings, shows the unmistaken path by turning the Wheel of Dharma.   
 
When you look at the qualities of the Buddha, especially the quality of great 
compassion, it makes a lot of sense. Naturally the Buddha has great 
compassion for all sentient being because the Buddha knows exactly and 
precisely the real situation of all sentient beings.  
 
6. The quality of power:  
This refers to the power of the Buddha’s knowledge and great compassion and 
is explained by the analogies in Verse 4.  
 
(1,4) 
Obeisance to the one who has no beginning, middle, or end 
Who is quiescent, who through buddhif ication became buddhified in self- 
arisen aspect 
And having become buddhified, taught the path of fearlessness and 
permanence so that those who had no t realized it might realize it, 
And who, carrying the supreme sword and diamond of knowledge and mercy, 
cuts the sprouts of suffering and destroys the walls of doubt that are 
surrounded by the darkness of various views. 
 
The wisdom and the great compassion of the Buddha is likened to the sword which has the power to cut the roots of suffering. “The sprouts of suffering” 
refers to the six results of the twelve links of dependent origination, which are 
divided into six causes and six results.  
 
The power of Buddha’s great compassion and knowledge is also analogous to 
the diamond that “ destroys the walls of doubt  that are surrounded by the 
darkness of various views”  (such as the view of the transitory collections).  
 
In brief, the first analogy of the sword explains the power of the Buddha’s abilities to cut the results of the afflictive emotions. The second analogy of the 
diamond explains the power of the Buddha’s abilities to demolish the causes of 
suffering, such as the view of the transitory collections and so on.  
 
Therefore, the sixth quality of power is counted as a separate quality from the qualities of knowledge and great compassion of the Buddha.   
 
The Buddha, after achieving the full state of enlightenment, remains in  meditative equipoise focussing on emptiness but, at the same time, he is able to perceive the conventional nature of phenomena. Because of realising  
conventional phenomena, the Buddha also sees the buddha nature within the 
continua of sentient beings. He develops great compassion for sentient beings 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 4 
Page 7 of 8                                                           and because of that, he shows the path or method by which sentient beings 
can remove all obscurations. 
 
The wisdom of the Buddha alone cannot be the direct antidote to the 
obscurations of sentient beings. Instead, the Buddha shows the path or 
methods to overcome them and by following them, sentient beings can 
overcome their afflictions. This is how Buddha’s wisdom helps sentient beings.  
 
“And having become buddhified, taught the path of fearlessness and 
permanence so that those who had no t realized it might realize it”:  What kind of 
path is shown by the Buddha? “ Fearlessness and permanence” are the 
distinctive qualities of the path shown by the Buddha.  
 
“The path of fearlessness,” according to my level of understanding of this text, 
is referring to the transcendental path. I read many commentaries. I am not 
sure but this is my conclusion after reading for three days. It is the superior 
path where there is no fear of the enemy or, literally, the fear of falling off the 
cliff.  
 
In the context of the higher vehicle, the individual who has achieved the 
superior path would have overcome the fear of their afflictions. For example, 
even though the superior bodhisattvas have not abandoned all their afflictions, 
they are no longer harmed by them and, in that sense, they no longer fear 
them. The deep cliff refers to the path of the lower vehicle. Once the bodhisattva has achieved the superior path, he will not fall back into the lower 
vehicle. This is what I think “ the path of fearlessness ” means, freedom from the 
fear of falling off the cliff.  
 
“The path of permanence” if taken literally doesn’t make sense because if it is a 
path, then it should be impermanent. Why then is this path called “ the path of 
permanence”?  This is because a superior bodhisattva will not fall back to the 
lower vehicle and they are certain to achieve their goal of buddhahood. Due to the stability of the path they have achieved, it is described as “ the path of 
permanence .”  
 
7. The quality of fulfilment of one’s own purpose 
8. The quality of fulfilment of the welfare of others.   
 
These two qualities are referred to in the fourth line of Verse 5: “ As well as 
being [the fulfillment of] the tw o aims [of oneself and others” and the last two 
lines of Verse 8: “ Through the first three, one’s own welfare [is accomplished];/ 
Through the latter three, others’ aims.”  
 
The first three qualities 1come under the quality of fulfilment of one’s own 
purpose.  
 
 
1 The first quality of being uncompounded is th e nature truth body of the Buddha which is 
pure from the beginning. The second quality of spontaneity is the nature truth body which is 
free from adventitious defilements. The third qu ality of not being realis ed through the cause of 
others is the wisdom truth body of the Buddha.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 4 
Page 8 of 8 The next three qualities 2 come under the quality of fulfilment of the welfare of 
others. These qualities are achieved on the basis of the first three qualities. 
After having achieved the first three qualities, one realises there is buddha 
nature within all sentient beings. Great compassion is then generated and on 
the basis of that comes the buddha activity of showing the path. In this way, 
the first three qualities are categorised as the qualities for the fulfilment of one’s own purpose and the next three qualities are categorised as the qualities 
for the fulfilment of the purpose of others. 
 
In order to turn the Wheel of Dharma, one must be motivated by great 
compassion to work for the benefit of others. In order to have great compassion for all sentient beings, one must know the situation of sentient beings. This 
shows the importance of  great compassion in the turning of the Wheel of 
Dharma. If one lacks great compassion, then there is the danger of falling into 
the extreme of thinking only of the fulfilment of one’s own purpose and working to attain nirvana for oneself. One would not have the thought of 
turning the Wheel of Dharma for the benefit of others.  
 
Question : 
“Obeisance to the one who ha s no beginning, middle, or  end who is quiescent, 
who through buddhification became bud dhified in self-arisen aspect”: What does  
“quiescent ” and “buddhification ” mean? 
 
Answer: 
“Quiescent”  refers to the pacification of the defilements in the second quality of 
the Buddha, that is, the Nature Truth Body that is free of adventitious 
defilements. 
 
“Who through buddhification became buddhified in self-arisen aspect” explains 
the third quality of the full enlightenment that one achieves through one’s own 
power without depending on others. 
 
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Sherab  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng, Alison Wong & Angie Xiao, 10th February   
2008  
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong, 3rd March 2008 
 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee, 4th March   2008 
 
Vetted by Geshe Chonyi, 9th March 2008  
 
 
                                                           
2 These are the qualities of knowledge, great compassion and power.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 5 
Page 1 of 7 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating the Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra-ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation Jeffrey 
Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and Wilson, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
Commentary from The Tath›gata Essence, Commentary to the First 
Chapter by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen, translation Gavin Kilty, © FPMT, Inc. 
January 2007, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
 
Root verses are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added 
 
Lesson No: 5                     Date:12th February 2008  
Chapter One: The Essen ce of a One Gone Thus 
Verses 9 - 14   
 
Geshe-la: Try to meditate on something that will really change your mind and   
bring you closer to the Dharma and encourage you to practise the Dharma. That 
is important.  
 
Also, we had been discussing the three obje cts of refuge in the last few classes. 
You have also recited the refuge prayer many times. You can think about each sentence and check how much you know, ho w strong is your refuge in the Three 
Jewels.  
 
There are so many ways to meditate. I can’t say which way is good. So you can 
choose your own meditation but the important thing is that your meditation 
should bring your mind to the Dharma.  
 
(Meditation break) 
 
There may be some people who do not know how to meditate. What you should 
do then is to go back and read the Lamrim and make up yo ur own meditation 
based on the outlines. Write down your  meditation, then come to class and 
meditate on that. That is how you can learn to meditate. Otherwise, you are 
silent for ten minutes but your mind is  not meditating or doing anything.  
 
*********************** 
Geshe-la: I had already mentioned in th e last few classes the importance of 
studying.  I am like a salesman, doing a sales job, explaining to you the need to 
study. Now is the time for you to buy.   
 
It is important for you to think for yourse lf whether studying is important or not. 
You have to decide for yourself. I had me ntioned this so many times in class. 
You must be tired of hearing it.  
 
Sometimes we may feel we are too old to study so I would like to share this 
story with you. As long as you have the strong desire from your heart to study , 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 5 
Page 2 of 7 then it is never too late. An example is  my mother who is around 75 years old. 
Two years ago she decided to do some studying, to learn some Tibetan words. 
In her whole life, until the age of 72, she had never had any education and is 
completely illiterate. She doesn’t know what is ‘A’ or ‘B’ or even how to read and   
write ‘1’ and  ‘2’.  
 
Two years ago, she did Nyung-na practice with some lay people. She felt  stupid 
simply sitting there and not knowing how to  do the prayers. Everybody else was 
chanting so nicely with the nice tunes. She said she felt like a mute. She felt she 
must do something so that she would be able to read and chant together with 
the others. She had this strong wish. Sh e found a nun to teach her Tibetan. She 
had to walk about 45 minutes every day to go to her teacher’s place to study the 
Tibetan alphabet.  
 
She said once she reached home, she wo uld forget everything. She felt so 
discouraged. She would just lie down on the bed and think that it would be 
impossible for her to study but she did not give up her wish. She carried on for 
two years.  
 
Now she is able to read the sadhana of  the Nyung-na practice and is able to 
read and chant the prayers with the nice tune. She is not very good but within 
two years, she made it. She was extrem ely happy as she had achieved her goal. 
 
Sometimes, you may have the thought th at it is too late to study Buddhist 
philosophy but as long as you have the st rong wish to do so, it is never too late . 
Look at my mum who is co mpletely uneducated but generated the wish to study 
at the age of 72. She may not understand the meaning of the sadhana. She only 
wished to be able to chant and do the prayers together with her friends and she 
made it. You should not discourage yourse lf from studying. As long as you have 
the determination, you can do it. 
  
******************************* 
When we recite, “S ang gyä chö dang tshog kyi chhog nam la,/Jang chub bar du 
dag ni kyab su chhi (I go for refuge until I am enlightened/To the Buddha, the 
Dharma and the Supreme Assembly),” that shows the objects to whom we are 
going for refuge. In this context, this line refers to the causal refuge, that is, we 
are taking refuge in the refuge accomplished in the mental continua of some 
one other than ourselves, regarding them as our protectors.  
 
“I go for refuge until I am enlightened,”  reminds us that we are going for refuge  
at all times, not only when we feel like it and abandoning our refuge when we 
don’t feel like it.  It is not like that. Who is the person going for refuge? It is 
oneself, the ‘I.’ Who is this ‘I’ and what is its nature? Is this ‘I’ inherently 
existent or not?  We should understand that this ‘I,’ who goes for refuge does not exist inherently. 
 
“Dag gi jin sog gyi pä so nam gyi,/Dro la phän chhir sang gyä drub par shog (By 
the merits I create though the practice of generosity and other perfections,/ 
May I achieve enlightenment for the benefit of all sentient beings),” indicates 
the practice of resultant refuge.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 5 
Page 3 of 7 “Through the practice of generosity and other perfections,”  shows the practice of 
the six perfections - generosity, ethics, patience, joyous perseverance, 
concentration and wisdom - through which one accumulates the collection of 
merit and wisdom. In dependence on these collections, one becomes a buddha 
for the benefit of sentient beings. One is focussing on the resultant states – the 
resultant Buddha, Dharma and Sangha - that one will achieve in the future 
and going for refuge in them for the benefit of sentient beings. 
 
Therefore, when we recite the refuge prayer, we should reflect and remember 
that: 
(1) the first two lines are causal refuge,  
(2) the last two lines are resultant refuge and  
(3) the ‘I’ who has gone for refuge is not inherently existent. 
 
In the last class, we had completed the presentation on the eight qualities of 
the Buddha. When we are familiar with those qualities and recall them when we recite the refuge prayer, it makes a difference to the quality of our refuge. 
Naturally, a mental image of the Buddha would appear and the feeling would 
come that the Buddha is truly someone who is amazing and inconceivable. 
That depth of feeling cannot arise if we are uncertain as to who the Buddha really is and what qualities he possesses.  
 
Does the resultant refuge exist or not?  
 
Geshe-la: There is no doubt that it exists.  Why do you all look so worried? If that 
object doesn’t exist, then there won’t be  two different types of refuge, isn’t it? 
When the object is there, then we definitely  have to say, “Yes, it exists,” isn’t it? 
If there is no object, how can we take refuge in it? 
 
(1,10) 
Due to being unthinkable, without th e two [i.e., contaminated actions and 
afflictive emotions], 
Without conceptions, pure, clear, and antidotal, 
The doctrine is that which is and that by which there is the [state] 
Devoid of passions—having the character of the [last] two truths. 
 
Verse 10 enumerates the eight qualities of the Dharma Jewel. They are: 
 
1. The quality of being unthinkable which means that it is unimaginable and 
inconceivable. 
 
2.  The quality of being without the two, that is, without contaminated 
actions and the afflictive emotions. 
 
3.  The quality of being without conceptions , that is, the Dharma Jewel is 
free from any form of conceptualisation that is improper mental engagement. 
 
4.   The quality of being pure which refers to the nature of the true path which 
is free of obscurations.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 5 
Page 4 of 7 5.  The quality of being clear because it knows the varieties of phenomena. 
 
6.  The quality of being antidotal  because the Dharma Jewel is the antidote to 
the two obstructions (of liberation and omniscience). 
 
7.   The quality of being true cessation is referred to in the third line of Verse 
10: “ the doctrine is that which is .” 
 
8.   The quality of being true path is also referred to in the same line of Verse 
10 as “ that by which  that (state)/Devoid of passions ” is achieved.     
  
There are two types of true cessation – the true cessation of natural purity and 
the true cessation that is free from adventitious stains. The first quality of being unthinkable refers to the true cessation of natural purity. Why is this 
quality unthinkable? This is explained in Verse 9. 
 
(1, 9) 
Obeisance to the sun of excellent  doctrine, not non-existent, 
Not existent, not existent and non-existent, and not analyzable as other then 
existent and non-existent, devoid of description, 
Known by oneself individually, quiescen t, undefiled, illumined with the light 
rays of exalted wisdom, 
And thoroughly destroying desire, hatred, and obscuration with respect to all 
objects of observation. 
 
Selflessness is a quality of both existent and non-existent phenomena.  
 
“Not non-existent”: When we analyse any non-existent phenomenon to check if 
it is inherently existent or not, we discover that we will not be able to find any 
non-existent phenomenon that is inherently existent.  
 
“Not existent ”: In the same way, when we analyse existent phenomena, we are 
unable to find any existent phenomena that are inherently existent.   
 
“Not existent and non-existent ”: Investigating existents and non-existents 
together, we again find that the two are not inherently existent.  
 
“Other than existent and non-existent ”: The fourth possibility entails 
investigating that which is neither existent nor non-existent and we find that 
this too is not inherently existent. 
 
When we analyse the true cessation of natural purity through the four 
possibilities of inherent existence, it is not findable. It is beyond these four 
possibilities. It is “ devoid of description”  because it cannot be fully understood 
or described through the use of  words or concepts. Therefore, it is 
unimaginable. Because of this, the Dharma Jewel, in particular, true cessation is said to be “ unthinkable.”  
 
In summary, the unthinkable quality of the Dharma Jewel is related to the 
true cessation of natural purity. That factor of purity is established to be 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 5 
Page 5 of 7 unthinkable through our analysis of its nature and through analysing the 
subject, that is, the mind that realises it. When we analyse it through the four possibilities, we discover that it is beyond all words and expressions. When we 
look at the subject (i.e., the mind) that realises this natural purity, it is only 
the wisdom that directly perceives emptiness that can understand and 
experience this natural purity. 
 
Question from student:  
How can a non-existent phenomenon be selfless? 
 
Answer: 
Does the sky flower have a self or is it selfless? It is selfless but we believe that 
a sky flower does not exist. 
  
“Known by oneself individually ”:  This quality of the Dharma Jewel, that is, the 
true cessation of natural purity can only be experienced and known by the superior being in meditative equipoise focussing on emptiness, through the 
complete subsidence of all dualities.  
 
“Quiescent” : This quality of pacification rela tes to the true cessation which is 
free from adventitious stains. It is called pacification because this state of 
purity is free of contaminated actions (karma), the afflictions and also all forms 
of incorrect mental attention. “ Quiescent ” here refers to the second and third 
qualities of the Dharma Jewel (without the two and without conceptions 
respectively) listed out in Verse 10.  
 
“Undefiled” : This relates to the fourth quality of the Dharma Jewel, the quality 
of purity which is the stainless nature of the true path, unmixed with the  
obstructions. Using the analogy of the sun, just as it is bright, clear and 
stainless, so is the Dharma Jewel undefiled.   
 
“Illumined with the light rays of exalted wisdom ”: The Dharma Jewel 
(particularly the true path) is like the sun illuminating all phenomena in its 
knowledge of all varieties of phenomena.  
 
“Thoroughly destroying desire, hatred, and obscuration with respect to all 
objects of observation ”: Just as sunlight dispels all forms of darkness, which 
symbolises ignorance and the obscurations, in the same way, the true path is 
an antidote that can eliminate all obscurations.   
 
(1, 11) 
This devoid [and making devo id] of passions is included 
Within true cessations and paths. 
Respectively those are also to be known 
By way of three qualities each. 
 
(1,12) 
It is unthinkable because of being unanalyzable, inexpressible, and known by 
Superiors. 
Due to being quiescent it is without the two, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 5 
Page 6 of 7 And it is without [improper] conceptions. 
The three, purity and so forth [i.e., clear and antidotal] are like the sun. 
 
The six qualities (unthinkable, without the two, without conceptions, pure, 
clear and antidotal) can be subsumed into true cessation and true path. The 
first three qualities are subsumed under true cessation while the latter three 
qualities are subsumed under true path. 
 
(1, 14) 
Because the perception of [their] internal exalted wisdom 
Of the mode and of the varieties is pure, 
The community of irreversible intelligent ones 
Is endowed with unsurpassed qualities. 
 
Verse 14 enumerates the eight qualities of the Sangha Jewel. They are: 
 
1. The quality of the knowledge of the mode of phenomena. 
The Sangha Jewel understands the true mode of existence of phenomena, that 
the nature of the mind is clear light and that the afflictions are adventitious.  
 
2. The quality of the knowledge of varieties 
 
3. The quality of the inner knowledge or internal exalted wisdom . 
 
4. The quality of being pure (or free) from the obstructions to liberation 
 
5. The quality of being pure (or free) from the obstructions to omniscience 
 
6. The quality of being pure (or free) from the inferior obstructions.  
 
7. The quality of knowledge. 
 
8. The quality of freedom.   
 
The seventh and eighth qualities of the Sangha Jewel are knowledge and freedom but it is unclear as to how they are shown in verse 14.   
 
It is essential to know the qualities of the Buddha Jewel, Dharma Jewel and 
Sangha Jewel by heart. If you do not know what those qualities are, then there 
is no basis for you to proceed to contemplate and analyse them. Ideally, if you 
are someone who really wants to study, you should memorise the relevant 
verses from the root text. For example, you should memorise Verse 14 in relation to the qualities of the Sangha jewel. If you are unable to memorise the 
relevant verses from the root text, at the very least, you should be able to list 
out the qualities when you see those verses.  
 
(1, 13) 
Obeisance to those who, having thoroughly  realized the limit or quiescence of 
selflessness in all transmigrators 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 5 
Page 7 of 7 Through perceiving the non-[inherent] existence of the entities of the afflictive 
emotions due to the natural clear light of the mind, 
Perceive perfect Buddhahood as residing in all, to those whose intelligence is 
unobstructed, 
And who are endowed with sight of the exalted wisdom that has as its objects 
the purity and infinity of sentient beings. 
 
Why does the Sangha Jewel possess the first quality of knowledge of the mode 
of phenomena?  The reason appears in Verse 13: “Through perceiving the non-
[inherent] existence of the entities of th e afflictive emotions due to the natural 
clear light of the mind,” that is, because the Sangha Jewel perceives the true 
mode of existence of phenomena, it understands that the nature of the mind is 
clear light and that afflictions are empty of inherent existence and are,  therefore, adventitious.   
 
What is the meaning of the “ clear light of the mind ” in this context? It means 
that the mind does not exist inherently and this accords with the way the mind 
exists in reality.  
 
These are the three conditions then for qualifying to be a Sangha Jewel and 
thereby becoming an appropriate object of refuge for us:  
• the ability to see things as they are  
• the ability to directly perceive the final nature of the mind 
• the ability to directly perceive the final nature of the afflictions 
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng, Alison Wong & Angie Xiao, 15th February   
2008  
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong, 3rd March 2008 
 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee, 4th March  2008 
 
Vetted by Geshe Chonyi, 9th March 2008 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 6 
Page 1 of 6 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating the Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra-ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation Jeffrey 
Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and Wilson, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
Commentary from The Tath›gata Essence, Commentary to the First 
Chapter by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen, translation Gavin Kilty, © FPMT, Inc. 
January 2007, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
 
Root verses are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added 
 
Lesson No: 6                     Date:14th February 2008  
Chapter One: The Essen ce of a One Gone Thus 
Verses 14 - 21   
 
(1, 14) 
Because the perception of [their] internal exalted wisdom 
Of the mode and of the varieties is pure, 
The community of irreversible intelligent ones 
Is endowed with unsurpassed qualities. 
 
Verse 14 enumerates the eight qualities of the Sangha Jewel. They are: 
 
1. The quality of the knowledge of the mode of phenomena . 
 
2. The quality of the knowledge of varieties (or the diversity of 
phenomena).  
 
3. The quality of the inner knowledge or internal exalted wisdom. 
 
4. The quality of being pure (or free) from attachment.  
 
5. The quality of being pure (or free) from impediment.   
 
6. The quality of being pure (or free) from the inferior obstructions.  
 
7. The quality of knowledge. 
 
8. The quality of freedom.   
  
(1,13) 
Obeisance to those who, having thoroughly  realized the limit or quiescence of 
selflessness in all transmigrators 
Through perceiving the non-[inherent] existence of the entities of the afflictive 
emotions due to the natural clear light of the mind, 
Perceive perfect Buddhahood as residing in all, to those whose intelligence is 
unobstructed, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 6 
Page 2 of 6 And who are endowed with sight of the exalted wisdom that has as its objects 
the purity and infinity of sentient beings. 
 
The Sangha Jewel possesses the quality of knowledge of the mode of 
phenomena because it directly perceives that the nature of the mind is clear 
light and that the afflictions in the mental continua of sentient beings are 
adventitious. In this context, “ clear light ” means that the mind is not inherently 
existent, which accords with the way the mind exists in reality. In the same 
way, adventitious afflictions means that those afflictions are empty of inherent 
existence. This is explained in Verse 13: “ Through perceiving the non-[inherent] 
existence of the entities of the afflictive emotions due to the natural clear light of 
the mind.” 
 
The second quality of the Sangha Jewel is the knowledge of varieties (or 
diversity of phenomena) . Through directly perceiving the final nature of the 
mind and adventitious afflictions, the Sangha Jewel understands that all 
sentient beings are pervaded by buddha nature, the potential to attain 
enlightenment. 
 
We can then see that there is a relationship between the first two qualities: the 
knowledge of the mode of phenomena and the knowledge of their diversity.  Because of the former (directly perceiving the non-inherent existence of the 
mind and its afflictions), the Sangha Jewel realises that sentient beings 
possess buddha nature (or the tathagata essence), the potential to become 
enlightened. 
 
For example, a superior bodhisattva on the first ground would arise from his    
meditative equipoise focussing on emptiness of the mind and the afflictions, 
with the realisation that the two are empty. Due to this realisation, he would 
realise that sentient beings possess buddha nature, the potential to achieve 
enlightenment. This is indicated in Verse 13: “Having thoroughly realized the limit or quiescence of self lessness in all transmigrators/ through perceiving the 
non-[inherent] existence of the entities of the afflictive emotions due to the natural clear light of the mind,/Perceive perfect Buddhahood as residing in all.” 
 
What we have discussed can also be found in verse 15.  
 
(1,15 ) 
Due to realizing the quiescent nature of  transmigrating beings, [that is, all 
persons and phenomena] 
They [perceive] the very mode [of being of phenomena], 
This being because of the natural thorough purity 
And because the afflictive emotions are extinguished from the start. 
 
This verse relates to the knowledge of the mode of phenomena. Because of this 
realisation, then we have the knowledge of the diversity of phenomena, as 
shown  in Verse 16. 
(1,16) 
Because the awareness realizing objects of knowledge and [their] finality 
Sees that the nature of omniscience 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 6 
Page 3 of 6 Exists in all sentient beings, 
They have [knowledge of] the varieties. 
 
(1,17) 
Those realizations in that way 
Are just perceptions by their own consciousness individually. 
In the basic element of non-defilement there are no passions 
And no obstacles, thus those are pure. 
 
The third quality of the Sangha Jewel is the internal exalted wisdom (or 
inner knowledge). Some texts refer to this quality as ‘individual knowledge.’ 
The reference to this quality is not explicit in this root text.  From the 
knowledge of the mode and varieties of phenomena comes the inner knowledge 
that directly perceives the emptiness of the mind and its afflictions and the 
realisation that all sentient beings have the potential to achieve enlightenment. This is mentioned in Verse 17: “ Those realizations in that way are just 
perceptions by their own consciousness individually,”  which means that the 
Sangha Jewel has the inner knowledge because of these two knowledges.   
 
The fourth quality of the Sangha Jewel is freedom from attachment . In this 
text, attachment is translated as “ passions .” Because the Sangha Jewel 
possesses the knowledge of the mode of phenomena, it is free from passions. In 
this context, the passions refer to the grasping at true existence.  
 
“Those whose intelligence is unobstructed,” in Verse 13 can be taken to refer to 
the fourth and fifth qualities of the Sangha Jewel, i.e., its freedom from 
attachment and impediment. These two qualities are also mentioned in Verse 
17:“In the basic element of non-defi lement there are no passions.”  
 
The fifth quality of the Sangha Jewel is freedom from impediment and is 
referred to in the last line of Verse 17: “A nd no obstacles, thus those are pure.”  
The Sangha Jewel possesses this quality because of its direct perception of the diversity of phenomena. Therefore they are free from all the obstacles that 
impede them from seeing that diversity. 
 
It is explained in some texts that the quality of freedom from attachment refers 
to the freedom from the obstructions to liberation and that the freedom from impediment is freedom from the obstructions to omniscience. It may seem odd 
to us that the Sangha Jewel possesses those qualities of freedom.   
 
There are many different levels of superior beings. When we studied the paths 
and grounds, you will recall that there are nine levels of obstructions to liberation and there are three levels of obstructions to omniscience. Superior 
beings at different stages of the path will likewise possess different degrees of 
freedom from these two obstructions. 
 
The sixth quality of the Sangha Jewel is freedom from the inferior 
obstructions , which means that it is free from seeking its own welfare, i.e., 
seeking liberation only for itself. This can also mean that the Sangha Jewel is 
free from self-cherishing. I am not sure where this quality is indicated in the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 6 
Page 4 of 6 root text. In this context, we are talking about the Mahayana Sangha Jewel. 
This quality could be implied in Verse 13: “ And who are endowed with sight of 
the exalted wisdom.”  Because the bodhisattva superiors directly perceive that 
sentient beings possess the buddha nature, they are free from the inferior 
obstructions.  
 
It is again unclear where the seventh and eighth qualities – the qualities of 
knowledge and freedom respectively – are in the root text. 
 
The first three qualities of the Sangha Jewel (the knowledge of the mode and 
varieties of phenomena and the internal exalted wisdom) can be subsumed 
under the seventh quality of  knowledge . 
 
The three freedoms (freedom from attachment, freedom from impediment and freedom from inferior obstructions) can be subsumed under the eighth quality  
of freedom . 
(1, 18) 
Because the sight of [these] wisdoms is pure, 
It is [close to being] the un surpassed wisdom of a Buddha. 
Therefore, an irreversible Superior 
Is a refuge for all embodied beings. 
 
The “ irreversible Superior”  refers to the bodhisattva superiors abiding from the 
first ground onwards, who will no longer fall or revert to the lower path. They  are very near to their goal of enlightenment and they will never generate the 
thought of seeking their own liberation. Such bodhisattva superiors are 
therefore befitting objects of refuge for us.  
 
(1,19) 
In order to [show the qualities of] teacher, teaching, and learners 
The Three Refuges were posited 
In terms of those of the three vehicles 
And those devoted to the three observ ances [of the individual refuges]. 
 
Verse 19 explains why the three jewels are posited in the first place. 
 
(1, 20) 
Because [the verbal doctrine is] abandoned, because [the realizational doctrine 
in the continuum of a Bodh isattva Superior] has the quality of deception, 
Because [a cessation is] a [mere] non-existence, and [non-Buddhas] have fright, 
The two forms of doctrine and the community of Superiors 
[Respectively] are not the supreme eternal refuge. 
 
Verse 20 indicates the difference between conventional and ultimate refuges 
and refers to the conventional refuge. Verse 21 indicates the ultimate refuge. 
 
(1, 21) 
Ultimately the refuge of transmigrators 
Is just the sole Buddha, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 6 
Page 5 of 6                                                           Because the Subduer has the Body of Doctrine [and thus is the doctrine]1
And because [a Buddha] is the finality of the Community. 
 
“Because [the verbal doctrine is] abandoned”  (Verse 20):  “ Verbal doctrine ” refers 
to the words in our prayers and practices. These words are to be abandoned 
because they are not our ultimate refuge. When we achieve enlightenment, 
they are no longer of any use to us. It is like our leaving the boat behind once  
we have crossed the river. Just as we won’t carry the boat with us, so when we reach our goal of enlightenment, we would leave the words behind.  
 
“Because [the realizational doctrine in the continuum of a Bodhisattva Superior] 
has the quality of deception”: Why is this not a final refuge? Because during 
that meditative equipoise, the bodhisattva superior experiences only 
emptiness. It is as if he is free of all defilements but in reality, that  
bodhisattva has not yet abandoned all his defilements and it is deceptive. 
Here, ‘deceptive’ means impermanent.  
 
“Because [a cessation is] a [mere] non-existence” : A cessation is a mere non-
existence. What is referred to here is the nirvana without remainder which is a 
mere non-existence of and separation from the afflictions. It is not a final 
source of refuge. The word “mere” indicates that it is a state which is free from 
the afflictions but not free from the obstructions to omniscience. This is what 
is being implied here. Since this is so, it is not the final source of refuge.  
 
“[Non-Buddhas] have fright”:  This refers to the hearer and solitary realiser 
arhats. They are the ones who have fright because they still have the 
obstructions to omniscience. Therefore they are not the final source of refuge.  
 
“The two forms of doctrine and the community of Superiors [respectively] are not 
the supreme eternal refuge.”  If that is the case, who is  the ultimate refuge?  It is 
the Buddha as mentioned in verse 21 .   
 
Question: 
Is there any similarity between the Dharma Jewel in this root and the four 
features of the True Path and True Cessation that are included in the Four Noble Truths?  
 
Answer: 
In the Four Noble Truths, the last truth is True Path. There are four characteristics of the True Path : (1) path (2) suitability (3) achievement and (4) deliverance. Whatever is True Path must necessarily possess these four 
features. In Maitreya’s Sublime Continuum , we are only looking at the qualities 
possessed by the Dharma Jewel. We are not looking at the Dharma Jewel from 
the perspective of its nature.  It is not necessarily so that whatever is a Dharma Jewel would naturally possess all these eight qualities. This is the 
difference between the True Path included in the Noble Truths and the 
Dharma Jewel we are studying here. This may be the difference but this point 
is not clarified in any text. This is just my personal view. 
 
1 The bracketed words in the English root text do not appear in the Tibetan text. They are 
included as amplifications for the purpose of clarity.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 6 
Page 6 of 6  
Question: 
What is the meaning of dharmadhatu (Skt)? 
 
Answer: 
It depends on the context as it may have different meanings when translated 
into English. Dharmadhatu is a synonym for emptiness, the final mode of existence.  
 
 
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng, Alison Wong & Angie Xiao, 18th February   
2008  
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong, 6th  March 2008 
 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee, 6th March  2008 
 
Vetted by Geshe Chonyi, 10th March 2008  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence  
Lesson 7 
Page 1 of 5 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating the Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra-ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation Jeffrey 
Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and Wilson, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
Commentary from The Tath›gata Essence, Commentary to the First 
Chapter by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen, translation Gavin Kilty, © FPMT, Inc. 
January 2007, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
 
Root verses are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added 
 
Lesson No: 7                     Date:19th February 2008  
Chapter One: The Essen ce of a One Gone Thus 
Verses 20 – 27, 96 
 
(1, 20) 
Because [the verbal doctrine is] abandoned, because [the realizational doctrine 
in the continuum of a Bodh isattva Superior] has the quality of deception, 
Because [a cessation is] a [mere] non-existence, and [non-Buddhas] have fright, 
The two forms of doctrine and the community of Superiors 
[Respectively] are not the supreme eternal refuge . 
 
A conventional object of refuge means that it is a temporary object of refuge, 
while an ultimate object of  refuge is the final object of refuge.  
 
(1,21) 
Ultimately the refuge of transmigrators 
Is just the sole Buddha, 
Because the Subduer has the Body of Doctrine (and thus is the doctrine) 
And because (a Buddha) is the finality of the Community. 
 
The Buddha is the final object of refuge. All other objects of refuge which are not the Buddha are temporary objects of refuge. The Tibetan word “ kon chog ” 
is usually translated as ‘jewel’ as in the Three Jewels. Kyabje Lama Zopa 
Rinpoche usually uses the Three Rare Sublime Ones. Here, it is translated in 
English as ‘rare and superior’. 
(1, 22) 
Because of appearing rarely, because of being without defilement, 
Because of having power, because of being the ornament of the world, 
Because of being just superior, and because of being changeless, 
[They are called] Jewels [literally, Superior Rarities]. 
 
“Kon chog” (or jewel) can be understood in six different ways.  
 
1. “Because of appearing rarely ”: A jewel is very precious and not easily 
found. In the same way, the Buddha is likened to a jewel as the coming of the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence  
Lesson 7 
Page 2 of 5 Buddha is an extremely rare event. Even when the Buddha does descend into 
this world, if one does not have the merit, it will be difficult to meet him. This is advice for us. Having met the Three Jewels, an occurrence which is 
extremely rare, we should strive to take whole-hearted refuge in them. 
 
2. “Because of being without defilement ”:  The Buddha’s undefiled quality 
is likened to a rare jewel. Once the jewel is cleaned properly, it will be 
completely without any dirt or stain. In the same way, the Buddha is pure and 
stainless.  
 
What kind of stains is being referred to here? The Buddha possesses the power 
to give refuge to sentient beings to protect and liberate them. It can be said then that the Buddha is free from the defilement of the inability to liberate 
sentient beings.  
 
The Buddha is also free of the defilement of deceit which means that he will 
not deceive sentient beings unlike the worldly gods who are not worthy objects 
of refuge for sentient beings. They are not undeceptive and do not possess the 
power to liberate all living beings.   
 
This second quality of being undefiled therefore has two aspects: the Buddha 
is free from the stain of the inability to benefit sentient beings and he is also 
free from the stain of deception which goes to show that the Buddha is a 
worthy object of refuge.   
 
3. “Because of having power”: The Buddha is likened to a wish-fulfilling 
jewel. It is said that when one finds such a jewel and one worships, pays 
homage and make offerings to it, it will grant all wishes and worldly desires 
such as food, wealth and  possessions. Likewise, the Buddha has the power to 
benefit sentient beings and fulfil our wishes because the Buddha possesses 
inconceivable  qualities such as magical powers, clairvoyance and so forth. 
 
4. “Because of being the ornament of the world ”: The wish-fulfilling jewel 
is said to be supreme amongst all jewels as it can help us fulfil and achieve 
many worldly purposes and goals. From the worldly point of view, it is said to 
be the best form of ornament.  
 
In the same way, the Buddha is the ornament of the world because the 
Buddha fulfils and accomplishes both the temporal and ultimate wishes and 
goals of sentient beings. Temporal goals refer to the fact that the Buddha is 
able to help sentient beings achieve a higher status and rebirth as a human or 
god. Ultimately, the Buddha can also help sentient beings achieve liberation and enlightenment. Since the Buddha can fulfil all wishes, there is great 
benefit in entrusting ourselves to the Buddha Jewel and he is, therefore, the 
best refuge. 
 
5. “Because of being just superior ”: The most outstanding jewel in the world 
is the wish-fulfilling jewel. In the same way, the Buddha is superior and 
transcends everything that is worldly and mundane. Through understanding 
the superiority of the Buddha, we come to understand how he is an 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence  
Lesson 7 
Page 3 of 5 uncommon object of refuge compared to the worldly gods, who are not real 
objects of refuge.  Since the Buddha has no equal, therefore he is superior. 
 
6. “Because of being changeless” : Praising or criticising a wish-fulfilling jewel 
will not change its quality. This also applies to the Buddha. The Buddha will always work to protect and benefit us regardless of whether we praise or 
criticise him.  
 
Of the seven diamond topics that are covered in this text, the first three - the 
Buddha, the Dharma and the Sangha - are now completed with verse 22.  
 
Question:  
(1,19) 
In order to [show the qualities of] teacher, teaching, and learners 
The Three Refuges were posited 
In terms of those of the three vehicles 
And those devoted to the three observ ances [of the individual refuges]. 
Can you please explain what “ the three observances ” is referring to?  
 
Answer: 
Verse 19 explains why the Three Jewels are posited in the first place and this 
is done from the perspective of the three vehicles - the path of the 
bodhisattvas, solitary realisers and hearers.  
 
The three refuges can be posited from the perspective of a person who has 
already entered any one of the three paths mentioned. It can also be posited from the perspective of the person who has not yet entered the path. In that 
scenario, how should we posit the Three Jewels? For such people, some focus 
mainly on the Buddha who is their object of worship; others focus mainly on the Dharma, their practice and there are still others who focus mainly on the Sangha, whom they serve and make offerings to.  
 
Geshe-la: Now I am going to teach like a grasshopper. You can read the root text 
on your own and ask if you have any questions. I cannot continue by going through verse by verse. If you really want to study, then you put in your time 
and go through the root text on your own. The translation and the commentary is 
there.  
 
I tried to put the material in a concise way to explain to you but I have read 
about 25 pages and this is hard to do. Th e outline is also very extensive. If you 
want to learn this text thoroughly, verse by verse, then perhaps we can do that 
after the Basic Program. It will take about one to two years, going through verse 
by verse, sentence by sentence. We will see.  
 
(1, 27) 
Because a perfect Buddha’s body is pervasive, 
Because suchness is without differentiation, 
And because a [Buddha] lineage exists, all embodied 
Are always in possession of a Buddha essence. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence  
Lesson 7 
Page 4 of 5 It is stated in the sutras that all embodied (or sentient) beings possess the 
buddha nature. Why? This is explained through the three reasons.  
 
The first reason appears in line 1 of Verse 27: “ Because a perfect Buddha’s 
body is pervasive.”  This refers to the pervasiveness of the Buddha’s 
enlightened activities which emanate to all sentient beings. Framed as a 
syllogism, we can say all sentient beings possess the buddha nature because 
they are pervaded by the enlightened activities of the Buddha.  
 
Put in another way, we can say all sentient beings posses the buddha-nature 
because the enlightened activities of the Buddha emanate to them all.  
 
But what does this actually mean? Some commentaries suggest that the 
meaning of ‘the Buddha’s enlightened activities emanating to all’ is that the enlightened activities themselves are the buddha nature.  
 
Gyaltsap Je says that this is incorrect. He explains this line, “ a perfect 
Buddha’s body is pervasive”  in this way: we have already established that the 
Buddha’s enlightened activities can and does emanate to the mental continua 
of all sentient beings. If that is the case, this shows that the mental continua 
of sentient beings possess the potential for enlightened activities to enter, to 
receive such enlightened activities and to work on them. This potential of sentient beings is the buddha nature.  
 
The second reason  appears in line 2 of Verse 27:  “Because suchness is 
without differentiation.”  The mind of the Buddha and the minds of sentient 
beings are both empty of true existence. This entity of being empty of inherent 
existence of both the Buddha’s and our minds are no different in nature. How 
this works as a reason for proving the existence of buddha nature is something we need to meditate on.  
 
Because the mind is empty of inherent existence, we say the nature of the 
mind is clear light, that is, it is empt y of inherent existence and the afflictions 
are adventitious.  
 
The third reason  appears in line 3 of Verse 27: “ And because a [Buddha] 
lineage exists.” The buddha lineage (or buddha potential) exists in all sentient beings, which means that in the mental continua of sentient beings, there are  
lineages which are suitable to be transformed into the Truth Body and the 
Form Body of the Buddha.  Therefore, sentient beings are said to possess buddha nature. 
 
Question:  
Is this buddha lineage related to the accumulation of merit and wisdom? 
 
Answer: 
We first need to understand what is the buddha lineage. The buddha lineage 
(or potential) can be defined as the phenomenon that is suitable to be transformed into a Buddha’s body. The Buddha’s body can be divided into the 
(1) uncompounded (or uncomposed body) and (2) the compounded (or 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence  
Lesson 7 
Page 5 of 5 composed) body. The Buddha’s bodies are definitely enumerated as these two. 
There are no Buddha’s body that is neither of the two.  
 
The phenomenon that is suitable to be transformed into the uncompounded 
body is called the natural lineage (or suchness with defilements). The 
phenomenon that is suitable to be transformed into the compounded body is 
called the developed lineage. (In the commentary, this is translated as the 
lineage arising from proper appropriation).  
 
The section on buddha nature is covered under two major headings. The 
explanation of the clear light nature of the mind is done through ten aspects (enumerated in Verse 29) and is covered in Verses 30-96. The establishment of 
afflictions as adventitious is explained through the nine examples which starts 
from Verse 97 onwards. We will look at the nine examples first and then look 
at the explanation of the clear light nature of the mind through the ten aspects if we have enough time. 
 
(1, 96) 
Thus the ten presentations [ranging from entity through qualities] 
Of the essence of Conquerors have been expressed. 
That [such an essential constituent now] dw ells inside the covering of afflictive 
emotions [of sentient beings] 
Is to be known by way of examples  [as its entity is not now known]. 
 
The manner in which buddha nature abides in sentient beings is explained by 
way of the nine examples. “ [Such an essential constituent now] dwells inside the 
covering of afflictive emotions [of sentient  beings] is to be known by way of 
examples [as its entity is not now known]”:  It is said that the buddha nature  of 
sentient beings are abiding within “ the covering of afflictive emotions .” This is to 
be understood by way of the nine analogies which we will look at in the next 
lesson. 
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng, Alison Wong & Angie Xiao, 22nd February   
2008  
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong, 7th  March 2008 
 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee,  9th  March   2008 
 
Vetted by Geshe Chonyi, 10th March 2008 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 8 
Page 1 of 10 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating the Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra-ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation Jeffrey 
Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and Wilson, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
Commentary from The Tath›gata Essence, Commentary to the First 
Chapter by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen, translation Gavin Kilty, © FPMT, Inc. 
January 2007, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
 
Root verses are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added 
 
Lesson No: 8                     Date:24th February 2008  
Chapter One: The Essen ce of a One Gone Thus 
Verses 27, 97-108 
(1, 27) 
Because a perfect Buddha's body is pervasive, 
Because suchness is without differentiation, 
And because a [Buddha] lineage exists, all embodied 
Are always in possession of a Buddha essence. 
There are three reasons that support the fact that sentient beings possess 
buddha nature.  
1. The mental continua of sentient beings are suitable vessels that can receive the enlightened activities of the Buddha. It is not phrased this way in Verse 27: “Because a perfect Buddha's body is pervasive.”  This means that the Buddha's 
enlightened activities are always emanating to sentient beings which shows 
that sentient beings can receive those enlightened activities and those 
activities can engage sentient beings. Because of this fact, we say that all 
sentient beings possess the buddha nature. 
2. “Because suchness is without differentiation”:  When we look at the minds of 
sentient beings and the Buddha’s mind from the perspective of their entity (or 
nature), there is no difference between them because they are both empty of 
inherent existence. Because there is no difference, therefore there is an 
opportunity for this natural purity of sentient beings (i.e., their mind being empty of inherent existence) to be transformed into the Nature Truth Body of the Buddha. 
3. Sentient beings are said to possess buddha nature because of the existence 
of the buddha lineage.  Buddha nature and buddha lineage roughly refer to the 
same thing but what does it mean when we say that since the buddha lineage 
exists in sentient beings, therefore they possess the buddha nature? All 
sentient beings possess the buddha nature because they possess the lineages 
that are suitable to be transformed into the Buddha's Truth Body and Form 
Body. Because they possess these two lineages, therefore they possess the buddha nature. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 8 
Page 2 of 10 To summarise, we possess buddha nature because:- 
1) We are suitable receptacles and the Buddha’s enlightened activities can 
emanate to us. 
2) The entity (nature) of our mind and the Buddha’s mind are the same insofar 
as they are empty of inherent existence. From the perspective of the entity of 
the mind, we possess buddha nature. 
3) We possess buddha nature because of the existence of its cause in the form of the buddha lineages. 
 
What is the nature of our minds?  They are in the nature of clear light. How does buddha nature abide? It abides with defilements. There seems to be an internal contradiction here. On the one hand, it is pure. On the other hand, it 
abides with defilements, i.e., our buddha nature abides with defilements and 
yet its nature is clear light. How can these two co-exist? What do we mean 
when we say the mind is accompanied by afflictions?  
 
1. Take the example of a king surrounded by his ministers and his entourage.  
Is the mind like the principal that is surrounded by his retinue of 
afflictions?  
2. Or is the mind bound by the afflictions like the example given in the root text of a Buddha dwelling inside an ugly lotus? 
3. Or is the mind, which is in the nature of clear light, transformed into the entity of the afflictions, under certain circumstances? 
 
I don't have an answer. The point is to think about this: what is the meaning of the phrase, 'The mind is accompanied by the afflictions?’  
 
If the nature of the mind is clear light, is it possible for the mind to be transformed into the entity of the afflictions or not? You need to think about this.  
 
If we maintain that the mind is not generated into the entity of the afflictions 
because its nature is clear light, then what about the afflictions themselves?  An affliction is always generated from an earlier moment of affliction. The 
grasping at the self of person is an affliction. Can we say that the entity of that 
affliction is clear light which is temporarily obscured by defilements? It is 
difficult to come to a definite conclusion on this.  
 
Let me share with you my personal opinion on this although it does not 
completely settle this qualm.  
 
Grasping at a self is an affliction. The object of the mode of apprehension of 
this affliction is the inherently existent self.  I think the nature of this affliction, which is a mind, is clear light although it engages an erroneous 
object. Because its object of engagement is erroneous (i.e., an inherently 
existent self of person which does not ex ist), and it engages its object in an 
erroneous way, therefore, it is called an affliction. 
 
If the self exists in the way this affliction sees it to exist, then we can establish 
that the nature of that mind is clear light and not an affliction. But, because 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 8 
Page 3 of 10 the way it grasps at the object is erroneous and it does not accord with reality 
and the object it is grasping at does not ex ist in reality, therefore, we call it an 
affliction. Other than that, it is not establis hed in the nature of an affliction. Its 
entity is clear light. It is called an affliction because it engages its object in an 
erroneous way and the object itself is erroneous.  
 
Geshe-la : I am not sure. This could be my  wrong thinking. I could be 100% 
wrong. I don't know. But it is good to think when we say our mind is deluded, 
what does that really mean ?  
 
We really should think about this. When we say, ‘My mind is so deluded and 
full of delusions,’ what do we mean? Are the afflictions separate from the mind 
in terms of their nature or are they one? They are either one with or different 
from the nature of the mind. If they are different in nature, are they like the 
analogy given in the text of the Buddha wrapped in an ugly lotus? 
 
Is it possible for the nature of the mind to be clear light but the nature of the 
afflictions to be polluted? 
 
Question from student : 
Is there a difference in this particular topic depending on the way it is presented in sutra (where the afflictions are eradicated) and the way it is presented in tantra (where they are transformed)?  
 
Answer :  
In tantra, there is the practice of taking the afflictions – desire, anger, 
ignorance - into the path. When we say taking desire into the path, what does 
that mean? Does it mean desire is transformed into the entity of the path? 
When we say we take anger into the path, does it mean that anger is 
transformed into the entity of the path? What about ignorance? Is that 
transformed into the entity of the path?  
 
In our study of lorig and the presentation of past and future lives, we learnt 
that a consciousness is a continuation from a previous moment of 
consciousness and it is consciousness because it connects to the next moment 
of consciousness. There is a continuum of a similar type and consciousness (or 
mind) comes from a previous moment of consciousness. An affliction is also consciousness. What about the afflictions then? They have  to come from a 
previous moment of affliction.  
 
When we talk about the future of the afflictions, where do the afflictions go? Do 
they connect to the future? Do they go on to enlightenment? If they do not connect, does that mean their continuity is ended? If they do connect, do they  
continue as afflictions or are they transformed into a different kind of mind 
and carry on from there? Or do they continue in the form of a potential?  
 
When we realise that the inherently existent self we are grasping at does not 
exist, do we then realise that the affliction is erroneous or not? Realising that 
the affliction is erroneous, we also realise that it is adventitious. The mistaken 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 8 
Page 4 of 10 way of apprehending its object (i.e., the self of person) has not entered into the 
real nature of the affliction itself and is therefore adventitious.  
 
Therefore, afflictions are called afflictions because they engage in their objects 
erroneously and not because their nature is afflicted. Rather, it is because they 
apprehend their objects in a mistaken way which does not accord with reality.  
 
Here are a few things to think about then:- 
1. What do we mean when we say the nature of the mind is clear light? 
2. What do we mean when we say that the defilements are adventitious? 
3. If they are adventitious, why are they adventitious? 
 
What I had mentioned so far is not the definitive answer. It is just my own 
opinion and my thoughts about these issues. They may be helpful to you. You 
can use them as a key to opening the door to other avenues of reasoning. You 
can read different texts and think about this from different angles. It is good to 
discuss this with your classmates. In discussion, you hear many different 
opinions and answers from different people. Then, you will be able to slowly 
form your own opinion about these issues.  
 
Question:  
Is there a difference between the ignorance that makes us create karma and 
the ignorance whose root is the failure to see things correctly?  
 
Answer: 
Ignorance primarily refers to the mind that is confused with respect to the final 
nature of phenomena and which grasps at the true existence of self and 
phenomena. There are different degrees of ignorance, coarse and subtle. 
Generally speaking, ignorance is the mind that doesn't know. Based on that 
definition, attachment and anger can be considered forms of ignorance. 
Ignorance is a mind that is confused with respect to its object. But, in this 
context, we are referring to ignorance of suchness (or emptiness).  
 
All sentient beings possess buddha nature (or suchness) but this buddha 
nature is obscured by adventitious defilements. In order to help us to 
understand how this is so and to show that these defilements are adventitious 
and can be removed, nine examples are given in Verses 97 and 98.   
 
(1, 97) 
Like a Buddha [dwelling inside] an ugly lotus, honey in [the middle of many] 
bees, 
A kernel inside a husk, gold within filth, 
A treasury [of jewels] in the earth [under the house of the destitute, the capacity 
of growing] stalks and so fort h [existing] in a small seed, 
The image of a Conqueror [made from a precious substance] inside a tattered 
garment, 
 
(1, 98) 
A lord of humans [who is a Universal Monarch] inside the womb of a lowly 
woman, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 8 
Page 5 of 10 And a precious [golden] image in an earthen [mold], 
This [naturally pure] essential constituent dwells in sentient beings 
Obscured with the adventitious defi lements of afflictive emotions. 
 
The analogies are:- 
1. A Buddha is sitting inside an ugly lotus 
2. Honey in the middle of many bees 
3. A kernel inside a husk 
4. Gold within filth  
5. A treasury of jewels buried in the ground. 
6. The capacity of a small seed to produce stalks   
7. A statue of a Buddha made from precious jewels inside a piece of tattered 
garment  
8. A baby who will become a wheel turning king who is in the womb of a lowly woman 
9. A precious golden image inside an earthen mould 
 
(1, 100) 
For example, a One Gone Thus blazing wi th the thousands [of magnificences] of 
the major [and minor] marks, 
Dwelling inside a lotus of ugly color 
Is seen by someone having the undefiled divine eye 
And is taken out from the lotus petals [to be shown to others]. 
 
(1,101) 
Similarly, the One Gone To Bliss sees with the [undefiled] Buddha eye 
The reality of natural [clear light] even in those [transmigrators] dwelling in the 
Most Torturous Hell, 
And having a nature of compassion, dw ells [here] at length undefiled, 
Releasing [trainees gradually] from defilement. 
 
(1,102) 
Just as one with the divine eye sees a One Gone Thus dwelling 
Inside an ugly closed lotus and cuts away the petals [so that it may be seen], 
So the compassionate Subduer sees the e ssence of a perfect Buddha [dwelling in 
all] transmigrators 
Obstructed by the coverings of the defi lements of desire, hatred, and so forth 
and [engages in activities] to destroy those defilements [of the basic constituent]. 
 
Earlier in the text, it was proved all sentient beings have buddha nature, only this buddha nature is obscured by afflictions. Can these afflictions be removed? Yes. What happens when the buddha nature is free from afflictions? 
It is then transformed into the Nature Truth Body of the Buddha.  
 
The Buddha, the enlightened mind, sees that all sentient beings, even those 
suffering in the Avici hells, have this buddha nature, which is obscured by adventitious defilements. Generating great compassion for sentient beings, he   
shows the path and the methods that will enable us to gradually separate the 
defilements from our buddha nature. If we did not possess buddha nature, the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 8 
Page 6 of 10 Buddha will have no reason to teach us the methods that can free us from our 
suffering.  
 
What do we mean when we say the nature of the minds of those hell beings is 
clear light? If the Buddha sees that even Avici hell beings have buddha nature, 
then we would have to say that the nature of their minds is clear light. We 
have to understand that the suffering in the Avici hells is so intense, the only 
thing that is manifesting in their minds would be negative emotions, without any opportunity to generate any virtuous thoughts.  
 
To help us understand when we are free from the adventitious defilements, our 
buddha nature will be transformed into the Nature Truth Body of the Buddha, the example of a Buddha wrapped inside an ugly lotus is given.  
 
For example, someone who is clairvoyant seeing that there is a beautiful Buddha inside the lotus will start peeling off the petals, layer by layer, in order to see the Buddha inside. Here, the Buddha is an analogy for our buddha 
nature and the petals of the lotus are an analogy for our defilements.   
 
(1, 103) 
Just as a person, who is skilled [i n analyzing honey ], upon seeking it 
Sees honey [of excellent taste and potency] surrounded [and protected] by a 
swarm of bees, 
And thoroughly removes it from the swarm of bees 
Through [various] methods [such as usin g smoke and thereby gets the honey], 
 
(1, 104) 
So the great sage [Buddha], having perceived with the all-knowing eye 
The essential constituent of [individual] knowledge like honey, 
Works at totally removing the obstructions, like bees, 
To that [basic constituent]. 
 
(1, 105) 
Just as a person seeking honey, [hav ing seen] honey obstructed by many 
thousands of ten millions of bees 
Removes those and makes use of the honey [for medicine, food, and so forth] 
according to wish, 
So the Conqueror—skilled in destroying the afflictive emotions, like bees, [which 
obstruct] the uncontaminated knowledge [of individual insight], like honey, 
Existing in [all] embodied beings—is li ke a person skilled [in taking honey]. 
 
The meaning of the analogy is the same here -  there is something that is being 
obscured and something that obscures. When you remove the obscurations, 
the object which was obscured will be revealed. The Buddha sees that sentient 
beings have the potential in their minds which can be transformed into the 
Nature Truth Body of the Buddha. Seeing this, the Buddha teaches us the  methods to free ourselves from the defilements so that we our buddha nature 
can be actualised. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 8 
Page 7 of 10 When we want to collect honey from the honeycomb, we have to first engage in 
many activities in order to chase away the bees. Once we have done that, we will be able to extract the  honey we seek. 
 
(1,106 ) 
Just as kernels of grain in their husks 
Cannot be used by people 
And just as those seeking food and so forth 
Remove them from the husks, 
 
(1,107) 
So the Conqueror [i.e., basic constituent] which exists in [all sentient beings 
But is mixed with the defilements of the afflictive emotions— 
As long as it is not freed from the mixtur e with the [adventitious] defilements of 
the afflictive emotions— 
Does not manifest the [inconceivable] deeds of a Conqueror in the three 
existences [of the Desire, Form, and Formless Realms]. 
 
(1,108) 
Just as kernels of rice, buckwheat, and barley not removed from the husks and 
still with bristles 
Do not serve as delicious food to be us ed by people [due to] not having been 
prepared well, 
So the body [or essence] of a Lord of Doct rine which exists in sentient beings, but 
is unreleased from the covering of the afflictive emotions, 
Does not afford the taste of the joy of doctrine for transmigrators beset by the 
covering of the afflictive emotions. 
 
The intended meaning behind this analogy is the same as before. The Buddha sees that sentient beings have the potential that can be transformed into the 
Nature Truth Body. Because of that, Buddha taught many methods which, if   
we put effort into practicing them, would free us from those defilements.  
 
This analogy is of the kernel inside the husk. We have to remove the husk to 
get at the rice grain within. The husk that covers the rice grain is analogous  to 
the adventitious defilements and the rice grain is the analogy for our buddha 
nature.  
 
These are analogies so you have to examine whether, in reality, our buddha 
nature exists in a similar way to the analogies or not.   
 
When we were examining the  Sangha  Jewel earlier in the text, it explained that 
the nature of the mind is clear light because it is empty of inherent existence. 
The defilements are also adventitious because they are not inherently existent.  
Why is the nature of the mind clear light? Why are the defilements 
adventitious? The same reason is given, i.e., they are both empty of inherent existence. 
 
The text is saying that because the mind is not inherently existent, therefore 
the nature of the mind is clear light. The text also uses the same reason to 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 8 
Page 8 of 10 explain why defilements are adventitious. The text does not seem to be saying 
that the nature of the mind is clear light because the defilements are adventitious.  
 
Comment by student : 
It seems to me that the final nature of all phenomena being empty of inherent existence is too general a reason to substantiate the thesis that the nature of the mind is clear light and that the defilements are adventitious. 
 
Response: 
The defilements are adventitious because they do not exist inherently. If the defilements were inherently existent, then they cannot be adventitious and there is no way they can ever change into something else. However, because 
the afflictions depend on causes and conditions, therefore, they are not 
inherently existent and since this is so, they  are adventitious. What better 
reason can you give to substantiate that the afflictions are adventitious? 
 
It is not easy to come to a definite conclusion about this topic that we are 
discussing. I do think about it myself.  Thinking about this is extremely 
important especially these two statements:  
1. The nature of the mind is clear light. 
2. The defilements are adventitious. 
 
Why? Because when we see that the nature of the mind is clear light and the defilements are adventitious which means they can be removed, we would have no difficulty practising the Dharma. Our Dharma practice becomes pure. 
Realising that the defilements are adventitious, we see that buddhahood is a 
possibility. Then, our refuge also becomes pure.  
 
Our understanding would also become a basis for developing bodhicitta. When 
we realise that buddha nature exists in all sentient beings, then no matter how 
horrible they may seem, we can develop impartial love and compassion for 
them. We would not discriminate between enemies, friends and strangers 
when we see that all of them have buddha nature.  
 
The main point is to understand that we have the potential to become a 
buddha.  Once we see this, we would understand that all other sentient beings have the same potential. Since this is so, it is wrong to harm them. Rather, we 
should help them to actualise this potential. The love and compassion we 
generate for others would become pure and grounded in logic. Without this 
fundamental understanding that others have the potential to become a buddha, the love and compassion we generate for others is always tainted with 
desire or attachment.  
 
If the Buddha sees that even Avici hell beings have buddha nature, we can 
infer that our enemies would also have buddha nature and it would be inappropriate to harm them. The point that I am trying to make is that the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 8 
Page 9 of 10                                                           subject  of buddha nature is extremely important, especially the realisation 
that the defilements are adventitious. 1
 
1 That existing within the enclosure of the delusions is known by these examples. 
 
Though the nature of the mind of sentient beings is pure, it nonetheless exists within the 
enclosure of the delusions. However, these delusions, which are merely adventitious stains, 
do not permeate the nature of the mind. This can be seen by examining the following nine 
examples. 
Like a Buddha in a decaying lotus, honey amidst bees, 
Grain within its husk, gold inside filth, 
Treasure in the ground, and sprouts and so on arising from the seeds (within fruits), 
A Buddha's form in tattered cloth, and 
Like a king in an ugly woman's womb, 
A precious form existing within a clay (mould): similarly, 
Obscured by the stains of the adventitious delusions, 
This Buddha potential exists in all sentient beings. 
 
What then are the nine examples? The first is the presence of a Buddha's form, complete 
with the major and minor marks, enclosed within a decaying lotus flower. The second is 
the presence of honey amid a swarm of bees. The third is a grain existing within its husk. 
The fourth is the presence of gold covered by filth. The fifth is the existence of a precious 
treasure under the ground. The sixth is the potential within the seed of a fruit to sprout into 
a tree. The seventh is a Buddha statue made from precious jewels covered by tattered 
rags. The eighth is the presence of a baby, who will become a great king, within the womb 
of an ugly woman. The ninth is the presence of a golden Buddha statue encased in a clay 
mould. 
As illustrated by these examples, Buddha potential exists within the continuum of 
sentient beings, obscured by the stains of nine types of adventitious defilements. 
 
The example of the lotus 
 
Suppose abiding within an ugly-coloured lotus 
Were a Tathagata shining with thousands of marks. 
When perceived by a human with the pure divine eye, 
It would be extracted from those 'water-born' petals. 
Similarly, the Tathagata sees with his Buddha eye 
The true nature of even those abiding in the lowest hells. 
Unobstructed, and remaining through compassion till the limit of the future, 
He makes us free of obscurations. 
Just as the Tathagata within the closed decaying lotus 
Is seen inside by the divine eye and then the petals cut away. 
Likewise the completely enlightened essence is perceived enclosed by the obscuring 
impurities of desire, hatred and so forth. 
And through compassion the Victor destroys such obscurations. 
 
The natural Buddha potential within the continuum of all sentient beings, when 
separated from all obscurations transforms into a Buddha's nature body. The Buddha 
has seen that this Buddha potential exists even in the case of beings in the lowest 
realms, there in the manner of being enclosed by various impurities. Through his great 
compassion the Buddha has shown the methods to remove these impurities. When his 
disciples practise these methods in; accordance with his instructions, they will remove all 
the: obscurations to the natural potentia l and will thus attain the nature body. 
The example speaks of a beautiful statue, a form body of a Buddha, complete with all 
major and minor marks, hidden within the closed petals of a withered, discoloured lotus 
flower. When this Buddha statue is perceived by a person who has the attainment of 
the clairvoyant divine eye he is able to remove the petals which obscure the form body of 
the Buddha so that it becomes completely and clearly manifest.  
Were we to become aware of a beautiful Buddha statue hidden amongst the petals of a 
lotus, we would remove the obscuring petals and reveal the statue fully. Similarly, the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 8 
Page 10 of 10                                                                                                                                                                                          Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng, Alison Wong & Angie Xiao, 1st March  
February   2008  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong, 8th March 2008; Checked by Yap Siew Kee, 9th March   2008 
Vetted by Geshe Chonyi, 10th March 2008  
 
Buddha is aware of the Buddha nature within a ll living beings, specifically here their natural 
potential. By removing the obscuring delusions of desire, hatred and so on, the natural 
potential is fully revealed in the at tainment of the Buddha's nature body. 
 
The example of the bees 
 
Just as when a swarm of bees surrounds the honey,  
The skilful person endeavouring to get it.  
Having seen this, makes sure with skilful means,  
That it is completely separated from the swarm of bees. 
Similarly, with the great sages and their omniscient eye;  
By seeing this honey-like element of potential.  
They bring about the complete and perfect  
Abandonment of the bee-like obscurations . 
 
When the natural potential for buddhahood wi thin the continuum of living beings is 
separated from all obscurations, it transforms into a Buddha's nature body. The great sages, 
all the Buddhas, perceive with their omniscient vision the Tathagata essence abiding 
within the minds of living beings but enclosed by the delusions. They show the methods for 
separating the Buddha potential from all the delusions so that, when it is completely freed 
of all obscurations, the natural potential transforms into the nature body of the state of 
buddhahood. This is illustrated by the person who is seeking honey. The honey is 
completely surrounded by a swarm of bees and so  the person must be clever in going about 
obtaining the honey. He must use a skilful method to first completely remove the swarm 
of bees, and then once the honey is separated from the bees, his desire for the honey can 
be realised. 
Like that, the person seeking the sweet taste of enlightenment must be skilful in 
separating his honey-like natural potential from the bee-like obscurations of the delusions. 
 
The example of the husk  
 
As the essential grain is covered by a husk,  
And cannot be consumed by any person,  
Those seeking food and so on  
Must themselves extract it from the husk. 
Similarly, sentient beings have delusions, 
And their Buddha (potential) is mixed with these stains.  
As long as it is not freed from the stains of the delusions  
That long the Buddha's activities will not extend throughout the three realms. 
 
The Buddha sees that the natural potential for buddha-hood within the continuum of 
living beings is polluted by the stains of th e adventitious delusions.  He therefore presents 
the methods of Dharma through which the Buddha potential is separated from the stains of 
all the adventitious obscurations and transforms into a Buddha's nature body. 
The example speaks of those who would eat the food from grains. They must first extract 
the grain from its husk and once the grain itself is manifest they can use it for 
nourishment. 
One cannot gain the delightful taste of grain foods without removing the husk. 
Similarly, without removing th e husk-like obscurations, the essential grain of the natural 
potential cannot be fully revealed as the nature body and thus cannot extend the bliss of 
Buddha-activity throughout the three realms.  (The Fundamental Potential for Enlightenment 
by Geshe Archarya Thubten Loden, pgs. 118~122)  
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 9 
Page 1 of 13 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating the Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra-ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation Jeffrey 
Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and Wilson, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
Commentary from The Tath›gata Essence, Commentary to the First 
Chapter by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen, translation Gavin Kilty, © FPMT, Inc. 
January 2007, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
 
Root verses are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added 
 
Lesson No: 9                     Date:26th February 2008  
Chapter One: The Essen ce of a One Gone Thus 
Verses 109 - 131 
 
Our object of refuge, the kind Guru Shakyamuni Buddha is someone we 
consider to be a valid authority as he possesses the ability to work for the 
benefit of all sentient beings. This ability did not happen without cause or 
condition. He is able to benefit sentient beings because he possesses the 
excellent abandonment and the excellent realisations, without which he would not be able to perfectly fulfil  his own purpose and the purposes of others.  
 
These two qualities of the excellent abandonment and the excellent realisations 
are preceded by the wisdom that directly perceives selflessness and great compassion.  
 
Are we able to generate this wisdom and great compassion in our minds? Yes, but to achieve these realisations, we have to familiarise our minds with them over a long period of time.  
 
Selflessness is an object of knowledge that can be realised by the mind because it exists in reality whereas the self cannot be realised by any valid cognition as it does not exist in reality. What determines the existence of an 
object?  An object exists if it can be certified by a valid cognition. Otherwise, it  
does not exist.  
 
Since selflessness exists, we can realise it. Then by familiarising ourselves 
repeatedly with what we have realised and ascertained, it is possible for that 
knowledge to become direct perception. It is the nature of our minds that the 
clarity of a valid object increases with greater familiarity. 
  
Is it possible to generate the mind of great compassion, focussing on all beings 
of the six realms? Yes, it is possible to develop such a mind. Is there any 
sentient being in existence towards whom we have never generated any love 
and affection? We have to say, ‘No.’ Such a sentient being does not exist, as we 
had loved every sentient being that had ever existed.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 9 
Page 2 of 13 We all have compassion. When we see our loved ones or close friends suffering, 
we find it unbearable and we want to free them from that suffering. The Lamrim mentions that there is not a single sentient being who has not been 
our loved one in the past. We naturally generate compassion whenever we see 
our loved ones suffering. Since there isn’t any sentient being who has not been 
our mother, father or loved one, it is possible for us to develop compassion for  
all sentient beings. 
 
Our love and compassion for our relatives and loved ones will naturally 
increase as long as it is not interrupted or destroyed by anger.  It is the natural 
quality of the mind that whatever we are familiar with will become stronger 
over time. In this case, it is compassion. This shows we all have the natural 
potential to generate and to develop our compassion.   
 
These two minds - the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness and great 
compassion - are valid minds based on reality. When we familiarise ourselves with these two minds, naturally they will increase in strength as this is the 
natural quality of the mind. When these two minds are fully developed, they 
will transform into the entity of the Buddha’s wisdom or the quality of the 
excellent realisations. At the time of enlightenment, these two minds transform into the composed body of the Buddha. 
 
The ultimate nature of these two minds is empty of inherent existence. At the 
time of enlightenment, the emptiness of these two minds becomes the quality of the excellent abandonment and are transformed into the uncomposed body 
of the Buddha.  
 
The lineages that become these two bodies (i.e., the composed and 
uncomposed bodies of the Buddha) are the developed lineage and the natural lineage respectively. From this, we can see how we all possess the potential to 
become a buddha as we have the potential to develop the two realisations -  
the direct realisation of emptiness and the mind of great compassion.  
 
Once we possess the two qualities of the excellent abandonment and the   
excellent realisations, our work for sentient beings will be spontaneously 
accomplished. The buddhas work for all sentient beings spontaneously and 
effortlessly, without any difficulty at all. Until we become a buddha, whatever 
we do for sentient beings will be difficult.  
 
It is useful for those of us who consider ourselves Buddhists to think why our 
kind Guru Shakyamuni Buddha possesses the power to spontaneously accomplish the welfare of sentient beings. He is able to do this due to certain 
causes and conditions and we should reflect on what they are to understand 
how the Buddha became so powerful. We should also reflect on whether we 
think we have the potential to become like him one day.  
 
It is said that, once we have realised emptiness and great compassion, through 
the power of familiarity, those realisations can grow limitlessly due to the 
natural quality of the mind.  We should check whether this is so.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 9 
Page 3 of 13                                                           We don’t have to only talk about great compassion. Is it not a fact that once 
the mind is familiar with an object, its focus on that object can become stronger and stronger? Since the mind has this quality, the power of familiarity, 
then naturally we start to develop effort, courage and determination. 
 
************************** 
(1, 109) 
Just as a person’s gold which had fallen into a place of rotten filth 
When that person was going about [on the road], 
Would remain for many  hundreds of years 
There as it was before due to having the attribute of indestructibility, 
(1,110) 
And just as a god with the pure divine eye, 
Having seen it there, says to someone, 
“[Take out] this supremely precious gold that is here, 
Cleanse it, and make something [such as a statue or ornament] that is to be 
made from a precious substance,” 
(1,111) 
So the Subduer, having perceived the qualities [of the basic constituent1
Existing in] sentient beings, sunk in the af flictive emotions which are like filth, 
Makes fall the rain of excellent doctrine for all beings 
In order to wash away the mu d of the afflictive emotions. 
(1, 112) 
Just as a god who has seen gold fallen into a place of rotten filth 
Earnestly shows its supreme beauty to someone so that it is thoroughly 
cleansed [of mud], 
So the Conqueror, having perceived in sen tient beings the precious [essence of] a 
perfect Buddha fallen in the great filth of the afflictive emotions 
Teaches doctrine to embodied beings so that that [basic constituent] is purified. 
 
The meaning of these verses is that the buddha nature present in all sentient beings has the potential to become the Nature Truth Body of the Buddha but it is presently obscured by adventitious defilements. Seeing this, The Buddha 
taught the Dharma in order to purify the adventitious defilements of sentient 
beings. For the sentient beings who put those methods (the Dharma) into 
practice, there will come a time when their minds are purified of the adventitious defilements and their buddha nature will transform into the 
Nature Truth Body of the Buddha. Although the different analogies are given, 
the intended meaning is the same. Different examples are given to aid our 
understanding.  
 
The fourth analogy is that of a clairvoyant god who sees a piece of gold lying in 
piles of filth. When he takes out that piece of gold from the pile of filth, then 
the gold will be revealed.  
 
1 Note: Buddha nature, basic constituent, natura lly abiding lineage and emptiness of the mind 
of sentient beings all mean the same thing.  
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 9 
Page 4 of 13 (1,113) 
Just as an inexhaustible treasure exists 
Under the home of those destitute 
But those persons do not know of it 
And that treasure does not say to them, “I am here,” 
 
(1,114 ) 
So because of not realizing this which is like a treasure of jewels inside the 
mind, 
[Naturally] undefiled [and thus] having a nature [ultimately] without 
[Newly] establishing [qualities] and removing [faults that earlier existed], 
All these beings continuously undergo many  forms of the suffering of poverty. 
 
(1,115) 
Just as to a poor person under whose ho use a treasure of jewels is concealed 
That treasure of jewels does not say, “I am [here]”, and that person does not 
know of it, 
So the Sage is born in the world [and teaches doctrine] in order that sentient 
beings, like poor persons, 
In whose home of the mind the treasure  of the [uncontaminated element of a 
Superior’s] qualities resides, could attain it. 
 
Here, the buddha nature  of sentient beings is likened to treasure the core of 
which is unpolluted by dirt. Because of their failure to realise their buddha nature (the emptiness of our minds), sentient beings experience many 
sufferings such as the suffering of poverty and so forth. Once they realise the 
emptiness of their  minds, they will be able to achieve buddhahood.   
 
Sentient beings are likened to the poor destitute who does not know he has a 
great hidden  treasure buried beneath his house even though it is right under 
his feet. This treasure is not going to call out to the man, ‘Hey, I am here. Can 
you take me out?’ Because of not knowing of the existence of the treasure, that 
poor man will not be able to use it to eradicate his poverty.  
 
Then a clairvoyant comes along. He is able to see the treasure beneath the 
house. He tells the destitute about it and asks him to take it out. The destitute follows his advice and starts digging out the treasure, which he then uses to 
alleviate his poverty.  
 
This is an analogy for how, due to our failure to realise the emptiness of our 
minds, we encounter so many difficulties and problems. If we can see the emptiness of our minds, we will be able to overcome our problems and become 
a buddha. 
(1,116) 
Just as a seed [capable of producing a tree] which exists in a fruit of a mango 
tree and so forth— 
[The seed being] undivertible [from giving rise to a sprout when it meets with 
favorable conditions]— 
Gradually turns into the phenomenon of a majestic tree, 
Through the plowing of the ground, water, and so forth, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 9 
Page 5 of 13 (1,117) 
So the [uncontaminated] virtue which is the essential constituent of the [Superior] 
qualities 
Inside the covering of the skin of the frui t of ignorance and so forth of sentient 
beings 
Gradually becomes the phenomenon of a King of Subduers 
In dependence upon this and that virtue [which is with the essential constituent]. 
 
(1,118) 
Just as a tree grows from within the skin covering a mango or palmyra fruit 
By way of the conditions of water, sunlight, air, earth, season, and space, 
So the sprout of the seed of a perfect Buddha contained inside  the fruit-skin of 
the afflictive emotions of sentient beings 
Increases into [direct] perception of the [e lement of Superior] qualities due to this 
and that virtuous condition [of the two collections of merit and wisdom which 
serve as the causes of liberation]. 
 
In this analogy, when a seed (which is the cause of a big tree) meets with 
conducive conditions such as water, fertiliser, etc., a sprout will slowly emerge and grow into a big tree. 
 
(1,119) 
Just as a god, having seen an image of the Conqueror 
Made from a precious substance, wrapped in a tattered smelly cloth, 
And abiding on a road, speaks to someone about the fact of its dwelling on the 
road 
So that it could be released [from that tattered garment], 
 
(1,120) 
So [the Buddhas] endowed with the eye of unimpeded [perception of all things]— 
Having seen that the phenomena of a One Gone Thus, wrapped in the 
[adventitious] afflictive emotions of various types, 
[Exists] even in animals—teach methods likewise for the sake 
Of freeing [the basic constituent]. 
 
(1,121) 
Just as one with the divine eye, having seen the image of a One Gone Thus that 
has the nature of a precious substance 
Abiding on a road, wrapped in  a smelly cloth, reveals this to someone in order 
that it might be freed, 
So, having perceived that the basic constituent dwelling on the road of cyclic 
existence, bound in the tattered garment of the afflictive emotions 
[Exists] even in animals, the Conqueror teaches doctrine so that it might be freed 
[from obstructions]. 
 
In this analogy, the Buddha sees that all sentient beings, even animals, possess buddha nature in their mental continua. He, therefore, taught 
different methods which, when followed by sentient beings, will enable them to 
slowly transform into the Nature Truth Body of the Buddha. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 9 
Page 6 of 13 The analogy here is of a statue of a buddha made from precious substances 
which is wrapped in a piece of tattered cloth. A clairvoyant sees this statue  inside the piece of rag and tells someone about it. This person then removes 
the cloth and extracts the buddha statue .  
 
I am not sure but there seems to be a difference between the first analogy  of  
the Buddha abiding within an ugly lotus and this seventh analogy of a buddha 
statue wrapped in rags. The former refers to the actual Buddha with marks 
and signs whereas the latter refers to the self-arisen statue of a buddha that is 
made of precious jewels. The Buddha makes another appearance in the ninth 
analogy which refers to a buddha statue within an earthen mould. Here, the buddha statue is not self-arisen but made by someone.  
 
(1,122) 
Just as an ugly woman without protector, 
Dwelling in a rest-house with no protector 
But holding in her womb a glorious king, 
Does not know that a lord of humans dw ells in her belly [and thus suffers the 
derision of others and so forth], 
 
(1,123) 
So being born in cyclic existence is like the dwelling-place without protection 
[from various sufferings]; 
Impure sentient beings are like the woman endowed with a womb; 
And the undefiled basic constituent is like [the king] dwelling in her womb 
As it is due to possessi on of this that is protection [from suffering]. 
 
(1,124) 
Just as, although a lord of the earth dw ells in the womb of a woman wearing 
smelly clothing on her body and having an ugly form, 
She undergoes supreme suffering in a protectorless dwelling-place, 
So although there is a protector dwelling inside their own [minds], transmigrators 
having a protectorless mind 
Dwell in a state of suffering due to a mind made unpeaceful by the power of the 
afflictive emotions. 
 
The analogy here is of a destitute, helpless pregnant woman who is without 
refuge or protection. Her baby has the potential to become a wheel-turning 
king one day but she is unaware of this at the time of her pregnancy. After she 
gives birth to the child and he slowly grows up to become the wheel-turning 
king, she will then have refuge, protection and help. 
 
(1,125) 
Just as having seen a statue [made from] melted gold inside [an earthen mold], 
Of full [size with all features, its own en tity being] quiescent of defilement [but] 
its outside having a nature of an earth [mold], 
One who knows this removes the external obstruction 
In order to cleanse the gold inside, 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 9 
Page 7 of 13 (1,126) 
So having perceived that the defilements 
Of the natural clear light are adventitious, 
Transmigrators who are like [the earthen mold which is] the location of the 
precious substance 
Are cleansed of defilements and become supremely enlightened. 
 
(1,127) 
Just as one skilled [in making statues]—knowing that a statue contained inside 
an earthen [mold] 
Made from blazing undefiled gold has a natu re of quiescence [since it is without 
defilement]—removes the earthen [mold], 
So the omniscient [wisdom of the Buddha], knowing the quiescent mind like pure 
gold, 
Removes the obstructions through expositio n of the doctrines [which are methods 
for this] by means of accomplishing [the  gentle pressure of] the stroke [that 
removes the earthen mold]. 
 
The analogy here is that of making a statue from melted gold. To do this, we 
need a mould into which the melted gold can be poured. When the gold is poured into the mould, the statue cannot be seen. It is only after the gold has 
set and the earthen mould is broken that the statue of the Buddha is revealed. 
 
(1, 128) 
Like a Buddha, honey, kernel, 
Gold, treasure, tree, 
Precious image, universal 
Monarch, and golden statue, 
 
(1,129) 
In an [ugly] lotus, [swarm of] bees, 
Husk, filth, earth, 
Peel of a fruit, tattered garment, womb 
Of a woman, and an earthen mold, 
 
(1,130) 
The coverings of the afflictive emotions in the continuums of sentient beings, 
Because of not being related [with the na ture of the mind, are adventitious but 
have abided] beginninglessly [together with the element of a Superior’s qualities. 
However] the undefiled nature of the mind 
Is said to [have abided as the great pu re nature without being polluted by those 
faults] beginninglessly . 
 
These three verses summarise the nine analogies we have discussed: that 
when the adventitious defilements which obscure the buddha nature in the 
continua of sentient beings are removed, that buddha nature will be 
transformed into the Nature Truth Body of the Buddha which has abandoned 
the two obstructions.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 9 
Page 8 of 13 The nine analogies help us to understand the intended meaning. There are 
nine analogies because there are nine types of defilements. These defilements are listed out in Verse 131. 
 
(1,131) 
The nine forms of defilements—(1-3) [the  latencies or seeds of] desire, hatred, 
and obscuration [which are overcome by the exalted wisdom of a Superior], (4) 
the strong arousal [or manifestat ion] of those [three poisons], 
(5) The level of] the predispositions [of ignorance which are the means of 
achieving the uncontaminated actions and the mental body in the continuum of a 
Foe Destroyer and which are to be overcome by the exalted wisdom of the great 
enlightenment], (6) the objects to be abandoned by the path of seeing [which 
obstruct a common being from seeing reality], (7) the objects to be abandoned by 
the path of meditation [in the continuum of a Learner Superior], 
(8) The objects to be abandoned by the [seven] impure [grounds which are to be 
overcome by the pure grounds], 
And (9) the defilements dependent on the pure grounds [which are to be 
overcome by the vajra-like meditative stabilization], 
 
The nine forms of defilements are:- 
1. desire 
2. hatred  
3. obscuration  
4. the strong arousal of those [three poisons] 
5. the predispositions  
6. the objects to be abandoned by the path of seeing  
7. the objects to be abandoned by the path of meditation  
8. the objects to be abandoned by the impure grounds 
9. the defilements dependent on the pure grounds 
 
The first three forms of defilements are the seeds or latencies of desire, hatred and ignorance. In some commentaries, they used the term, the seed of the three poisons.  
 
As the result of the first three seeds or latencies, there is strong arising of the three mental poisons (desire, anger and ignorance). This is counted as one defilement. 
 
In the Tibetan root text, the fifth defilement is only stated as ‘the predisposition,’ which refers to the level (or ground) of the predisposition of ignorance.  
 
For us ordinary sentient beings, our karma is motivated by our afflictive 
emotions which results in our contaminated physical and mental aggregates. 
The karma that projects our rebirth into samsara is contaminated karma.  
 
The superior bodhisattvas have ‘mental’ bodies but their bodies are not 
considered true suffering because they are the result of uncontaminated 
projecting karma. What is the cause for the superior bodhisattvas to create 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 9 
Page 9 of 13                                                           this uncontaminated projecting karma? That cause is called the level (or 
ground) of the predisposition of ignorance.2
 
2 The example of the filth  
Suppose, while walking hurriedly, a person's gold  
Fell into a place of rotting filth.  
Being of indestructible nature, this gold  
Would remain there as it was for many centuries. 
A god possessing the pure divine eye, seeing it there,  
Would say to a person, 'As there is gold here,  
Cleanse this supreme precious metal,   
And fashion it into valuable creations!' 
Like that, the Capable One, seeing the 
Qualities of sentient beings sunk in filth-like delusions, 
Brings the rain of precious Dharma to all beings 
In order to purify that mire of delusions 
 
The way the natural potential transforms into  a Buddha's nature body is illustrated by 
this example as follows. The Buddha potentia l of ordinary beings, sunk in filth-like 
delusions, is seen by the Buddhas. To clean away the obscuring filth of the adventitious 
defilements, the Conqueror Buddhas bring forth a rain of Dharma to overcome the 
defilements. When the adventitious defilements are completely purified, the natural 
potential transforms into a nature body. 
A person walking hurriedly along a path may accidentally drop some gold that he is 
carrying and this gold could fall into a filthy  swampy pit beside the path. The gold could 
remain undiscovered and unchanged for hundreds of years hidden by filth though its 
purity would be unaffected by that filth. In that way gold's nature is said to be indestructible. 
Now imagine that a god who possessed the pure divine eye noticed the gold there and told 
somebody, 'There is gold here! Clean it and then you can fashion it into whatever Buddha 
statues or ornaments that you wish.' 
A god sees the gold, which itself is pure and unchanged, fallen into filth. With great 
insistence he points this out to someone so that she can recover it, clean it and then make 
use of this precious substance. Like that, the Buddha sees the natural potential of ordinary 
beings, itself pure and unchanged over time, fallen into the filth of the adventitious delusions. With insistence he points out the existence of the gold-like natural potential. He 
gives a rain of Dharma teachings to all living beings in order to purify that natural potential 
so that they can make full use of it. 
 
The example of the ground  
 
Suppose beneath the ground within a poor person's house  
There were an inexhaustible treasure.  
The person does not know of it. Also the treasure  
Cannot say to that person, Here I am!' 
Similarly with the precious treasure enclosed within the mind, 
The stainless suchness, neither established nor negated:  
By not recognising it, poverty-like suffering  
Of many aspects will constantly be experienced by these living beings. 
 
The way the natural potential transforms into a Buddha's nature body is illustrated by 
this example as follows. The precious treasu re-like Buddha potential within the mental 
continuum of living beings is a suchness that is not permeated by the stains of mental 
defilements. At the level of this stainless pure nature, perfect suchness, the two self-
lessnesses are not newly established and nor are there two selves to be newly negated. The 
two selflessnesses, the emptiness of inherent existence of the self and phenomena, are not 
newly established as suchness. They have always been suchness. Also there are no 
inherently existent self or phenomena to be negated or refuted. At this ultimate level of 
suchness, inherently existe nt self and phenomena have never been the case. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 9 
Page 10 of 13                                                                                                                                                                                           
The pure natural potential is a suchness, or emptiness, and thus an ultimate truth. At 
that level its emptiness is not newly established and nor is the basis negated by 
emptiness—inherently existent self and phenomena— newly negated. At the ultimate level 
emptiness has always been emptiness, suchness always suchness, and this is the abiding nature of reality that is the true nature, or Buddha nature, of living beings.  
By not directly realising the emptiness of inhere nt existence which is the natural potential, 
and which has always been the case, one continues to experience the manifold poverty-like 
sufferings of cyclic existence and to lack the qualities of a Superior. However, by recognising 
the true nature, the emptiness of inherent existence of self and phenomena, and 
familiarising oneself again and again with this, one will attain the state of buddhahood. 
The example is given of a very poor person who is unaware that beneath the ground in 
his house there is an inexhaustible treasure. He cannot see the treasure and nor can the 
treasure call out to him and say, 'Here I am!'. So the person's abject poverty cannot be 
removed and he continues to suffer. However, we re a god with clairvoyant vision to tell the 
pauper of the treasure, he would immediately remove the covering of earth. The treasure, 
that had always been there, would be revealed and his poverty ended forever. 
The immaculate suchness of the mind, one's natural potential, has abided as the true 
nature of the mind beginninglessly. Though it is like a treasure that can end your 
poverty-like suffering forever, it cannot call out so that you notice it. It remains hidden by 
the earth-like covering of the obscurations until a Buddha manifests and makes you aware 
of its existence. It is then merely a case of removing the obscuring coverings to be able to 
access this inner treasure which is able to solve all your problems and eliminate all suffering 
of samsara. 
 
The example of the fruit  
 
The imperishable energy of a sprout is contained 
Within the seeds of the fruit of a mango tree and the like. 
When in the presence of ploughed soil, water and so on 
The form of a kingly tree will gradually be produced.  
Similarly, enclosed within the fruit-skin of the 
Ignorance of beings, is the virtuous element of truth. 
And so, by depending on this and that virtue,  
It gradually transforms into the very character of a King of Capable Ones. 
 
The way the natural potential transforms into  a Buddha's nature body is illustrated by 
this example as follows. As the seed is enclosed within the fruit, so the element of the 
Tathagata essence in sentient beings abides enclosed by ignorance. In order to remove the 
impurities which obscure the potential, one must apply joyous effort to the accumulation of 
virtues through the practice of the three principal paths, the six perfections and so on. By 
applying these conditions to remove the obscurations, one will see the awakening and 
emergence of the natural potential and its transformation into a King of Capable Ones. 
This is shown by the example of the mango tree. Within the mango fruit there is the seed 
with the potential, or energy, to germinate into a sprout. This energy is called imperishable 
because it remains for as long as the seed exists. When the mango fruit meets the necessary 
conditions of cultivated soil, water and heat the covering skin of the fruit will rot away. 
The potential of the sprout will thus be awakened and activated so that it emerges through 
the covering skin of the fruit and gr adually transforms into a huge tree. 
The fruit-like ignorance obscures the sprout-like natural potential. The practices of the 
three principal paths, the six perfections and so on are like the secondary conditions of 
earth, water, heat and so on. They cause the obscuring fruit-like ignorance to be removed 
and stimulate the emergence of the sprout-like natural potential. By the continued presence 
of the secondary conditions this sprout-like natural potential will transform into a nature 
body. 
 
The example of the tattered cloth  
 
Suppose a Buddha image made of precious jewels, 
Wrapped in tattered, foul-smelling rags, and fallen on a road, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 9 
Page 11 of 13                                                                                                                                                                                           
Were seen by a god. In order that it be uncovered, 
He would reveal to someone that it was sitting on the road. 
Similarly, the Tathagata essence, seen even in animals,  
Has been wrapped without beginning in the various  
Forms of delusions. Thus, for the purpose of  
Liberating it, the methods have been shown. 
 
The way the natural potential transforms into  a Buddha's nature body is illustrated by 
this example as follows. The Buddha sees the presence of the element of the Tathagata 
essence in all beings, including even animals, though still wrapped in, or concealed by, 
delusions and so forth. It is for the purpose of liberating the Tathagata essence, or natural 
potential, from the delusions concealing it that the Buddha taught a great variety of 
methods of practice. He set forth the eighty-four thousand Dharmas which include the 
methods of the sutra and vajrayana sets and methods suited to beings of the three scopes. 
Through following his teachings and engaging in the three wisdoms of listening, thinking 
and meditating, the natural potential will be transformed into a Buddha's nature body. 
The example speaks of a beautiful Buddha statue adorned with jewels but wrapped 
up in dirty, tattered, foul-smelling rags. It has fallen by the road and remains sitting 
there undiscovered because it is concealed by the rags. Passers-by have no way of 
knowing that there is something of great value hidden within. When eventually a god with 
clairvoyant vision perceives the statue amongst the rags, he tells a passer-by of it so that he 
can uncover the Buddha statue. When this person removes the concealing rags the beautiful 
and precious form of the Buddha becomes manifest. 
The beautiful Buddha-form of the natural potential is hidden by the rags of delusion 
and remains undiscovered. When the Buddha tells us what is hidden within, the obscuring 
rags of the delusions can be removed to reveal the full wonder of the nature body. 
 
The example of the woman's womb  
 
Suppose a certain helpless, ugly woman, 
Unprotected, and staying in a shelter for the homeless, 
Held a glorious king inside her womb. 
Yet did not realise that a ruler existed within her abdomen. 
Birth in samsara is like a shelter for the homeless.  
Impure living beings are like the pregnant woman.  
The stainless element is like that within the womb, 
 Because, by having it, one is protected. 
 
The way the natural potential transforms into a Buddha's nature body is illustrated by 
this example as follows. Within the mental continuum of the impure beings of samsara is 
the stainless nature, the element of the Tathagata essence. It is held within the 
adventitious defilements which obscure it, and which bear a similarity to a womb. The 
methods for the purification of these defilements which obscure the Buddha potential 
have been explained. The methods are the various techniques contained in the teachings 
of sutra and tantra and condensed into the three  
principal paths of renunciation, bodhichitta and wisdom. When, through the practice of 
suitable methods, the natural Buddha potential is completely freed from all defilements, it 
transforms into a Buddha's nature body. The one who has attained a nature body becomes 
the protector of all living beings. 
This point is illustrated as follows. Within th e abdomen of a defenceless woman, forced to 
live in a shelter for the homeless, is a baby who will one day become a universal king, a 
great ruler. Because the baby is obscured by the covering of the womb, that woman 
remains unaware of the type of being that sh e holds within. After birth, when separated 
from the womb, that baby will grow and eventually become a universal king who will then be 
the greatest possible protector for the woman. 
Beings within samsara are like the pr egnant woman and their natural Buddha 
potential is like the foetus—not yet formed into a king, but with the potential to become a 
great ruler. The nature of the baby-like potentia l is not apparent because it is obscured by 
the abdomen-like adventitious defilements. However, when the baby of Buddha potential is 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 9 
Page 12 of 13                                                                                                                                                                                           
removed from the womb-like adventitious defilements, its potential becomes apparent and 
will steadily grow and develop into the king-like nature body which is the ultimate protector. 
 
The example of the clay mould  
 
Suppose that inside (a mould) there were a complete statue of melted gold. 
(Inside) is pure but outside is in the nature of clay. 
By seeing and knowing of that gold inside, a person  
Would cleanse it in order to remove that covering 
 By nature clear light, its defilements 
 Are adventitious. By thoroughly seeing this. 
Living beings, resembling jewel-mines. 
Are purified of the obstructions to supreme enlightenment. 
The way the natural potential transforms into a Buddha's nature body is illustrated by 
this example as follows. The Tathagata essence, or natural Buddha potential, is clear light 
by nature but is obscured by defilements. The Buddha is able to see these defilements as 
merely adventitious. He therefore shows living beings, who all have the Buddha potential, the 
methods by which they can remove the adventitious defilements. Through the practice of 
such methods as great love, compassion, bodhichitta and so on, when eventually completely 
separated from all defilements, a person becomes a Superior Buddha. 
The verse speaks of living beings as resembling jewel mines because they are the source 
of generating all the limitless qualities of Buddhas. The compassion, love, bodhichitta, 
generosity and so on that lead to the attainment of buddhahood are all practised in 
relation to other living beings. It is therefore said that living beings and Buddhas are 
equally responsible for one's attainment of buddhahood. Recognising this, we should have 
as much respect for living beings as we have for Buddhas. As Shantideva says in his 
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds: 
 
The qualities of a Buddha are attained equally 
From sentient beings and Conquerors.  
Why then not respect sentient beings  
In the same way as respecting Conquerors? 
 
The example of the clay mould illustrates th at a Buddha statue made from molten gold 
can exist within its clay mould without being seen. In order to reveal its existence one 
must clean away the clay mould. When this is done the Buddha's form becomes manifest. 
 
The way the nine obscured objects are made manifest by removing the nine obscurations 
 
The nine examples are examined briefly in relation to the way that the obscured Buddha 
potential is made manifest by removing the obscurations to it. This is considered under two 
main subject headings. 
 
• The examples of the nine obscurations 
• The examples of the nine obscured objects 
 
 
The examples of the nine obscurations: 
Within a lotus, a swarm of bees, 
A husk, filth, and ground, 
A seed within, a tattered cloth,  
A woman's womb, and clay 
The examples of the nine obscured objects: 
Is that like a Buddha, the honey,  
The grain, the gold, the treasure, 
A tree, a precious image,  
A universal king, and a golden image. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 9 
Page 13 of 13                                                                                                                                                                                          Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng, Alison Wong & Angie Xiao, 4th March    
2008  
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong, 8th  March 2008 
 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee, 9th March   2008 
 
Vetted by Geshe Chonyi, 10th March 2008  
 
In brief, when the nine obscurations are removed one attains the nature body which is 
free from the obscurations to liberation and the obscurations to omniscience. For example, 
when the lotus, bees, husk, filth, the covering ground, the seed within, the tattered cloth, the woman's womb and the clay mould are removed, then, respectively, a Buddha's body, 
honey, grain, gold, a wish-fulfilling treasure, a tree, a precious image, a universal king, and 
an image of the Buddha made from gold become manifest. ( The Fundamental Potential for 
Enlightenment  by Geshe Archarya Thubten Loden, pgs. 122-131) 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 10 
Page 1 of 7 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating the Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra-ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation Jeffrey 
Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and Wilson, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
Commentary from The Tath›gata Essence, Commentary to the First 
Chapter by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen, translation Gavin Kilty, © FPMT, Inc. 
January 2007, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
 
Root verses are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added 
 
Lesson No: 10               Date:28th February 2008  
Chapter One: The Essen ce of a One Gone Thus 
Verses 131-135 
  
You can do any meditation you like. But if you are not sure what to do, it is 
good for you to meditate on the seven limbs practice, after which you should 
make single-pointed request to the Buddha for his blessings to stop all wrong 
conceptions and to generate in your minds the realisations starting from 
correctly devoting to the spiritual masters up to the stage of no-more-learning. You should also request him to grant blessings to pacify all outer and inner 
obstacles.  
 
(Meditation break)  
 
We recite the refuge prayer, “I go for refuge until I enlightened to the Buddha, 
Dharma, Sangha” all the time. It is not just tradition to do so before teachings and before we begin our practice. It is important we remember the purpose of 
that prayer. What we are doing – teaching and listening to the Dharma – is 
Dharma from the side of the activities but whether our participation in it 
becomes Dharma depends on our minds. During these prayers, we are also 
praying that the activities we are engaging in here be beneficial for all sentient 
beings. We should contemplate this and generate some feeling for this from our hearts and not simply recite the prayers with our mouths. 
 
It is my duty to remind you of the importance of setting the right motivation. 
But it is up to you individually whether you do it or not. You are in control here. If some one else can help us set the motivation, then it becomes very 
easy, isn’t it? But that is not the case.  
 
It makes a big difference if we can genuinely generate this feeling from our 
hearts, “May what I am doing be of benefit to others.” The purpose of reciting the refuge prayer is to remind ourselves of the kind of motivation we should be 
generating. When you know how to generate the proper motivation, there is 
less need to rely on words .  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 10 
Page 2 of 7 Whenever you come for class, the moment you leave your home or workplace, 
you should think, “I am going to listen to the teachings in order to benefit all living beings.” That becomes a virtuous motivation and every single step you 
take travelling to the centre becomes virtue. This happens primarily because of 
the motivation.  
 
When you are new to Buddhism, you try very hard to set the proper 
motivation. After some time, however, less attention is paid to the state of the mind and you no longer bother to develop the motivation in the heart when 
saying the prayers. That is a mistake. If you allow this to happen and carry on 
like that,  even if you practise for another hundred years, you will not see any change or development in the mind and you will remain under the influence of the three mental poisons.  
 
My saying all this does not imply that you are not setting a proper motivation. 
Rather, it is just a reminder and also to make sure that you do not make the mistake of neglecting this. All of you are trying to generate the good motivation. 
That is good. It is important.  
 
When you don’t develop a proper motivation, you lose out. From my side, 
before I teach, I really try to motivate from my heart that whatever I say may be of benefit to you all. From your side, you should set the motivation to listen to 
the teachings in order to be able to benefit others.  
 
In the last lesson, we looked at the Buddha’s qualities of excellent 
abandonment and realisations, qualities which make him so different, so powerful and so special. He is able to achieve these two qualities due to 
developing great compassion and directly perceiving emptiness. What makes 
Buddha’s realisation of emptiness so powerful? It is his great compassion. In order to be a Mahayanist, this wisdom realising emptiness must  be conjoined 
with the great compassion.  
 
We all have the potential to generate, develop and strengthen this mind of 
great compassion and there are many methods that show us how to do this. For example in the Eight Verses of Mind Transformation, the first verse is this:- 
“Determined to obtain the greatest possibl e benefit from all sentient beings, who 
are more precious than a wish-fulfilling jewel, I shall hold them most dear at all times.”  
 
It is appropriate for us to develop love and respect for others for when we do this, we will be able to achieve the supreme goal, both temporal and ultimate. The Buddha Jewel is our ultimate object of refuge. We all aspire to achieve the 
state of buddhahood. How does a buddha come about? Buddhas are born from 
the mind of great compassion developed in dependence on all sentient beings before they became enlightened.  
 
Great compassion has to be generated in order to enter the Mahayana path 
and this comes about in dependence on sentient beings. As the bodhisattvas progress on the path, the strength of  their great compassion, in dependence 
on sentient beings, increases.  Then, even when buddhahood is achieved, great 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 10 
Page 3 of 7 compassion is still needed for a buddha to turn the Wheel of Dharma for the 
benefit of all sentient beings. Therefore, the mind of great compassion is 
extremely important in the beginning, in the middle and at the end and it is 
only generated in dependence on sentient beings.   
 
From this, we can see how others are more important than ourselves. In 
particular, if we want to generate bodhicitta, if we want to develop realisations of the paths and grounds and if we want enlightenment - all these must come 
in dependence on sentient beings. Therefore, there is no choice but to respect 
and love them if we want to achieve the supreme goal of full enlightenment.  
 
Even if we found and owned hundreds and thousands of wish-fulfilling jewels 
and prayed and made offerings to them, they can’t bestow on us the state of full enlightenment, a state characterised by the complete elimination of all 
suffering and their causes. Those jewels may help to alleviate our poverty and 
financial problems in this life, but they won’t help us in our future lives and they cannot give us the highest happiness, enlightenment. Comparing wish-fulfilling jewels with sentient beings then, which is more precious?  
 
We do not recognise that sentient beings are far more precious than the wish-
fulfilling jewel due to our  self-cherishing attitude. If we were to suddenly find a wish-fulfilling jewel or a million dollars, we would be completely happy and 
satisfied thinking, “With this, everything will be fine. Nothing else matters. 
Sentient beings do not matter as this is more precious than they are.” Because of this attitude, we neglect sentient beings and look down on them when we  should be doing the complete opposite.  
 
As we are going to do 10 minutes of meditation at the beginning of every class 
from now on, I thought this would be helpful for you to reflect on. Meditating doesn’t mean sitting there in silence, looking nice with your eyes closed. That 
doesn’t mean you are meditating. You have to understand that when you don’t 
meditate and familiarise your mind with these topics, then change will never  
come.  
 
I am not saying you have to meditate on this topic. This example is just a 
suggestion. But you should actively participate in this in the sense that before 
you come to class, you should decide and choose a topic that will be useful for 
you to meditate on. You choose the subject matter.  
 
There are a lot of people who say, “I want to meditate but I do not know what 
to meditate on and don’t know how to meditate.” These are people who have 
been Buddhists for the last ten to twenty years. This is a very sorry state of 
affairs.  
 
In order to overcome all these problems, I have decided to put aside 10 
minutes for you to do some meditation. Since there is going to be meditation, then you would have to think about and decide what would be your meditation 
topic. You should be able to meditate on something so that when someone 
asks you what you were meditating on during the 10 minutes, you have a 
ready reply. We should spend these 10 minutes in a meaningful way.   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 10 
Page 4 of 7 In the last lesson, we started looking at the nine analogies describing the nine 
adventitious defilements which are obscuring our buddha nature.  
 
(1,131) 
The nine forms of defilements—(1-3) [the  latencies or seeds of] desire, hatred, 
and obscuration [which are overcome by the exalted wisdom of a Superior], (4) 
the strong arousal [or manifestat ion] of those [three poisons], 
(5) The level of] the predispositions [of ignorance which are the means of 
achieving the uncontaminated actions and the mental body in the continuum of a 
Foe Destroyer and which are to be overcome by the exalted wisdom of the great 
enlightenment], (6) theobjects to be abandoned by the path of seeing [which 
obstruct a common being from seeing reality], (7) the objects to be abandoned by 
the path of meditation [in the continuum of aLearner Superior], 
(8) The objects to be abandoned by the [seven] impure [grounds which are to be 
overcome by the pure grounds], 
And (9) the defilements dependent on the pure grounds [which are to be 
overcome by the vajra-like meditative stabilization], 
 
The first three defilements are the seeds of the three mental poisons - desire, hatred and ignorance. 
 
The fourth defilement is the strong arising of these three poisons from their seeds, e.g., the strong arising of desire from the seed of desire and so forth, and are counted as one defilement. The fourth defilement does not refer to 
simply the mere manifestation of the poisons but a strong arising of them 
which is powerful enough to create a projecting karma that will propel one into 
the lower realms. For example, in the case of anger, the anger manifested has 
to be powerful enough to create a projec ting karma that will throw one into the 
lower realm. Likewise, for desire, it has to be strong enough to create the 
projecting karma that will cause one to take rebirth in the desire realm.  
 
The fifth defilement is “[ The level of] the predispositions [of ignorance]”  which we 
looked at in the previous lesson. The mental body attained by the bodhisattva 
superior on the first ground is the result of uncontaminated actualising karma. 
The condition for the accumulation of that karma is the level of the 
predispositions of ignorance.  
 
We should know both the terms and the meaning behind them. Some people 
get very upset and angry when they see such words, “[ The level of] the 
predispositions [of ignorance],”  thinking “What on earth is this talking about?” 
That is pointless as nothing is achieved by getting angry at the words.  
 
The level of the predispositions of ignorance is the condition that causes the accumulation of uncontaminated karma which is the actualising cause of the mental body of the bodhisattva superior. We can also say that it is the subtle 
motivation which causes the accumulation of this uncontaminated karma.  
 
What is the direct antidote to the obstructions to omniscience? It is the 
uninterrupted path at the end of the continuum of a sentient being, the last moment before that sentient being becomes a buddha. Once the obstructions 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 10 
Page 5 of 7 to omniscience are removed, in the very next moment, one becomes a buddha. 
From that moment, one doesn’t need any kind of motivation or even subtle effort in order to work for the benefit of sentient beings. It is spontaneous and 
effortless. That’s the quality of a buddha. This subtle motivation is therefore an 
impediment to fulfilling the welfare of sentient beings.  
 
Question: 
Why do we have to abandon a good motivation?  
 
Answer: 
Generating even a subtle motivation requires effort. Won’t it be better if our 
working for the welfare of others can happen spontaneously without our having to put in any effort? Because it is an impediment to achieving  
enlightenment, therefore it has to be abandoned. 
 
As mentioned in the root text, the next two defilements are the objects to be 
abandoned by the path of seeing and the objects to be abandoned by the path 
of meditation. In this context, these two defilements should be understood to 
refer to the Hinayana paths of seeing and meditation. There are texts that 
indicate otherwise but it is easier to affix these two objects of abandonment to   the Hinayana Path.  
 
The eighth defilement is the objects to be abandoned by the seven impure 
grounds, i.e., the first seven bodhisattva grounds and the ninth defilement is the defilements dependent on the pure grounds, i.e., the eighth to the tenth  
bodhisattva grounds. 
 
These are the nine obscuring defilements referred to by the nine analogies  
starting with “ a Buddha [dwelling inside] an ugly lotus .”  which is the analogy 
of how our buddha nature is obscured by the defilements. You should go 
through the other analogies on your own.  
(1,132) 
Are indicated by [the nine] examples 
Of the covering of a lotus and so forth, 
But the divisions of coverings  of afflictive emotions 
Are beyond the limits of number. 
(1, 133) 
These nine defilements—desire and so forth— 
Are briefly indicated respectively 
By the nine examples 
Of the covering of a lotus and so forth. 
(1,134) 
[By way of possessing] impurity [mainly] through four, one, 
Two, and two of these defilements respectively 
Childish [common beings], Foe Destroyers, 
Learners [on the four paths], and [impure and pure] intelligent [Bodhisattvas 
are obstructed from direct perception of  the element of a Sup erior’s qualities in 
them]. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 10 
Page 6 of 7                                                           Verse 134 shows the type of persons who possess those defilements. The 
“childish”  possess the first four defilements. “ The Foe Destroyers ” possess the 
level of the predispositions of ignorance. The “ Learners [on the four paths ],” i.e., 
the Hinayana learner superiors possess the objects to be abandoned on the 
Hinayana path of seeing and the Hinayana path of meditation. The “Bodhisattvas,” i.e., the bodhisattva superiors possess the objects to be 
abandoned by the seven impure grounds and the defilements dependent on 
the pure grounds.  
 
The verses starting from verse 135 explain the relationship between the 
analogy and the intended meaning. The first example is the obscuring lotus 
which is analogous of the seed of desire.  
 
(1,135) 
Just as a lotus born from mud 
Pleases the mind when it is [newly] present, 
But later [when old] does not please, 
So [when the latencies of] desire [become manifest attachment through 
improper mental application, one is] happy [but when it ceases one is 
unhappy, due to which it is like the pleasure of seeing a lotus]. 
The lotus is the analogy for desire. We are delighted by and generate attachment to the beauty of the blooming lotus. Our attachment disappears 
when the lotus wilts. In the same way, whether we are talking about men or 
women, due to our incorrect mental attention focussing on their 
attractiveness, the mind exaggerates their qualities far beyond what is actually 
there. Due to the superimposition or exaggeration of the object, we develop 
desire or attachment for that person. As our object of desire ages, our attachment also begins to weaken as well. This shows that desire does not 
increase limitlessly but declines after some time.  
The same applies to our object of attachment. The attractive object does not 
become increasingly so over time but its attractive qualities will wane. This is how desire and attachment work in reality and this is how the object of 
attachment exists. Although this is realty, we don’t realise it. We grasp at our 
object of attachment thinking it is everlasting and will not change.  
The example of the lotus helps us to understand how attachment works.  
When we look at our own experiences with pleasant objects, then we know how 
to deal with our attachment to them and how to weaken it. When we realise 
that the object of our attachment is impermanent and will change, it will help 
us to weaken our desire and attachment. 1
 
1 The meaning of the nine examples 
 
 Now the examples are expanded upon from th e point of view of the various types of 
obscurations to be removed: 
Attachment, hatred and ignorance, 
Their violent outbursts and latencies, the 
Abandonments of the paths of seeing and meditation,  
And the impure and pure grounds: 
These nine defilements, and related (opponents), are shown well 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 10 
Page 7 of 7                                                                                                                                                                                          Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng, Alison Wong & Angie Xiao, 6th March    
2008  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong, 15th March 2008; Checked by Yap Siew Kee, 16th March 2008 
Vetted by Geshe Chonyi, 17th March 2008  
 
By the examples of the covering lotus and so forth.  
The coverings of secondary defilements  
Have limitless millions of divisions 
These nine delusions, attachment and so forth,  
In brief, are respectively illustrated well  
By the nine examples of  
The covering lotus and so forth  
There are nine categories of defilement whic h obscure the Buddha potential. Attachment, 
hatred and ignorance each obscure it. So too do violent outbursts of these three poisons 
obscure the potential. The latencies of ignorance, the objects of abandonment of the 
hinayana path of seeing, the objects of abandonment of the hinayana path of meditation, 
the objects of abandonment of the seven 'impure' Bodhisattva grounds and the objects of 
abandonment of the three 'pure' Bodhisattva grounds, also obscure the Buddha potential. 
These nine obscurations are symbolised by the nine examples: the lotus, bees, husk, filth, 
ground, seed, tattered cloth, womb and clay mould. 
Specifically the examples relate to the meanings as follows: 
1 Attachment obscures the Buddha potential as the ugly lotus petals obscure the 
Buddha statue sitting within. 
2 Hatred obscures the Buddha potential as a swarm of bees obscures the honey in 
their midst. 
3 Ignorance obscures the Buddha potential as a husk obscures the grain within. 
4 Violent outbursts of the three poisons obscure theBuddha potential as filth 
obscures the gold it covers. 
5 The latencies of ignorance obscure the Buddha potential as the ground obscures the 
precious treasure hidden beneath. 
6 The objects of abandonment of the hinayana path of seeing obscure the Buddha 
potential as a seed obscures the potential sprout that is abiding within.  
7 The objects of abandonment of the hina yana path of meditation obscure the 
Buddha potential as the tattered cloth obscures the golden image of the Buddha 
wrapped within. 
8 The objects of abandonment of the seven 'impure' grounds obscure the Buddha 
potential as the poor woman's womb obscures her baby with the potential to be a 
universal king. 
9 The objects of abandonment of the three 'pure' grounds obscure the 
Buddha potential as the clay mould obscures the golden image of the Buddha. 
The way these nine examples, such as the lotus, resemble the nine obscurations, such as 
desire, is as follows: 
As a lotus, grown from the mire. 
Delights the mind when appearing in front,  
But later that delight disappears,  
So, the joy of attachment is similar. 
The desire which obscures the Buddha potential is likened to a lotus flower. When one 
first sees a lotus flower, which grows from muddy water, one is delighted and attracted to 
it. However, over time the beau tiful flower withers with age and is no longer of interest, 
nor able to generate any sense of delight. This is like the delusion of desire, for example 
the desire of a man towards a beautiful young woman. When a man sees a beautiful 
young woman he is delighted and attracted to her and experiences the 'joy' of desire. 
However, as the woman's fresh young beau ty fades and withers with age, joy and 
attraction also wither and die. ( The Fundamental Potential for Enlightenment by Geshe 
Archarya Thubten Loden, pgs.133~147) 
 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 11 
Page 1 of 8 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating the Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra-ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation Jeffrey 
Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and Wilson, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
Commentary from The Tath›gata Essence, Commentary to the First 
Chapter by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen, translation Gavin Kilty, © FPMT, Inc. 
January 2007, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
 
Root verses are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added 
 
Lesson No: 11                                Date: 4th March 2008  
Chapter One: The Essen ce of a One Gone Thus 
Verses 136 – 143 
 
Before we can generate great compassion, we must first generate a good heart. 
The second verse of the Eight Verses of Thought Transformation  says: “ When in 
the company of others, I shall always consid er myself the lowest of all, and from 
the depths of my heart hold others dear and supreme .” 
 
The presence of other people in our lives is one of the conditions for our experiencing unhappiness or anger in our minds and developing negative emotions. Since this is so, the antidote is mentioned in the above verse.  
 
When we focus on the good qualities of others – be they family, friends or our classmates - it is possible to see ourselves as lower than them. With this outlook, the result is harmony and we can avoid problems and unhappiness in 
our relationships with others.  
 
One of the reasons that problems arise is our pride. Because of pride, jealousy 
comes into the picture followed by negative competitiveness which escalates into anger and hatred. These are the consequences of our egotistic thinking 
that we are superior to the other person, which only brings unhappiness.  
 
The remedy then is to see ourselves as being lower than everyone else. Even if 
we cannot manage this in relation to everyone, at the very least, we should see ourselves as lower to the people we interact with most often. When we can 
sincerely appreciate and recognise the qualities of others and recognise that 
the other person is better than oneself, naturally we would be able to have love, affection and respect for that person. 
 
The Eight Verses of Thought Transformation are instructions for increasing the 
mind of enlightenment (bodhicitta). We have to relate and interact with others 
in our daily lives. When such interaction is not managed skilfully, it can only 
lead to problems.  Therefore, the advice is to subdue our pride by taking a  
lower position. When the appreciation of and respect for others is sincere and 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 11 
Page 2 of 8                                                           heartfelt, then naturally we would be able to “hold others dear and supreme.”    
 
With regards to respect, it is not a matter of external behaviour and 
appearances. If our respect is false, even if we behave respectfully towards the other party, that person will be able to sense our insincerity.  
 
This is the advice given in the second verse of the Eight Verses of Thought 
Transformation.  It would be good if you can memorise all the eight verses or,  
at the very least, those verses which you find particularly helpful and then 
reflect on them daily as they will benefit us. 
 
We should understand the context of this second verse. In general, we are 
advised to see ourselves as lower than others in order to subdue our pride and to enable us to appreciate the qualities of others. But this does not mean we 
should allow ourselves to be bullied or abused and suffer in silence. This is not 
what is being suggested here. There is a time and place for everything. If such 
things were to happen to us without reason, we should take a stand and act appropriately while maintaining our affection and respect for the other party.   
 
********************************* 
The first of the nine analogies, the lotus, was used as an analogy for the seed 
of desire to help us understand that all contaminated pleasures found in cyclic existence are unstable and subject to change.  
(1,136) 
Just as bees, having become greatly disturbed, 
Sting [and thereby generate pain], 
So [manifest anger] is generated [from the latencies of hatred] 
Whereby [pangs of] suffering are generated in [one’s own and others’] hearts. 
 
If we disturb a beehive, the bees will get angry and sting us in return.  
 
Geshe-la: I heard that when bees sting, the sting will come out and they will  
die.1
When we generate hatred, we harm ourselves and others and there is no space for happiness in our hearts. Also, our appearance also deteriorates and we only say unpleasant things as the mind is so upset and unhappy.  There is 
nothing good about anger.  
Geshe-la: When you disturb the bees, they  will not give you honey! They will 
sting you instead. The same thing happe ns when we are angry. We don’t smile 
and we sting others with our sharp words aimed at hurting their hearts, just like a bee sting. 
 
1 If a sting does occur, the bee will die soon after stinging because the sting is left behind and 
the bee disembowels itself in flying away.  Once the bee’s sting is inside a victim, it pumps out 
more venom and emits alarm pheromones.  During  this time, the stinging bee will spend its 
dying moments distracting its victim by flying around  its head as if it were going to sting again. 
(Analysis of Honeybee Aggression by Dylan Voeller and James Nieh) 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 11 
Page 3 of 8 The main point here is not only to understand the analogy itself but to 
understand the intended meaning behind it. We can check through our personal experience whether these verses are true or not. If they are, then we 
must change our behaviour and attitudes. When there is no longer any 
manifest anger in our minds, then we ourselves experience peace and others 
also experience peace from us since we will no longer harm them.  
 
(1,137) 
Just as a kernel of rice and so forth is [not seen 
When] obstructed on the outside by the husk, 
So perception of the factuality of the essence [of a One Gone To Bliss] 
Is obstructed by the egg-shell of ignorance. 
 
Ignorance in its dormant state is likened to the husk covering the kernel of rice 
in that our ignorance grasping at true existence obstructs us from seeing directly our buddha nature. What does this mean? Buddha nature is the 
emptiness of our minds. Ignorance is the mind which perceives our minds to  
exist truly which does not accord with the way our minds exist in reality. Our 
minds do not inherently exist. Since this is so, we say that ignorance obscures us from seeing the actual nature of our minds, its emptiness which is our 
buddha nature. 
 
(1,138) 
Just as filth is disagreeable, 
So, because of being a cause of [many faul ts such as] reliance [on the attributes 
of the Desire Realm 
Through] the desires of those having attachment [to the Desire Realm], 
That which is aroused [by the three poi sons is a source of renunciation] like a 
pile of filth . 
 
The strong arousal of the three mental poisons is likened to filth. “ Filth” here 
refers to the sperm and egg of our parents. This is something that is only 
sought after by those with desire and is unwanted by those free of desire. The 
intended meaning is that while ordinary beings still experience strong arousal 
of the three poisons (the manifestation of which obstructs the attainment of the superior path), the superior beings are free of this.   
 
Superior beings do not newly  accumulate projecting karma that cause rebirth 
in cyclic existence because afflictions no longer arise strongly in their mental 
continua. In order to accumulate projecting karma that will cause rebirth in 
cyclic existence, the afflictions must manifest strongly.  
 
Why do they not experience the strong arousal of the three mental poisons?  Because they have achieved the direct realisation of emptiness and they directly realise the true mode of abiding of phenomena. Because of this, the 
afflictions in the minds of the superior beings are very weak and no longer  
have the power to cause them to newly accumulate projecting karma.  
 
However we should understand that, with the exception of the foe destroyers 
(who no longer take rebirth), there are superior beings who continue to take 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 11 
Page 4 of 8 rebirth many times even though they no longer newly accumulate projecting 
karma such as the superior beings on the Hinayana path of meditation who still have to experience the projecting karma accumulated when they were 
ordinary beings.  There are many divisions of superior beings who have to take 
rebirth two, seven times and so forth. The body of the hearer superior on the 
path of meditation is true suffering as it is the result of karma and afflictions and will remain so even when he becomes an arhat.  
 
Question :  
Do bodhisattva superiors take rebirth in cyclic existence under the power of 
karma and afflictions? 
 
Answer :  
No, bodhisattva superiors taking rebirth in cyclic existence do not do so under the power of karma and afflictions. Their bodies are not true suffering as they 
possess mental bodies. I don’t think that means their bodies are in the nature 
of the mind but perhaps, their bodies are like those of bardo beings in their 
non-obstructiveness, i.e., their bodies can move everywhere. I am not exactly sure what a mental body is but the texts do mention that the bodhisattva 
superior has a mental body. In most cases, the bodhisattva superior takes 
rebirth intentionally and through the power of their prayers.  
 
(1, 139) 
Just as [a great treasure of] wealth is obstructed [by the earth] 
And therefore [the poor] do not know of it and do not obtain the treasure [as an 
object of use], 
So for beings [bereft of the wealth of good qualities] the self-arisen [exalted 
wisdom of inexhaustible] good qualities 
Is obstructed by the level of the latencie s of ignorance [and thereby is not seen]. 
 
The level of the predispositions of ignorance is likened to the great earth which 
obstructs ordinary beings from seeing the treasure hidden within it, preventing 
them from making use of it. Likewise, our buddha nature has existed since 
beginningless time but is obscured by the level of the predispositions of 
ignorance. As long as this is so, we will not have the opportunity to achieve the Truth Body of a buddha. Only when we are free from the level of the 
predispositions of ignorance will we be able to attain the Nature Truth Body.   
 
(1,140 ) 
Just as through the gradual growing of the sprout [of a tree] and so forth 
The covering over the seed is gradually rent asunder, 
So through [gradually generating the exalted wisdom] seeing suchness 
[The afflictive emotions] which are to be abandoned by the path of seeing are 
overcome . 
 
This seed is analogous of the objects which are abandoned by the Hinayana 
path of seeing. That seed has the potential to transform into a tree. As the seed matures, its soft skin splits open, allowing the sprout to slowly emerge. That 
sprout eventually grows into the tree and the seed ceases to exist.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 11 
Page 5 of 8 At the first moment when the Hinayana practitioner sees emptiness directly, 
he achieves the uninterrupted path of th e Hinayana path of seeing and is able 
to abandon those objects which are to be abandoned by that path of seeing. 
When those objects are abandoned, he then achieves the path of thorough 
release of the Hinayana path of seeing. It is similar to the seed being 
transformed into the sprout and the seed then disappearing and ceasing to exist.    
 
Question : 
Why is the Hinayana path being discussed in this Mahayana treatise? 
 
Answer :  
Yes, this is a Mahayana treatise. But, in this particular section of the text, we 
are talking about the nine defilements which are the objects of abandonment. Verse 134, for example, shows the kind of defilements that are possessed by 
different types of people.  
  
(1,141) 
From relation with the path of Superiors [directly seeing the reality of the four 
truths], 
The objects of abandonment by the exalted wisdom of the path of meditation 
Of those who have overcome the essence [or main of the objects of 
abandonment—the false view of] the transito ry collection [as inherently existent I 
and mine and so forth]— 
Are indicated as like tattered garments [in that they lack a core of hardness]. 
 
When the practitioner on the Hinayana path directly perceives emptiness for 
the first time, at that moment, he achieves the uninterrupted path of seeing, 
which is the direct antidote to the objects that are to be abandoned by the path 
of seeing, specifically, the intellectually acquired view of the transitory 
collection. When those objects are abandoned, he then achieves the path of thorough release of the Hinayana path of seeing. The object of abandonment at 
this stage is the innate view of the transitory collection which is then destroyed 
by the vajra-like concentration at the Hinayana path of meditation. 
 
(1,142) 
The defilements dependent upon  the seven [impure] grounds 
Are similar to the defilement of the coveri ng of a womb [since what one has is not 
seen or since those defiled st ates of mind involve exertion]. 
Like being freed from the covering of the womb, [the arising of] the exalted non-
conceptual wisdom [without ex ertion on the pure grounds] 
Is like [the birth of] a developed [universal monarch, in that such does not 
depend upon exertion]. 
 
The bodhisattva grounds are divided into ten grounds. The first seven grounds 
are called the impure grounds and the remainder three grounds are the pure grounds. The defilements that are to  be abandoned at the seven impure 
grounds are likened to the stain of the womb. In this analogy the covering of 
the womb obscures the baby who has the potential to be a wheel turning king. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 11 
Page 6 of 8                                                           The wisdom of the eighth bodhisattva ground is achieved in dependence on the 
abandonment of the stains of the seven impure grounds. 
 
(1,143) 
The defilements related with the three [pure grounds] 
Are to be known as like an earth [m old] that covers [a golden statue]. 
They are overcome by the vajra- like meditative stabilization 
Of those great beings [at the end of th e continuum of being a sentient being]. 
The defilements of the three pure grounds are abandoned by the “ vajra-like 
meditative stabilisation.”2  
 
2 The way these nine examples, such as the lotus, resemble the nine obscurations, such 
as desire, is as follows: 
 
As a lotus, grown from the mire. 
Delights the mind when appearing in front,  
But later that delight disappears,  
So, the joy of attachment is similar . 
The desire which obscures the Buddha potential is likened to a lotus flower. When one 
first sees a lotus flower, which grows from mu ddy water, one is deli ghted and attracted to 
it. However, over time the beautiful flower withers with age and is no longer of interest, nor 
able to generate any sense of delight. This is like the delusion of desire, for example the 
desire of a man towards a beautiful young woman. When a man sees a beautiful young 
woman he is delighted and attracted to her and experiences the 'joy' of desire. However, as 
the woman's fresh young beauty fades and withers with age, joy and attraction also wither 
and die. 
 
Just as a swarm of bees 
Sting when thoroughly disturbed; 
Likewise, when hatred arises,  
Suffering arises in the heart. 
The hatred which obscures the Buddha potential is likened to a swarm of bees. When a 
swarm of bees is strongly disturbed, the bees cause great harm to others by stinging 
them. At the same time they cause great harm  to themselves because, in hurting others, 
they lose their sting and die in pain. Like that, when hatred arises in one's continuum, the 
mind is greatly disturbed and suffering is  experienced by both oneself and others. 
 
Just as the grains of rice and so on  
Are obscured by the external husk,  
Likewise, seeing the meaning of the essence,  
Is obscured by the covering of ignorance. 
The ignorance which obscures the Buddha potential is likened to a husk. The husk of 
the rice obscures the grain so that we cannot see the grain directly. Like that, the ignorance 
conceiving true existence obscures the Tathagata essence so that we cannot directly 
perceive it. 
 
As impurities are incompatible (with a Superior)— 
But (compatible) with those having attachment  
Because they cause engagement in passion—  
In this way violent outbursts are likened to impurities. 
The violent outbursts of the three poisons, attachment, hatred and ignorance, which 
obscure the Buddha potential are likened to a specific 'impurity', the sperm and ovum. 
This 'impurity' is said to be incompatible with those who are free from desire: that is, a 
Superior being. But these 'impurities' are nonetheless said to be compatible with those 
with attachment: that is, ordinary beings. This is because the energy of sperm and ovum 
are needed by ordinary beings as the cause for them to engage in acts of passion. Like 
that, the violent outbursts of the three poisons are incompatible with the behaviour of a 
Superior being. However, ordinary beings do have these violent outbursts of the three 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 11 
Page 7 of 8                                                                                                                                                                                           
poisons, and these outbursts are an obstacle to their attainment of the Superior's path. 
 
Suppose that wealth is obscured.  
Not knowing it, that treasure cannot be obtained. 
Likewise, in living beings, the naturally arising potential 
Is obscured by the earth of latent ignorance. 
The latencies of ignorance which obscure the Buddha potential are likened to the earth, 
or ground. The earth obscures a treasure buried beneath so that ordinary beings are 
unable to recognise the existence of the treasure and thus cannot benefit from its wealth. 
Similarly, the Buddha potential abides naturally within the continuum of living beings. As 
long as it remains obscured by the traces of the latencies of ignorance, the treasure-like 
potential will not be seen by living beings and the nature body will not be attained. 
However, when it is freed from the latencies of ignorance, the natural potential transforms 
into the nature body. 
 
Just as the sprout and such gradually grow 
And split the skin of the seed; 
Likewise, by seeing suchness,  
The abandonments of the 'seeing’ are averted. 
The objects of abandonment of the hinayana path of seeing which obscure the Buddha 
potential are similar to a seed which has the potential to grow a sprout. Through the 
gradual germination of the sprout, when it eventually splits open the skin of the seed, the 
sprout becomes manifest. The uninterrupted path of the hinayana path of seeing directly perceives the selflessness of the person. The objects of abandonment of this path of seeing 
are thus averted. 
They are 'averted' in the sense of being overcome such that they will not return. Thus 
they cannot influence the mind of the being on  this uninterrupted path. They are finally 
abandoned completely when one achieves the released path of the hinayana path of 
seeing. At this stage the practitioner's mi nd is totally freed from these objects of 
abandonment. 
 
Having connected with the path of the Superiors, 
For those who have overcome the essence of the transitory collection. 
The objects abandoned by the wisdom of the path of meditation 
Are shown to resemble the tattered cloth. 
The objects of abandonment of the hinayana  path of meditation which obscure the 
Buddha potential are likened to a tattered cloth. Through constant acquaintance with the 
path of a Superior, that is, by the uninterrupted path of the hinayana path of seeing which 
directly cognises the selflessness of persons, one overcomes the artificial deluded view of 
the transitory collection.2 The artificial deluded view of the transitory collection, referred to 
as the 'essence of the transitory collection', is an intellectual construct. It is distinct from the 
innate deluded view of the transitory collection which is the object of abandonment 
progressively overcome by the stages of the path of meditation. The objects of abandonment 
of the hinayana path of meditation are likened to the tattered cloth and are overcome by the 
vajra-like concentration of the hinayana path of meditation. 
 
The defilements related to the seven grounds  
Are similar to the impurities of the womb.  
Release from that womb is like the  
Non-conceptual wisdom, well matured. 
The defilements of the seven impure grounds are similar to the impurities of the womb. 
The non-conceptual wisdom of the eighth ground Bodhisattva, having depended on the 
seventh ground wisdom, frees one from the defilements of the first seven grounds. It is 
shown to be similar to a baby being born: a baby with the potential to become a universal king. The baby is thus released from its previous confinement within the mother's womb. 
Being released from the impurities of the womb  is likened to attaining the non-conceptual 
wisdom of the eighth ground Bodhisattva whic h is released from the constriction of the 
obstructions of the first seven grounds. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 11 
Page 8 of 8                                                                                                                                                                                           
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng, Alison Wong & Angie Xiao, 10th March    
2008  
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong, 15th March 2008; Checked by Yap Siew Kee, 16th March   
2008 
 
Vetted by Geshe Chonyi,  17th March 2008  
 
 
The defilements related to the three grounds 
Are known as like stains of mud. 
The objects to be eliminated by 
The great beings' vajra-like concentration.  
The defilements of the three pure grounds are similar to the clay mould. When the clay 
mould is broken open, and the remaining traces of clay are removed, the golden statue inside 
becomes clearly manifest. Similarly, the defilements of the three pure grounds are the 
objects to be eliminated by the vajra-like co ncentration of the great being. 'Great being' 
refers to a Bodhisattva nearing the end of the continuum of a sentient being. When the 
defilements of the three pure grounds are abandoned, the three bodies of a Buddha—
truth, enjoyment and emanation—are attained. 
 
By these defilements, the childish,  
Foe Destroyers, trainees, and the wise 
Are respectively contaminated by 
Four, one, two and two. 
The nine defilements are related to four classes of person who are said to predominantly 
possess them. The first four defilements, attachment, hatred, ignorance and violent 
outbursts of these, mainly contaminate the co ntinuums of the childish: that is, ordinary 
beings. The fifth, latencies of ignorance, mainly contaminate Solitary Realiser and Hearer 
Foe Destroyers in the form of subtle latencies of ignorance. The sixth and seventh, the 
objects of abandonment of the hinayana paths of seeing and meditation, remain and contaminate the continuum of hinayana Superior trainees. The eighth and ninth refer to two 
obscurations: the eighth, those within the continuums of the 'wise' Bod-hisattvas of the seven 
impure grounds, and the ninth those within the continuums of the 'wise' Bodhisattvas of the three pure grounds. The first seven Bodhisattva grounds overcome and abandon 
progressive levels of the obscurations to liberation which are their main objects of aban-donment. The eighth to tenth grounds are all directed towards progressively overcoming the obscurations to omniscience, and when these are completely abandoned the Bodhisattva 
attains buddhahood. ( The Fundamental Potential for Enlightenment by Geshe Archarya Thubten 
Loden  pgs.133~147)  
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 12 
Page 1 of 8 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating the Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra-ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation Jeffrey 
Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and Wilson, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
Commentary from The Tath›gata Essence, Commentary to the First 
Chapter by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen, translation Gavin Kilty, © FPMT, Inc. 
January 2007, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
 
Root verses are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added 
 
Lesson No: 12                                Date: 6th March 2008  
Chapter One: The Essen ce of a One Gone Thus 
Verses 27, 143 - 149 
 
You can meditate on any topic during our ten minutes of meditation before 
class but for those of you who have nothing to meditate on, I have been 
sharing with you some explanations on the Eight Verses of Thought 
Transformation  thinking that that may be beneficial for you and that, at the 
very least, you can reflect on their meaning.  
 
It is difficult to see any change if you leave whatever you have learnt or heard 
only at the level of listening or studying and not reflecting or meditating on 
their meaning. When you reflect on what you had studied, then more stable 
imprints will be left in your mental continuum. The benefit of engaging in 
meditation is something you have to discover for yourself. Meditation is definitely beneficial but you have to realise this for yourself. Amongst the  
three-fold activities of listening to, reflecting and meditating on the teachings, 
reflection is considered more important than listening and meditation is 
considered more important than reflection.  
 
The Eight Verses of Thought Transformation is advice for increasing bodhicitta 
and for developing the good heart. We now look at the third verse: “ Vigilant, the 
moment a delusion appears in my mind , endangering myself and others, I shall 
confront and avert it without delay.” 
 
What obstruct us from developing the good heart are the afflictive emotions 
such as anger, pride and so forth. Since that is so, we need to eliminate them 
by relying on the antidotes. This verse is telling us that whatever we may be 
doing, we need to be  vigilant at all times, always checking  the state of our 
minds to see whether they are under the influence of the afflictive emotions or not.  
 
What happens when the afflictive emotions manifest? They disturb our mental 
peace and cause us to make the people around us uneasy. Let us take anger as an example. When anger arises in our minds and if we give in to it without 
counteracting it with antidotes, it grows stronger and then manifest in the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 12 
Page 2 of 8                                                           form of harsh speech, unpleasant physical demeanour and harmful physical 
actions. When we engage in such negative actions of body, speech and mind,  imprints are left on our mental continua which will ripen in the form of 
suffering in our future lives. We would have to experience those sufferings over 
many lifetimes because of a single negative imprint.  
 
In chapter 5 on guarding alertness in Shantideva’s A Guide to the 
Bodhisattva’s Way of Life, he talks about the harm of not restraining our crazy 
elephant mind, which will only lead us into non-virtue and the accumulation of 
the heaviest negative karma that results in rebirth in the Avici hells.1 
Comparing this crazy mind of ours to a mad elephant, no matter how powerful 
the elephant may be, the worst it can do is to kill us but it doesn’t have the 
power to send us to the lower realms. 
 
When anger is manifesting in our minds, there is no opportunity for  love and 
compassion to arise. Therefore, we have to rely on vigilance all the time to 
check the state of our minds. If we find that an afflictive emotion is about to 
rise or had arisen, we have to apply the relevant antidotes to try and overcome 
it.  If we allow the affliction to manifest unabated, we would only end up with 
more problems and difficulties.  
 
Our seeing certain people can make our afflictions, such as our anger, arise. At 
that time, we can apply the antidote of meditating on love to make that anger 
subside. When that doesn’t work, we can distance ourselves from the object of 
our anger and focus on something else such as the breath. These are stop gap 
measures – even thinking about the person can still make us angry - but the point is we need to strive and put effort into applying the antidotes to overcome 
our anger.   
 
As I have mentioned before, it would be beneficial if you can memorise these 
verses and reflect on them. Definitely, over time, you will see some change in your mind. But if we leave everything at the level of listening or studying  
without reflecting on them, then there is no way the mind can change.  
Reciting such prayers can be more beneficial than reciting mantras. Of course, reciting mantras are beneficial but sometimes we do so without knowing the purpose of such recitation and our minds remain unmoved and unchanged.  
  
When we memorise something like these Eight Verses  and recite them, we can 
understand and reflect on the meaning of the words and see the reasons why 
we need to change. There will then be some mental transformation as 
compared to just reciting mantras. 
 
1 In this (world), unsubdued and crazed elephants 
Are incapable of causing such harms 
As the miseries of the deepest hell, 
Which can be caused by the unleashed elephant of my mind. 
 
However, if the elephant of my mind is firmly bound 
On all sides by the rope of mindfulness, 
All fears will cease to exist 
And all virtues will come into my hand. 
(Verses 2 & 3 of Chapter 5,  A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life  by Shantideva)  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 12 
Page 3 of 8 It is very important that we keep this point in mind. We all have  prayers and 
sadhanas to recite and commitments to keep. We have been reciting them for a long time but there doesn’t seem to be any mental improvement. Our minds 
remain unchanged. This happens, not due to the fault of the prayers but 
because we don’t reflect on their meaning. The subject matter of our prayers 
and sadhanas are very profound but we see them as burdens, to be recited quickly and gotten out of the way, without any feeling for or reflection on their 
deeper meaning.  
 
The point I am trying to share is that it is important to reflect on the meaning 
of the words of the prayers that we recite and the text we are studying. On the basis of such reflection and familiarisation, we then meditate on them. 
 
Look at the second verse of the Eight Verses of Thought Transformation : “When 
in the company of others, I shall always  consider myself the lowest of all, and 
from the depths of my heart hold others dear and supreme.” 
 
It is not difficult to memorise this. Its meaning is accessible and easy to 
understand. If we reflect on this verse on a regular basis, over time, it will  
definitely benefit our minds and we will see some change. It will definitely 
contribute to greater harmony in our interactions with others. Everything we 
have studied and learnt are basically advice and instructions on how we can 
improve the positive aspects of our minds.  
 
“I shall always consider my self the lowest of all” means that we should see 
others as better than ourselves.  Some people may feel, “It is quite difficult to 
see how others can be better than me.” But if we think about it, it is not so 
hard to do. Everyone is different with different qualities. If we focus on some 
quality that another person has that we lack, for example, the ability to cook well, then, from that perspective, that person is better than us. Another example is the ability to clean well. We may think that cleaning is easy but 
someone may do a better cleaning job than us. In the same vein, there are 
people with language skills, qualities and knowledge we lack. From these 
perspectives, they are better than us.  
 
When we reflect along these lines, it becomes possible to see the good qualities 
of others, to see them as higher than ourselves and generate appreciation and 
respect for them. It is beneficial to remember this way of thinking and apply it 
in our daily lives. When we don’t do this, thinking we are superior to others, 
we are only succumbing to our pride and ego, which is a fault and is not 
beneficial at all.  
******************************** 
(1,143) 
The defilements related with the three [pure grounds] 
Are to be known as like an earth [m old] that covers [a golden statue]. 
They are overcome by the vajra- like meditative stabilization 
Of those great beings [at the end of th e continuum of being a sentient being]. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 12 
Page 4 of 8                                                           The defilements of the three pure grounds (i.e., the eighth, ninth and tenth  
grounds)2 are abandoned by the vajra-like meditative stabilisation.  
 
Question :  
In verse 142, what does “ exertion ” mean? 
 
Answer :  
There is coarse exertion on the seven impure grounds and subtle exertion on the three pure grounds. 
 
(1,144) 
In that way, the [nine] defi lements—desire and so forth— 
Are similar to the examples—lotus and so forth. 
 
The first two lines of verse 144 summarises what we have discussed so far: 
stating how the nine defilements are similar to the nine examples.    
 
(1,144 cd) 
Because of having three natures, the basic constituent 
Is qualitatively similar with [the nine examples of] a Buddha so forth . 
 
We have identified the obscuring factors or defilements. What are they 
obscuring? They are obscuring our buddha nature (or tathagata essence).   
 
We now look at how our tathagata essence is qualitatively similar to the nine 
examples. 
 
 
2 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 12 
Page 5 of 8 (1,145) 
The [three] natures of this [essence]—the Doctrine Body of self-arisen exalted 
wisdom], 
The [unchangeable] suchness, and the lineage [for achieving Buddhahood]— 
Are to be known [respectively] through the [first] three examples, 
One [example, gold,] and the [remaining] five [examples]. 
 
The reasons as to why all sentient beings possess buddha nature had been 
given earlier in verse 27.  
(1, 27) 
Because a perfect Buddha’s body is pervasive, 
Because suchness is without differentiation, 
And because a [Buddha] lineage exists, all embodied 
Are always in possession of a Buddha essence.  
 
“The (three) natures” of this buddha nature are given in verse 145: 
1. “The Doctrine Body of self-arisen exalted wisdom, ”  
2. “The (unchangeable) suchness” and  
3. “The lineage .” 
 
There are nine examples of the obscuring factors  and nine examples of the 
obscured . Now we are looking at the nine examples of the obscured. 
 
Verse 145 refers to “ the (first) three examples,/One (example, gold) and the 
(remaining) five (examples).” The first nature, “ The Doctrine Body of self-arisen 
exalted wisdom” is known through the first three examples of the obscured, 
i.e., the Buddha’s body, honey and the kernel. The second nature, “ The 
(unchangeable) suchness,”  has one example, gold. The third nature, “ the 
lineage”  is exemplified by the remaining five examples (i.e., the treasure, the 
sprout, the statue made of precious gems, the baby with the potential to 
become a Wheel-turning king and the golden statue).  
 
(1,146) 
The Doctrine Body is to be known as having two aspects— 
The very undefiled element of [a Superior’s ] qualities [the actual realizational 
Doctrine Body that is the object of the exalted wisdom of individual insight], 
And the teaching, causally concordant with [realizing] that, of the mode 
Of the profound [emptiness] and the mode of the various [vast conventionalities 
such as the grounds and paths that are taught in 
accordance with the interests of trai nees—the imputed Doctrine Body, the 
verbalized doctrine]. 
 
The first of the three natures of buddha nature is the “ Doctrine Body of self-
arisen exalted wisdom.” 
 
In the context of this text, this Doctrine Body (or the dharmakaya) is said to 
have two aspects:- 
1. the realisational Doctrine Body (or the dharmakaya of realisation) 
2. the verbalised Doctrine Body (or the dharmakaya of the teachings) 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 12 
Page 6 of 8 This dharmakaya of realisation is the final wisdom which directly perceives the 
undefiled dharmadhatu of the mind or put simply, it is the direct realisation of emptiness in the mind of the Buddha. (These terms may sound complicated 
but they appear in the text so it is good to hear and know them).  
  
The dharmakaya of teachings is divided into two aspects:  
1. the definitive sutras that reveal the profound meaning of emptiness. These 
teachings are the concordant result of the realisational Doctrine Body (the dharmakaya of realisation) 
2. the interpretive (or provisional) sutras that teach the various conventional truths. 
 
If one refers to the dharmakaya of the teachings in an abbreviated way, it is 
divided into two: the definitive sutras and the interpretive (or provisional) 
sutras. 
 
Verse 146 is stating  that, in this context, the dharmakaya is divided into 
three:- 
1. the dharmakaya of realisation and  
2. the dharmakaya of teachings divided into two:   
i. the definitive sutras 
ii. the interpretive sutras 
 
 (1,147) 
Since the [realizational Doctrine Body] is beyond the world, 
An example [capable of illustrating it] is not observed in the world. 
Therefore [the body of] a One Gone Thus and the basic constituent 
Are indicated to be similar. 
 
As stated in verse 147, the realisational dharmakaya is likened to the first example, the body of the Buddha because one cannot find any other better 
example in this world.  
 
 (1,148) 
The teaching of the mode of the subtle profundity [of emptiness] 
Is like the single [sweet and delicious] taste of honeys. 
The teaching of the mode of the various aspects of [method] 
Is to be known as like [the various] kern els [of grains dwelling] in the covering of 
various [husks]. 
 
In the first two lines of verse 148, the definitive sutras, the subject matter of which is the profound meaning of emptiness is likened to the taste of “ the 
single (sweet and delicious) taste of  honey.”  Just as all honeys are one in their 
sweetness, in the same way, all composed phenomena are one in that they are 
empty of inherent existence.   
 
The interpretive (or provisional) sutras that teach conventional truths are 
likened to the kernels of grain inside their husks. This is shown in the last two lines of verse 148. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 12 
Page 7 of 8                                                           The subject matter of the interpretive sutras is the various conventional truths 
and these sutras are said to be the skilful methods that lead us to an understanding of the essence of all scriptures, i.e., the ultimate truth (or 
emptiness). As mentioned in the first two lines of chapter 9 in Shantideva’s A 
Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life : “The Muni (the subduer) taught all these 
branches/For the purpose of wisdom.” 
 
Earlier on, we had said that one of the reasons why sentient beings possess  
buddha nature is due to the Buddha’s enlightened activities engaging with and pervading all sentient beings. Amongst the enlightened activities of the 
dharmakhaya here, it is primarily the activity of the enlightened holy speech.  
 
In verse 149, the second nature of the three natures of buddha nature, 
“suchness” is likened to gold.3
 
3 4. Meanings of the examples of that which is obscured 
Thus the nine defilements, attachment and so forth. 
Resemble the lotus and the rest. 
Because the element is included within the three natures. 
It is likened to the examples of the Buddha (statue) and so forth 
We have shown above the manner in which the examples of lotus and so on resemble 
nine types of defilements. Now, what is the object obscured by these nine types of 
defilements such as attachment and so forth? It is the Tathagata essence within the 
continuum of beings that is the object obscured. The reason for illustrating the Buddha 
potential with nine examples is to show that the Buddha nature is included within the 
three natures. It is thus likened to the Buddha statue and so forth. 
These natures are: the truth body,  
Suchness, and also potential.  
They are known by three.  
One, and five examples. 
The three natures are illustrated by the examples as follows. The truth body is 
illustrated by the first three examples: the Bu ddha statue, the honey and the grain. Such-
ness is illustrated by the fourth example: th e gold. Buddha potential is illustrated by the 
remaining five examples: the treasure, the spro ut, the precious statue, the baby with po-
tential to be a universal king, and the statue made from molten gold. The examples 
relevant to each of the three natures are explained below. 
 
The examples of the truth body  
The truth body is known in two aspects:  
The perfect immaculate sphere of phenomena;  
The profound (teachings) caused by that, 
And that taught in manifold ways. 
 
The truth body in this particular context is  described in two parts. The first is the 
wisdom truth body which, in this instance, is the perfect immaculate wisdom directly per-
ceiving the ultimate nature of the mind. The second itseif has two parts, both of which 
arise due to the wisdom truth body. The first is the definitive sutras which primarily and 
explicitly explain profound emptiness. The second is the sutras requiring interpretation 
which primarily and explicitly explain the various conventional truths. 
Because it transcends the world, there is  
No conceivable example for it within the world.  
Thus the Tathagata (statue) and this element  
Are shown as being similar. 
The ultimate wisdom directly perceiving the undefiled emptiness of the mind is the 
truth body referred to as transcending the world. It is the 'element' which is compared with 
a Tathagata statue. This comparison is made because there is no other conceivable 
example within the world that could suitably represent this transcendent element, the truth 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 12 
Page 8 of 8                                                                                                                                                                                          (1,149) 
[The suchness which is] the nature [of ph enomena] is [always] changeless [such 
that even though it appears to be related with afflictive emotions, there is no 
change in its own entity just as gold does not change by falling into filth], 
And it is [naturally] virtuous [and s upreme just as gold is beautiful and 
valuable,and in another way, it is virtuous in the sense that just as gold is fit to 
be crafted into adornments, so virtue is generated when suchness is observed], 
and [the entity of the basic constituen t] is pure [just as gold is pure of 
defilement]. 
Therefore this suchness is said 
To be similar to the form of gold. 
 
Question :  
What is the “ vajra-like meditative stabilisation ” mentioned in verse 143?  
 
Answer : The vajra-like meditative stabilisation is the mind that is the final 
antidote to the obstructions to omniscience. 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng, Alison Wong & Angie Xiao, 12th March    
2008  
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong, 29th March 2008; Checked by Yap Siew Kee, 1st April 2008 
 
Vetted by Geshe Chonyi,  31st March 2008  
 
body. Because it is the ultimate transcendent wisdom, the truth body is known to be 
beyond the world. 
The subtle and profound aspects of the teachings  
Are as like the one taste of honey;  
While the manifold forms and aspects of the teachings  
Are known as like the various grains within their husks. 
The sutras which primarily and explicitly expound the ultimate truth are likened to 
honey because honey always has a single taste, the same in being sweet in nature. Simi-
larly, there is no difference in the entity of the emptiness which is the subject matter of 
these sutras. 
The sutras which primarily and explicitly expound the various conventionalities are 
likened to the variety of grains within husks because they show the various methods to 
extract the benefit of the essence—perceiving emptiness.  
 
The example of suchness  
By nature unchangeable, 
Because it is virtuous and perfectly pure. 
This suchness is said 
To be like the forms of gold. 
Suchness is likened to gold because gold is immutable: its nature does not change. It can, however, change form and thus be made into various ornaments. Whatever its form though, 
the nature of gold is never tarnished. Like that, the emptiness of the mind is unchanging by 
nature while the wisdom perceiving it is transformable through the various Bodhisattva grounds. Suchness remains virtuous throughout, and perfectly pure by nature. ( The 
Fundamental Potential for Enlightenment by Geshe Archarya Thubten Loden, pgs.133~147) 
 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 13 
Page 1 of 4                                                           Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating the Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra-ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation Jeffrey 
Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and Wilson, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
Commentary from The Tath›gata Essence, Commentary to the First 
Chapter by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen, translation Gavin Kilty, © FPMT, Inc. 
January 2007, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
 
Root verses are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added 
 
Lesson No: 13                              Date: 11th March 2008  
Chapter One: The Essen ce of a One Gone Thus 
 
The fourth verse of the Eight Verses of Thought Transformation which are 
advice for increasing the good heart is: “ Whenever I see beings  who are wicked 
in nature and overwhelmed by violent negative actions and sufferings, I shall 
hold such rare ones dear, as if I had found a precious treasure.” 
 
Amongst the nine defilements, the fourth one is the strong manifestation of the 
three mental poisons, for example, anger. There are some people who are perpetually angry, always engaging in very violent negative actions which we 
would consider cruel, bad or wicked. Such people would suffer greatly due to 
the ripening of their negative karma.  
 
This particular verse however advises us that when we encounter such a 
person, we should treat him/her like a precious treasure. For most of us, it 
would be very difficult to have any affection or love for such a person. But if 
one is a practitioner training in the generation of great compassion and 
bodhicitta, then it would be wrong to forsake this person. Rather we should feel happy to meet this person and rejoice.  
 
We had studied earlier, in the chapter on patience in Shantideva’s A Guide to 
the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life, that our enemy is actually the source of all our 
temporal and ultimate happiness since patience can only be generated in 
dependence on the person who is harming us. Patience is the cause for us to 
achieve happiness in this life and also to attain the goal of enlightenment.1  
 
1 Therefore, just like treasure appearing in my house 
Without any effort on my part to obtain it, 
I should be happy to have enemies 
For they assist me in my conduct of Awakening. 
 
Because I am able to practice (patience) with them, 
They are worthy of being given 
The very first fruits of my patience, 
For in this way, they are the cause for it. 
(Verses 107 & 108, Chapter 6, A Guide to the  Bodhisattva’s Way of Life  by Shantideva) 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 13 
Page 2 of 4                                                           Realising this, we would not abandon our enemies and it becomes possible for 
us to develop affection or love for them instead.  
 
We had learnt that all sentient beings possess buddha nature. When we say 
the nature of the mind is clear light, it means that sentient beings are not 
inherently bad even though we may think of them as wicked or cruel. They too 
have buddha nature but they engage in inappropriate actions due to their 
being controlled by their afflictions. These afflictions however are adventitious and can be removed. Understanding this, we can generate compassion for 
them. 
 
We can reflect on how such wicked people will suffer in this life due to their 
bad deeds. They are also accumulating negative karma which can only result 
in more suffering in the future and a suffering rebirth. Such people then 
become our objects of compassion rather than aversion or hatred.  
 
This verse also mentions how we would normally avoid people who are  
overwhelmed by suffering, such as people suffering from contagious diseases 
for fear of being infected ourselves. But if one is a practitioner intent on 
developing bodhicitta, we should see such people as objects of compassion. 
Mentally, we should develop compassion for them and we should also try and 
help at the practical level. Such people are precious because they are the 
causes for us to develop compassion.  
 
As mentioned in Shantideva’s text, we had sacrificed our bodies and our lives 
countless time in the past in order to achieve our own happiness but we had 
failed to accomplish anything significant.2 But now, if we can develop 
compassion for this suffering person and also offer practical assistance, even if 
we were to die from catching the contagious illness, it would have been 
worthwhile because we had died due to our practice of bodhicitta.   
 
Those “ who are wicked in nature and overwhelmed by violent negative actions”  
act as the condition for us to develop patience. Those who are overwhelmed by 
suffering act as the condition for us to develop compassion. Therefore meeting 
such people is likened to finding a precious treasure.  
 
It is not a matter of your opinion as to whether such behaviour is possible or 
not. The point is to analyse the reasons and logic given as to why we should do this. For the person who is only interested in the affairs of this life, there is no 
need for such instructions. This is advice for those who are really intent on 
developing great compassion and bodhicitta. Generally speaking, if we deal with such people in a negative way, it only makes things worse. But there is a chance they may change if we adopt a softer approach. We can see this 
happening in the world. But this is not our style.  
 
 
2 For over countless myriads of aeons 
I have been cut, stabbed, burned, 
And flayed alive innumerable times, 
But I have not awakened. 
(Verse 21, Chapter 7, A Guide to the  Bodhisattva’s Way of Life by Shantideva)  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 13 
Page 3 of 4 Engaging with and doing something that makes such negative and suffering 
people happy seems to be a better option. This clever approach is for the shrewd and intelligent ones.  But it is not easy as it takes effort especially if 
the person is difficult to deal with. It requires the continuous application of 
patience. We may be able to put up with that person for a short while - 10 to 
15 minutes – and then, that’s it. That is the difficult part for most of us.  
 
Geshe-la :  After 10 minutes, we become a different person – angry, no more 
patience! After 10 minutes, both sides are equally angry.   
 
If we think about it, we would probably agree that patience is beneficial and is 
a good thing for both ourselves and others, making us and others happy. But the challenge is in practising it.   
  
Geshe-la asked the class the following qu estions. Most of the the responses from 
the students are inaudible.  
 
We have this kind of mind that wishes to study, that wishes to recite prayers. 
Are these minds the blessing  of the Buddha? What do you think? If you say, 
“Yes,” explain why and how this works?  
 
Whatever positive or virtuous thought you may have, coming to class - is that  the blessing of the Buddha? Experiencing good food and other enjoyments, is 
that the blessing of the Buddha or not?  
 
When you generate compassion towards se ntient beings, is that the blessing of 
the Buddha?  
 
Response from a student:   
If you say that all the blessings are from the Buddha without any effort on our part, then Buddha is doing everything like a god but in Buddhism, we don't 
believe in an omnipotent god.  
 
It is mentioned in the text that our virtuous thoughts are the enlightened 
activities of the Wisdom Truth Body, which can be divided into two:   
1) the enlightened activities possessed by the subject, i.e., the Wisdom Truth Body of the Buddha. 
2) the enlightened activities possessed by the object which refers to all the virtue in the mental continua of those to be subdued. 
 
Earlier, we had studied the three reasons that prove we possess buddha nature. One of the reasons is because the Buddha's body is pervasive, i.e., the Buddha's enlightened activities pervade (or engage) all sentient beings. Put in 
another way, sentient beings possess the quality to be pervaded by Buddha’s 
enlightened activities.  
 
It is said that the Buddha’s enlightened activities exist in the mental continua 
of all sentient beings. There is not a single sentient being who has never  
developed a positive thought. Everyone has definitely generated a positive or 
virtuous thought at some time. Since all virtues are the enlightened activities 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 13 
Page 4 of 4 of the Wisdom Truth Body, that means all sentient beings possess something 
in them which is receptive to the Buddha's enlightened activities. Therefore, all sentient beings possess the buddha nature. 
 
Is everything the result of karma or not?  
 
Many texts mention that our world, the sentient beings and everything within it 
are due to karma. What do you think? Do you accept that or not?   
 
Today, there is rain in Singapore. Is that due to the karma of Singaporeans or all sentient beings? When you get caught in the rain and come down with flu, is 
that due to your karma? Is the tsunami due to karma or not?  
 
Depending on the manner of classification, there are three or four karmic effects. Based on three effects, they are the fruitional effect, the causally concordant effect and the environmental effect.  
 
How would we explain the environmental effect? A person who has to stay in a place that is perpetually filthy and dirty – is that person experiencing the environmental karma he had created in the past? 
 
Uncomposed phenomena are not created by karma. There is a difference between composed space and uncomposed space. The space that we see now with our eyes is an object of the eye consciousness. It is a functioning 
composed phenomenon. Sometimes, that space is illuminated and sometimes, 
it is dark. But when we talk about uncomposed space, that is not created by 
causes and conditions. 
 
The fact that the sprout can grow from its seed, is that karma?  
 
There are three questions for you to think about: 
1) All the virtuous thoughts we have, are they the blessing of the Buddha or not? 
2) All the things that exist, all composed  phenomena, is that karma or not? This 
does not include uncomposed phenomena. 
3) We have 70 people here, are they created by your karma? I am asking 
whether the person that you see is crea ted by you or not? Do people exist 
because of your karma? 
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng, Alison Wong & Angie Xiao, 19th March    
2008  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong, 30th March 2008 
 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee,  1st April 2008 
 
Vetted by Geshe Chonyi, 31st March 2008  
 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 14 
Page 1 of 9 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating the Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra-ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation Jeffrey 
Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and Wilson, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
Commentary from The Tath›gata Essence, Commentary to the First 
Chapter by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen, translation Gavin Kilty, © FPMT, Inc. 
January 2007, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
 
Root verses are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added 
 
Lesson No: 14                              Date:13th  March 2008  
Chapter One: The Essen ce of a One Gone Thus 
Verses 149 – 153 
 
The fifth verse of the Eight Verses of Thought Transformation is: “When, out of 
envy, others mistreat me with abuse, insu lts, or the like, I shall accept defeat 
and offer the victory to others.” 
 
While this instruction seems difficult it is not impossible to achieve. Practising 
accepting defeat and offering the victory to others is extremely important and  necessary for anyone who aspires to develop great compassion and bodhicitta.   
When others, out of envy or jealousy, abuse us verbally or insult us even 
though we may not be at fault, it is better not to respond. We should accept defeat but this should be done without anger but rather motivated by care and compassion for the other party.  
  
It is said that when we accept that small loss motivated by compassion, the 
positive effect we will experience in the future will be much greater. Otherwise, there is no reason to accept the defeat. This does happen. Even though we are 
not at fault, we are abused and insulted because of others’ jealousy or envy of 
us. If we did not commit those mistakes we are accused of, as mentioned in 
Shantideva’s A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life , then there is no reason 
to be upset by those insults. If what ou r critics say are true, then they are only 
stating facts. Again, there is no reason for us to be upset. 
 
There are many ways of cultivating this attitude of offering the victory to others 
and accepting defeat for ourselves. When others harm or criticise us or their actions upset us, these unpleasant events did not happen without cause.  
They are due to the ripening of negative karma we had created in the past, i.e., 
we created the cause and we are experiencing the result. We should 
acknowledge this when we experience an unpleasant event.  
 
Our usual response is to become very angry and upset when we are falsely 
accused. But according to this advice, if we want to generate bodhicitta, we 
should learn to accept defeat.  If we are not interested in generating bodhicitta, 
then that is a different matter.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 14 
Page 2 of 9 When we accept defeat, we should understand there is a greater purpose to be 
achieved and then do so with intelligence and motivated by compassion.  Accepting defeat does not mean keeping quiet and not responding to the verbal 
assault even when one is seething with anger inside.  That is not accepting 
defeat as the problem remains unsolved. If we remain upset, we only make 
ourselves unhappy and our anger will only grow stronger.  Like a bomb, the pressure builds up till it explodes one day. When that happens, both parties 
will lose out.  
 
Thinking we are accepting defeat by keeping quiet but remaining angry within, 
that is the way of the foolish one as we are only making a loss for ourselves.  Accepting defeat out of concern and compassion for the other party, that is the 
way of the intelligent one as we will profit through our own happiness and the 
happiness of others. The ripening result of accepting defeat with compassion 
will also be happiness. That is the real profit. It is really difficult to do this for most people but that is the way out and it is not impossible to achieve.  
 
Remember the second verse of the Eight Verses: “ When in the company of 
others, I shall always consider myself the lowest of all, and from the depths of 
my heart hold others clear and supreme”?   We should be doing this but instead 
we usually see ourselves as equal or even superior to others. How can we 
generate such a humble attitude? By reflecting that our object of comparison has a quality or skill that we lack. From that perspective then, that person is 
superior to us.  
 
This happens to every one of us. When we think we are superior to someone 
else, then we look down on him and speak to him in an unpleasant manner. 
When we find this happening, the best thing to do is to look at that person’s 
qualities. When we find that person has qualities that we don’t have, we 
should acknowledge that and stop our thinking, “I am better.” By seeing and acknowledging his qualities, naturally, we will be able to respect and develop affection for him. When we have respect for others, then naturally, there will be 
harmony and we will be able to get along with everyone. We would be happy 
and so would others. Respecting others means that there is less likelihood of problems and conflicts arising.  
 
Problems and conflicts arise due to the lack of mutual respect which happens 
when one thinks one is superior to others. Even if we don’t think that, we may still think we are equal to others with a why-should-I-listen-to-you attitude. 
Because of this, conflicts and disharmony arise.  
 
From time to time, it is good to bring to mind the person we think we are 
superior to and focus on his/her qualities. If we look for them, we will definitely be able to find and acknowledge a quality of that person that we lack.  
Recognising that quality will counter the negative mind that looks down on 
that person. It becomes possible to see ourselves as lower than that person. This does not happen because we don’t think in this way. Such reflection definitely works.   
****************************** 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 14 
Page 3 of 9 The three natures of our buddha nature are the dharmakaya (or Doctrine 
Body), suchness and the lineage.  
 
The Doctrine Body can be divided into two: 
1. The realisational Doctrine Body (or the dharmakaya of realisation)  
2. The verbalised Doctrine Body (or the dharmakaya of the teachings) which is further divided into two aspects:-  
i. the definitive sutras that reveal the profound meaning of emptiness which are the concordant result of the realisational Doctrine Body and 
ii. the interpretive sutras that explain the various conventional truths. 
In this way, there are three divisions to the truth body.   
 
The first nature – the “ Doctrine Body of self-arisen exalted wisdom” - is known  
through the first three examples of that which is obscured: the Buddha’s body, 
the honey and the kernel.  
 
Question:  
What is this “ self-arisen exalted wisdom ”? 
 
Answer :  
We can refer to the third quality of the Buddha Jewel (i.e., the quality of not 
being realised through the cause of others).   
 
(1, 149) 
[The suchness which is] the nature [of ph enomena] is [always] changeless [such 
that even though it appears to be related with afflictive emotions, there is no 
change in its own entity just as gold does not change by falling into filth], 
And it is [naturally] virtuo us [and supreme just as gold is beautiful and valuable, 
and in another way, it is virtuous in the sense that just as gold is fit to be crafted 
into adornments, so virtue is generate d when suchness is observed], and [the 
entity of the basic constituent] is pur e [just as gold is pure of defilement]. 
Therefore this suchness is said 
To be similar to the form of gold. 
 
The second nature, suchness, is likened to gold, which is unchanging in its nature even when it is made into different types of ornaments.  It is the nature of gold that it does not rust. It may tarnish but that is not an integral part of 
the gold itself. Likewise, the entity of emptiness of true existence of our minds 
does not change and is naturally pure. The wisdom that focuses on that is virtuous. 
 
The third nature, the lineage is divided into two: the naturally abiding (or 
natural) lineage and the developmental (or developed) lineage.  The naturally abiding lineage has been in our minds since they came into existence and has 
been there since time without beginning. The developmental lineage refers to 
the imprints that are left on the mind through the force of hearing, reflection 
and contemplation which have the potential to be transformed or developed into a path. 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 14 
Page 4 of 9 (1,150) 
Like a treasure [that naturally remains under the ground] and a fruit tree [ that 
gradually grows with exertion] 
The lineage is to be known as having two aspects— 
[The pure element of a Superior’s qualities] that naturally abides since 
beginningless [time] 
And [the developmental lineage of] supreme virtue [newly] aroused [through the 
exertion of hearing and so forth that are concerned with the naturally abiding 
lineage]. 
 
The naturally abiding lineage is likened to a treasure in the sense that 
mountains and mines are where jewels come from. In the same way, this lineage is the origin of all the Buddha’s qualities such as the ten powers and so 
forth.  
  
The developmental lineage is likened to a fruit tree with fruits. By adding water 
and fertiliser, that fruit tree will yield more and more fruits. Likewise, it is the 
imprints that arise due to the force of hearing, reflection and meditation which 
will cause the developmental lineage to increase.  
 
By depending on these two lineages, the final result will be the three bodies of 
the Buddha - the truth body, the complete enjoyment body and the emanation 
body. 
 
By focusing on the naturally abiding lineage, we will generate the wisdom that realises it and through that, we accumulate the collection of wisdom. This will 
result in the attainment of the dharmakaya, the truth body. 
 
By meditating on the developmental lineage conjoined with love and bodhicitta, 
we accumulate the collection of merit and we achieve the form bodies:– the  
complete enjoyment body and the emanation body.  
 
In other words, we achieve the truth body of the Buddha by depending on the 
collection of wisdom and we achieve the form bodies of the Buddha by 
depending on the collection of merit. 
 
(1,151) 
It is asserted that the Three Bodies of a Buddha 
Are attained through these two causal lineages; 
Through the first, the first body [t he Doctrine Body, is attained]; 
Through the second, the latter two [Bodies of Complete Enjoyment and 
Emanation are attained]. 
 
“Through the first, the first body [t he Doctrine Body, is attained]” : The “first ” 
refers to the naturally abiding lineage and “ the first body ”  refers to the truth 
body. 
 
“Through the second, the latter two [Bodies of Complete Enjoyment and 
Emanation are attained]”: The “second ” is the developmental lineage and “ the 
latter two”  refers to the complete enjoyment body and the emanation body. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 14 
Page 5 of 9 We should understand how, by depending on the naturally abiding lineage, the 
truth body is achieved. Another explanation is that the naturally abiding lineage is transformed into the truth body when the naturally abiding lineage 
is separated from its stains.  
 
Can we say that, one day, when the naturally abiding lineage is free from its  
defilements, it becomes the truth body (or dharmakaya)? Yes, if we understand the truth body here to refer to the nature truth body.  
 
Remember however that the truth body is divided into the nature truth body (or svaibhavakaya) and wisdom truth body (or dharmakaya). Can this naturally abiding lineage that is free from stains be transformed into the wisdom truth 
body? We cannot say that. But if we look at the explanation that by focusing 
on the naturally abiding lineage, we generate the wisdom realising it and 
through that we accumulate the collection of wisdom, that explanation can  be 
used to explain the attainment of both  the nature truth body and wisdom truth 
body. By depending on the collection of wisdom, we achieve the nature truth 
body and at the same time through the collection of wisdom, we achieve the omniscient mind, the wisdom that realises things as they are. 
 
When we meditate on the developmental lineage conjoined with bodhicitta, we 
accumulate the collection of merit and we will attain the form bodies of the Buddha, which are divided into two: the complete enjoyment body and the 
emanation body.  
 
Here we are talking about the three bodies: the truth body, the complete 
enjoyment body and the emanation body. The truth body here refers to the 
nature truth body which is likened to the self-arisen statue of the Buddha that 
is not made by someone yet it fulfils the wishes of all living beings. In a similar 
way, the nature truth body is not the result of causes and conditions but, like the self-arisen statue of Buddha, fulfils the hopes and wishes of living beings.   
 
(1,152) 
[The natural purity and] beauty [of good qualities] of the Nature Body 
Is to be known as like an image [made from] a precious substance, 
For [that which abides] naturally [from the start] is not made [through new 
exertion] 
And the qualities [of the powers and so forth] are a treasure of precious 
substances. [A statue made of precious substance does not depend upon its own 
compositional activity.] 
 
Some texts use the example of a naturally occurring treasure instead of the 
self-arisen statue of a Buddha but there is no difference in their meaning.   
 
(1,153) 
Because of possessing the great [wealth of ] the kingdom of the Great [Vehicle] 
doctrine [of the profound and the vast, 
The Complete Enjoyment Body which] com pletely enjoys [or makes use of the 
Great Vehicle doctrine] is like a Univer sal Monarch [who controls the glorious 
wealth of the seven precious substances and the four continents]. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 14 
Page 6 of 9                                                           Because of having the nature of a reflection [of appearances in accordance with 
whatever will tame trainees] 
An Emanation [Body] is  like a gold image. 
 
The complete enjoyment body is likened to a Wheel-turning king who enjoys 
everything he possesses and controls, including the Mahayana doctrine.  
 
The emanation body is likened to a gold image of the Buddha. Just as the entity of that image is gold shaped into the form of the Buddha, likewise the 
emanation body is the wisdom of the Buddha which appears in different forms 
according to the perspective of the objects to be subdued: “ Because of having 
the nature of a reflection [of appearances in accordance with whatever will tame 
trainees], an Emanation [Body] is like a gold image.”. 
 
We have now completed the section on establishing that the defilements are 
adventitious through the 9 examples. In our next class, we will go back to the earlier part of the text that explains the clear light nature of the mind through 
the ten aspects.
12
 
1 The example of suchness 
By nature unchangeable, 
Because it is virtuous and perfectly pure. 
This suchness is said 
To be like the forms of gold . 
Suchness is likened to gold because gold is immutable: its nature does not change. It can, 
however, change form and thus be made into various ornaments. Whatever its form though, 
the nature of gold is never tarnished. Like that, the emptiness of the mind is unchanging by 
nature while the wisdom perceiving it is transformable through the various Bodhisattva 
grounds. Suchness remains virtuous throughout, and perfectly pure by nature. 
 
The examples of the Buddha potential 
Like a treasure and fruit tree, 
The potential is known in two aspects: 
That by nature existent without beginning, and 
That made perfect and supreme by practice. 
Buddha potential, as illustrated explicitly in  this verse, is of two types: the natural 
potential which exists of itself beginninglessly, and the developed potential which arises 
through being perfected by the wisdoms of listening, thinking, meditation and so forth. 
The natural potential is likened to a precious treasure. Just as a precious treasure is the 
source of a great variety of beautiful jewels, so  the natural potential is the source of all the 
various qualities of a Buddha, the ten powers and so forth. 
The developed potential is  likened to a fruit tree. When a fruit tree is properly nurtured 
by the conditions of water, manure and heat, it grows more and more. Similarly, when 
the developed potential is nurtured by the wisdom of listening and so on, its qualities 
increase further and further. 
By these two potentials, a Buddha's  
Three bodies are said to be attained:  
The first body by the former,  
The other two by the latter. 
From these two Buddha potentials one attains three bodies of a Buddha: the nature body, 
enjoyment body and emanation bo dy. By meditating with the natural potential as object of 
observation one accumulates the collections of wisdom and attains the nature body. The 
developed potential, when induced by great love, compassion and bodhichitta, develops 
further and further. One accumulates merit and eventually attains the two form 
bodies: the complete enjoyment body and the emanation body. 
The beautiful nature body is 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 14 
Page 7 of 9                                                                                                                                                                                           
Known to be like a precious statue. 
It is not created (newly) by nature, 
And is the source of precious qualities .  
The nature body is likened to a Buddha statue which is made of precious jewels. The 
precious jewel, particularly referring to gold in this example, has an abiding nature. It is not 
newly created from other substances, causes and conditions. This beautiful precious 
jewelled statue is able to satisfy the desires of others. Like that, the nature body is the abiding nature of reality and is not created newly by causes and conditions. It has the 
power to satisfy the aspirations of living beings. 
Because of possessing the majesty of the great Dharma,  
The complete enjoyment is likened to the universal king.  
Because of being in the nature of an image,  
The emanation body is likened to the golden form. 
The complete enjoyment body is likened to a universal king who enjoys his sovereign 
domain. Like that the complete enjoyment body enjoys sovereignty over the mahayana 
Dharma. 
The emanation body is likened to the image of the Buddha made out of gold. The golden 
statue, though by nature gold, in appearance has the form of the Buddha which can be of 
many different types. Similarly, the emanation body is actually the wisdom of the Buddha 
itself but to the eyes of trainees it appears in emanation bodies of various forms. 
 
Purpose of teaching Buddha potential  
A qualm is expressed in the following verse: 
It has been taught in this and that (sutra) that all  
Objects of knowledge are eternally empty—like clouds, Dreams and illusions.  
Why has the Buddha here again  
Mentioned the existence of the Tathagata essence in living beings? 
The emptiness of inherent existence of all phenomena, their suchness, is taught 
extensively in such texts as the Perfection of Wisdom sutras, where the examples of phe-
nomena being like clouds, dreams and illusions are also used. Why then should this 
suchness, the natural Buddha potential, be taught yet again as set forth in the Tathagata 
Essence Sutra? 
The response is: 
Inadequacy, contempt for inferior beings, 
Apprehending the unreal, deprecating reality. 
Excessive attachment to oneself: To those with these five faults, 
It has been taught for the purpose of abandoning them. 
The purpose of the teaching of the Tathagata Essence Sutra is to overcome five faults, 
especially the first two of these. The teachings of the Perfection of Wisdom sutras, on the 
other hand, were designed particularly to overco me just the last three faults. The five faults 
are: 
1 Inadequacy: Without recognising that one has Buddha potential it is easy to be 
discouraged and think that one has no chance of great attainments such as 
enlightenment. The Tathagata Essence Sutra was taught to overcome this lack of confidence. 
2 Contempt for inferior beings: Because some sutras speak of certain beings not having 
Buddha potential, some may develop an inflated sense of superiority, thinking that they 
are greater because they have Buddha potential. The Tathagata Essence Sutra seeks to 
overcome such false arrogance by proclaiming that all beings equally share Buddha 
potential.  
3 Apprehending the unreal: is to apprehend inherently existent phenomena when, 
in fact, phenomena lack inherent existence. 
4 Deprecating reality: is to over-negate inherent existence and thus fall to the extreme of 
nihilism. 
5 Excessive attachment to oneself: is obsessive, selfish regard which is a hindrance to 
exchanging the benefit of self for the benefit of others ( The Fundamental Potential for 
Enlightenment by Geshe Archarya Thubten Loden, pgs. 133~147)  
 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 14 
Page 8 of 9                                                                                                                                                                                           
2 The Buddha Jewel: The Dharmakaya and the Rupakaya 
You might have heard the word “kaya,” a Sans krit word. It means body; not body in the 
sense of the physical body, but body in the sense of corpus or collection or group. Sometimes 
we talk about three kayas, or bodies, of the Buddha and sometimes this can be divided into four kayas of the Buddha. And sometimes it’s on ly divided into two kayas of the Buddha. It 
does make sense. 
If we take the division into two kayas -- two gr oups or collections or corpuses of qualities of 
the Buddha -- one is called the dharmakaya, meaning the truth body and the other one is 
called the rupakaya, meaning the form body. With  this division, the dharmakaya or the truth 
body is referring to the mind of the Buddha and the rupakaya or form body is referring to the 
form or the physical manifestation of the Buddha. 
If we go into a little more depth, the rupakaya can be split into two. Of the two kinds of 
rupakaya, one is called the sambhogakaya, often translated as the enjoyment body, and the 
other one is called the nirmanakaya, or the em anation body. These are two different physical 
aspects of a Buddha.  
When a fully enlightened one appears in a body made of light in a pure land, teaching the 
bodhisattvas, teaching the Mahayana teachings, and has all the 32 signs and 80 marks, that 
is called a sambhogakaya or enjoyment body. This  is a rather mystical or ethereal physical 
appearance of a Buddha in a body of light, residing in a pure land, teaching the bodhisattvas. 
The sambhogakaya has all the physical signs of a fully enlightened being, such as the crown 
protrusion on the head and the curl and the eyes in the palms of the hand and the Dharma 
wheels on the feet and the long ear lobes. 
The emanation body, or the nirmanakaya, refers to a grosser physical appearance of a fully 
enlightened being. An example would be Shaky amuni Buddha, who lived 2500 years ago.  
The division of the rupakaya, the physical  aspect, into the enjoyment body and the 
emanation body, represents the different ways a fully enlightened being can appear in the 
world in order to benefit others. One way they can benefit others is to appear in a pure land 
and teach the high-level bodhisattvas. But we don’t have access to a pure land, we haven't 
created that positive potential, so out of co mpassion the Buddhas appear in an emanation 
body, which is a much grosser physical appearance, so that we in our form can communicate with them. The form body of a Buddha is acting for the purpose of others in an active form of 
compassion. When you have the compassion that wants to liberate others from their suffering, 
you want to appear in a physical form, and thus you get these two physical appearances. 
So when we take the truth body and the en joyment body and the emanation body, we get 
three kayas or three bodies of the Buddha. Now if we want to get four bodies, then we take the 
dharmakaya or truth body and we subdivide it into two also. So you see how we're doing this. We’re just getting more subdivisions. Sounds  like a housing development doesn’t it? The 
dharmakaya can be subdivided into the jhana-dh armakaya, which is translated as the wisdom 
truth body, and the second one is the svabha vakaya or the nature body of the Buddha. 
When we talk about dharmakaya as one thing, the truth body, it refers more to the mind of 
the Buddha. When we subdivide the dharmakaya, we're going to get a little more technical.  
When we talk about the wisdom truth body, we’re talking about the consciousness of the 
Buddha, the mind of the Buddha, the wisdom of the Buddha.  
When we talk about the nature body, we’re talking about emptiness of that mind and the 
true cessations of that mind. 
When you divide the dharmakaya into two, one is the wisdom dharmakaya and one is the 
nature dharmakaya. The nature body refers to the emptiness of the Buddh a’s mind, the lack of 
inherent existence of the Buddha’s mind. The natu re body also refers to the cessations on a 
Buddha's mindstream – the cessations of suffer ing and the cessations of the afflictions and 
karma. While the wisdom truth body is a consciousness, the nature body is an absence of inherent existence and an absence of suffering and afflictions.  
Consciousnesses are impermanent phenomena; they change moment by moment. The 
nature body, being emptiness and cessations, is a permanent phenomenon. It doesn’t change. Why? Because it is a negative phenomenon. It is a lack of something, an absence of something. 
So what we’re emphasizing here with the dharmakaya is the mind of the Buddha, the 
wisdom mind of the Buddha, and then the fact that that mind is empty of inherent existence. It's said that the dharmakaya, the truth body, fulfills one’s own purpose.  Because of having a 
truth body, because of one’s mind being a Budd ha’s mind, one no longer suffers. One no 
longer has problems and confusion. But becaus e a Buddha also has very strong compassion 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 14 
Page 9 of 9                                                                                                                                                                                           
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng, Alison Wong & Angie Xiao, 23rd March    
2008  
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong, 31st March 2008 
 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee, 1st April 2008 
 
Vetted by Geshe Chonyi,  31st March 2008  
 
 
 
and wants to work for the benefit of others, a Bu ddha is obliged by his compassion to appear 
in physical forms that can communicate with se ntient beings, because sentient beings cannot 
communicate directly with the Buddha’s mind . We don’t have the clairvoyant powers, our 
minds are too obscured to communicate directly with the truth body of the Buddha. Therefore 
the Buddhas appear in the form bodies, they appear as emanation bodies for very obscured 
beings like us. They appear as enjoyment bodies for the high level bodhisattvas who are much 
less obscured than us. ( Extract from Ven Thubten Chodron’s teachings  – Taking Refuge)  
 
 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 15 
Page 1 of 8 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating the Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra-ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation Jeffrey 
Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and Wilson, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
Commentary from The Tath›gata Essence, Commentary to the First 
Chapter by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen, translation Gavin Kilty, © FPMT, Inc. 
January 2007, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
 
Root verses are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added 
 
Lesson No: 15                            Da te: 18th March 2008  
Chapter One: The Essen ce of a One Gone Thus 
Verses 29 - 33  
 
The sixth verse of the Eight Verses of Thought Transformation  is: “ When 
someone whom I have benefited and in whom I have great hopes gives me 
terrible harm, I shall regard that person as my holy guru.” 
 
The Eight Verses of Thought Transformation are instructions to help us develop 
the mind of enlightenment, bodhicitta. The main obstacle to developing bodhicitta in our minds is anger. The person described in this verse is 
probably someone towards whom we have the strongest hatred or aversion as 
it is someone we have benefited and in whom we have placed great hopes. 
Regardless of whether our motivation had been pure or not, we expect appreciation from that person and instead, we are harmed in return. When 
that happens, we become angry with that person and begin to generate 
aversion towards that person.  We also become unhappy.  
 
That is a good time to revisit the chapter on patience in Shantideva’s A Guide 
to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life which talks about the harmful effects of anger. 
We should reflect how anger destroys us, harming us now and also leading us 
to many problems in the future. The moment anger manifests in our minds, 
immediately, our mental peace and stability is gone, making us unhappy.  
 
It is important for us to be very clear about the causes and conditions that 
lead to anger manifesting in our minds because at the beginning of that 
chapter, it explains how mental unhappiness is the fuel for anger to arise. 
There are many conditions that can make us mentally unhappy and this verse 
is reminding us that when we meet with such conditions, we have to be careful not to succumb to unhappiness.  
 
We should regard that person who is harming us, making us unhappy as our 
teacher. Conventionally speaking, we would expect kindness and gratitude in return when we help someone and it is considered wrong for that person to 
repay our help by harming us in return.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 15 
Page 2 of 8 But it is different when we are engaged in the practice of patience and the 
generation of bodhicitta. Here, we are advised to see this person as a teacher. We need to understand why. It is because this person who is harming us 
becomes our teacher of patience, offering us the opportunity to develop real 
patience which is needed for the development of bodhicitta. Even our teacher 
or lama who teaches us Dharma cannot give us that.  
 
So when we encounter such a difficult situation, we need to use our minds to 
think, to avert anger towards that person and generate patience instead. We 
also need to develop compassion and affection for that person. If we are unable 
to do this, we will never be able to develop real compassion in our minds. 
Without developing a fully qualified compassion, there is no way for us to attain the ultimate state of enlightenment. 
 
When we meet with difficulties, we have to develop patience but we need to 
know how, such as examining the faults of anger, the benefits of patience and the methods for developing it. We should revisit the Shantideva text.  
 
This verse is pointing out that when we encounter such conditions, we should not be put off by that person and nor should we generate any resentment or grudges towards him/her. It would be very good if we can see that person as a 
teacher. But, at the very least, we should not harbour grudges because doing 
so brings us no benefit whatsoever. When we have anger in our minds, we only hurt ourselves. We become unhappy and then all the problems will start from there. That is why it is said that anger is the enemy who really destroys us. It 
doesn't hurt the other person at all. 
  
Since we do ten minutes of meditation before class, one of the reasons we are 
going through the Eight Verses of Thought Transformation  is because I thought 
they might be helpful for some of you. This is something that you can meditate 
on. 
***************************** 
 
Every sentient being have the potential to become a buddha. Why? Because 
the nature of the mind is clear light and the defilements are adventitious. 
 
We have established that the defilements (or stains) are adventitious through the nine examples and their intended meanings. Now, we will look at how the nature of our minds is clear light through the presentation of the ten aspects. 
 
(1, 29) 
The entity [of natural purity], the causes [that serve as means of purification], the 
effect [of separation from all defilements], the function [of causing adoption and 
discarding upon seeing the disadvantages of pain and advantages of pleasure], 
the possession[of the qualities of cause a nd effect], manifestation [of differences 
in reality by way of the persons on whom it depends], 
States [of difference], and similarly the meaning of omnipresence [that is, reality 
pervading all], 
Immutability at all times [in terms of good qualities], and undifferentiability [of 
the final] qualities 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 15 
Page 3 of 8                                                           Are said to be the intended meanin g of the ultimate basic element. 
 
The ten aspects are listed out in Verse 29: 
1.   The entity 
2. The causes 
3.   The effect 
4.   The function 
5.   The possession 
6.   Manifestation  
7.   States (of difference) 
8.   The meaning of omnipresence 
9.   Immutability at all times 
10.  Undifferentiability 
 
The meaning of the entity  of buddha nature is explained briefly in the first 
two lines of Verse 30. 
(1,30) 
Like the [natural] purity of a jewel, space, and water, 
The nature [of the basic constituent] is always unafflicted. 
 
When we look at the individual characteristics, there are the examples of “ a 
jewel, space and water.” The truth body, dharmakaya, is likened to a jewel. 
Suchness is likened to space and the lineage is likened to pure water. When we  
look at the general characteristic of the three, it will be “ the nature (of the basic 
constituent that is always unafflicted.”  1
 
It will be helpful for you to read the root text and the relevant sections of the 
commentary given to you. When I give you a brief explanation in class, then it will make some sense. I can't explain each and every single word. For those 
who wish to study, you have to put in a little effort to read the text.   
 
Next is the brief presentation of the causes which appears in the remaining 
lines of verse 30: 
(1, 30 cd) 
It arises from (1) devotion to the [Great Vehicle] doctrine, (2) the higher wisdom 
[realizing selflessness], 
(3) [The immeasurable] meditative stabil ization [endowed with bliss], and (4) 
compassion [for sentient beings]. 
 
 
1  Nature (v.30) 
 This is in two parts: simile and significance . From the point of view of their individual 
characteristics, the three aspects are analogou s to the wishfulfilling jewel, space and water, 
respectively, while natural purity is a genera l characteristic of all three. The dharmak āya of the 
tathāgata is analogous to a wish-fulfilling jewel; su chness is analogous to space, and lineage is 
analogous to pure water. By stating that the dharmak āya here is a dharmak āya emanating 
enlightened deeds it is not difficult to understa nd these enlightened deeds as being capable of 
engaging with sentient beings, and this is why the dharmakā ya is compared to a wish-fulfilling 
jewel. However, if it were teaching that the dharmak āya itself was the basic element then the 
word "emanate" in the line, "Because the perfect buddha body emanates," would be 
unnecessary.  (Gyaltsap Je’s commentary, pg. 35) 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 15 
Page 4 of 8                                                           The causes are identified as: 
1. Devotion to the (Great Vehicle or Mahayana) doctrine 
2. The higher wisdom (realising selflessness) 
3. The meditative stabilisation (endowed with bliss) 
4. The compassion (for sentient beings) 
 
By depending on these four causes, the tathagata essence (or buddha nature) 
can be purified of all its defilements and the developmental lineage can be transformed into the dharmakaya (or truth body). We should not understand 
the causes here to mean the causes that produce the tathagata essence. 
Rather, they act to purify  the tathagata essence of its defilements. 
2
 
 
Verse 31 gives an extensive explanation of the entity  of the buddha nature.  
 
(1,31) 
Because of [having] the power [of fulfilling hopes], of not changing to anything 
other [in nature], 
And of being a nature whose en tity is moist [with compassion], 
[The basic constituent] is qualita tively similar to the features 
Of a precious [wish-granting] jewel, space, and water. 
 
“[Having] the power [of fulfilling hopes]”:  The dharmakaya (or truth body) 
possesses the power to fulfil the worldly and transcendental wishes and goals 
of all individuals as it is the source of all worldly and transcendental qualities 
which sentient beings have the potential to develop. (This is related to our 
earlier discussion on how all sentient beings are receptive to the enlightened activities of the dharmakaya.) Therefore, the dharmakaya is likened to a 
precious wish-fulfilling jewel that can fulfil the wishes of all beings. 
 
“Not changing to anything other [in nature]”:  Suchness is unchanging as it does 
not change into something else under the influence of causes and conditions 
and is likened to uncompounded space. Uncompounded space is the mere 
absence of obstruction and is a mental construct. It doesn't come into 
existence due to causes and conditions. In a similar way, suchness is the mere negation of all elaborations of true existence.  
 
Space can be either compounded (or composed) space (which exists due to 
causes and conditions and is the space we see) or uncompounded (or 
uncomposed) space  
 
2  Cause 
 From great devotion for the Mahayana, which can be compared to a seed, a mother, a 
womb and a nurse; from higher wisdom, epitomized by the perfection of wisdom in the mind 
stream of the bodhisattva; from the limitless ga teways of the bodhisattva samadhi, and from 
great compassion, suchness will be rid of all defilement, the lineage will be purified, and from 
this process of transformation the dharmak āya will arise. (Gyaltsap Je’s commentary, pg. 36)  
 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 15 
Page 5 of 8                                                           which comes into existence without depending on causes and conditions). It is 
not the space we see but is the factor of the lack of obstruction (or negation of 
obstruction).  
 
When we say we see a person, we see that  person by depending on seeing his  
aggregates. The aggregates itself are not the person but they are the  bases for us to see the person. Similarly, th e space that we see is a composed 
phenomenon which is the basis for us to impute the absence of obstruction. 
That space changes according to causes and condition. When we switch on the 
lights, the space becomes bright. When we switch off the lights, the space 
becomes dark. Depending on the composed space we see, we are able to posit uncomposed space which is the mere absence of obstruction that does not 
change under any causes and conditions. It is a permanent phenomenon.  
  
When we talk about water, its moistness exists as oneness with the water 
itself. In the same way, the developmental lineage exists as oneness with the  naturally abiding lineage. Then, just as the entity of water is its moistness, the 
entity of developmental lineage is moist with compassion. 
 
In verse 31, we are talking about the truth body, suchness and the lineage 
which goes with the three analogies.  
The truth body is said to be analogous to the jewel, suchness is analogous to 
space and the developmental lineage is analogous to water.3
 
3  Commentary  
 The brief explanation of these three, which was taught by the lines beginning "Because the 
perfect buddha body emanates," begins from, "Concerning these three…" The expanded 
explanation says of their individual characterist ics, that "in the dharmakaya of the tathagata 
all hopes and wishes are accomplished," referring to all worldly and supramundane excellence. 
Concerning suchness, it is not to be transformed by cause and conditions but like space, 
which does not change from its characteristic of being the mere negation of obstructive form, "suchness too does not change" from its characteristic of being the mere negation of the 
elaboration of true existence. "The tathagata lin eage" arising from proper appropriation, exists 
upon the naturally abiding lineage, and just as water dwells in the nature of wetness, "it is 
moistened by compassion for sentient beings."  
 By focusing on all sentient beings individually  at different times, there is no sentient being 
who has not experienced the compassion of wishing others to be free of suffering. Therefore all 
sentient beings have existed as objects of compassion, and also as developers of compassion. 
Therefore, ones compassion generated for individual sentient beings when they are born as our friends and relatives, if it were not destroyed by  opposing conditions, such as anger, and if it 
were not separated from long-term conducive co nditions, would develop into great compassion, 
which is a mind that focuses on all sentient beings at the same time and whose nature is that 
it wishes for their separation from suffering. However, because the conducive conditions are 
incomplete and because opposing conditions dest roy it, it is mere compassion, and should not 
be classified as great compassion. It is perf ectly acceptable to categorize this type of 
compassion as a cause of great compassion, however, here the lineage arising from proper 
appropriation refers to the uncontaminated seed planted by listening to the sacred dharma, 
and also to the great compassion of the bodhisattvas, for example.  
 Concerning general characteristics, "they are always naturally devoid of any affliction," 
meaning that afflictions do not exist by their ow n nature, their mode of apprehension is not in 
accord with reality, and "by nature these three are completely pure." ( Gyaltsap Je’s 
commentary, pgs 37-38)  
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 15 
Page 6 of 8                                                                                                                                                                                            
Verse 32 is the extensive explanation of the causes  that serve as the means for 
the purification of the suchness with defilements. Th 
e four obstructions which prevent the manifestation of the buddha nature are 
identified as well as the persons who possess those obstructions.  
 
(1, 32) 
(1) Hatred for the [Great Vehicle] doctri ne, (2) view of self, (3) Fear of the 
sufferings of cyclic existence [and thus seeking one’s own peace and happiness], 
And (4) not having concern for the welfare of sentient beings 
Are the four forms of obstructions [p reventing manifestation of the Buddha 
nature respectively] 
Of (1) those of great desire [who do not at all abandon cyclic existence], (2) 
Forders, (3) Hearers, and (4) the Self-Arisen. 
The causes of purifying [those] are the four aspects 
Of the practices of special devotion [to the Great Vehicle] and so forth. 
 
(1,33) 
Those who have the seed which is devotion to the Supreme Vehicle, 
The mother which is the wisdom gi ving birth to the Buddha qualities, 
The womb which is the bliss of concentration, and the nurse which is 
compassion 
Are the [Bodhisattva] children born  from [the mind of] the Subduer. 
 
The four obstructions are:  
1. Hatred for the (Great Vehicle) doctrine 
2. The view of self 
3. The fear of sufferings of cyclic existence 
4. Not having concern for the welfare of sentient beings 
 
Who possesses these obstructions? Respectively, they are: 
1. Those of great desire 
2. The forders or trithikas 
3. The hearers 
The self-arisen (or the solitary realisers)  
 
Question : Is buddha nature suchness with or without defilements? 
 
Answer : When we talk about buddha nature (or buddha lineage or potential), it 
is the phenomenon that proceeds to enlightenment. As it is working its way towards enlightenment, then obviously it is accompanied by defilements. If it  
doesn’t have defilements, why are we working for enlightenment?  
 
Suchness with defilements is buddha nature. Suchness without defilements is 
the nature truth body. When one is free from all defilements, when one  
becomes a buddha, one will no longer have buddha nature.  
 
 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 15 
Page 7 of 8                                                           We have to know what buddha nature is referring to. For example, when we 
talk about space, both compounded and uncompounded space are empty  in the conventional sense that there is an absence of obstruction but they are 
quite different from one another.  
Suchness with defilements is given the name buddha nature. When we achieve 
enlightenment, that suchness becomes suchness without defilements, i.e., the 
nature truth body. Their entity is the same but they are very different. Let us look at the example of the emptiness of a golden pot and the emptiness of the 
silver pot. The entity of emptiness of the two pots is the same, but the emptiness of the golden pot is not the emptiness of the silver pot.  
In the same way, the entity of suchness with defilements and suchness 
without defilements is the same. But we have to know when one is given the name buddha nature and when one is called the nature truth body.  
 
Four different kinds of persons are said to possess the four obstructions. In 
general, persons can be classified into three categories:-. 
1. Those who have fallen into the extreme of samsara (or those who desire 
samsara) 
2. Those who have fallen into the extreme of peace or those who desire nirvana 
3. Those who are not fallen into either the extreme of samsara or nirvana 
 
Those who have fallen into the extreme of samsara are of two types: 
• Some who completely deny the existence of liberation/nirvana. 
• Some who, even though they accept the possibility of liberation, they do 
not enter into the path that leads to it. 
 
There are people who deny the existence of liberation/nirvana, saying it 
doesn't exist and they have no interest in  it. 
 
Then there are others who, although they have some interest in liberation, they 
do not enter the path that leads to that goal. Engaging only in negative actions, it is difficult for them to develop any sense of disenchantment with cyclic 
existence or develop a mind directed towards achieving liberation. In some 
sutras, it is mentioned that there are some sentient beings whose lineage is literally cut-off, i.e., they have no lineage.  However, the meaning of this have to be interpreted as, in reality, there are no sentient being who do not have the 
buddha lineage.
4
 
Verse 32 also refers to those who have great desire and possess hatred 
towards the doctrine. Such individuals can be shown the path leading to good 
rebirth by teaching them the practice of ethics but they are not suitable 
receptacles for the teachings of selflessness of persons. Even amongst 
 
4  Falling to the extreme of samsara 
 "Those who desire samsara should be known as being of two types. The first is hostile 
toward a path to freedom and declares that freedom does not exist," thereby leading to 
deprecation of freedom. Even if they are aware th at freedom does exist, they turn their back on 
it because of their great attachment. "They do not pass beyond sorrow into nirvana," and are 
known as the cut-off lineage. "They desire samsara itself and make no efforts for nirvana." For 
the time being these sentient beings are not at all repulsed by samsara, and are incapable of 
developing any kind of striving for freedom. Howe ver, the teaching that these beings belong to 
a permanently cut-off lineage is a non-literal teaching. ( Gyaltsap Je’s commentary,  pg 40)  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 15 
Page 8 of 8                                                           proponents of Buddhist tenets, there is a sub-school of the Great Exposition 
School called the Vatsiputriyas who assert the self of persons. These proponents have fallen into the extreme of samsara and some of them also 
criticise and deny the validity of the Mahayana teachings. Such people are 
what we call “ those of great desire.”
5  
As that person of great desire harbours hatred towards the Mahayana, it is 
very difficult for that person to achieve enlightenment until that particular obstruction is removed.  
 
We now examine those who have fallen into the extreme of nirvana (or those 
who desire nirvana). This group can be divided into: 
1. Those who have fallen into the extreme of nirvana but are engaging in the incorrect method 
2. Those who have fallen into the extreme of nirvana but are engaging in 
the correct method 
 
Those engaging in the incorrect method  are of three types: 
i)   The outsiders (i.e., non-Buddhists), translated here as forders or trithikas 
in Sanskrit 
ii)   Those who have a mistaken understanding of emptiness 
iii)  Those who have not realised emptiness but think they have achieved the realisation of emptiness 
 
The forders are the ones who possess the obstruction of the “ view of self.” 
Their incorrect view and conduct are obstructions for them as they will not be able to achieve enlightenment.  
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng, Alison Wong & Angie Xiao, 28th March    
2008  
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong, 31st March 2008 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee, 1st April 2008 
 
Vetted by Geshe Chonyi,  5th April 2008  
 
 
 
5
   "Then there are those who have definitely fall en to this extreme within our own dharma." 
Some of these are only suitable for teachings on  morality, who for the time being are not even 
suitable vessels for teachings on the coarse non-self of persons and who have a strong 
attachment to the Hinayana do ctrine. "These people have rese ntment for the Mahayana" and 
deprecate it by declaring it not to be the word of the Buddha." With these beings in mind the 
Buddha said: 
 "I am not their teacher; they are not my di sciples. Sariputra, they are veiled by the 
thick darkness of ignorance. Darker than darkness itself is their resultant endless 
suffering, where they are tormented ceaselessly, traveling from darkness to even greater darkness, to be enveloped by great darkness. This I have said." ( Gyaltsap Je’s 
commentary, pg 40-41) 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 16 
Page 1 of 9 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Grea t Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating the Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra-ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation Jeffrey 
Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and Wilson, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
Commentary from The Tath›gata Essence, Commentary to the First Chapter 
by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen, translation Gavin Kilty, © FPMT, Inc. 
January 2007, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
 
Root verses are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added 
 
Lesson No: 16                                Date: 20th March 2008  
Chapter One: The Essen ce of a One Gone Thus 
Verses 32-33  
 
The seventh verse of the Eight Verses of Thought Transformation is:  ”In short, both 
directly and indirectly, do I offer every ha ppiness and benefit to all my mothers. I 
shall secretly take upon myself all their harmful actions and suffering.” 
 
When we say a person is good-hearted, what do we mean? A good heart is a mind 
that wishes others to have happiness and to be free from suffering.  The practice of giving and taking (tonglen) helps us to increase the good heart and is done on the 
basis of the mental attitude described in this verse. So, when we see suffering 
sentient beings, we visualise taking on th eir suffering and giving them whatever 
happiness we have. 
 
The practice of tonglen is indispensable for developing bodhicitta in our minds.  
What is the benefit of engaging in this practice? Due to the power of familiarity with this practice, we develop the strong aspiration to actually want to make it 
happen. There will come a time when we will be able to  actualise our aspiration 
and actually do something beneficial for others to help them overcome their 
suffering and achieve happiness.  
 
There are many ways of doing tonglen practice. One method involves visualisation 
with our breathing. When we exhale, we visualise giving all our virtue and 
everything that sentient beings need to them. They receive it and become happy. 
With each inhalation, we take upon ourselves all their problems and suffering 
which we then use to destroy our own self-cherishing attitude. 
 
As mentioned in the teaching, we first practise tonglen with our loved ones. Once  
accustomed to that, we switch our focus to people we are indifferent to. From 
there, we progress to people whom we dislike or our enemies. Only after that do we 
focus on all living beings. 
********************************* 
This is a difficult topic and the text and commentary can be challenging. But if we 
simply stop because we find it difficult, it will always remain difficult. We should  
try our best to study, to read and to understand the text. Personally speaking, I 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 16 
Page 2 of 9 also find it difficult. But I think, “This is Dharma. I am practising Dharma and I 
am learning something.” So I try and put in the effort and then I feel happy and I rejoice. 
 
(1,32) 
(1) Hatred for the [Great Vehicle]  doctrine, (2) view of self, (3) Fear of the sufferings of 
cyclic existence [and thus seeki ng one’s own peace and happiness], 
And (4) not having concern for the welfare of sentient beings 
Are the four forms of obstructions [pr eventing manifestation of the Buddha  
nature respectively] 
Of (1) those of great desire [who do no t at all abandon cyclic existence], (2)  
Forders, (3) Hearers, and (4) the Self-Arisen. 
The causes of purifying [those] are the four aspects 
Of the practices of special devotion [to the Great Vehicle] and so forth. 
 
We have been looking at the four obstructions and the persons who possess them. These persons can be divided into three types:- 
1. Those who have fallen into the extreme of samsara (or those who desire samsara) 
2. Those who have fallen into the extreme of peace or those who desire nirvana 
3. Those who have not fallen into either the extreme of samsara or nirvana 
 
Those who have fallen into the extreme of samsara are of two types: 
• Some who completely deny the existence of liberation/nirvana. 
• Some who, even though they accept the possibility of liberation, do not enter the 
path that leads to it. 
 
There are people who deny the existence of liberation/nirvana, saying it doesn't exist and they have no interest in it. 
 
Then there are others who, although they have some interest in liberation, they do not enter the path that leads to that goal. Engaging only in negative actions, it is difficult for them to develop any sense of disenchantment with cyclic existence or 
develop a mind directed towards achieving liberation. They are likened to people 
who have their lineage cut off.  
 
As mentioned in the last lesson, amongst the Buddhist tenets, there is a sub- 
school of the Vaibashikas (or Great Exposition School) called the Vatsiputriyas 
who only accept Hinayana teachings as the words of the Buddha. Some of these 
proponents also criticise and deny the validity of the Mahayana teachings. They  
assert the existence of a self-sufficient substantially existent person and is referred to as someone “of great desire ” in Verse 32.   
 
We now examine those who have fallen into the extreme of nirvana  (or those who 
desire nirvana). This group can be divided into: 
1. Those who have fallen into the extreme of nirvana but are engaging in the 
incorrect method 
2. Those who have fallen into the extreme of nirvana but are engaging in the 
correct method 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 16 
Page 3 of 9                                                           Those engaging in the incorrect method  are of three types: 
i)   The outsiders (i.e., non-Buddhists), translated here as forders or trithikas in 
Sanskrit 
ii)   Those who have a mistaken understanding of emptiness 
iii) Those who have not realised emptiness but think they have achieved the realisation of emptiness 
 
The forders are the ones who want to achieve liberation but they possess the obstruction of the “ view of self.”  Their incorrect view and conduct are obstructions 
for them as they will not be able to achieve liberation.   
 
Then there are Buddhists who are like these outsiders in wanting to achieve liberation, but engage in the incorrect methods. For example, the Vatsiputriyas not only assert that the self is self-sufficient and substantially existent but they also 
assert that a self is neither permanent nor impermanent but is inexpressible. The 
key to achieving liberation is the wisdom realising the selflessness of a person. Due to their assertions with regards to the self, they are unable to posit the meaning of emptiness and are therefore said to be engaging in the incorrect 
method.  
 
As mentioned earlier, there are Vatsiputriyas who have fallen into the extreme of 
samsara. We see here there are also Vatsiputriyas who have fallen into the 
extreme of nirvana and engaging in the incorrect method. Both groups of 
Vatsiputriyas are interested in liberation and assert the self is self-sufficient 
substantially existent person. However, the former group deprecate the Mahayana teachings while the latter group does not do this.  
 
There are also proponents of Mahayana tenets who have fallen into the extreme of 
nirvana but are engaging in the incorrect method such as the proponents of the Mind Only School.  They do assert the selflessness of a person and phenomena 
but, believing their view to be the ultimate one, they think they have realised 
emptiness.   
 
The Mind Only school asserts the selflessness of a person. They also assert the 
selflessness of phenomena as the lack of any difference in substantiality between 
the apprehending consciousness and the apprehended object.1 Holding this view 
to be the ultimate view, they think they have realised emptiness but this is not so. 
They also assert that this emptiness is truly existent.  
 
This does not mean to say that the view of the Mind Only School is not useful in helping us to realise the very subtle view of the higher schools. But, in this context, their proponents are classified as persons engaging in the incorrect 
method because they assert that the emptiness they posit is truly existent. 
 
Geshe-la: What I have explained so far, if  you go back and read the commentary – 
maybe before you may not have understood  the commentary – but now, you may 
have some idea.  
 
1 Put another way, it is mentioned in the Handout No. 7 for Basic Program, Module 3 on Tenets, 
that one of the illustration for the subtle selfl essness of phenomena is an emptiness that is the 
emptiness of a form and the valid direct perceiver apprehending it of being separate entitities.    
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 16 
Page 4 of 9 Answer to student’s question :  
There are non-Buddhist practitioners in the classification of those who have fallen 
into the extreme of nirvana because although they believe in the possibility of liberation, they fail to put in any effort to achieve something constructive towards 
this goal.  
 
These treatises are challenging and it will be difficult for me to explain everything.   
What I am doing here is summarising for you what I have read and understood. It is not easy to do even that. In summarising these points, it is possible that I may  
make some mistakes along the way or give you information that is not in 
accordance with the intent of the text. So it is important, if you have interest, to read the text and check whether what I have mentioned in class is correct or incorrect. If you think you have found anything that is incorrect or is not in 
accordance with the intent of the text, you should bring it up to me. 
 
To summarise then, those who have fallen into the extreme of nirvana and are 
engaging in the incorrect method includes (1) those who are unable to posit correctly the meaning of emptiness and (2) those who view emptiness to be truly 
existent.
1
 
The hearers and solitary realisers are those who have fallen into the extreme of 
nirvana but are engaging in the right method  because they have the realisation 
of emptiness.2  
 
We have now covered those who have fallen into the extremes of samsara and 
nirvana. Next, we look at those who have not fallen into the extremes of samara 
or nirvana.  From the perspective of the vehicle, this refers to the Mahayana 
practitioners. From the perspective of the tenets, this would refer to the 
proponents of the Middle Way Schools.3  
 “The causes of purifying [those] are the four aspects/ Of the practices of special 
devotion [to the Great Vehicle] and so forth” (last two lines of Verse 32) refer to the 
antidotes to the four obstructions mentioned earlier.  
 
What are the antidotes?  
• “Special devotion ” is devotion for the causal and resultant Mahayana and is the 
faith of conviction in the Mahayana, which is the antidote for “ those of great 
desire,”  who harbour “ hatred for the (Great Vehicle) doctrine.” 
• The realisation of emptiness in the mental continua of the bodhisattvas is the 
antidote to the view of self which is the obstruction possessed by the forders.  
• The development of concentration in the mental continua of the bodhisattvas is 
the antidote to the obstructions possessed by the hearers who, due to their “ fear  
of the sufferings of cyclic existence ,” seek only their own liberation, their “ own 
peace and happiness.” 
• The great compassion of the bodhisattvas is the antidote to the obstruction 
possessed by the solitary realisers (who are very individualistic by nature and do 
not depend on others), their lack of “ concern for the welfare of sentient beings.” 4 
 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 16 
Page 5 of 9 Question:  
Is there a difference between the obstructions possessed by the hearers and the 
solitary realisers? 
 
Answer : 
There is a difference and the reasons for this difference will come later in the text. The hearers tend to congregate as they depend on others. The solitary realisers do not congregate as they do not depend on others. They are individualistic. 
 
(1,33) 
Those who have the seed which is devotion to the Supreme Vehicle, 
The mother which is the wisdom gi ving birth to the Buddha qualities, 
The womb which is the bliss of concentration, and the nurse which is 
compassion 
Are the [Bodhisattva] children born  from [the mind of] the Subduer. 
 
For simplicity’s sake, we can understand this verse as showing the temporal effect.  
• Devotion for the causal and resultant Mahayana is like a seed that gives birth to 
the son of a wheel-turning king.  
• The wisdom realising emptiness that is complemented with bodhicitta is like a 
mother that gives birth to the Dharma of the Buddha.  
• The meditation on concentration is likened to dwelling inside the womb.  
• The compassion is likened to the nurse. 
 
In this analogy, in order to be born as a son of a wheel-turning king, there must be the seed of the father. The mother’s womb must also be functioning well. After birth, the baby needs to be well taken care of by the nurse. Only then can he grow 
up to become a wheel-turning king. In the same way, first, we need faith in the 
causal and the resultant Mahayana. With this faith, we develop the  aspiration to achieve full enlightenment. In order to do this, we will create the causes that will enable us to do this and we will develop qualities such as calm abiding, special 
insight and great compassion. Through that, we can then become a superior 
bodhisattva abiding in the first ground of the path and so forth. 
 
We are now looking at the clear light nature of the mind through the presentation 
of the ten aspects, which explains how the nature of the mind is clear light. We 
have completed the first two aspects, the entity and the causes. Can you explain 
how the presentation of the entity helps you to understand that the nature of the 
mind is clear light? Can you also explain how the presentation of the causes helps 
you to understand that the nature of the mind is clear light? 5  
 
Answer to student’s question:  We are not saying that the dharmakaya is the 
tathagata essence. In this context, the dharmakaya is said to possess the power to 
become the source of all the worldly and transcendental qualities. Sentient beings 
possess in them this tathagata essence that has the potential to transform into this 
source   of all the worldly and transcendental qualities.  In this context, the 
dharmakaya, the truth body, is the source of worldly and transcendental qualities 
and it performs the enlightened activities which engage all sentient beings, who 
are receptive to such enlightened activities. That potential  that makes us receptive 
to the enlightened activities of the Buddha is the tathagata essence. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 16 
Page 6 of 9                                                            
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng, Alison Wong & Angie Xiao, 30th March 2008  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong,  10th April March 2008 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee, 10th April 2008 
Vetted by Geshe Chonyi,  11th April 2008  
 
1 Falling to the extreme of peace  
The general explanation begins, "Wishing for fr eedom…" The specific explanation is under two 
headings: 
1. Those engaged in the wrong method 
2. Those engaged in the right method 
Those engaged in the wrong method 
“These are of three types. The first type  belongs to the numerous Tirthankara outsider systems, 
who profess doctrines of permanence and non-existence. They are outside our own dharma both by 
way view and practice. "They include the hedonist  Carvaka, the wandering Parivrajaka, and the 
naked Nirgrantha." Some of these even deny the ex istence of a high status of rebirth in past and 
future lives, and some, like the M ımamsaka, while accepting high status, deny the existence of 
freedom. 
The second type  "while following practices similar to the outsiders, has faith in our dharma." 
However, they hold to a wrong understanding of empt iness. "Who are they? It is like this; they have 
no faith in the ultimate." Like the philosophy asserted by the other schools, they believe in a 
substantially existing person whose existence is  not imputed at all on the collection or the 
continuum of the aggregates. They includ e some sections of the Buddhist Vats ıputr ıya, who hold to 
a tenet of a self of persons. They are similar to those "within our own dharma" mentioned above, in s o  f a r  a s  t h e y  b o t h  a s s e r t  a  s e l f  o f  p e r s o n s .  However those mentioned above make no effort to 
attain freedom, and resent the Mahayana dharma, while this latter type strive for freedom and 
some do not deprecate the Mahayana dharma. Among the Vats ıputrı ya there are those who do and 
those who do not deprecate the Mahayana scriptures. The Kashmiri Vaibhasika, etc., may be 
similarly divided. 
Applying this to scripture, the Buddha said , "To have no faith in emptiness is to be 
indistinguishable from the Tirthankara outsiders." The thinking behind this statement is that for 
the time being they are not fit to be taught even a coarse no-self of persons, and in that sense they 
are indistinguishable from the Tirthankara outsiders.  
Imagining it to be the thinking of the Seven Treatises on Valid Perception , some say that if 
something exists, it must be impermanent. Such an assertion is a great mistake because it plants 
the instincts of these bad views. Such a statement does not understand or have any belief in the 
validly established presentation of permanence as the negation of destruction, which is well known 
to scholars.  The non-affirming negation that is a mere negation of the self of persons and of things 
is what is to be perceived by the wisdom perceiving no-self, and if the above claim were true it 
would represent a deprecation of the meaning of no -self in such a validly established presentation. 
This would plant heavy instincts for the mentally constructed grasping to self. 
The third type  of person, while not understanding the ultimate way that phenomena exist 
nevertheless think that they do and "conceitedly holds a view on emptiness," which sees emptiness 
as truly existing. "Whatever view on emptiness they may have, their gateway to freedom will consist 
of that view on emptiness." If the gateway or method to attain the freedom of nirvana is the wisdom 
of perceiving emptiness, then to hold to emptiness also as truly existing is explained as being a 
temporarily incurable view. It is clear that this refers to the Yogacara school who assert an 
emptiness that is the lack of any difference in substantiality between apprehending consciousness 
and apprehended object. This is their ultimate reality. They also accept that emptiness truly exists 
in the sense of existing by way of its own characte ristics. This is the opinion of the omniscient Je 
Rinpoche. Otherwise it would follow that they do no t fit in any of these three categories, which the 
commentary lists later. 
In the system where existence by way of its own characteristics is the measure of true existence 
and is refuted by valid cognition, this fault of holding to the true existence of the refutation is not 
found. This is because in the understanding of  subtle emptiness, when the mind is actually 
grasped by the wisdom perceiving emptiness, there is no base for holding the refutation to exist by 
way of its characteristics. As the Bodhicaryavatara says: 
When that to be refuted has been refuted,  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 16 
Page 7 of 9                                                                                                                                                                                                    
there is no base for analysis. 
Therefore, in accepting an emptiness that is merely the refutation of the coarse object of 
refutation, the fault remains of holding a tenet in wh ich the refutation is held as truly existing. This 
view is incurable for as long as there remains a forceful clinging to the true existence of coarse 
emptiness. Other than that, the views of the Yogacara should be seen as methods for ripening the 
continuum into perceiving the subtle emptiness of the Madhyamika.  
Being engaged in the wrong method here refers to those tenets that hold to the true existence of 
emptiness. This is in opposition to the ultimate view of emptiness, even though other meditations 
and practices may be followed perfectly. However, to  say that the Cittamatra view is an obstacle to 
attaining freedom is a hugely distorted view revealing an ignorance of the paths and stages. 
To apply this to scripture; the Sutra requested by Ka śyapa  says: 
Kasayapa, to have views on the person the size of Meru is tolerable,  
but with conceit to have views on emptiness is not. 
Although just the innate clinging to a self of pers ons is still present, they do not assert it to be 
the ultimate view, nor is the self of persons asse rted to be the ultimate emptiness. However, they 
do assert emptiness that is the lack of any di fference in substantiality between apprehender and 
apprehended as being the ultimate reality, and this deposits a mentally constructed view on top of 
the innate view, which becomes difficult to eradicate. 
I do not think it is correct to claim that th is commentary teaches Vijñaptivada philosophy. 
Acarya Arya Asanga began the Vijn aptivada tradition for the sake of  followers of Cittamatra lineage 
and taught it extensively. In his Yogacara Bodhisattva Levels the above citation was cited to 
contradict the No-Nature school who assert that ther e is not a trace of anything existing by its own 
characteristics. Here it is cited in order to damage the assertion that emptiness truly exists. 
This assertion also includes the doctrine of th e Hearers of course, but does not end with them 
otherwise this section on Yogacara would not be mentioned at all. ( Gyaltsap’s commentary, pg. 41-
44) 
 
2 Those engaged in the right method 
Those who fall to the extreme of peace and "are enga ged in the right method are also of two types. 
There are those who enter the perfect way and are in accord with the vehicle of the Hearers." They 
understand the subtle emptiness that is the no-s elf of persons and phenomena, and attain the 
direct perception of the path of seeing. "The second type is the Solitary Realizer whose way of 
perceiving emptiness is similar." 
This also teaches that Hearers and Solitary Rea lizers both perceive the two kinds of subtle 
emptiness because engaging in the wrong method through wrong views, where the reality of 
existence is not perceived and both phenomena and emptiness are held to be truly existing, was taught in the previous section. Also, if right method and wrong method were differentiated by 
method, as opposed to wisdom, and which refers to those practices that lead to enlightenment 
together with the generation of the Mahayana mi nd—the basis of those practices, then it would 
have been correct to include Hearers and Solitary Realizers in those engaged in the wrong method. 
Therefore, whether the attainment is freedom or omniscience, from the perspective of the view the 
ultimate method can be none other than the perception of subtle emptiness. Although this 
perception is found in Hearer and Solitary Realizer  a r y a s ,  t h e r e  i s  n o  c e r t a i n t y  t h a t  i t  i s  f o u n d  
throughout the Hearer and Solitary Realizer lineage. (Gyaltsab’s commentary, pgs. 44-45)  
 
3 Not falling to either extreme 
Through the power of karma and mental affliction one is born in samsara. By putting a stop to 
birth in samsara one attains nirvana. "To have no desire for either of these is to dwell perfectly 
within the Mahayana." Of these there are special and the ordinary disciples. The latter would 
include the Yogacara, while the former are "the most intelligent of beings" who practice to perfection the philosophies and meditations of th e Mahayana. "Unlike those of great desire…they 
enter a path in which samsara and nirvana are equalized." They are of a pure attitude, "with a mind reliant upon non-abiding nirvana," and of pu re conduct, "with conduct reliant upon samsara 
devoid of mental affliction," in which they take  birth through the force of prayer and compassion. 
"They dwell in compassion and a firm resolve" that wi shes all sentient beings to be free of suffering 
together with the thought, "I will free them." Th is is the foundation and "the pure root" of the 
Mahayana mind. They are the Great Madhyamikas wh o practice to perfection the path that negates 
the two extremes of samsara and peace. ( Gyaltsab’s commentary, pg. 45)  
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 16 
Page 8 of 9                                                                                                                                                                                                    
4 Teaching 
This begins from the line, "Apart from those sent ient beings dwelling perfectly within the Mahayana 
perceiving the obstructions to be without nature, those of great desire, the outsiders, the Hearers 
and the Solitary Realizers, these four kinds of sentient beings, dwell within the obstructions that prevent the perception and actualization of the tathagata basic element." 
This refers to dwelling in the obstructions that  prevent the perception of emptiness by nature 
together with the complete method side, and for th e time being obscure its realization. [112]This is 
not a general teaching that the Hearers and Solitary Realizers do not perceive emptiness, but refers 
to the fact that their meditations are not characterized by the treasury of space samadhi, as 
explained further on. 
Explanation 
"What are these four? The bodhisattvas meditate on devotion to the Mahayana dharma as an 
antidote for hatred and anger toward the Mahayana  dharma, which is the ob struction of those with 
strong desire. The bodhisattvas meditate on the pe rfection of wisdom as an antidote for the views 
on self, which is the obstruction of the Tirthank ara outsiders. The bodhisattvas meditate on the 
treasury of space samadhi, and so forth as an antidote to seeing samsara as suffering and to 
abandoning other sentient beings, which is the obst ruction of those of the Hearer doctrine who are 
frightened by the sufferings of samsara. The bodhisattvas meditate upon great compassion as an 
antidote to the obstructions of the Solitary Realiz ers, who pay no regard to the welfare of others 
and turn their backs on sentient beings," by not ta king on the responsibility that promises, "I will 
free sentient beings." Here each obstruct ion is linked with its respective antidote. 
Summary 
This begins from the line, "The bodhisattvas meditate on these four…" To summarize; great 
devotion toward the causal and resultant Mahayana dharma as a prerequisite, followed by 
meditation on great compassion leading to the generation of the mind of supreme enlightenment, 
and meditation on the exclusively Mahayana samadhi focused on the union of peaceful abiding and penetrative insight; this is the complete body of antidotes. ( Gyaltsab’s commentary, pg. 46-47)  
 
5 Nature [Entity]  
The nature refers to three things: the truth body, suchness, and Buddha potential. These three 
are included in the category of the nature as distinct from the categories of cause and result. 
They are illustrated by three analogies: 
 Like a jewel, space and pure water, 
Ever undefiled in nature. 
The Tathagata's truth body is likened to a wish-fulfilling jewel. Suchness is likened to space and 
Buddha potential is likened to pure water. These three—truth body, suchness and Buddha 
potential—are by nature ever pure, or undefiled, in that they have always had a nature of 
being an emptiness of inherent existence. Like that, a jewel is not by nature hidden by a covering 
of earth, space is not by nature obscured by clouds and water is not by nature polluted by 
mud. 
The Sublime Continuum expands on these three as follows: 
Because the element is included in the threefold nature,  
It bears a similarity to the Buddha and so forth. 
Its nature is that of the truth body.  
Of suchness and also potential.  
These should be known by three,  
One, and five examples . 
An extensive explanation of the threefold nature is incorporated in the nine examples referred to 
in this verse as the three, one and five. These nine examples are explained in Chapter 6. 
Causes  
In this case 'causes' refers to four particular causes which purify the obstructions to realising 
the threefold nature. These causes enable the threefold nature to emerge by purifying the 
obstructions to it: 
It emerges through faith in the Dharma,  
Higher wisdom, concentration, and compassion. 
Faith in the Mahayana Dharma is likened to a seed. A Bodhisattva's higher wisdom cognising 
emptiness is like a mother. A Bodhisattva's higher concentration is like being secure in the 
comfort of a mother's womb. A Bodhisattva's great compassion is likened to a nurse. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 16 
Page 9 of 9                                                                                                                                                                                                    
With faith in the supreme vehicle as the seed, 
Wisdom as the mother giving birth to a Buddha's phenomena. 
Abiding in the blissful womb of concentration and nursed by compassion, 
Emerge those sons of the Buddha. 
Faith in the causal and resultant aspects of the supreme vehicle is like the seed which will 
mature into the birth of a universal king. There are three types of faith: clear faith, wishing faith 
and believing faith. The faith referred to here is believing faith, because this faith of certainty in 
belief is the fundamental cause that can be developed into the realisation of all the Buddha's 
doctrines. It will eventually give birth to the attainment of buddhahood. Faith overcomes the 
disinterest and lack of conviction with regard to the Mahayana path that is a great obstacle to 
realising the threefold nature. The Lamp of the Jewel Sutra says: 
Faith precedes all qualities!  
Giving them birth like a mother,  
It nurtures good qualities  
And increases them all. 
When the wisdom perceiving emptiness is couple d with extensive method, the practices of great 
love, great compassion, bodhichitta and so on, it is like a mother. It is the 'mother' that gives 
birth to the phenomena, or attributes, of a Buddha. The wisdom perceiving emptiness is like 
the mother of Buddhas, whereas the extensive method practices of great love and so on are like 
the father. This is asserted because the wisdom perceiving emptiness is the common cause of 
the Hearer's, Solitary Realiser's and Bodhisattva's enlightenment. Extensive method, however, 
is uniquely a cause for the Bodhisattva's enlightenment and is therefore likened to the father. 
This follows the ancient Indian system of lineage, where a child's lineage was determined 
specifically by the lineage and occupation of the father, rather than the mother. The wisdom 
perceiving emptiness, which is likened to the mother, overcomes the acquired and innate 
grasping at the inherent existence of self and phenomena which are great obstacles to revealing 
the threefold nature. 
The bliss of higher concentration is likened to abiding in the mother's womb because it 
provides protection from the sufferings of samsara. The stable, secure and comfortable mind of 
concentration withdraws one's attention from the agitation engaging the external distractions of 
samsara and mental dullness. The Bodhisattva with highly developed concentration has a 
mind that remains blissful and undisturbed within the protection of his meditative stabilisation. 
He is sustained by concentratio n alone. Like this, the mother's womb protects a foetus from 
the external world which would otherwise destroy it. Secure and comfortable within this womb, 
it is sustained entirely by the mother and requires no other food or breath of its own. Abiding 
in the bliss of concentration overcomes the fear of samsara which obscures one's threefold 
nature. 
Great compassion is likened to a nurse and is important at the beginning, middle and end 
of the Bodhisattva's practice. Just as a nurse cares for and nurtures an infant from the first 
moment of its birth, and continues to look after it during the child's growth and right through to 
maturity, so compassion nurtures the development of one's Buddha potential at the 
beginning, middle and end of one's practice. As Chandrakirti says in his Engaging in the Middle 
Way: 
Because this compassion alone is the seed of the Victor's rich harvest, 
And like the water for its development, 
And the ripening of that to be enjoyed for a long time, 
I, therefore, shall praise compassion at the start. 
It is therefore most important to develop genuine great compassion in order to be able to 
actualise one's threefold nature. 
These four causes eliminate the obstacles to the threefold nature, the realisation of which 
brings the following results. ( The Fundamental Potential for Enlightenment by Geshe Archarya 
Thubten Loden,  pgs 133~147) 
 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 17 
Page 1 of 8 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating the Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra-ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation Jeffrey 
Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and Wilson, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
Commentary from The Tath›gata Essence, Commentary to the First 
Chapter by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen, translation Gavin Kilty, © FPMT, Inc. 
January 2007, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
 
Root verses are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added 
 
Lesson No: 17                              Date: 25th March 2008  
Chapter One: The Essen ce of a One Gone Thus 
Verses 34-38 
 
The eighth verse of the Eight Verses of Thought Transformation  is: “Undefiled by 
the stains of the superstitions of the eight worldly concerns, may I, by perceiving 
all phenomena as illusory, be released from the bondage of attachment.” 
 
The preceding verses of the Eight Verses dealt with the practices of training the 
mind in developing bodhicitta, which are unstained by the eight worldly dharmas (or the eight worldly concerns). These are:  
 
1) Craving for pleasures of the six senses.  
2) Craving to be free of the unpleasant.  
3) Craving to acquire material things.  
4) Craving to avoid losing or not obtaining material things 
5) Craving for personal praise and admiration.  
6) Craving to avoid personal slander, blame and criticism.   
7) Craving to hear sweet, ego-pleasing words or sounds.  
8) Craving to not hear ugly, displeasing words or sounds.  
 
When we are training in developing the good heart and our activities to benefit others are somehow related to our own interest or for the purpose of securing praise and good reputation, with such an underlying motivation, our actions 
become impure.  
 
All the preceding verses up to this part of Verse 8: “ Undefiled by the stains of 
the superstitions of eight worldly concerns”  show the practice of method. “ May 
I, by perceiving all phenomena as illusory, be released from the bondage of attachment” shows the practice of wisdom.  
 
When we practise seeing all phenomena as illusory, then whatever attachment 
and anger we may have will be pacified. Generally, we like to be praised and dislike criticism. When we are praised, it is good to examine the nature of that 
praise. How does it appear to us?  It appears to be truly existent but it actually 
does not exist truly. Likewise, the person who is praising us appears to be 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 17 
Page 2 of 8 truly existent but he/she does not exist truly. In the same way, we, the 
persons being praised, appear to exist truly but in fact we do not exist truly. We can also apply this line of analysis to when we are being criticized.   
 
When we bring to mind the person who is criticising or praising us, that person appears to our minds to exist and be able to stand on his own two feet without depending on his body and mind. But in reality does that person exist 
in such a way? If the person does exist in this way, we should be able to find 
that person as an independent entity, separate from his body and mind but 
are we able to separate the person in this way? Are we able to find such a  
person or not? Obviously the answer is ‘No!' That is why we say the person is 
empty of true existence. This is likened to the illusion of a horse or elephant that is created by a magician. Although there is an appearance of a horse or 
elephant, in reality, there is no horse or elephant there. Likewise, although the 
person who is praising or criticising us appears so real, such a truly existent person does not exist (or is empty of true existence). 
 
We have attachment for the person who is praising us and aversion for the 
person who is criticising us. But what is the basis for these emotions to arise? Basically, it is the appearance of the truly existent person. We believe in that 
appearance and then we grasp at it, believing this is how that person exists 
and we generate strong attachment or aversion. Once we are able to 
understand how mistaken these appearances are, how they do not accord with  reality, it won’t matter whether we are being praised or criticised, we would be  
able to respond with equanimity.  
 
Let us say we dream of someone praising us. We get very excited over the 
praise in the dream. We really like it as it feels so nice. But when we wake up, the person who was praising us is gone and we realise that person does not 
exist in reality. Understanding that it was only a dream, we are no longer 
excited over that praise we received. The same would apply if we were to dream 
of someone criticising us. Realising it was only a dream, our unhappiness over the criticism goes away.  
 
Our experiences in life are like dreams. Why? Because in real life, when we 
look at the people who praise or criticise us, they appear real, to be truly existent and we believe them to be so. In the same way, we believe the pleasure 
we seek and the suffering we wish to avoid to exist truly from its own side.   
When we are able to understand  the emptiness of the person who is praising 
or criticising us, the emptiness of their praises or criticisms and the fact we ourselves are also empty of true existence, then it is like waking up from a 
dream (especially when we have the direct perception of emptiness). When we wake up from our dream, we realise whatever we dreamt of actually do not 
exist. 
 
“May I, by perceiving all phenomena as i llusory, be released from the bondage of 
attachment” refers to the understanding of all phenomena as illusory. We can 
apply it to the eight worldly dharmas by understanding how happiness or 
unhappiness, material gain or loss, praise or criticism and good reputation or 
bad reputation are all like illusions. They do not exist truly. We can also apply 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 17 
Page 3 of 8 this understanding to compassion. When we look at the nature of compassion, 
the object of our compassion and the person who is generating compassion, again they should be  seen to be illusory in nature. 
********************* 
We have been looking at how the nature of our mind is clear light through the presentation of the ten aspects of which we have covered the first two aspects, the entity and the causes.  
 
For the first aspect, the entity of the tathagata essence is explained through 
the three analogies – the jewel, space and water.  
 
For the second aspect, the causes does not refer to the causes of the tathagata 
essence but rather the causes for purifying the tathagata essence, which are 
identified as: 
1. Devotion to the (Great Vehicle or Mahayana) doctrine 
2. The higher wisdom (realising selflessness) 
3. The meditative stabilisation (endowed with bliss) 
4. The compassion (for sentient beings) 
These are the four causes that will awaken the buddha lineage, purifying the 
tathagata essence of its stains (or defilements). 
 
Answer to student’s question : 
The second aspect is the causes. What of? We would have to say the causes of the buddha nature (or tathagata essence). However, it is not the fully qualified or real cause in the sense that it is not a cause that produces the buddha 
nature. Why? Because the buddha nature (or tathagata essence) does not have 
any cause. It is the emptiness of the mind which is a permanent phenomenon  
not subject to causes and conditions. So, in this context, causes here mean (1) 
the causes for purifying the tathagata essence of its stains and (2) the  causes 
for awakening the buddha lineage. These are the reasons for positing the four causes and calling them the causes of the tathagata essence.  
 
These four causes cause the developmental lineage to increase. At the very 
least, you should know this.  If you were asked to explain the meaning of the second aspect and how it shows that the nature of the mind is clear light, at 
least you should be able to say that this aspect refers to the causes of 
purifying the tathagata essence and for awakening the buddha lineage. As for the details of this aspect, these appear at great length in the commentary.   
  
(1,34) 
The perfection of the qualities of purity, self, bliss, 
And permanence [of the Truth Body which is the fruit of  
purifying the obstructions through their antidotes] is the fruit. 
[The lineage] has the function of [bring ing about] aversion for the suffering [of 
cyclic existence] 
And the aspiration as well as the wish to attain the peace [of nirvana]. 
 
 “The perfection of the qualities of purity, self, bliss,/ And permanence [of the 
Truth Body which is the fruit of/puri fying the obstructions through their 
antidotes] is the fruit ’ is the brief presentation of the effect.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 17 
Page 4 of 8 “[The lineage] has the function of [bring ing about] aversion for the suffering [of 
/cyclic existence]/ and the aspiration as well as the wish to attain the peace [of 
nirvana]”  is the brief presentation of the function . 
 
The function and the quality of possessing the lineage are to produce the desire to achieve nirvana based on the development of renunciation which 
comes from the understanding of the unbearable suffering of samsara. 
Understanding the unbearable suffering of samsara, renunciation of samsara 
is generated. One then develops the yearning and aspiration to achieve nirvana. The development of such a mind is said to be the function of the  
lineage. 
 
With regards to the effect, Verse 34 lists out four fruits (or results) of the 
tathagata essence:  
1. The perfection of the qualities of purity 
2. The perfection of the qualities of self 
3. The perfection of the qualities of bliss 
4. The perfection of the qualities of permanence 
 
Are these fruits produced by the tathagata essence? We would have to say, ‘No’ because the tathagata essence is a permanent phenomenon which cannot produce anything. Why then are they called the “ fruits ”? This is because when 
the tathagata essence is purified of its stains, these four qualities will be 
achieved.  
 
Verses 35 to 38 give an extended explanation of the effect.  
 
(1, 35) 
In brief the fruits of these [four causes, devotion to the Great Vehicle and so 
forth, 
Are attainments of the four qualities] distinguished as 
Purity and so forth [i.e., self, bliss, and permanence] through being antidotes 
That are opposite to the four erroneous aspects [impurity and so forth] with 
respect to the Truth Body. 
 
(1,36) 
Because that [Truth Body] is naturally pure [from the start] 
And because [the adventitious defilement s as well as] the predispositions are 
abandoned, [this possession of the two type s of purity] is [a perfection of] purity. 
Because the elaborations of [the conception of] of self [imputed by the Forders] 
and of the selflessness [concei ved by Hearers and so forth] 
Have been pacified, it is [a perfection of] holy self. 
 
(1,37) 
Because the [subtle] aggregates which have a mental nature 
And their cause [the level of the pred ispositions of igno rance] have been 
removed, it is just [a perfection of] bliss. 
Because cyclic existence and nirvana are realized as equal [in nature] 
It is [a perfection of] permanence [that is, unbroken (fulfillment) of the two aims]. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 17 
Page 5 of 8 (1,38) 
Eliminating with wisdom all attachment to self [as well as its latencies, they do 
not dwell in cyclic existence], 
But due to being attached to sentient be ings [with great compassion they do not 
forsake them], whereby the compassionate [Bodhisattvas] do not [fall to an 
extreme of peace], attaining a [solitary] peace. 
In that way, in dependence on [the  two] methods [for attaining]  
enlightenment—the awareness [realizing selflessness] and the mercy [of great 
compassion]— 
Bodhisattva Superiors [do not fall to th e two extremes], not being in cyclic 
existence of in nirvana. 
 
Question :  
The lineage in Verse 34 seems to be suggesting that it is the function of the 
lineage to awaken an aspiration for liberation (or nirvana) rather than 
achieving enlightenment which we always talk about.  
 
Answer :  
There is nothing wrong with this. This is because developing renunciation of  
samsara and developing the wish to achieve enlightenment are functions of the 
lineage. The word “ peace” here includes many things and shouldn't be 
understood to be restricted to only mean the peace of nirvana attained by the 
hearers and solitary realisers. Peace can include non-abiding nirvana and great liberation which means enlightenment. 
 
The revulsion that the hearers and solitary realisers have for samsara and 
their minds that aspire to achieve liberation, is that lineage or not?  
 
Geshe-la: Why is the lineage of the arhats not buddha lineage? Do you mean that the arhat never gets enlightened? An arhat has to get enlightened. There is no such thing as Hinayana enlightenment.  There is only one enlightenment. One 
day, the arhat will become enlightened so the arhat does have buddha lineage. 
 
What is the result of the four causes, i.e., devotion to the Mahayana doctrine, the higher wisdom, the meditative stabilisation and great compassion, which purify the tathagata essence? The result is the abandonment of the four 
erroneous views as mentioned in Verse 35.  
 
The four erroneous views  are: 
1. Apprehending that which is impermanent as permanent 
2. Apprehending that which is unclean to be clean 
3. Apprehending that which is misery to be happiness or pleasure 
4. Apprehending the selfless as self 
The abandonment of these four erroneous views is the effect (or fruit or result). 
These four erroneous views can be posited by depending on the conventional 
or by depending on the ultimate. The four non-erroneous views are the 
opposites of the four erroneous views.   
 
But when these are discussed in relation to the wisdom of the Buddha, they 
would still be considered erroneous. We should understand why this is so.   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 17 
Page 6 of 8                                                           In our earlier discussion on the types of persons possessing the obscurations, 
we looked at the view of emptiness as posited by the Mind Only School. That is the method to realise subtle emptiness but nevertheless the proponent of the 
Mind Only School is still considered to be a person engaging in the wrong 
method because that person views (1) the mind realising emptiness to be truly 
existent and (2) even that emptiness itself to be truly existent.  
 
For example, we are not saying that the mind that realises the impermanence 
of the body is mistaken. However, this mind in relation to the wisdom of the 
Buddha is considered erroneous because this mind apprehends the 
impermanence of the body to be truly existent. The mind that realises the 
impermanence of the body is not erroneous but the mind that apprehends the impermanence of the body as truly existent  is wrong consciousness. That  
conception of the true existence of the impermanence of the body is erroneous. 
 
The mind that realises selflessness in relation to the wisdom of the Buddha is 
also considered erroneous because this mind realises coarse selflessness and it views that to be truly existent.  
 
Verse 35 points out that the final wisdom, the dharmakaya, referred here as the Truth Body, is the abandonment of the four erroneous views regarding both conventional and ultimate. This is said to be the result which is 
enumerated as four - the perfections of the quality of purity, self, bliss and 
permanence of the Truth Body.
12
 
1  Expanded 
1. An explanation of the wrong views and the r esults of eradicating them through the    
antidotes 
2. Linking cause to result 
3. Specific explanations of the hindrances to the three kinds of person seeking to attain 
the dharmakaya 
An explanation of the wrong views and results of eradicating them through the 
antidotes 
1.  The meaning 
2.  Application to scripture 
 The meaning 
1. Wrong views regarding conventional existence 
2. Wrong views regarding ultimate existence 
3. The divisions of result obtained by abandoning the wrong views 
Wrong views regarding conventional existence 
This begins, "Thinking impermanent phenomena su ch as form to be permanent…" up to "these 
are said to be the four wrong views." These four wrong views exist also in those whose minds have not been affected by tenets because they are wrong views that engage erroneously with 
the conventional world of the truth of suffering. 
Wrong views regarding ultimate existence 
This begins, "By reversing these…" up to "these ar e the reverse of the four wrong views. On the 
basis of the dharmakaya of the tathagata, with its characteristics of permanence and so forth, 
these are wrong views." 
The wisdom apprehending the aggregates as im permanent and so forth directly opposes the 
mind apprehending permanence and so forth as  w e l l  a s  t h a t  m i n d ' s  m o d e  o f  a p p r e h e n s i o n  
when both are focused on the same object. The first mode of apprehension above is in accord with the conventional existence of the aggregates and therefore is an actual antidote to 
apprehending them as permanent and so forth. In the commentary it is stated that holding 
wrong views regarding the dharmakaya refers to holding to the true existence of the 
impermanent aggregates. To say that apprehending the aggregates as impermanent and so 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 17 
Page 7 of 8                                                                                                                                                                                           
forth is a wrong consciousness mistaken in it s apprehended object is a deprecation of the 
conventional truth. To assert that it is not right to apprehend the aggregates as being 
impermanent, and that to do so is an obstac le to freedom, is the philosophy of the Chinese 
master Hoshang, who asserted that it is not right to apprehend anything as existing anywhere 
or not existing anywhere or existing as something or not as something. In such a philosophy 
there can be no division into right and wrong.  
Also, holding no-self to truly exist is to hold coarse no-self as truly existing, because having 
perceived the subtle no self with valid perception and by keeping it in mind, it is not possible 
to hold a tenet which believes that such a refutation is truly existing. Any mind that arises 
holding as truly existing the no-self that is the refutation of the subtle object of refutation, has 
to be an innate mind. One might say, "That cannot be so, because emptiness of existing by 
characteristics is itself the basis for an appr ehension of its true existence, and yet that 
emptiness has had nothing to do with samsara since beginningless time." There is no fault 
here. As a basis for the apprehension of true ex istence, the Mahayana path together with its 
results has also had nothing to do with samsara since beginningless time and yet any 
apprehension of true existence that results from focusing upon it without resorting to logical 
investigation, must be an innate mind. If that were not so, the teaching from the Ornament for 
Clear Realization on the abandonments on the path of meditation which talks of the existence 
of several conceptual perceptions of separate apprehender and apprehended, could not be 
substantiated. ( Gyaltsap Je’s commentary , pgs. 50-52)  
 
2 Result 
There are four results which arise from the four causes mentioned above. 
       Transcendental qualities of purity, self, bliss  
 And permanence are the result . 
The four results are: 
1 Transcendental purity. 
2 Transcendental self. 
3 Transcendental bliss. 
4 Transcendental permanence. 
More extensively: 
This is purity because it is pure by nature, and 
 Because the predispositions are abandoned. 
The complete pacification of the elaborations of 
Self and non-self is the sublime self. 
It is bliss because of the demise 
 Of the aggregates of a mental nature and their causes. 
 It is permanence because the equality of 
        Samsara and nirvana is realized. 
A Buddha's truth body has tr anscendental purity because it is pure by nature and 
because it is free of the predispositions of the delusions. 
The truth body transcends self because it has a complete pacification of conceptual 
elaborations regarding truly existent non-self or the true existence of the permanent type 
of self asserted by the forders. Forders believe that the self is a functioning thing, that it is 
permanent, that the self and form are different entities, and some also hold that the self is a 
creator. Within the sphere of the truth body, however, there is no such conceptual 
elaboration regarding self or non-self or any form of duality at all. 
The truth body has transcendental bliss because the obstructions to omniscience have 
been overcome. The obstructions to omniscience are:  
(1) the subtle latency of the conception of inherent existence,  
(2) the appearance of inherently existent objects to the six consciousnesses, and  
(3) the stains of apprehending the two truths as different substantial entities.  
There are no other obscurations to omniscience than these three. Because there are 
no obstructions to omniscience that are consciousnesses, ignorance is not classified as an 
obstruction to omniscience: rather, as an obstruction to liberation. The 'aggregates of a 
mental nature' in this case specifically refer to the mental consciousness which arises from 
karma and ignorance. Karma and ignorance in turn arise from the subtle latency of 
ignorance which is the first of the obstructions to omniscience. Because of the demise of this 
subtle latency, there is the demise of the aggregates of a mental nature, and their causes, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 17 
Page 8 of 8                                                                                                                                                                                           
This text is tough. If you really want to study, you have to try to read the text 
beforehand. Then my brief explanation will make it easier to understand. There is no way we can go into extensive explanation in class. 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng, Alison Wong & Angie Xiao, 3rd April 2008  
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong, 11th April 2008 
 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee, 15th April 2008 
 
Vetted by Geshe Chonyi, 14th April 2008  
 
 
which are the source of all suffering. Thus the truth body is said to be a state of 
transcendental bliss. 
A Buddha's truth body is transcendental permanence because it is a final cessation 
which directly perceives that both samsara and nirvana are equally empty of inherent 
existence. The truth body transcends both samsara and nirvana is considered to be 
permanent because the nature body is a final cessation. These four transcendent qualities 
are possessed only by Buddhas. Ultimately, they are free of the twin streams of peace 
(nirvana) and existence (samsara). 
Actions 
The actions of the potential are overviewed as follows: 
Renouncing suffering and the desire to attain peace, 
These wishes are the actions (of the potential). 
Renunciation arises from perceiving the faults of samsara, and interest in attaining peace 
arises through seeing the benefits of nirvana. Seeing the faults of samsara and the benefits 
of nirvana are the actions of the potential. This is expanded further: 
If Buddha potential did not exist, 
Aversion to suffering would not arise. 
Desire, aspiration and longing for nirvana 
Would also not arise. 
If the uncontaminated and naturally pure seed of Buddha potential were not present, then, 
when seeing the faults of the suffering of samsara, aversion for it would not arise. Also, when 
seeing the benefits of the happiness of nirvana, an aspiration, longing or desire to attain 
nirvana would not arise. The reasoning that explains this is that all beings have Buddha 
potential because, when seeing the faults of samsara, renunciation and the desire to 
abandon it arises, and with that, the intention to attain nirvana is seen. 
Samsara and nirvana, their  
suffering and happiness! Seeing their faults and qualities  
Is due to the existence of the potential.  
But not if without potential. 
Through contemplating the general and particular faults of samsara, one will come to 
associate the faults of suffering with samsara.  Likewise, through cont emplating the benefits 
of nirvana, one will come to associate the benefits of happiness with the attainment of 
nirvana. This occurs due to the presence of the Buddha potential. If there were no Buddha 
potential these associations would not be possible. When hearing of the faults of samsara 
and the benefits of nirvana, and when the mere sound of the teachings on emptiness causes tears to come to the eyes and the hairs of the body to stand on end, it is a sign of 
the awakening of the Buddha potential. ( The Fundamental Potential for Enlightenment by 
Geshe Archarya Thubten Loden pgs 133~147) 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 18 
Page 1 of 2 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating the Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra-ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation Jeffrey 
Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and Wilson, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
Commentary from The Tath›gata Essence, Commentary to the First 
Chapter by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen, translation Gavin Kilty, © FPMT, Inc. 
January 2007, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
  
Root verses are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added 
 
Lesson No: 18                              Date: 27th March 2008  
 
(This session was given over to group discussion. Geshe- la gave a few pointers 
on how debate and discussi ons should be conducted).   
 
In order for us to have a fruitful discussion and to achieve its purpose, we 
need a few causes. We need wisdom, familiarity with the text we are studying and, best of all, the ability to apply logic. 
 
What are the things that will ‘beautify’ the debate/discussion? We must exhibit a pleasant demeanour. Whatever we say must be meaningful and expressed clearly in a pleasant manner without using any harsh or offensive language. 
The debate/discussion should be lively but conducted without pride or conceit.  
 
We may have a good or bad attitude during the debate/discussion. An example 
of  a bad attitude is when we put down our opponent out of anger so that we can defeat him. This is done out of attachment for winning the debate or 
argument.  Not following the proper method of reasoning is also considered a 
negative attitude.  
 
A bad debate or discussion gone wrong is when it is conducted with a bad 
attitude. Then such discussion will not become Dharma as it is infused with 
afflictive emotions that cause one to be angry and unhappy. In the process, we 
also hurt other people. As the result of such karma, we would have to 
experience unpleasant effects in our future lives. 
 
An example of a helpful or positive attitude would be the genuine wish to know 
and understand the subject as well as having respect for the opponent in the debate/discussion. We must have a positive motivation and the good heart  
wishing to help our opponent or partner remove their wrong understanding of 
the subject, i.e., we should have compassion for our discussion partner or opponent. We should also help our opponent or discussion partner to understand the subject matter if they do not do so.  
 
Quarrelling is an example of a bad debate/discussion because participants 
would tend to use nasty words to hurt the other party. Facial expressions also become ugly.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 18 
Page 2 of 2 A civilised debate/discussion is an example of a good debate/discussion. When 
there is a fruitful discussion going on, people will learn from one another. In order to achieve this, when others point out our wrong understanding, 
misconception or wrong view, we should recognise them and remain calm.  
 
What are the benefits of engaging in debate/discussion that is conducted in 
the correct positive manner? Our understanding and realisations will increase. We will derive satisfaction because we learn and increase our knowledge 
during the debate/discussion. Our reputation will spread far and wide. We will 
have the karma to be born as a powerful person such as a Dharma king in the 
future and we will be able to uphold the teachings of the Buddha.  
 
I thought of mentioning this to you so that you can understand how a  
meaningful debate/discussion should be conducted. Sometimes, I feel that  
some of the discussions don’t seem to be meaningful and not that good. 
 
In order for debate/discussion to happen, in the first place there must be a 
cause. The causes were mentioned earlier. If there is no cause, then there will 
be no fruit or effect. Sometimes afflictive emotions will arise during 
debate/discussion. This is due to anger, pride, desire and so forth. We should 
then rely on mindfulness, reminding ourselves over and over that we do not 
engage in debate/discussion in order to generate negative emotions. These do 
arise during debate/discussion and we should be vigilant so that we can counteract them.  
  
In the ideal situation, a fruitful debate/discussion should involve all parties. 
All those involved should be of similar intelligence and have similar interest in 
studying.  If everyone is at a similar level, then we will get something out of  
the debate/discussion.  
 
For us here, it is quite difficult as there are some who want to study and there 
are others who do not want to study at  all. When we put these two types of 
people together, the person who has interest will know a lot and the person 
who has no interest does not know much. Then we cannot expect much out of 
the debate/discussion. However, we have to try our best given whatever 
situation we are in.  
 
Basically, we should participate with a good motivation. Sometimes, some 
people seem to be unhappy or at a loss during the debate/discussion. Anyway, 
during the discussion, there would be some people who would ask questions 
and we should try to answer them with the intention to help them understand. 
We should reply clearly, with good intentions, in a pleasant manner, using pleasant language and with a pleasant demeanour.  
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng, Alison Wong & Angie Xiao, 9th April 2008  
Edited by Cecilia Tsong, 11th April 2008 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee, 15th April 2008 
 
Vetted by Geshe Chonyi, 14th April 2008   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre             Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 19 
Page 1 of 8 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Grea t Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating the Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra-ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation Jeffrey 
Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and Wilson, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
Commentary from The Tath›gata Essence, Commentary to the First Chapter 
by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen, translation Gavin Kilty, © FPMT, Inc. 
January 2007, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
  
Root verses are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added 
 
Lesson No: 19                                      Date: 1st April 2008  
Chapter One: The Essen ce of a One Gone Thus 
Verses 35-37 
 
The 10 minutes we have been spending before every class meditating is an 
opportunity to train ourselves in meditation and to sit still in the 7-point 
Vairochana posture. If even sitting still for 10 minutes is difficult, then we can 
forget about stilling our minds.  
 
There may be some pain or discomfort, but instead of letting our minds focus on 
that, we should try to put up with it for a while instead of shifting here and there. 
We should see it as the practice of the patience of voluntarily accepting suffering, 
(which we had studied in the earlier modules). When we have such a thought, the 
discomfort will slowly go away. This practice can be accompanied by reflecting on 
how our bodies are in the nature of suffering, are impermanent and selfless.  
************************** 
The four effects or results of the tathagata essence are: 
1. The perfection of the qualities of purity 
2. The perfection of the qualities of self 
3. The perfection of the qualities of bliss 
4. The perfection of the qualities of permanence 
The four causes of purifying the tathagata essence are: 
1. Devotion to the (Great Vehicle or Mahayana) doctrine 
2. The higher wisdom (realising selflessness) 
3. The meditative stabilisation (endowed with bliss) 
4. The compassion (for sentient beings) 
The four effects are the results of these four causes. 
 
Here, we are not talking about the causes and effects of the tathagata essence in 
the fully qualified sense. The four causes of the tathagata essence are the causes for purifying the tathagata essence of its stains. Once that is done, we will achieve 
the final result of the four perfections.  
 
1. The first cause for purifying the tathagata essence is devotion to the 
Mahayana doctrine . This is the antidote to the hatred of the Mahayana. As a 
result of such devotion, one enters into the Mahayana path, abandoning all dislike 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre             Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 19 
Page 2 of 8 for the Mahayana. The defilements are gradually eliminated as one progresses 
along the path and once they are completely removed, one achieves the result of perfect purity (or the dharmakaya).  
 
2. The perfection of the qualities of self  is the result of meditating on the 
perfection of wisdom. As mentioned earlier, the forders are those who possess the view of self. There are also some proponents of Buddhist tenets who assert that 
the five aggregates illustrate the person or who assert a substantially existent self 
that exists apart from the aggregates. These are all wrong conceptions.  
 
Due to these wrong conceptions, these forders and Buddhist proponents are 
unable to enter the correct path or engage in the correct method. In order to abandon the grasping at the self of  person – whether that is conceived to be the 
aggregates as the illustration of the person or a substantially existent self that 
exists apart from the aggregates - they have to realise the emptiness of inherent existence.  
 
By meditating on the emptiness of inherent existence they will achieve the result of 
the perfect self. The self referred to here is  selflessness. The self that is asserted by 
non-Buddhists and proponents of all Buddhist tenets below the highest school is 
mistaken and incorrect. The correct or perfect self is selflessness, i.e., the 
emptiness of the inherently existent person. One realises that the entire world and 
its inhabitants are empty of inherent existence through the meditation on the perfection of wisdom. When one has this realisation, the perfect self and  
enlightenment are achieved. 
 
3. The hearers seek only liberation due to their fear of the sufferings of cyclic 
existence. The antidote for them to turn away from this mere wish for liberation is the meditation on the infinite forms of concentration  such as the sky treasury 
concentration and so forth. In reliance on these forms of concentration, they will 
achieve the result of the perfection of the qualities of both worldly and 
transcendental bliss.  
 
4. There are also solitary realisers who possess the obstruction of not having 
concern for the welfare for sentient beings, preferring isolation instead. Meditation 
on compassion  is the antidote for this condition whereby they can achieve the 
result of the perfection of the qualities of permanence  so that they will be able 
to always work for the benefit of sentient beings. 1
There are hearer arhats, solitary realiser arhats and persons abiding on the three pure grounds who have yet to achieve these four perfections because they still 
possess the four obstructions (or hindrances). The four obstructions are: 
1. Circumstance 
2. Cause 
3. Arising 
4. Destruction 
 
In this context here, the first hindrance, circumstance  refers to the  level of 
predisposition of ignorance  which is similar to the ignora nce that is the first link of 
the 12 links of dependent origination from which compositional activity (or karma) 
arises.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre             Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 19 
Page 3 of 8  
The cause , in this context, refers to the uncontaminated karma  which is similar to 
the compositional activity of the 12 links.  
 
What arises through the force of circumstance and cause? The projected effect will 
be name and form and so on. In this context, arising refers to the mental body  
that is formed by the level of predisposition of ignorance and uncontaminated 
karma.  
 
In the 12 links of dependent origination, there is the link of aging and death 
showing that phenomena undergo disintegration. Here, destruction refers to the 
inconceivable transformation of death . 
 
So, when we talk about circumstance, cause, arising and destruction, they refer to 
the level of predisposition of ignorance , uncontaminated karma , the mental body  
that arises from those two and the inconceivable transformation of death 
respectively. 
 
The level of predispo sition of ignorance  is the predisposition of grasping at true 
existence. I have referred to this before but I think my earlier explanation may have been incorrect.   
 
Uncontaminated karma  is present in the mental continua of hearer arhats,  
solitary realiser arhats and persons abiding on the pure grounds and is the subtle motivation that moves the body, speech and mind towards a particular object.  
 
The mental body  which arises from the uncontaminated karma undergoes the 
inconceivable transformation of death . This mental body is likened to the bardo 
body which passes away in the intermediate state. 
 
The person abiding in the three pure grounds also possesses these four hindrances and therefore, that person does not possess the four perfections. For example, these hindrances have to be abandoned in order to achieve the perfection 
of the qualities of purity. This explanation goes with verse 35.
2
  
(1,35) 
In brief the fruits of these [four causes, d evotion to the Great Vehicle and so forth, 
Are attainments of the four qualities] distinguished as 
Purity and so forth [i.e., self, bliss, and permanence] through being antidotes 
That are opposite to the four erroneous aspects [impurity and so forth] with respect 
to the Truth Body. 
(1,36) 
Because that [Truth Body] is naturally pure [from the start] 
And because [the adventitious defilement s as well as] the predispositions are 
abandoned, [this possession of the two type s of purity] is [a perfection of] purity. 
Because the elaborations of [the conception of] of self [imputed by the Forders] and 
of the selflessness [conceived by Hearers and so forth] 
Have been pacified, it is [a perfection of] holy self. 
(1,37) 
Because the [subtle] aggregates which have a mental nature 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre             Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 19 
Page 4 of 8                                                           And their cause [the level of the predisposi tions of ignorance] ha ve been removed, it 
is just [a perfection of] bliss. 
Because cyclic existence and nirvana are realized as equal [in nature] 
It is [a perfection of] permanence [that is, unbroken (fulfillment) of the two aims]. 
 
"Because that [Truth Body] is naturally  pure [from the start], and because [the 
adventitious defilements as well as] the predispositions are abandoned [this 
possession of the two types of purity] is [a perfection of] purity”(Verse 36): The 
dharmakaya (or truth body) is the perfection of purity  because it is pure in the 
sense of being free of the natural stains and it is pure because it is free from the 
afflictions and their imprints.   
 
“Because the elaborations of [the conception of] of self [imputed by the Forders] and of the selflessness [conceived by Hearers and so forth]/Have been pacified, it is [a 
perfection of] holy self"(Verse 36):  The dharmakaya is the holy self  because the 
elaboration of the self that is imputed by the forders “ have been pacified” and it is 
also free from all elaborations of true existence.  
 
"Because the [subtle] aggregates which have mental nature and their cause [the level of the predispositions of  ignorance] have been removed , it is just [a perfection 
of] bliss” (Verse 37): The dharmakaya is the perfection of bliss because it has 
abandoned the level of predisposition of ignorance and uncontaminated karma 
which are the causes for the arising of the mental body.  
 
"Because cyclic existence and nirvana are realized as equal [in nature]. It is [a 
perfection of] permanence [that is, unbroken (fulfilment) of the two aims]"(Verse 37): 
The dharmakaya is the perfection of permanence because it realises that both 
cyclic existence and nirvana are equal in the sense of not existing inherently and it 
is free from the two extremes of samsara and nirvana. 3
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng, Alison Wong & Angie Xiao, 14th April 2008  
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong, 18th April 2008 
 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee, 20th April 2008 
 
 
 
1  Brief explanation 
"These four perfections, which are qualities of the tath›gata dharmakaya, are the results, explained 
here in an order that is the reverse of the order of the four causes explained previously," namely, 
devotion, wisdom, samadhi and great compassion. This means that the dharmakaya perfection of permanence, the perfection of bliss, perfection of self and perfection of purity are taught in this 
order in the sutra above, but will be explained in  the order of the previous explanation of their 
causes. 
Expanded explanation 
1. Linking the perfection of purity to its cause, devotion to Mahayana dharma 
2. The perfection of the highest self as the result of meditation on the perfection of wisdom 
3. The perfection of highest bliss as the result of meditation on the perfection of meditative 
concentration 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre             Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 19 
Page 5 of 8                                                                                                                                                                                                    
4. The perfection of permanence as the result of meditation on great compassion 
 
Linking the perfection of purity to its cause, devotion to Mahayana dharma 
This is explained as "reversing the love of the impu rity that is samsara, which is found in those of 
great desire, and who harbor resentment for the Mahayana dharma," while attached solely to 
samsara. In this way each result is explained by way of its obstruction, the person with the 
obstruction, the antidote to the obstruction and the results of meditating on the antidote. 
The perfection of the highest self as the result of meditation on the perfection of wisdom 
1. Meaning 
2. A specific explanation of "highest self" 
Meaning 
"By reversing the attraction to the Tirthankara outsider philosophy that views the appropriated 
aggregates as the self of persons and the self of phenomena, thereby holding something that does 
not exist to be a self, and by meditating on the perfection of wisdom," which perceives directly that 
there is not a trace of person or aggregate existing  by their own nature, "one attains the result of 
the perfection of the highest self," which is the ultimate dharmakaya, divorced from all elaboration 
of self of persons and of phenomena. 
A specific explanation of "highest self" 
"All Tirthankara outsiders assert phenomena such as form, which do not ha ve a nature" of true 
existence, of a truly existing self of persons, or of independent existence, "to have a self," which truly exists. "In the way that those phenomena are held as a self, these outsiders are fooled by the 
characteristics of that self in the way that it is held, when at all times self of persons and 
phenomena does not exist. 
"The tathagatas, with the gnosis of truth that knows things as they are, have found the 
perfection of the highest no self of all phenomen a. In the way that it sees no-self, the gnosis that 
knows things as they are, is not fooled by the char acteristics of the self of persons and the self of 
phenomena, which do not exist anywhere." This is because the way phenomena are seen by the buddhas in meditative placement is the true st ate of phenomena and established as their nature. 
"Therefore, it is asserted that at all times this  is the true state and the nature of phenomena." 
"Here it is the no-self of persons and of phenomena that is referred to as 'self'." Self as an 
affirmation and an independent and permanent functional phenomenon cannot possibly exist. A 
sutra says, "Existing by not existing." This means that if something "existing" truly exists, it should 
be found. However, "by not existing" truly at all things exist empty of true 
existence and devoid of elaboration. 
Here "highest self" is clearly explained as referring to the no-self perceived by the buddha 
gnosis, which sees things exactly as they are. Therefore, other instances of "highest self" must be 
no more then the mere refutation of the self of pe rsons and phenomena. To say that it refers to an 
affirmation and an independent and permanent func tional phenomenon is to cling to the wrong 
self, thereby showing a strong affinity with the philosophies of other systems. The assertion that 
this clinging is an understanding of the true state of phenomena is the main object to be refuted in 
this treatise and its commentary. Unless you have eaten datura, while studying this treatise open 
your eyes and look! You will understand it to be  teaching the non-existence of an affirming, 
independent and permanent functional phenomenon. 
The perfection of highest bliss as the result of meditation on the perfection of meditative concentration 
This begins from, "The Hearers who are frightened by the sufferings of samsara…" up to, "this is 
the attainment of the perfection of the highest bliss." The perfection of highest bliss is the 
uncontaminated bliss that has abandoned even the mental body formed by the grounds of 
predispositions of ignorance. 
The perfection of permanence as the result of meditation on great compassion 
This runs from, "With no regard for the welfare of se ntient beings…" up to "this is the attainment of 
the perfection of permanence." 
 
Summary 
This runs from, "Like this, the devotion of th e bodhisattvas…" up to "will attain the four 
perfections." 
Synopsis 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre             Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 19 
Page 6 of 8                                                                                                                                                                                                    
In the sutras "the tathagatas talked of these four causes bringing about the ultimate dharmadhatu 
pervading limitless space to the farthest reaches of time." Therefore in the sutras the dharmakaya 
is taught by three features—its nature, its pervasiveness and its duration. Alternatively, it can be 
divided into four categories and extensively explai ned as follows. "By great meditative devotion to 
the sacred Mahayana dharma," referring to the twenty-one categories of insight of the 
uncontaminated gnosis in causal and resultant phas es, the obscurations of mental affliction and of 
omniscience are eliminated" to produce the pristine and ultimate dharmadhatu of the tathagatas. 
This, therefore, is the ultimate dharmadhatu" endo wed with the two purities. "By the meditation on 
the perfection of wisdom sentient beings and the external world are understood as the ultimate no-
self, like space," empty by nature, free of all extremes of elaboration. "By the meditation on 
samadhi such as the treasury of space, the great lord of dharma pervading and teaching all 
disciples in all world realms. It is, therefore, as limitless as space." Because the enlightened form of the tathagata teaches the dharma to all suitable disci ples at the same time it is said to "pervade." 
However to assert that the portion that pervades the disciples of the east is the portion pervading 
the disciples of the west, is a tenet of the Vaisesi kas and other outsiders. "By the meditation on 
great compassion it becomes endowed with the un broken continuum of great compassion for all 
sentient beings for all time and is therefore extends to the farthest reach of time." ( Gyaltsab’s 
commentary , pgs. 54-58)  
 
2 Specific explanations of the hindrances to the three kinds of person seeking to attain the 
dharmakaya 
1. Meaning 
2. Application to scripture 
3. Only the dharmakaya of the tathagata has the four perfections  
Meaning 
1. The types of hindrance to the attainment of dharmakaya 
2. The nature of the hindrances 
3. How the hindrances prevent the three types of person attaining their goals 
The types of hindrance to the attainment of dharmakaya 
"For the Hearer arhat and the Solitary Realizer arhat who dwell in the uncontaminated sphere," 
referring to the pacification of the sufferings of samsara, achieved by the power of their direct 
perception of suchness; "for the bodhisattvas wh o have gained the powers," referring to those 
dwelling on the pure levels who have attained the ten powers and the total abandonment of the 
obstructions of mental affliction, " there are four hindrances to the attainment of the four perfections 
of the tathagata dharmakaya ." These four are: " circumstance ," which is analogous to grasping and 
taking under the banner of mental affliction; " cause ," which is analogous to karma; " arising ," which 
is analogous to name and form, and " destruction ," which is analogous to old age and death. 
The nature of the hindrances 
Circumstance  
"This is the ground of the predispositions of igno rance, and is similar to ignorance, which causes 
mental formations." Because it ha s provided many opportunities for the perpetuation of afflictions 
since beginningless time in samsara, it is a "groun d." Its nature is non-afflicted ignorance, which 
has perpetuated itself without interruption and is categorized as an obstruction to omniscience. 
These predispositions of ignorance are similar to the afflicted ignorance of holding to the true 
existence of self and aggregates, which is the caus e of mental formations categorized as virtuous, 
non-virtuous and immovable karma. 
Cause 
"This refers to the karma uncontaminated by affliction, and formed by the circumstances of the 
predispositions of ignorance." Categorized as ment al activity, it is the substantial cause of the 
mental body and is the subtle motivational forc e, which creates the consciousness of the body and 
speech of the three kinds of persons. "This is sim ilar to the mental formations," mentioned above. 
Arising 
"This refers to a body whose nature is similar to the mind, formed by the ground of the predispositions of ignorance as a cooperative cause and non-afflicted karma as the substantive 
cause." It is unobstructed by anything and cannot  be directly seen or known by those of a lower 
insight than the three types of person. "This mental body is of three types and is analogous to the 
formation of the three worlds of desire, fo rm and formlessness, which are endowed with 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre             Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 19 
Page 7 of 8                                                                                                                                                                                                    
contaminated karma as a cause and the four subs tantive circumstances" of desire, view, holding 
ones conduct as supreme, and views of self.  
Destruction 
"Destruction is the inconceivable transformation of  death," like a bardo body destined to spend two 
weeks in the bardo, dying at the end of the firs t week. "It occurs due to the circumstance of 
possessing the three types of mental body, and is like old age and death brought on by the 
circumstance of birth," created by the power of karma and affliction. 
How the hindrances prevent the three types of person attaining their goals   
"For the Hearer arhat, Solitary Realizer arhat and the bodhisattva who have gained the ten powers, 
the ground of the predispositions of ignorance, wh ich is the basis of all mental affliction, has not 
yet been removed, and so they remain with th e defilement of the predispositions of mental 
affliction," which is categorized as an obstruction to omniscience. "Therefore, at that time they do 
not attain the completion of the perfection of purity," which represents the complete destruction of 
all obstructions.  
"Due to the power of the predispositions of ignorance the subtle movements of mental 
fabrication still occur. “This means that althou gh they do not apprehend any phenomenon as 
existing by its own characteristics, there is nevertheless the appearance of phenomena existing by 
their own characteristics. Because they still possess the previously explained uncontaminated karma, "they will not at that time attain the uncreated perfection of self," in which neither 
obstructions of afflictions or obstructions to om niscience are created, and which does not end at 
the direct perception of the two types of no-self, but reverses all appearance of true existence. 
The next sentence beginning, "By the predisposition s of ignorance…" says that the three types of 
person at that time do not attain the perfection of  great bliss, which is the negation of the mental 
body and of suffering as the result of mental aff liction. The next sentence beginning, "For as long 
as…" means that as long as they have not perceive d the basic element of the tathagata, the limit of 
perfection, in permanent meditative placement, "they will not be separated from the inconceivable 
transformation of death, and will not attain the unchanging perfection of permanence," which 
refers to not being transformed through the proces ses of birth and death. The point of explaining 
permanence this way is to prevent the developmen t of the perception of permanent but functional 
phenomena as asserted by other systems. 
While still on the path of learning one has the ability to reveal manifestations in a thousand 
million great-thousand-world systems of the trich iliocosm all at the same time and from each 
audience to bring limitless sentient beings to the le vel of an arhat. Although they have the ability to 
ripen the minds of disciples like bursting a blister at the right time, nevertheless while still on the 
path of learning they have a subtle motivational intent to teach dharma, to reveal those 
manifestations at any one time and to accomplish th e welfare of those sentient beings, as explained 
previously. By relying on the state of perfection, not only will they abolish the twelve links of 
dependent origination in forward order categorized as mental affliction, but also the twelve links of 
dependent origination in forward order categorize d as obstructions to omniscience. They sit in 
meditative placement on suchness without rising for as long as samsara lasts, and at that time 
they attain the four perfections. This is what is meant by the perfection of permanence, and to 
believe in an affirming, independent and perman ent functional phenomenon is to adhere to a 
system outside this tradition. 
It should be understood that if those sentient beings previously mentioned are not first ripened 
by bodhisattvas, they would fall to the extreme of non-existence, even if they were to actualize the 
state of perfection. In the Ornament of the Sutr as and in Haribhadra's Commentary to Ornament 
for Clear Realization, the measure of a ripe ned sentient being is also based on this. 
The above hindrances can also be put into three categories analogous to affliction as the twelve 
links of dependent origination: those analogous to  affliction as affliction, those analogous to 
affliction as karma and those analogous to affliction  as birth. This is taught by the line beginning, 
"The predispositions of ignorance…" up to "the complete affliction of birth." ( Gyaltsab’s 
commentary , pgs. 58-62)  
 
3 Root text (v.36/7) 
The dharmakaya of the tathagatas is the perfection of purity because it is pure by nature and all 
predispositions of mental affliction are abandoned f o r e v e r .   I t  i s  t h e  p e r f e c t i o n  o f  h i g h e s t  s e l f  
because it is pervaded by a pacification, in wh ich it directly perceives as non-existent the 
elaborations of a truly existing no-self and the self imputed by the outsiders, and because of the non-arising of all elaborations of the appearance  of duality by relying upon no-self. It is the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre             Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 19 
Page 8 of 8                                                                                                                                                                                                    
perfection of bliss because it has removed, by complete abandonment, the aggregates of a mental 
nature formed by non-afflicted ignorance and non- afflicted karma, together with their causes, the 
ground of predispositions of ignorance and karma. It is the perfection of permanence because it 
perceives samsara and nirvana as equal, as both are empty by nature. This is the ultimate 
severance from the extremes of samsara and peace. ( Gyaltsab’s commentary , pgs. 63)  
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 20  
Page 1 of 8 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating the Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra-ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation Jeffrey 
Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and Wilson, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
Commentary from The Tath›gata Essence, Commentary to the First 
Chapter by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen, translation Gavin Kilty, © FPMT, Inc. 
January 2007, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
  
Root verses are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added 
 
Lesson No: 20                             Date: 3rd April 2008  
Chapter One: The Essen ce of a One Gone Thus 
Verses 34, 38-40 
 
I will summarise what we have covered so far.  
(1,34) 
The perfection of the qualities of purity, self, bliss, 
And permanence [of the Truth Body wh ich is the fruit of purifying the 
obstructions through their antidotes] is the fruit. 
[The lineage] has the function of [bring ing about] aversion for the suffering [of 
cyclic existence] 
And the aspiration as well as the wish to attain the peace [of nirvana]. 
 
The four effects of the tathagata essence are: 
1. The perfection of the qualities of purity 
2. The perfection of the qualities of self 
3. The perfection of the qualities of bliss 
4. The perfection of the qualities of permanence 
 
These four final results are the effects of the four causes.  The four respective  
causes of the tathagata essence are: 
1. Devotion to the Mahayana doctrine 
2. The higher wisdom 
3. Meditative stabilisation 
4. Compassion 
The perfect purity is the result of having devotion to the Mahayana doctrine.  
The perfect self is the result of meditating on the perfection of wisdom.  
The perfect bliss is the result of meditative stabilisation. 
The perfect permanence is the result of meditating on great compassion. 
 
There are some who may have qualms about the fruits of the four causes to be  
the fruits of the tathagata essence but there is nothing wrong in saying this. When the tathagata essence is purified of its stains, only then will the four 
results be obtained. One must rely on the four causes in order to purify these 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 20  
Page 2 of 8 stains. That being the case, we can say that the results of the four causes are 
the fruits of the tathagata essence.  
 
In the previous lesson, we learnt that the three types of persons - hearer 
arhats, solitary realiser arhats and the persons abiding on the three pure 
grounds - have not achieved the results of the four perfections because they 
still possess the four hindrances – circumstance, cause, arising and 
destruction - that obstruct their attainment of the dharmakaya. The four hindrances refer to the  level of predisposition of ignorance , uncontaminated 
karma , the mental body  that arises from these two and the inconceivable 
transformation of death  respectively.  
● The level of predisposition of ignorance  is the predisposition of grasping at 
true existence. 
● Uncontaminated karma,  the subtle motivation that moves the body, speech 
and mind to a particular object, abides in the mental continua of hearer 
arhats, solitary realiser arhats and the persons abiding on the pure grounds.  
● The mental body  which arises from the uncontaminated karma undergoes 
inconceivable transformation of death .  
 
The Buddha possesses the four perfections of the dharmakaya because he has freed himself from these four hindrances: 
• The Buddha has the perfection of purity because he has abandoned the level 
of predisposition of ignorance.  
• The Buddha has the perfection of self because he has abandoned  
uncontaminated karma.  
• The Buddha has the perfection of bliss because he has abandoned the 
mental body which is the result of the level of predisposition of ignorance and uncontaminated karma.  
• The Buddha has the perfection of permanence because he is free from the 
inconceivable transformation of death.  
 
What is the perfection of permanence? The hearer arhats, solitary realisers 
arhats and the persons abiding on the three pure grounds do not possess this 
since they are still subject to the inconceivable transformation of death 
although they experience birth and death in a subtler manner than we do. On 
the other hand, since the Buddha is no longer subject to this inconceivable 
transformation of death , he abides in the state that is not subject to arising and 
destruction and he is able to abide till the end of samsara for the benefit of all 
sentient beings. That is why the Buddha is said to have the perfection of 
permanence.  
 
In the last lesson, we talked about a bardo being that is destined to remain in 
the intermediate state for two weeks.  That bardo being has to undergo death 
every seven days. At the end of the first week, he dies and is reborn again. If 
this being has to remain in the bardo for two weeks, he has to die twice. The 
inconceivable transformation of death is something like this. The mental body is similar to the way in which the bardo body passes away in the intermediate 
state. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 20  
Page 3 of 8 “Because cyclic existence and nirvana are realized as equal [in nature]/It is [a 
perfection of] permanence [that is, unbroken (fulfillment) of the two aims]” (Verse 
37): The dharmakaya is the perfection of permanence (which is the result of 
meditating on great compassion) because it realises both cyclic existence and 
nirvana are equal.  The Buddha has achieved the final separation from both 
the extremes of samsara and nirvana. He achieved the final freedom from the 
extreme of nirvana because of his great compassion. The wisdom realising 
emptiness and great compassion are therefore the roots for the attainment of the dharmakaya. We can say that they are the roots for achieving non-abiding 
nirvana as shown in Verse 38.
1
 
(1, 38) 
Eliminating with wisdom all attachment to self [as well as its latencies, they do 
not dwell in cyclic existence], 
But due to being attached to sentient be ings [with great compassion they do not 
forsake them], whereby the compassionate [Bodhisattvas] do not [fall to an 
extreme of peace], attaining a [solitary] peace. 
In that way, in dependence on [the two]  methods [for attaining] enlightenment—
the awareness [realizing selflessness] and the mercy [of great compassion]— 
Bodhisattva Superiors [do not fall to th e two extremes], not being in cyclic 
existence or in nirvana. 
 
Due to force of their wisdom realising emptiness, the bodhisattva superiors do 
not abide in the extreme of samsara as they have abandoned all forms of attachment such as attachment to the self. The bodhisattvas also do not abide 
in the extreme of nirvana because of their strong compassion wishing to free 
all sentient beings from their suffering. The bodhisattva superiors abide in 
non-abiding nirvana. 
 
This completes our discussion of the effects of the tathagata essence. We now 
move on to look at the function  of the tathagata essence. 
 
The brief presentation of the aspect of function appears in the last two lines of Verse 34: “[The lineage] has the function of [bringing about] aversion for the suffering [of cyclic existence] and the aspiration as well as the wish to attain the 
peace [of nirvana].”    
 
The extensive explanation of function appears in Verses 39 and 40:2
(1, 39) 
If the basic Buddha element did not exist, 
Discouragement with the suffering [of cyclic existence] would not occur 
And the desire for nirvana as well as seeking [methods for attaining it] 
And wishing [for it] would also not exist. 
 
(1, 40) 
These perceptions of the disadvantageou s sufferings of transient existence 
And the advantageous happiness of nirvana 
Are functions of the exis tence of the lineage, 
Since these do not exist in those without the lineage. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 20  
Page 4 of 8 Understanding the benefit of nirvana (or the sorrowless state), one would then 
develop an aspiration to achieve it. The arising of such an aspiration is a sign that we possess the lineage and it is also its function. Verse 39 states that if 
sentient beings do not possess the tathagata essence which is naturally pure 
and they do not possess the seed for the uncontaminated mind, they will never 
be able to develop any wish to be free from suffering even when they understand the faults and disadvantages of suffering. In the same way, when 
these sentient beings see or understand the advantages of nirvana, they will not develop the aspiration to achieve it.  The point is that all sentient beings do 
possess the lineage because they do develop disenchantment with cyclic existence and they also develop an aspiration for liberation. 
3
 
Question :  
Does the tathagata essence manifest when sentient beings develop 
disenchantment with cyclic existence and develop an aspiration for liberation? 
Answer :  
We have to distinguish between the awakening of the lineage and its manifestation.  We can say that the lineage is  awakened  when sentient beings 
develop disenchantment with cyclic existence and develop an aspiration for 
liberation.  
 
We cannot say, however, that the lineage is manifest.  It is not clear cut. We 
may have to say that the tathagata essence manifests upon the achievement of 
enlightenment. But does the tathagata essence exist at the time of 
enlightenment or does it manifest as tathagata essence at that time? We have 
to say no because at the time of enlightenment, there is no tathagata essence.   
 
Question: 
What happens then when we develop bodhicitta? 
Answer:  
When we develop great compassion and bodhicitta, that is the awakening of 
our Mahayana lineage but we cannot say that the tathagata essence is manifesting at that time.  
Geshe-la: I am not sure because the texts are not clear on this point .  
 
Question :  
What is the developmental lineage? Can you give us an illustration of it? 
Answer :  
The developmental lineage refers to the seed (or potential) in the minds of sentient beings for the development of virtuous thoughts. This seed is activated 
through the force of hearing, such as listening to teachings, etc. It then 
increases in strength (hence its name, developmental  lineage) but the extent to 
which it does so depends on other conditions. 
 
Question: 
How then do we know when our developmental lineage is ‘newly’ awakened? 
Answer:  
There are different signs that may indicate that the lineage of a person is being 
awakened. It is like a seed transforming into a plant but it takes time. The seed 
doesn’t become a plant overnight. The effect of hearing teachings would be 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 20  
Page 5 of 8 different for everyone, depending on varying conditions and so forth. But there 
are some indicative signs, for example, when that person meditates or listens to teachings on emptiness, wisdom or bodhicitta, the mind moves, the  hair 
may stand on ends or tears may fall.  
 
Prior to enlightenment, the tathagata essence is obscured by the nine 
obscuring defilements and as long as it is obscured by all or some of these defilements, we cannot say that the tathagata essence is manifest. When the 
nine obscuring defilements are completely removed, there is no more tathagata 
essence.  
 
In the analogy of the kernel of grain inside the husk, we cannot see the grain 
without removing the husk. The grain manifests  when the husk is removed. In 
the same way, the tathagata essence only manifests when all the obscuring 
defilements are removed but when all the obscuring defilements are removed, 
it does not manifest as tathagata essence.  
 
Question : 
Can our lineage ‘go back to sleep’ after it’s been awakened? 
Answer : 
Yes. Depending on whether you encounter good or bad conditions, the 
awakening of your lineage can go up and down.  
 
Geshe-la: You should discuss more wh at that means, “the buddha lineage 
manifests.” You should also discuss whether the buddha lineage really 
manifests or not. You should look at the nine examples. Without that, how does 
that manifest. So, one, you remove all th e obstacles, you become enlightened, 
that’s one, isn’t it?  
 
Those who have the lineage are able to see the faults of cyclic existence and 
the benefits of nirvana. Those who do not have the lineage will not be able to do this. Seeing the faults of cyclic existence and the benefits of nirvana are 
said to be the function of the lineage. 
 
There are some sutras that refer to sentient beings who have no lineage or 
have their lineage cut off. Such sutras should not be understood to be definitive in their meaning. The intention behind such statements would have 
to be unravelled.  
 
Our system posits that if one is a sentient being, one necessarily has the 
tathagata essence. This is final. When we see statements mentioning  sentient beings having no lineage or we think of those people who engage in all sorts of 
negativities that will cause them to remain in cyclic existence for a very long 
time, we may think they are hopeless and have no lineage at all.  
 
But according to our system these people do have the lineage. Mental 
defilements are not the nature of their minds. It is possible to separate the 
defilements from their minds. It is, therefore, possible for all sentient beings to 
achieve enlightenment, they will achieve enlightenment and the time will come 
for all of them to achieve enlightenment.  
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 20  
Page 6 of 8                                                           Qualm :  
When sentient beings become buddhas, there will be more and more buddhas 
and the number of sentient beings will decrease over time. We talk of working  for the benefit of sentient beings. We may then worry that, as the number of 
sentient beings drop, we may not be able to complete the accumulation of 
merit. There will come a time when all sentient beings have achieved 
enlightenment, i.e., there are no more sentient beings left, only buddhas. We 
then have to say that there exist buddhas who do not work for sentient beings. 
 
Response: 
When buddhas achieve enlightenment, they pledge to work for the benefit of 
sentient beings until the end of samsara and they manifest different activities such as teaching the Dharma.  
 
If we say that sentient beings cannot become buddhas, then it is useless to 
make the pledge as the pledge cannot be fulfilled. In our system, in response to 
the question, “Is it possible for all sentient beings to achieve enlightenment?”  
the answer is “Yes.”  
 
Will there be a time when no more sentient beings exist? Yes. This means all 
sentient beings will achieve enlightenment.  
 
Everyone agrees that samsara has no beginning. But with respect to the question whether samsara has an end or not, there are two schools of thought. One asserts that there is an end to samsara while another school says that 
samsara has no end. Gyaltsab Je asserts the former point of view, i.e., there is 
an end to samsara. Which school of thought is more grounded in logic and supported by more reasons? 
   
For the bodhisattvas abiding on the eighth ground, will there not come a time 
when there are no bodhisattvas abiding on the pure grounds? If we say yes, we also have to say that there will come a time all sentient beings will achieve 
enlightenment. 
 
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng, Alison Wong & Angie Xiao, 15th April 2008  
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong, 18th April 2008 
 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee, 20th April 2008 
 
 
 
1 Root text (v.38) 
The arya bodhisattvas have severed all clinging  to self through the wisdom that cognizes 
impermanence and so forth as well as emptiness, and does not dwell in the extreme of 
samsara, yet they cling to all sentient beings with the desire to free them from suffering. 
Therefore the compassionate bodhisattva does not reach the extreme of peace. In this way, by 
prolonged meditation on the method for the actualization of the highest enlightenment, 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 20  
Page 7 of 8                                                                                                                                                                                           
categorized by "cognition", which is explained above, and by compassion, the arya bodhisattva 
does not fall to the extremes of samsara and nirvana. 
   One earlier commentator when commenting on  the verse, "By knowledge, no dwelling in 
samsara, by compassion, no dwelling in peace" from the Ornament for Clear Realization , 
explains the negation of the extreme of samsara as referring solely to the wisdom perceiving 
emptiness. This clearly shows a lack of unde rstanding because both Airya Vimuktasena and 
Acarya Haribhadra explain it as referring to the wisdom that sees the faults of samsara, and 
the faults of samsara are perceived with a conventional valid perception, and not by a valid perception of ultimate truth. 
   The Hearers described above as "traveling alone to their peace" are to be understood as those 
who, for the time being , are of "definite lineage," and not as they are described by the Yogacara 
who take the Sutra Unraveling the Thought  as literal. ( Gyaltsab’s commentary , pg. 68) 
 
2 Root text (v.39) 
If the naturally pure, basic element of the budd ha, and the uncontaminated seed did not exist, 
it follows that aversion arising from seeing the disadvantages of suffering would not occur. 
There would be no wanting, no striving and no yearning for nirvana arising from 
understanding the benefits of its happiness. The proof thrown up by this consequence is: the 
lineage of the buddha exists in sentient beings  because the wish to abandon samsara, brought 
on by aversion to it, and the wish to attain nirvana, can be seen to exist. 
Explanation of the text 
The commentary from, "In short, the basic element,  the naturally pure lineage, exists with two 
distinct functions, even in those sentient beings  who have gone wrong" up to "'wishing' means 
wanting," teaches how nirvana is held as a worthy goal of many excellent qualities. "'Wanting' 
means moving in the direction of achieving the goal," means wanting to attain these qualities. "'Striving' means seeking a method to attain the goal one desires" is self-explanatory. 
"'Yearning' means moving the mind towards the goal that one desires" refers to the joy felt on seeing that through this method one will attain nirvana. 
Root text (v.40) 
Seeing the faults of suffering and the benefits of happiness in samsara and nirvana 
respectively is the functioning of the lineage. Why? Because seeing the faults and benefits of 
samsara and nirvana is not found in those without lineage. The first sentence expresses the 
sequential reasoning; the last sentence expresses the reverse reasoning. ( Gyaltsab’s 
commentary, pg. 69-70) 
 
3 Result 
There are four results which arise from the four causes mentioned above. 
            Transcendental qualities of purity, self, bliss  
       And permanence are the result . 
The four results are: 
1 Transcendental purity. 
2 Transcendental self. 
3 Transcendental bliss. 
4 Transcendental permanence. 
More extensively: 
This is purity because it is pure by nature, and 
 Because the predispositions are abandoned. 
The complete pacification of the elaborations of 
Self and non-self is the sublime self. 
It is bliss because of the demise 
 Of the aggregates of a mental nature and their causes. 
 It is permanence because the equality of 
        Samsara and nirvana is realized. 
A Buddha's truth body has tr anscendental purity because it is pure by nature and 
because it is free of the predispositions of the delusions. 
The truth body transcends self because it has a complete pacification of conceptual 
elaborations regarding truly existent non-self or the true existence of the permanent type 
of self asserted by the forders. Forders believe that the self is a functioning thing, that it is 
permanent, that the self and form are different entities, and some also hold that the self is a 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 20  
Page 8 of 8                                                                                                                                                                                           
creator. Within the sphere of the truth body, however, there is no such conceptual 
elaboration regarding self or non-self or any form of duality at all. 
The truth body has transcendental bliss because the obstructions to omniscience have 
been overcome. The obstructions to omniscience are:  
(1) the subtle latency of the conception of inherent existence,  
(2) the appearance of inherently existent objects to the six consciousnesses, and  
(3) the stains of apprehending the two truths as different substantial entities.  
There are no other obscurations to omniscience than these three. Because there are 
no obstructions to omniscience that are consciousnesses, ignorance is not classified as an 
obstruction to omniscience: rather, as an obstruction to liberation. The 'aggregates of a 
mental nature' in this case specifically refer to the mental consciousness which arises from 
karma and ignorance. Karma and ignorance in turn arise from the subtle latency of 
ignorance which is the first of the obstructions to omniscience. Because of the demise of this 
subtle latency, there is the demise of the aggregates of a mental nature, and their causes, 
which are the source of all suffering. Thus the truth body is said to be a state of 
transcendental bliss. 
A Buddha's truth body is transcendental permanence because it is a final cessation 
which directly perceives that both samsara and nirvana are equally empty of inherent 
existence. The truth body transcends both samsara and nirvana is considered to be 
permanent because the nature body is a final cessation. These four transcendent qualities 
are possessed only by Buddhas. Ultimately, they are free of the twin streams of peace 
(nirvana) and existence (samsara). 
Actions  
The actions of the potential are overviewed as follows: 
Renouncing suffering and the desire to attain peace, 
These wishes are the actions (of the potential ). 
Renunciation arises from perceiving the faults of samsara, and interest in attaining peace 
arises through seeing the benefits of nirvana. Seeing the faults of samsara and the benefits 
of nirvana are the actions of the potential. This is expanded further: 
If Buddha potential did not exist, 
Aversion to suffering would not arise. 
Desire, aspiration and longing for nirvana 
Would also not arise . 
If the uncontaminated and naturally pure seed of Buddha potential were not present, 
then, when seeing the faults of the suffering of samsara, aversion for it would not arise. 
Also, when seeing the benefits of the happiness of  nirvana, an aspiration, longing or desire to 
attain nirvana would not arise. The reasoning that explains this is that all beings have 
Buddha potential because, when seeing the faults of samsara, renunciation and the 
desire to abandon it arises, and with that, the intention to attain nirvana is seen. 
Samsara and nirvana, their  
suffering and happiness! Seeing their faults and qualities  
Is due to the existence of the potential.  
But not if without potential. 
Through contemplating the general and particular faults of samsara, one will come to 
associate the faults of suffering with samsara.  Likewise, through cont emplating the benefits 
of nirvana, one will come to associate the benefits of happiness with the attainment of 
nirvana. This occurs due to the presence of the Buddha potential. If there were no Buddha 
potential these associations would not be possible. When hearing of the faults of samsara 
and the benefits of nirvana, and when the mere sound of the teachings on emptiness causes tears to come to the eyes and the hairs of the body to stand on end, it is a sign of 
the awakening of the Buddha potential. ( The Fundamental Potential for Enlightenment by  
Geshe Archarya Thubten Loden, pgs 133~147) 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program –Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 21 
Page 1 of 9 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating the Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra-ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation Jeffrey 
Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and Wilson, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
Commentary from The Tath›gata Essence, Commentary to the First 
Chapter by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen, translation Gavin Kilty, © FPMT, Inc. 
January 2007, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
  
Root verses are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added 
 
Lesson No: 21                            Date: 15th April 2008  
Chapter One: The Essen ce of a One Gone Thus 
Verses 41-43  
 
Some of you may think: “I have been in this Basic Program for a few years but 
it seems like I don’t know anything.”  
 
Recently, we received teachings on the Heart Sutra  from Choden Rinpoche. For 
those of you who have been studying in the Basic Program, especially the regular students, you must have understood something or had some 
familiarity with the terms used when you listened to those teachings. This is 
due to the studies you have done so far.  
 
Those who attended the teachings who had not studied at all, some left after 
half an hour, others left after an hour or so. I met people who told me, "I have 
no idea what Rinpoche is talking about. I don't understand a thing."  
 
I personally think that for those of you who have been attending the Basic 
Program and studying on a regular basis and who were present at Rinpoche’s teachings, even if you didn’t grasp 100% of what Rinpoche was trying to put 
across, I think you might have understood at least 90% or 95%.  
 
It is good to reflect like this because there are people who have been studying 
for a few years but still feel they hadn’t learnt anything and question the 
benefit and purpose of studying.  During those Heart Sutra  teachings, we can 
see the benefit quite clearly as there is an obvious difference between the 
person who has done some studying and someone who has not studied at all. The former would definitely understand more of Rinpoche’s teachings. Definitely, studying is beneficial and realising this helps us to generate the 
determination not to give up but to continue our studies.    
 
In the Basic Program, although we don't go into much detail, at the very least, 
you get some idea from being introduced to the topic, the key concepts and the 
main points. When you complete the Basic Program, when you attend 
teachings in the future, definitely you will get more out of those teachings and 
see the benefit of the studies you had done. The modules in the Basic Program 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program –Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 21 
Page 2 of 9 become the foundation for receiving those future teachings. Without any 
understanding or any exposure to the various texts covered in the Basic Program, it would be difficult to be able to understand, from various 
perspectives, the depth and profundity of such teachings.   
 
**************************** 
We have been talking about the tathagata essence. (This is the literal 
translation though it is more popularly translated as buddha nature). What exactly is it? I can't decisively say for sure but if we say that the tathagata 
essence is the naturally abiding lineage, is there any fault there?  
 
Comparing the tathagata essence with lineage, we have to say that lineage 
encompasses more than the tathagata essence (or naturally abiding lineage) because it also encompasses something more than the tathagata essence. 
 
What is lineage? It is a phenomenon that is suitable to be transformed into a buddha's body and it consists of the naturally abiding lineage and developmental lineage, both of which are suitable to be transformed into a 
buddha's body. The naturally abiding lineage is the phenomenon that is 
suitable to be transformed into the uncompounded body  of the Buddha. 
 
The tathagata essence had been said to be equal to the lineage. Here I am 
positing to you that the tathagata essence is not equal to lineage, i.e., the 
tathagata essence and the lineage have to be separated because the tathagata 
essence is only one subset of the lineage. Is there anything wrong with that 
position? 
 
There have been many questions related to whether the tathagata essence and 
the lineage is the same thing. I am positing that the tathagata essence is not the same as the lineage, that these two are not equal.  
 
Look at the page 78 of the commentary under ‘ Our own assertions’: “If the 
minds of sentient beings were not naturally pure, we would have to admit the possibility of truly existent phenomena in the realm of existence. Therefore, as all 
existence would not be proven by valid perception to be empty of true existence, 
ultimate truth could not be established. On the other hand, if mind is established 
by valid perception as being naturally pur e, the defilement of holding to true 
existence and its instincts can be establ ished by that valid reasoning to be 
adventitious and separable from the mind.”  You need to think about this.  It is 
not difficult.
1
 
“You might say, "The defilements are sepa rable from the mind but it cannot be 
established that the antidotes which dest roy those defilements will ever take 
root in the mind." 
  
If one had such a thought, Gyaltsab Je rebuts it by putting forth five 
questions: 
  
1. “Is this because there is no method to destroy these defilements 
within the continuum of sentient beings ? The first reason is cannot be 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program –Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 21 
Page 3 of 9 correct because continued familiarity with  the wisdom that understands no-self 
has the ability to put an end to all defilement.”  
 
2. “Is it because there is a method but nobody knows it? The second 
reason is incorrect because logic has well established the existence of the 
Teacher who for the sake of others me ditated on the wisdom understanding no-
self.” 
 
3. “Is it because others have never put that method into practice?  The 
third reason is incorrect because motiva ted by the buddhas there is no sentient 
being at all who has not striven to attain a high status rebirth. For the time being 
not every sentient being has made effort  to attain the definite goodness of 
nirvana. However, because all sentient  beings possess th e lineage of the 
buddhas and because the compassion whic h has taken on the task of bringing 
all sentient beings to the state of enli ghtenment has never waned, one day they 
will renounce samsara and strive for nirvan a. This point can also be proven by 
the logic of scripture validated by the three examinations.” 
 
4. “Is it because the person who knows the method will never teach it to 
others because of a lack of compassion?  The fourth reason is incorrect 
because when any sentient being strives from their own side, the all-conquering 
buddhas with unwavering compassion for all sentient beings like that of parents 
to their only child will never ab andon the activity of teaching.”  
 
5. “Is it because even though this method is taught, it is impossible to 
enter and practice the teachings ? The fifth reason is incorrect because this 
treatise, its commentary and other texts satisfactorily establish that whenever 
the conditions to awaken of the lineage are present and complete, the lineage 
will awaken .”   
 
Now refer to page 80 of the commentary: “If you say, "It follows then that the 
buddhahood of all sentient beings is a possibility because all sentient beings are 
future buddhas," I would agree totally.”2
 
Everyone accepts that samsara has no beginning. But in our system, we say 
that samsara has an end and that it is possible for all sentient beings to  
achieve enlightenment and that there will come a time when they will achieve 
enlightenment. Does samsara in general have an end? In our system, samsara 
in general has an end because of the reasons stated.  
 
Amongst the ten aspects explaining the clear light nature of the mind, we have 
completed function of the tathagata essence. The next aspect is possession. 
This means that the tathagata essence possesses the quality of the cause and 
the quality of the result. Verse 41 is a brief presentation of this aspect: 
(1,41) 
Just as a great ocean [contains countless jewels and immeasurable water, so 
the basic element of a Superior’s qualities is] the source 
Of countless jewels of good qualities a nd the inexhaustible [water of compassion 
and thus it possesses the features of a cause]. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program –Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 21 
Page 4 of 9 Because of being an entity endowed with the indivisible qualities [of 
clairvoyance, uncontaminated exalted wisdom, and uncontaminated 
abandonment, 
It possesses the features of an effect] like an oil lamp[‘s 
Having] the indivisible [qualities of illumination, warmth, and color]. 
 
“Just as a great ocean [contains countless  jewels and immeasurable water, so 
the basic element of a Superior’s qualities is] the source/ Of countless jewels of 
good qualities and the inexhaustible [water of compassion” refer to the 
tathagata essence possessing the quality of the cause.  
 
“Because of being an entity endowed with the indivisible qualities [of 
clairvoyance, uncontaminated exalted wisdom, and uncontaminated abandonment,/It possesses the features of an effect] like an oil lamp[‘s / 
Having] the indivisible [qualities of illumination, warmth, and color]” show how 
the tathagata essence possesses the quality of the result.
3
 
(1,42) 
Because (1) of containing the basi c element [or cause] of the  
Truth Body [devotion (to the Great Vehi cle)], (2) if attaining a Conqueror's  
exalted wisdom [deep wisdom], 
And (3) [of the operation of great] compassion, 
[This basic constituent] is show n to be similar to an ocean 
Through [correspondence] with (1) a vessel, (2) [having] jewels, and (3) [having] 
water. 
 
Verse 42 is the extensive explanation of how the tathagata essence possesses 
the quality of cause.  
• The root cause of achieving the dharmakaya is devotion to the Mahayana 
teachings and due to this devotion one achieves wisdom, meditative 
stabilisation and compassion. This devotion is likened to a vessel (or 
container) holding wisdom, meditative stabilisation and compassion inside.  
• The causes for attaining the Buddha’s exalted wisdom are wisdom and 
meditative stabilisation. These two are likened to jewels.  
• The bodhisattvas’ compassion, the cause for achieving Buddha's great 
compassion is likened to water.   
Therefore the tathagata essence possesses the quality of the cause.4
 
(1,43)  
Because the [five] clairvoyances, [uncontaminated] exalted wisdom, the 
undefiled suchness, 
[And the abandonments of thorough transformation 
Subsist] indivisibly in the undef iled basis, it corresponds 
To an oil lamp in which illumination, warmth, and co lor [subsist] indivisibly. 
 
Verse 43 shows how the tathagata essence possesses the quality of result  
which are enumerated as seven results: the five clairvoyances, 
uncontaminated exalted wisdom and undefiled suchness (or the quality of 
abandonment).  These seven final results correspond with the three qualities of 
a lamp: 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program –Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 21 
Page 5 of 9                                                           • the five clairvoyances correspond to its illumination   
• the uncontaminated exalted wisdom (or the knowledge of extinction of the 
contamination) is likened to its warmth or heat and   
• the undefiled suchness (or stainless abandonment) corresponds with its 
colour.5 
 
There is a summary on page 87 of the commentary: “These seven qualities, 
comprising the five types of clairvoyance, uncontaminated gnosis and its 
abandonments, which exist in the continuum  of those on the path of no further 
learning, and the uncontaminated sphere" of constant meditative placement 
within the suchness of total isolation from  all defilement, "are indivisible from 
each other" in terms of their nature. "B eing inseparably possessed by and at one 
with the dharmadhatu is the meaning of 'possession. 
 
Application to scripture 
This is taught from the line beginning, "T he examples illustrating the meaning of 
possession…" The quote begins from, "Sar iputra, for example, a lamp…" This 
passage teaches that these qualities are fo und at the time of the final result but 
not in the minds of ordinary beings.” 
 
The meaning of possession may not be clear by reading this. We can only say 
that at the very end the tathagata essence is said to be possessed of these seven qualities of the result. 
6
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng, Alison Wong & Angie Xiao 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee 
 
 
 
1 Our own assertions  
As explained above, to accept future buddhahood but not to accept the certainty of that 
buddhahood is illogical. Moreover, to say that it is not established that all sentient beings are 
future buddhas does not withstand analysis. If th e minds of sentient beings were not naturally 
pure, we would have to admit the possibility of  truly existent phenomena in the realm of 
existence. Therefore, as all existence would not be proven by valid perception to be empty of 
true existence, ultimate truth could not establis hed. On the other hand, if mind is established 
by valid perception as being naturally pure, the defilement of holding to true existence and its 
instincts can be established by that valid reason ing to be adventitious and separable from the 
mind. Otherwise, like the outsider M ımamsaka school, we would have to accept that the 
defilements are part of the nature of mind. 
You might say, "The defilements are separabl e from the mind but it cannot be established 
that the antidotes which destroy those defilements will ever take root in the mind." I would reply, "Is this because there is no method to destroy these defilements within the continuum of sentient beings? Is it because there is a meth od but nobody knows it? Is it because others 
have never put that method into practice? Is it because the person who knows the method will n e v e r  t e a c h  i t  t o  o t h e r s  b e c a u s e  o f  a  l a c k  o f  c o m p a s s i o n ?  I s  i t  b e c a u s e  e v e n  t h o u g h  t h i s  method is taught, it is impossible to  enter and practice the teachings? 
The first reason is cannot be correct becaus e continued familiarity with the wisdom that 
understands no-self has the ability to put an end to all defilement. The second reason is 
incorrect because logic has well established the existence of the Teacher who for the sake of 
others meditated on the wisdom understanding no-self1. The thir d reason is incorrect because 
motivated by the buddhas there is no sentient be ing at all who has not striven to attain a high 
status rebirth. For the time being not every sentient being has made effort to attain the definite 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program –Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 21 
Page 6 of 9                                                                                                                                                                                           
goodness of nirvana. However, because all sent ient beings possess the lineage of the buddhas 
and because the compassion which has taken on the task of bringing all sentient beings to the 
state of enlightenment has never waned, one day they will renounce samsara and strive for 
nirvana. This point can also be proven by the logic of scripture validated by the three examinations. 
The fourth reason is incorrect because when any sentient being strives from their own side, 
the all-conquering buddhas with unwavering compassion for all sentient beings like that of 
parents to their only child will never abandon th e activity of teaching. The fifth reason is 
incorrect because this treatise, its commentary and other texts satisfactorily establish that 
whenever the conditions to awaken of the lin eage are present and complete, the lineage will 
awaken. Therefore having accepted that there cannot possibly be a sentient being who is not a 
future buddha, do not say that not all sentient beings are future buddhas, or that they are future buddhas but their buddhahood is not certain. ( Gyaltsab Je’s commentary , pg. 78-79)  
 
2 If you say, "It follows then that the buddhahood of all sentient beings is a possibility because 
all sentient beings are future buddhas," I would agree totally. If you then produce the 
consequence that this means sentient beings are already buddhas, this has been dismissed 
previously. You might say, "It follows that sentie nt being never existing is a possibility because 
of the existence of all sentient beings as bu ddhas." This argument does not follow. You as a 
buddha contradicts you as non- existent. Moreover, I accept the consequence of the possibility 
of the non-existence of sentient beings beca use the complete non-existence of phenomena 
exists. I also accept the possib ility of the non-existence of sent ient beings as objects of the 
buddhas' activities. It is similar to the previous  consequence. You will say, "It follows that the 
end of the continuum of sentient beings as obj ects of the buddhas' activities is a possibility 
because of the existence of all sentient beings as buddhas. It follows that the ending of the 
continuum of an eighth level bodhisattva is a possibility because of his existence as a buddha. 
The pervasion is similar and so you must acce pt all three consequences." You should examine 
well your thinking that the proof of your pervasio n rests on the fact that if one is a buddha one 
cannot be a sentient being. If you think hard about this you will see you have not 
differentiated between the existence of all sentient beings as buddhas and all sentient beings 
as buddhas. 
You may ask, "If the existence of all sentient beings as buddhas is a fact, where and when 
does it exist?" Well, the perfectly enlightened buddha that is the consummation of your 
aspiration to become a buddha for the sake of all sentient beings, in whose continuum does it 
exist and when does it exist? You reply, "It exists when one becomes a perfectly enlightened 
buddha and exists within that buddha's contin uum. In the continuum of one on the path of 
accumulation the buddha as his goal of practice does not exist because cause and result do not exist at the same time." Why would it be wrong to give the same answer to your first 
question? 
Some will ask, "If samsara had a beginning, it would have been produced without a cause. 
Therefore it has no beginning. However, does it ha ve an end?" To this some reply, "Samsara as 
a generality has no end but specific instances of samsara have an end." This is contradictory 
because there can be no existence to a vase not existing as a phenomenon1. Therefore, there is an end to samsara, whether generally or sp ecifically. Some passages speak of the end of 
samsara as not being evident. This means that one should not hold to the foolish notion that a particular sentient being attains liberation at a particular time and not before or after that. 
However, one should remember that there is no  sentient being who cannot attain liberation. 
To say that there is no end to samsara and that all sentient beings are future buddhas is 
totally contradictory. 
That is sufficient digression for now. ( Gyaltsab Je’s commentary , pg. 80-81)  
 
3 Possessed of the quality of cause  (v.41) 
The presence of the lineage in sentient beings is like the great ocean, a source of inexhaustible, 
causal, jewel-like qualities. The ocean is a repo s i t o r y  o f  p r e c i o u s  j e w e l s  a n d  j u s t  a s  t h e s e  
jewels and the water of the ocean exist together, so the ocean-like basic element is the basis of 
four qualities. These four are devotion, which is compared to th e ocean as a repository, wisdom 
and samadhi, which are like jewels, and compassion which is like the water. 
Possessed of the quality of result 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program –Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 21 
Page 7 of 9                                                                                                                                                                                           
Like the flame of a lamp possessed of indivisi ble qualities it possesses the five kinds of 
clairvoyance, namely knowing miraculous powers, possessing the ear of the gods, knowing the 
minds of others, knowing previous lives, and knowin g birth and death. It is also possessed of 
the gnosis of the extinction of contamination and the suchness of the extinction of 
contamination. These are the seven resultant qualities. ( Gyaltsab Je’s commentary , pg. 82-83)  
 
4 Root text (v.42)  
Devotion to the Mahayana dharma, the cause of the pure dharmakaya, is likened to a 
repository. The uncommon Mahayana peaceful abiding and special insight are the causes that 
achieve the gnosis of the conqueror and are likened to jewels. The great compassion of the bodhisattva is the cause that flows into the compassion of the tathagata and is likened to 
water. The basic element is summarized by the possession of these causal qualities and 
therefore it is taught, with three examples, as being like an ocean.  
Explanation of each 
"The cause of the pure dharmakaya" is devotion  to the Mahayana dharma. This is the first 
cause and without this as a basis, samadhi on the union of Mahayana peaceful abiding and 
special insight, and the meditation of great compassion, will simply not come about. The 
method for gaining "the gnosis of the buddha," or the non-abiding nirvana, is the path that 
negates the extremes of peace and samsara. Compassion, as the purifier of the basic element 
of all sentient beings, is the cause that "enters the great compassion of the tathagatas." 
Matching quality to example 
Meditation on devotion to the Mahayana dhar ma is analogous to a repository because it 
produces every dharma of the buddha, and from the point of view of its own nature it is 
capable of producing the result of "limitless qualit ies, and within it can be found the jewels of 
inexhaustible wisdom and samadhi and the waters of compassion." 
"Meditations on the gateways to wisdom and samadhi are like jewels because they lack the 
conception" which thinks, 'this will produce such and such result, and because "they possess 
the quality of an indescribable power to produce results." 
"The bodhisattva meditation on compassion ca n be compared to water." In the same way 
that water never goes beyond being "wet," compa ssion in its efforts to separate them from 
suffering is "of a nature of one-taste suprem e 'moistness' toward all sentient beings." 
These three causes for creating, achieving and entering the three phenomena of the 
dharmakaya, the gnosis of the conqueror, and great compassion, respectively, are the four 
causal qualities linked to and possessed by the basic element. This is the meaning of the term, 
"possession." (Gyaltsab Je’s commentary , pg. 83-85)  
 
5 Root text (v.43) 
The resultant qualities—the five kinds of clairvoyance, the undefiled gnosis of the end of 
contamination or defilement and the suchness of the abandonment of defilement—are, from 
the point of view of their nature and reality,  inseparable from "the undefiled basis," which 
refers to the basic element or to the basis of the undefiled and non-afflicted sphere. The gnosis 
of the end of contamination refers to the clai rvoyance of the abandonment of contamination, 
which is the gnosis directly cognizing the abandonment of defilement itself. Although 
"suchness" can refer to liberation, here it refers to "abandonment." 
Expanded explanation 
"The resultant qualities of the five types of clairvoyance are like the illumination of a lamp 
because they destroy the darkness that prevents the experience of the phenomena." The 
whereabouts of one's teacher, companions, disci ples, and so forth are all clearly visible. 
Attachment or nonattachment in the minds of others is clearly apparent. One's and others' 
previous lives stretching to infinity are clearly visible and the disciples one has connections 
with are directly perceivable. Therefore, they are compared to the illumination of a lamp. 
The next lines state, "The gnosis of end of co ntamination is like heat because it has burnt 
away the firewood of karma and affliction. The complete transformation that is the 
abandonment of contamination is like the color of  the flame because it is clear light, undefiled 
and pure. Here, 'undefiled' means the abandonment of the obscurations of mental affliction," 
holding to the true existence of self and aggr egates. "Pure" means the abandonment of  the 
instincts of affliction that manifest as fallaci ous appearances of true existence. "'Clear light' 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program –Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 21 
Page 8 of 9                                                                                                                                                                                           
means that these two obscurations are adventit ious and are not of the nature of mind." 
(Gyaltsab Je’s commentary , pg. 85-87) 
  
 
6 Possession  
Like a great ocean, an inexhaustible abode  
Of limitless quality jewels, and  
Like a lamp, because its nature 
Possesses inseparable qualities. 
The Buddha potential possesses qualities of the cause and qualities of the result. The 
qualities of the cause are likened to a great ocean and the qualities of the result are likened 
to a lamp. 
The qualities of the cause are, as explained earlier, the four qualities of belief, wisdom, 
concentration and compassion. A great ocean contains an inexhaustible supply of precious 
jewels and so on. It is also a huge reservoir collecting the water of all rivers. Like that, the 
Buddha potential of living beings contains the fo ur qualities of the cause. Belief is like the 
container, wisdom and concentration are like precious jewels and compassion is like the 
water. 
There are seven qualities of the result. These are likened to a lamp because just as the 
qualities of light, heat and colour are inse parable from the lamp flame, so the seven 
qualities of the result are inseparable from their nature: that is, from the perspective of a 
Bodhisattva of any of the ten grounds, when engaged in meditative equipoise on the ultimate, 
the seven qualities of the result are seen to be inseparable from their ultimate nature, 
emptiness. This nature, which is the natural potential, can therefore be said to possess the 
seven qualities of the result. 
The seven qualities of the result are the extinction of contaminations, such as a 
Buddha's cessation, and the six clairvoyances. They are the divine eye, the divine ear, 
knowledge of others' minds, magical emanations, memory of former lives, and knowledge of 
the extinction of contaminations. 
The qualities of the cause are explained more extensively: 
Because it includes the truth body, the Conqueror's  
Wisdom, and compassion, the element  
Is shown to be similar to an ocean's  
Bed, jewels and water. 
Belief in the mahayana Dharma is the cause for purifying the obstructions to the truth 
body, here specifically referring to the nature body, and thus belief can be said to hold all 
realisations and qualities. It is an inexhaustible source of mahayana realisations. Without 
belief, it is not possible to gain the realisations of the mahayana path. It is likened to the 
ocean bed which holds all the water, fish, jewels, coral and so on that are found in the 
ocean. 
Uncommon, or mahayana, special insight and calm abiding, being motivated by 
bodhichitta, are the causes for achieving a Buddha's wisdom truth body. This precious 
wisdom, uncommon special insight, and precious concentration, calm abiding, when 
motivated by bodhichitta are therefore likened to precious jewels. 
The Bodhisattva's practice of great compassion is the cause of receiving a Buddha's 
great compassion and is likened to the water. As  water is always moist, compassion is said 
to be 'moist' with the intention of benefiting al l living beings and freein g them from suffering. 
The moisture of water permeates the hard, dry earth and its nature is to soften it and 
create the conditions for growth. It is in this way that great compassion is said to be moist, 
because it naturally permeates all living beings with a softening and nurturing influence 
that provides the conditions for the growth and development of realisations. 
Buddha potential embraces these four qualities of the cause and so is likened to the 
ocean. Intrinsic to Buddha potential are thes e four special causes of Buddhahood: belief, 
wisdom, concentration and compassion. 
The qualities of the result are explained more extensively as follows: 
In the immaculate state, clairvoyance,  
Wisdom and that very purity  
Are inseparable by reason of similarity to a lamp  
And its phenomena of light, heat and colour. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program –Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 21 
Page 9 of 9                                                                                                                                                                                           
Within the sphere of uncontaminated purity, the seven qualities of the result are 
classified in three divisions as  
(1) the first five clairvoyances;  
(2) the sixth clairvoyance, pure knowledge of  the extinction of contaminations; and  
(3) the stainless abandonment, whic h is the nature body itself.  
Because these three are inseparable from the point of view of their entity, they are 
likened to the light, heat and colour which are inseparable from the lamp flame itself. 
The relationship of example and meaning is as follows. The resultant five clairvoyances are 
like the light of a lamp. Each of these clairvoyances dispels the darkness of its corresponding 
obstructions. Thus, through the divine eye, the whereabouts of teachers, friends and 
students of this and previous lives appears clearly and directly to the mind. Through the 
clairvoyant knowledge of others' minds, the presence or absence of desire and so on in the 
minds of others is perceived clearly and directly. By the clairvoyant memory of previous lives, 
limitless previous lives are perceived naturally and directly. The connections between 
student and teacher throughout these lives appear as though illuminated by light. 
The knowledge of the extinction of contaminations is likened to the heat of the lamp 
flame which completely burns the fuel of negative karma and delusions. 
The stainless abandonment is likened to the colour of the lamp flame. Through the 
abandonment of the obstructions to liberat ion, clarity is attained, and through the 
abandonment of the obstructions to omnisc ience, purity is achieved. The stainless 
abandonment is the Buddha's cessation and have these two factors of clarity and purity Both 
the obstructions to liberation and the obstructions to omniscience are adventitious and thus 
do not permeate the nature of mind, which itse lf is clear light. The colour of a lamp flame 
may temporarily be polluted by smoke or ash but this pollution is merely adventitious. It is 
not the nature of the colour to be polluted or stained in any way. The real nature of colour 
has both the factors of being clear in its appearance and being pure colour. 
From within the sphere of a Buddha's meditative equipoise on emptiness, these seven 
qualities of the result are seen to be inseparable, from the point of view of their entity, just 
as the light, heat and colour are inseparable from the lamp itself. 
They are attained by purifying the obstructions to the Buddha potential. ( The Fundamental 
Potential for Enlightenment by Geshe Archarya Thubten Loden, pgs. 99-103)  
 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre   Basic Program – Module 10 
                                                                                       The Tathagata Essence  
Lesson 22 
Page 1 of 8 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating the Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra-ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation Jeffrey 
Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and Wilson, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
Commentary from The Tath›gata Essence, Commentary to the First 
Chapter by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen, translation Gavin Kilty, © FPMT, Inc. 
January 2007, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
  
Root verses are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added 
 
Lesson No: 22                            Date: 17th April 2008  
Chapter One: The Essen ce of a One Gone Thus 
Verses 44-46  
 
We usually go for refuge and recite the prayers for generating bodhicitta before 
class. It is important, at that time, to adjust our motivation to ensure that our 
participation in class is Dharma.   
 
We also offer the mandala before class. That should be an opportunity to 
accumulate a vast amount of merit rather than doing it because it is the 
routine. The point of making the hand mudra for the mandala offering is to 
remind us to think about the meaning of the mandala and to visualise certain 
things.  Otherwise, simply reciting the prayers with the hand mudra will not bring much benefit. The mudra symbolises Mount Meru and the four 
continents. We visualise offering many pleasant and precious substances. Who 
do we offer them to? We offer, with single-pointed faith, to our own spiritual 
teacher or master or the Three Jewels. Visualising the offerings  helps us to accumulate merit and contributes towards the success of this session of listening to the teachings.  
 
We usually do not pay attention to these things. After some time, they become 
habit or routine. We do the practices mechanically. The practices become dry because we don’t feel anything and nothing happens to the mind.  Then doing 
them is quite pointless. 
 
The purpose of making these offerings is to move the mind. It has to be heart-
felt. It is important to remind ourselves of this all the time. You may already be 
doing this so then this is just a reminder. When you feel something, even for a 
minute, you have accomplished the purpose of the practice and it will be 
beneficial. But if your mind is unmoved and you do not feel anything, then there is no benefit even if you recite these prayers for one or two hours. 
 
****************************** 
We have completed five aspects of the tathagata essence: entity (nature), 
causes, result, function and possession. Next is manifestation (or engagement). The remaining four aspects after that - states (of difference), the meaning of 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre   Basic Program – Module 10 
                                                                                       The Tathagata Essence  
Lesson 22 
Page 2 of 8 omnipresence [or the all pervading character], immutability at all times [or 
eternally unchangeable] and undifferentiability qualities [or indivisible quality) are auxiliary topics.  
(1,44 ) 
[Stemming] from the manifestat ion of difference in suchness 
In common beings, [Learner] S uperiors, and perfect Buddhas, 
The Perceiver of Suchness [the Buddha] taught [fortunate] sentient beings 
About this essence of the Conquerors. 
 
Verse 44 is the brief presentation of manifestation. When we look at suchness 
from its subjective perspective (i.e., of the person who possesses it), there are three:- 
1. an ordinary being 
2. a superior being  
3. a buddha 
Suchness itself can be divided into:  
1. Suchness that is not purified of defilements  
2. Suchness that is partially purified of defilements 
3. Suchness that is completely purified of defilements.  
Because suchness can be divided in this way, therefore the Buddha taught that sentient beings also possess suchness, the essence of the Conquerors. 
 
“The essential basis for sentient beings to attain enlightenment is this natural purity within the minds of sentient  beings because through focusing and 
meditating on it, it becomes the source that produces the qualities of the buddha. 
Because suchness with defilement cate gorizes the essence of the method to 
attain the perfect buddhahood of the conqueror, it is known as the essence of the 
conqueror.” (Pg. 88 of the commentary) 
 
The tathagata essence refers to the emptiness of the minds of sentient beings. 
Focussing and meditating on that, it becomes the source of the qualities of the 
Buddha and one achieves the dharmakaya. What is “ the essence of the method 
to attain the perfect budd hahood of the conqueror”? It is suchness with 
defilements.  
 
Based on this extract, we can say, ‘The tathagata essence is the emptiness of 
the minds of sentient beings that is accompanied by defilements.’ But can we 
also say, this is the lineage as well? If that is the case, how about the 
emptiness of the afflictive emotions? Can that be lineage or not? Can they be 
transformed into the body of the Buddha? 
 
Whatever is a tathagata essence is necessarily a lineage and whatever is a 
lineage necessarily proceeds on to enlightenment. That being the case, when we say that the tathagata essence is the emptiness of the minds of sentient 
beings, does it refer to all minds?
1
(1,45) 
Common beings err [with respect to the true mode of subsistence]. 
[Superiors] seeing the truth are the opposite. 
Ones Gone Thus [perceive] how things are without error 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre   Basic Program – Module 10 
                                                                                       The Tathagata Essence  
Lesson 22 
Page 3 of 8 [And having overcome the predispositions of  the two obstructions] are without 
fictional elaboration. 
 
The minds of ordinary beings are said to “err,” i.e., they are with errors 
because the suchness of these minds has yet to abandon the defilements.  
“(Superiors) seeing the truth are the opposite”: The superior beings, with the 
exception of the Buddha, are the opposite to ordinary beings because they 
have realised emptiness directly and they have partially abandoned the defilements. Therefore they are not with error.  
 
The buddha superiors are without error and without elaboration because the 
suchness in the buddha superiors’ minds are completely purified of all  defilements and are free from error and elaboration.  
 
This is the meaning of manifestation which shows us how the tathagata 
essence can be considered from the perspective of the persons who possess it 
and also from the perspective of whether the defilements have been  
abandoned or not.2
 
The seventh aspect is translated here as states of difference but some texts 
translate them as temporary divisions because they are divisions that are  made not on the basis of them having a separate entity but because of the 
different states that exist. 
 
The brief presentation of the states of difference is in verse 46: 
(1, 46) 
Impure, [both] impure and pure, 
And very pure are respectively 
Called the element of a sentient being, 
Bodhisattva, and Buddha. 
 
• The first “ impure ” refers to the suchness that is not purified of even the 
slightest defilement. This suchness is the element of ordinary beings.  
• The second “ impure and pure ” refers to the suchness that is not purified of 
all the defilements (the impure) but is purified of the seeds of the intellectually acquired afflictions (pure). This suchness is the element of the 
bodhisattva. 
• The third “ very pure” refers to the suchness that is purified of both the 
intellectually acquired and innate afflictions. This suchness is the element of 
the Buddha so this very pure suchness is the Tathagata, the One Gone Thus. 
 
For Verse 46, the word “element” does not appear in the Tibetan root text which reads: “ Impure, [both] impure and pure, and very pure are respectively 
called sentient being, Bodhisattva and Buddha.”  This requires interpretation. 
The impure suchness that is not purified of even the slightest defilement 
cannot be called ordinary being but have to be referred to as ‘the element of ordinary being.’ In the same way, the suchness that is partially purified is the 
element of the bodhisattva. However, we can call the totally pure suchness the 
Tathagata. That is the difference.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre   Basic Program – Module 10 
                                                                                       The Tathagata Essence  
Lesson 22 
Page 4 of 8 Look at page 90~91 of the commentary: “Suchness "unpurified" of a single seed 
of obscuration; suchness "unpurified" of a ll defilement but "purified" of the seeds 
of some defilement, such as certain me ntal constructions; a nd suchness "totally 
purified;" these three types of suchness ar e spoken of as the basic element of 
ordinary sentient beings, th e basic element of the mind s of arya bodhisattvas, 
and as the tathagata.” Note that it does not mention the ‘element’ of the 
Tathagata. 
 
The commentary continues: “ In this teaching of the divisions of suchness it is 
not wrong to posit the totally purified suchness as the tathagata, but the first 
two kinds of suchness cannot be equated with ordinary beings and bodhisattvas 
because positing the ultimate truth as a living being belongs to  outsider systems.  
 
The words, "spoken of as" indicate that the three kinds of suchness are bases for imputing the existence of the three kinds of person. This is similar to a person 
being imputed in dependence on an aggr egate collection and continuum, and yet 
no illustration of that person can be es tablished within their aggregate collection, 
their continuum, or separate from them. To  explain that in more detail, in the 
Heart Sutra it says, "Form is emptiness, emptiness is form." When looking to see 
how form actually exists, one comes to understand that there is not a trace of 
form existing by way of its own natu re. Without losing the core of that 
understanding one looks to understand how the base for the imputation of form 
exists, and one sees that a phenomenon not existing by its own nature is conventionalized as "form." Similarly, here, to understand how a phenomenon 
not existing by its own nature is convention alized as the three kinds of person, is 
to perceive the meaning of the tathagata essence.” 
 
• The suchness that is not purified of even the slightest of defilements is the 
basis of designation of an ordinary being.  
• The suchness that is partially purified from obscurations in the continuum 
of the person who sees the truth directly  is the basis of designation of the 
superior being.  
• The suchness that is completely purified of all defilements is the basis of 
designation of the buddha superior.  
 
The basis of designation of the person is the emptiness of the person. When we search for the ‘I’ of the ordinary or superior being, we find nothing other than their emptiness of inherent existence. Within that understanding of how the 
person is empty of inherent existence, we discover that the person is merely 
imputated (or labelled) on this emptiness. From this, we have an idea of how 
the basis of designation of the person is emptiness of the person.  
 
The commentary points out that the bases of designation of ordinary beings 
and the person are similar to what is being mentioned in the Heart Sutra: 
"Form is emptiness, emptiness is form."  What is the nature of form? When we 
look for it, we do not find form yet at the same time, form does exist. How does 
form exist? Within the state of understanding that form is empty of inherent existence, we discover that form is nothing other than mere imputation on that emptiness.  What is the basis of designation of form? It is the form that is 
empty of inherent existence. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre   Basic Program – Module 10 
                                                                                       The Tathagata Essence  
Lesson 22 
Page 5 of 8 Answer to student’s question : 
“The words, "spoken of as" indicate th at the three kinds of suchness are bases 
for imputing the existence of the three kinds of person.”  The first two kinds of 
suchnesses are not ordinary beings and bodhisattvas respectively because  
they are the bases of designation of ordinary beings and bodhisattvas 
respectively. 
 
Response to comment from student : 
When we look for the person, be it an ordinary or superior being, what we 
discover is the mere emptiness of that person. The person does exist – the person eats/walks, experiences happiness and suffering, etc. - but, at the end 
of our analysis, we do not find ‘the person’ but only the emptiness of that 
person.  
 
There may be a danger of slipping into the extreme of nihilism but we know 
that the person exists so the point then is to discover how that person exists?  
How does the ‘I’ exist? It exists as mere imputation on the collection of physical 
and mental aggregates. Within the state of emptiness, we understand it as a 
dependent origination, existing as an imputation of the mind.  
 
There are gross and subtle levels of dependent origination. A general 
understanding of  dependent origination does not necessarily mean that one 
understands emptiness. The subtlest level of the meaning of dependent 
origination is how things exist through being imputed by conceptuality while 
they are empty. The person is empty of inherent existence yet the person exists as merely labelled through the force of conceptuality.  
 
Answer to students’ query: 
When it is stated in Verse 45 that “Common beings err [with respect to the true 
mode of subsistence]” and that “Ones gone Thus [perceive] how things are without error, ” it does not mean that the suchness  of ordinary beings is with 
error but that suchness is not purified of even the slightest defilements and 
therefore called ‘with error.’  The bodhisattva superiors are the opposite 
because the suchness of their minds are purified of the intellectually acquired afflictions and, on that basis, is called, ‘without error.’  
 
Questions from student : 
“Similarly, here, to understand how a phenomenon not existing by its own 
nature is conventionalized as the three kinds of person, is to perceive the meaning of the tathagata essence.” I have a number of questions: 
What is the meaning of “ perceive the meaning of the tathagata essence” ? Does 
it mean one perceives the emptiness of one’s mind or one perceives the tatagata essence itself? 
“Conventionalized as the three kinds of person ”: Earlier on, the commentary 
mentions, “these three types of suchness are sp oken of as the basic element of 
ordinary sentient beings, th e basic element of the mind s of arya bodhisattvas, 
and as the tathagata.” Shouldn’t then the number of kinds of person 
conventionalised be only two?   
Amitabha Buddhist Centre   Basic Program – Module 10 
                                                                                       The Tathagata Essence  
Lesson 22 
Page 6 of 8                                                           Geshe-la: If you say emptiness of the B uddha’s mind is tathagata, there is no 
problem.  with that. But if you say emptin ess of the sentient being is the sentient 
being, that is a problem.  
 
We should understand that the basis of imputation of the person is  
emptiness. We can then apply this understanding to ordinary beings, bodhisattvas and the Tathagata.  
 
We have to know how a sentient being with defilements is merely imputed on 
emptiness. Once we understand that sentient being with defilement is empty of 
inherent existence, we understand how that sentient being can change and  
become a buddha and we also understand that the nature of that sentient 
being is also clear light.  
 
The Buddha who is a superior being, is not something that is radically  
different. The Buddha also exists as mere imputation on emptiness. Both sentient beings and the Buddha are mere imputation onto emptiness. When  
we look at their bases of designation, they are the same, i.e., emptiness.  
 
The point is to understand how sentient beings are imputed on emptiness and 
how the nature of sentient beings are empty of inherent existence. On the 
basis of that, we understand that the nature of sentient beings is clear light, 
we understand how sentient beings have the tathagata essence. 3 The point is 
to understand how the sentient beings with defilement are in the nature of 
clear light. This means to understand that the sentient beings do not exist 
inherently.  
 
This is my own view based on my reading of the text so you would have to 
think and analyse this further.   
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng, Alison Wong & Angie Xiao 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee 
 
 
 
1 Teaching (v.44) 
Suchness is located in bases such as ordinary beings, arya beings and perfect buddhas. These 
are manifestations by base. Suchness exists as three types, namely, within the non-
purification of defilement, within those "not fallin g to one side" and within the extinction of all 
obscuration. This is manifestation by type. Because of this the seer of suchness taught 
suchness with defilement, the essence of the conqueror, existing in sentient beings.  
The essential basis for sentient beings to attain enlightenment is this natural purity within 
the minds of sentient beings because through fo cusing and meditating on it, it becomes the 
source that produces the qua lities of the buddha. Because suchness with defilement 
categorizes the essence of the method to attain the perfect buddhahood of the conqueror, it is 
known as the essence of the conqueror. ( Gyaltsab Je’s commentary , pg. 88)  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre   Basic Program – Module 10 
                                                                                       The Tathagata Essence  
Lesson 22 
Page 7 of 8                                                                                                                                                                                           
2 Root text (v.45 ) 
Because suchness in the minds of ordinary beings has not abandoned a single seed of 
obscuration and because it abides with the seeds of defilement, it is "with error." Suchness in 
the minds of those, who are not buddhas, but who directly perceive the truth is "the opposite 
of that," which means that it has not comple tely abandoned defilement but has abandoned 
some seeds of defilement, and therefore is not with error. The suchness in the fully developed minds of the tathagatas who see things as they really are, is "free from error and elaboration." These are the types of suchness. 
The aryas referred to here are mainly bodhisat tva aryas but other aryas can be included in 
the second category.  ( Gyaltsab Je’s commentary , pg. 88-89)  
 
3 Engagement  
Because suchness is engaged differently by  
Ordinary beings, Superiors and Buddhas,  
The Knowers of suchness have taught  
This Buddha essence is in sentient beings. 
The suchness of ordinary beings has not been  purified of obstructions at all. The 
suchness of Superior beings other than Buddhas is partially separated from obstructions. 
For example, the suchness of Hearer or Solitary Realiser Foe Destroyers is separated from 
the obstructions to liberation, but not the obstructions to omniscience. The suchness of a 
first ground Bodhisattva is separated from ne ither the obstructions to liberation nor the 
obstructions to omniscience, but is separated from the artificial conception of self. The 
artificial conception of self, or the acquired conception of self, is the conception of self 
arising from doctrinal influence. It is distin ct from the innate conception of self. The 
artificial conception of self arises, for example, from hearing a doctrine asserting a 
permanent or independently existent self and adopting this false view. The innate conception 
of self, on the other hand, is the basic ignorance conceiving inherently existent self and 
phenomena which from beginningless time ha s bound sentient beings to samsara. The 
suchness of Buddhas is completely separated from all obstructions. Therefore, suchness 
is posited as being engaged with obstructions, with partial obstructions and totally without 
obstructions. Although the suchness itself is identical in each case, it can nonetheless be 
divided into three according to the basis of engagement. Because the suchness of ordinary 
beings and Superiors is their natural potential, it is correctly taught that all sentient beings 
have Buddha nature. 
Ordinary beings are mistaken,  
Knowers of the truth are the opposite.  
Tathagatas perceive it as it is  
Without error and without elaboration. 
The suchness within the continuum of ordinary beings has not been freed of even the 
least seeds of the obstructions. Because the seeds of obstruction remain, the view of 
ordinary beings is necessarily mistaken. The suchness within the continuum of Superior 
beings other than Buddhas has been partially freed from obstructions but not completely. 
Having reached the level of a Superior, their view  of suchness is unmistaken and in complete 
contrast to that of ordinary beings. The suchness within the continuum of Buddhas is 
completely freed from obstructions. Without conceptual elaborations they perceive all 
phenomena as it is (in its true nature), without any error. 
Temporary divisions  
The impure, (both) pure and impure. 
And completely pure, are respectively 
Referred to as ordinary beings, 
Bodhisattvas, and Tathagatas . 
The suchness of ordinary beings is referred to as impure because an ordinary being has 
not even slightly abandoned the seeds of the obstructions. Superior Bodhisattvas have 
partially abandoned the obstructions, in that they have overcome the artificial conception 
of self. They have not completely abandoned the obstructions, however, because they have 
yet to overcome the innate conception of self. The Bodhisattva's suchness is therefore 
referred to as being both pure and impure. 
A Bodhisattva becomes a Superior when she is at the level of the first Bodhisattva 
ground. The first Bodhisattva ground holds both the path of seeing and the path of 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre   Basic Program – Module 10 
                                                                                       The Tathagata Essence  
Lesson 22 
Page 8 of 8                                                                                                                                                                                           
meditation. The first stage of the path of seeing is the Bodhisattva's uninterrupted path of 
meditative equipoise directly perceiving the emptiness of inherent existence of self and 
phenomena. During that uninterrupted path the Bodhisattva overcomes the artificial 
conception of self, but has not yet completely abandoned it in the sense that it will never 
again return. This uninterrupted path proceeds to the next stage of the path of seeing, that 
is the path of release, wherein the artificial conception of self is totally abandoned. The next 
stage is the post-meditative stage of the path of seeing, where the Bodhisattva recognises 
that she has yet to overcome the innate conception of self. She then proceeds to make 
offerings and so on, accumulating merit to empower her continuum to be able to 
progressively overcome the innate conception of self. While still at the first Bodhisattva 
ground she then enters the meditative equipois e of the uninterrupted path that is the first 
stage of the path of meditation. During this she endeavours to overcome the great of the 
great obstructions to liberation. From here, through the second to tenth grounds, the 
Bodhisattva is engaged in the path of medi tation and has passed beyond the path of 
seeing. 
The above is a general explanation of the stages by which a Bodhisattva progresses. It 
refers to the type of person who enters the mahayana path from the outset. An exception to 
this general explanation is the type of person who first progresses through the hinayana 
stages and, after becoming a hinayana Foe Destroyer, later enters the mahayana path. 
According to the presentation of the Middle Way Consequence school such a person will, 
even at the first ground, have already abandoned the innate conception of self by the 
previous attainment of the realization of a Foe Destroyer. 
A Tathagata has completely abandoned all obstructions to both liberation and 
omniscience and his suchness is referred to as completely pure. 
The meaning of the nature and so forth 
Is summarised by these six. 
<There being three temporary elements 
Is explained by three names. 
The meaning of Buddha nature and so forth has been summarised into the six points 
that have been explained thus far: that is, the subjects of nature, causes, result, actions, 
possession, and engagement. The meaning can be further condensed into the three 
temporary states of the 'element' - Buddha nature or suchness. These are known 
respectively by three names: the suchness of ordinary beings, the suchness of Superior 
beings and the suchness of Buddhas. The suchness of an ordinary being and that of a 
Superior being other than a Buddha have stai ns. The suchness of a Buddha is without the 
slightest stain. 
Suchness in the case of an ordinary being is temporarily stained by the obstructions to 
liberation and the obstructions to omniscience. The suchness of a Superior being other 
than a Buddha is temporarily partially obscured by the obstructions to liberation and/or 
the obstructions to omniscience. Suchness in the case of a Buddha is not stained by either obstruction. The suchness itself, however, is identical in each case and differentiation is 
made on the degree to which suchness is temporarily obscured by the obstructions to 
liberation and omniscience. . ( The Fundamental Potential for Enlightenment by Geshe Archarya 
Thubten Loden, pgs. 99-103)  
 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                           Basic Program – Module 10
                                                                                        The Tathagata Essence  
Lesson 23 
Page 1 of 10 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating the Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra-ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation Jeffrey 
Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and Wilson, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
Commentary from The Tath›gata Essence, Commentary to the First 
Chapter by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen, translation Gavin Kilty, © FPMT, Inc. 
January 2007, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
  
Root verses are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added 
 
Lesson No: 23                            Date: 22nd April 2008  
Chapter One: The Essen ce of a One Gone Thus 
Verses 46-50 
 
I am going to summarise what we had discussed so far. If you hadn’t 
understood the earlier explanation on the aspect of manifestation, then you 
may not get much out of this summary. But if I were to go word by word, it 
would be difficult to summarise. When I try to summarise, it is also very 
difficult as you may not understand the meaning. You have to try to pay attention. If you really want to understand this topic, then ideally you should 
put aside the time to come to class continuously because these things are all 
inter-related. I can't keep on repeating or summarising over and over again. 
 
Manifestation is the sixth aspect of the ten aspects explaining the clear light 
nature of the mind. The point of understanding this aspect is to see how all 
sentient beings possess the tathagata essence.   
 
When we look at suchness from the perspective of the persons who possess it, there are three:- 
1. an ordinary being  
2. a superior being  
3. a buddha.  
The suchness that is accompanied by defilements in the continua of ordinary 
beings and the superior beings is the tathagata essence (or buddha nature) 
whereas the suchness in the continua of the buddhas is the dharmakaya, the 
Truth Body.  
 
A qualm may arise as to why there are so many different kinds of suchnesses? 
The seventh aspect, states [of difference] (or temporary divisions) of the tathagata essence is the response to this qualm, where it is clarified that the 
division of suchness into three is done on the basis of these being temporary 
divisions and not because the suchnesses are of different entities.  
 
(1,46) 
Impure, [both] impure and pure, 
And very pure are respectively 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                           Basic Program – Module 10
                                                                                        The Tathagata Essence  
Lesson 23 
Page 2 of 10 Called the element of a sentient being, 
Bodhisattva, and Buddha. 
• The first “ impure ” refers to the suchness that is not purified of even the 
slightest defilement. This suchness is the element of ordinary beings.  
• The second “ impure and pure ” refers to the suchness that is not purified of 
all the defilements (the impure) but is purified of the seeds of the 
intellectually acquired afflictions (pure). This suchness is the element of the 
bodhisattva. 
• The third “ very pure” refers to the suchness that is purified of both the 
intellectually acquired and innate afflictions. This suchness is the element of 
the Buddha so this very pure suchness is the Tathagata, the One Gone Thus. 
When we look at the bases of designation of these three persons, they are imputed onto something that has the nature of emptiness and are therefore, 
the same entity. 
 
• Sentient beings and bodhisattvas are imputed onto suchness that is 
accompanied by defilements, their bases of designation. Therefore it is 
“impure ” and “ impure and pure .”  
• The “very pure” refers to the suchness that is completely without defilements 
which is the basis of designation of the Buddha.  
 
When we think about a person, what is the nature of that person? When we look for the person, after analysis, the ‘person’ is not findable. What we find 
instead is the emptiness of that person. Understanding the emptiness of the 
person, we understand how that person is basically a mere imputation onto 
that emptiness. When we think about this, it gives us some understanding that everything is in the nature of emptiness and that everything arises from emptiness.  
 
The extensive explanation of states of difference appears in Verse 47. 
(1, 47) 
The basis constituent that is contained 
Within these six topics of entity and so forth [i.e., causes, effect, function, 
possession, manifestation, and states] 
Is indicated with [those] three names in terms of these three states 
[Whereas in its entity there is not the slightest difference]. 
 
The basis constituent, suchness, is contained within these six topics (or 
aspects). “ Three names in terms of these three states”:  The suchness that is 
established by these different topics at different times is given different names. 
This temporary division of suchness is not made based on the suchnesses 
having different entities but rather on the basis of “ states”  as mentioned in the 
text. It is a temporary terminological division This answers the earlier qualm of 
why there are so many different kinds of suchnesses. 1  
 
Next is the aspect of the meaning of omnipresence  [that is reality pervading 
all or the all-pervading character) which is explained in Verse 48. 
(1,48) 
Just as space which has a non-conceptual [and unobstructed] nature 
Pervades [undifferentiably] all [physical things], 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                           Basic Program – Module 10
                                                                                        The Tathagata Essence  
Lesson 23 
Page 3 of 10 So the nature of the mind, the undefiled basic element, 
Pervades all states of persons. 
 
The division of suchness into three is a temporary terminological division and 
is not made on the basis of suchness having different entities. The suchness of 
these three states (or times) does not have different entities because suchness 
pervades all. If these three suchnesses were of different entities, then we 
cannot say that suchness pervades all as there are the three types of persons.  
 
In Verse 48, space is used as an an alogy for its pervasion of everything. 
Although space does not think, ‘I am going to pervade everything,’ nevertheless 
it does so. Similarly, emptiness, which is the nature of the mind, pervades all 
just as space pervades all phenomena. This is discussed on pg. 94 of the 
commentary: “Unformed space is the mere negation  of obstructing tangibility; it 
does not take the form of a self-sustaining affirmation. Although it pervades 
different "receptacles," it is only given different na mes on the basis of these 
individual phenomena. From the point of view of its own nature it does not take 
on individual forms. Similarly, the enti ty of pure suchness, which is the mere 
negation of existence by nature, pervades everything, and yet, unlike blue and yellow, for example, from the point of vi ew of its nature it does not take on 
different forms. One single nature pervad es all states; merely the states are 
differentiated.”
2
 
If we say that the mind, which is empty of inherent existence, pervades all, is 
there a problem?  
 
The extensive explanation of this meaning of omnipresence is given in Verse 
49. 
(1,49) 
[The pure basic element] pervades the general character of all phenomena, 
[Thus] it pervades [all states of] faulty [common beings, 
Bodhisattvas] with good qualities, and [Buddhas of] final [qualities] 
Just as space is omnipresent in low,  middling, and supreme forms [such as 
earth, copper, and gold vessels]. 
 
In pg. 95 of the commentary, it states: “ In its generality the basic element of 
suchness pervades every fault, every good qu ality that has left behind particular 
seeds of the defilement, and every ultima te quality, in the same way as space 
pervades lesser forms, such as an earthe nware receptacle, intermediate such as 
a copper receptacle, and supreme fo rms such as a gold receptacle.” 
 
This explanation shows that the suchness in the continua of an ordinary 
being, a bodhisattva or a Buddha are not different entities but one entity. Their nature is not different, but having said that, these three different types of 
suchness are not the same. Having the same nature does not necessarily mean 
that they are the same because when divided terminologically, there are three, not one.   
 
To summarise, manifestation is the sixth of the ten aspects. When suchness is 
divided from the perspective of the person who possesses it, there are three 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                           Basic Program – Module 10
                                                                                        The Tathagata Essence  
Lesson 23 
Page 4 of 10 divisions: (1) an ordinary being, (2) a bodhisattva and (3) the Tathagata. 
However, this division of suchness does not lead to the fault of there being 
many different suchnesses because this temporary division is not made on the 
basis of the entity of suchness, because these three suchnesses have the same 
entity. This point is further elaborated by the seventh and eighth aspects, 
states of difference and the meaning of omnipresence. 3
 
The ninth aspect is immutability at all times  (or eternally unchangeable). 
Suchness that is impure (i.e., accompanied by defilements, in the continua of 
ordinary and superior beings) will ultimately become very pure suchness when 
all the defilements are purified, i.e. when one becomes a buddha. The impure 
suchness is purified when one achieves enlightenment and acquires perfect qualities. However, the suchnesses of the three types of persons are of the same entity and unchanging.  
 
A qualm may arise: "If the first two states are with fault and the third state is 
without fault and endowed with excellent qu alities, then how can it be claimed 
that the latter exists in the same way as the former?"  (Pg. 97 of the 
commentary).  
 
The ninth aspect is the response to this qualm.  The division of suchness into 
three is a terminological division only. Our position is that despite the fact that impure suchness becomes suchness that is very pure, the suchness itself has 
not changed as it is eternally unchangeable. The following verses will prove 
this assertion. 
(1,50) 
[Even when the essential constituent is to gether with defilement,] those faults 
are adventitious [and suitable to be removed, thus they are not its nature], 
And its good qualities are naturally indivi sible [unfit to be removed and thus not 
adventitious]. 
Therefore, as it was before [when in cyclic  existence] so it is  later in [nirvana, 
Always] of unchangeable nature. 
 
The last two lines of verse 50: “ Therefore, as it was before [when in cyclic 
existence] so it is later in [nirvana, always] of unchangeable nature” is the 
thesis that suchness is eternally unchangeable.  
 
The proof  of this thesis appears in the first two lines of Verse 50: “ [Even when 
the essential constituent is together with defilement,] those faults are 
adventitious [and suitable to be removed, thus they are not its nature], and its 
good qualities are naturally indivisibl e [unfit to be removed and thus not 
adventitious].”  
 
“Those faults are adventitious and its good qualities are naturally indivisible”:   
How do these two reasons act as proof of the thesis that suchness is 
unchangeable? Think about this.4
 
Question : 
Is there a difference between a ‘basis of designation’ and ‘base’? 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                           Basic Program – Module 10
                                                                                        The Tathagata Essence  
Lesson 23 
Page 5 of 10 Answer:  
Geshe-la: In Tibetan, there is no difference between the two terms.  
These have many meanings. The basis of designation can mean that which is 
dependently arisen or refer to the base upon which we impute something. A 
person is that which is imputed in dependence on the five aggregates. The 
aggregates are the bases of designation of a person. Is it also the base of a 
person? Geshe-la: I think they are the same .  
 
With respect to the process of imputation, you can impute by depending on  the 
basis or you can also impute onto that basis.  
 
Let us take momentariness as the object. Momentariness is the basis of 
designation of impermanence. Impermanence is imputed by depending on momentariness. There is however much debate as to whether momentariness 
is the basis of designation of impermanence.  
 
In some texts, it is mentioned that the bases of designation and imputed 
phenomena are mutually exclusive. Whatever are imputed phenomena are not bases of designation. In this case, impermanence is not momentariness.
5   
 
Question: 
Is the suchness with defilement the final basis of designation of the sentient being or not? 
 
Geshe-la: You can say that. 
 
Response to st udent’s question : 
Geshe-la: You can’t say that suchness with defilement is a sentient being. If you 
say that, that is the same as saying empt iness is sentient bei ng, isn’t it? So you 
cannot say that. Suchness which is totally purified of its defilements, that is 
Tathagata, you can say that. Basis of sentient being doesn’t mean that it is a 
sentient being! 
 
Response to stud ent’s question: 
In the context of ordinary beings, the seed of obscurations refers to the objects 
of abandonment on the path of seeing.  
 
The bodhisattva superiors have abandoned those obscurations that are to be 
abandoned on the path of seeing but have not yet abandoned the obscurations 
that have to be abandoned on the path of meditation. Therefore in relation to 
the bodhisattvas, the seed of obscurations refer to the object of abandonment 
on the path of meditation.  
 
We can also relate these to intellectually-acquired afflictions and innate 
afflictions. Ordinary beings have not abandoned the intellectually-acquired afflictions. Bodhisattvas have abandoned these but not the innate afflictions.  
 
We can say that ordinary beings have not abandoned the seed of obscurations and we can also say that they have not abandoned the seed of defilements. They both mean that ordinary beings have not abandoned the intellectually 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                           Basic Program – Module 10
                                                                                        The Tathagata Essence  
Lesson 23 
Page 6 of 10                                                           acquired afflictions. For the bodhisattvas, we can say that they have not 
abandoned the seed of obscurations and we can also say that they have not abandoned the seed of defilements. They both mean that they have not 
abandoned the innate afflictions. 
 
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng, Alison Wong & Angie Xiao 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee 
 
 
1 Root text (v.47) 
Here the suchness with defilement basic element is imputed as the three kinds of person by 
way of its gradual progression and is taught by th ree names. This is what is being taught here; 
they are not, as explained above, actual illustrations of the three kinds of person. How is the 
basic element described? It is summarized by th e six topics, nature and so forth, and is the 
suchness ascertained by those topics. In brief, it is imputed by three different names in three 
different states. ( Gyaltsab Je’s commentary, pg. 91 - 92)  
 
2 Teaching (v.48) 
Just as space pervades every ab sence of obstructing tangibility,  and is of a non-conceptual 
nature that never thinks, "I pervade the emptiness within the world," likewise emptiness by 
nature, the defilement-free sphere that is th e nature of the mind, pervades all phenomena. 
"Defilement-free sphere" indicates that the defi lements are not of the nature of the mind, and 
does not refer solely to the absence of adventitious defilement. 
Unformed space is the mere negation of obstruct ing tangibility; it does not take the form of 
a self-sustaining affirmation. Although it pervades different "receptacles," it is only given 
different names on the basis of these individual phenomena. From the point of view of its own 
nature it does not take on individual forms. Similarly, the entity of pure suchness, which is the 
mere negation of existence by nature, pervades everything, and yet, unlike blue and yellow, for 
example, from the point of view of its nature it does not take on different forms. One single nature pervades all states; merely the states are differentiated. ( Gyaltsab Je’s commentary , pg. 
94)  
 
3 Root text (v.49) 
In its generality the basic element of suchness pervades every fault, every good quality that 
has left behind particular seeds of defilement, an d every ultimate quality, in the same way as 
space pervades lesser forms, such as an earthenware receptacle, intermediate such as a 
copper receptacle, and supreme forms such as a gold receptacle. 
Application to scripture 
"Therefore, the basic element of sentient beings is not one thing and the dharmakaya another, 
because the basic element of sentient beings," when its suchness with defilement is purified of all defilement, "is the dharmakaya. The dharmakaya," during the time it is emptiness by 
nature with defilement, "is the basic element of sentient beings. In reality they are not two." 
From the point of view of its nature it does not appear in distinct forms. "Only in words are 
they different. This the buddha has said." 
To say that the basic element of sentient beings and the dharmakaya are identical in 
meaning contradicts logic. Therefore, just as the paths of a crow and of a vulture flying 
through the sky do not appear in different fo rms, and just as space itself in different 
receptacles does not appear in different forms, but is only differentiated by words, in the same way emptiness by nature is known as the basic element of sentient beings when it is suchness 
with defilement and as the dharmakaya when it is the extinction of all defilement. However, 
from the point of view of its own nature it does not take on different forms. This is the meaning 
of the above text. (Gyaltsab Je’s commentary , pg. 95-96)  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                           Basic Program – Module 10
                                                                                        The Tathagata Essence  
Lesson 23 
Page 7 of 10                                                                                                                                                                                           
4 Link 
This begins, "Although the tathagata basic el ement dwells in these three states…" "The 
fourteen verses" refers to fourteen "root-like" verses. Twelve of these teach the immutability of 
the basic element during the impure states. 
One verse, beginning "Released from birth, death and old age…" teaches immutability during 
the impure and pure states, and one root -like verse, beginning, "Unchangeable and 
inexhaustible…" teaches the totally pure state. 
On the following verses of root text, there is one verse that summarizes all three states 
(v.50), twelve root-like verses (v.51-62) and two commentary like verses on the first state (v.63-
64), one root-like verse (v.65) and twelve comment ary-like verses on the second state (v.66-77), 
[145] one root-text verse (v.78) and six commentary-like verses on the third state (v.79-84). Therefore there are thirty-five vers es on the topic of immutability. 
Root text (v.50) 
Just as emptiness by nature exists in the mind s of ordinary sentient beings, likewise in the 
later states of the Hearer and Solitary Realizer arya, the bodhisattva arya, and the totally pure 
state, it remains as suchness, which is the mere negation of existence by its own nature. Just 
as it exists in the third state, so it was in the first and second state. Therefore it is an 
unchanging suchness. 
You may ask, "If the first two states are with fault and the third state is without fault and 
endowed with excellent qualities, then how can it  be claimed that the latter exists in the same 
way as the former?" There is no contradiction here. The faults are adventitious in that they can be removed, every quality of the buddha can be  developed and the focus for the development of 
these qualities exists innately. Therefore, the mere negation of existence by way of its own 
nature cannot be changed by the faults, nor can it be altered by the qualities also, because 
just as every drop of water is of one taste with the ocean, so every phenomenon is of one taste 
within natural emptiness. Therefore, the ultimate truth cannot take any form other than the mere negation of existence by way of its own nature. Moreover, when perceived in the 
meditative placement of every arya being, it ab ides in that state and does not differ in form in 
the slightest. That is the meaning of immuta bility, whereas the assertion of a permanent 
functional phenomenon does not belong to the tradition of this dharma. 
Description of each category 
These are in the fourteen verses. "The fourteenth verse explains that in the totally pure 
state," from the perspective of their nature and of being separable, the qualities "are indivisible 
and inseparable." 
Individual explanations 
1. Immutable during the impure state 
2. Immutable during the impure and pure state 
3. Immutable during the totally pure state [146] ( Gyaltsab Je’s commentary , pg. 96-98)  
****************************** 
All-pervading character  
Just as space, concept-free by nature, 
Is all-pervading. So 
The nature of mind, the immaculate sphere. 
Is likewise all-pervasive. 
Space has no conceptual intention to be everywhere, nor to abide within all empty vessels. 
Nonetheless it naturally exists everywhere. Like that, suchness has no conceptual intention 
to pervade the minds of all beings and all established bases, but naturally does so. The 
nature of mind is referred to as the immaculate sphere because it is not touched by the 
slightest impurity. 
Space is posited as the mere absence of obstructive contact. It pervades the entire variety 
of vessels and is differentiated only on the basis of the vessel or boundary that surrounds 
it. For example, we may speak of the space in the cupboard or the space in the bedroom. 
The space itself is identical in each case but is differentiated by the boundary, or perhaps 
the direction, that qualifies it. Likewise, suchness is the mere absence of inherent 
existence and is differentiated merely on the variation in the base that qualifies suchness 
in particular instances. We can therefore speak of the emptiness, or suchness, of the person 
and the emptiness of phenomena. Though the base of the emptiness is different, the 
emptiness itself is identical. Ultimately there is only one suchness. This is in contrast, for 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                           Basic Program – Module 10
                                                                                        The Tathagata Essence  
Lesson 23 
Page 8 of 10                                                                                                                                                                                           
example, to the way that the colours blue and yellow are omniscience differentiated, where 
a distinction can be made on the basis of their entity. 
This general characteristic pervades 
The faulty, the qualified and the ultimate, 
As with space and the inferior, 
Medium and supreme aspects of forms. 
The suchness which is the general characteristic of all things pervades ordinary 
beings, who are referred to as faulty because they have not yet in any way overcome the 
obstructions. It pervades Superior beings, who are referred to as the qualified because, 
though they have not completed the accumulation of all qualities, they nonetheless have 
the qualities arising from having partially  removed the obstruct ions. Suchness also 
pervades Buddhas, who are referred to as the ultimate. The point is illustrated by 
considering inferior, medium and supreme forms. A vessel made of clay would be considered 
an inferior form. One made of bronze would be considered medium, whereas a vessel made 
of g ol d w ould be call ed  supr eme. Space itself  naturally and equally pervades the inferior 
clay, medium bronze and supreme gold vessels. There is no difference in the space itself, 
whether it be held within an inferior, medium or supreme quality vessel. Though we refer to 
the clay pof s space, the bronze pofs space and the gold vase's space, they are merely 
nominal distinctions. The actual entity of space is identical in each case. Like that, when we 
refer to an ordinary being's suchness, a Superior's suchness or a Buddha's suchness, we 
are making a nominal distinction. The entity of suchness is identical in every instance at its 
ultimate level. 
Though we refer to an ordinary being's suchness as being stained by delusions and 
obstructions as compared to a Buddha's suchness, which is completely and utterly free of 
delusions and obstructions, these are conventional, or nominal, distinctions. Ultimately, 
from the point of view of its entity, suchne ss is always simply undifferentiated suchness. 
There is no distinction at the ultimate level. Similarly, whether it be a lowly crow flying 
through space or a great eagle winging its way through space, the space itself is the same. 
Eternally unchangeable  
Though possessing adventitious faults,  
Because it has qualities by nature,  
It is the unchanging reality,  
The same after as it was before. 
The mind is empty of inherent existence during the stage of an ordinary being, and also 
during the stage of Superior Hearers or Solitary Realisers and Superior Bodhisattvas. Their 
mind is empty of inherent existence as is the mind at the stage of a Buddha. The suchness 
of the mind, or the mind's actual mode of existence, is the mere absence of inherent 
existence and this remains its unchanging reality during the three stages of ordinary 
being, Superior being and Buddha. A difference is therefore not seen in the suchness of the 
mind of a sentient being, a Superior Hearer or Solitary Realiser, or a Bodhisattva. Rather, a 
distinction can be made on the basis of whether there is temporary, complete or partial 
obscuration of the nature of the mind by the adventitious defilements. 
As space pervades all and, Due to being subt le, is completely unaffected, So, that which 
abides in all sentient beings, Is completely unaffected. 
Space pervades all worlds of the desire, form and formless realms. It is said to be subtle 
because it is non-material and not an object directly apprehended by sense conscious-
nesses. It is not affected by material forms,  atoms and so on. Like that, Buddha nature 
pervades all sentient beings but is not affected by delusions and so on because it is pure by 
nature. 
Just as all worlds 
Arise and disintegrate within space, 
So in the unproduced sphere 
All the senses arise and subside. 
All worlds, universes, suns, moons and stars depend for their existence on space. The 
bases of matter, the air, fire, water and earth elements, all arise within space and eventually 
disintegrate within space. Space itself, however, neither arises nor disintegrates and nor 
does it depend for its existence on the elements. In like manner, the worlds of the senses 
arise and pass within the sphere of reality, or emptiness. Without a nature of emptiness 
they could not come into existence at all and nor could they disintegrate. They are 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                           Basic Program – Module 10
                                                                                        The Tathagata Essence  
Lesson 23 
Page 9 of 10                                                                                                                                                                                           
dependent arisings and their very function and existence depends on emptiness. However, 
emptiness itself neither arises nor disintegrates and is thus referred to as the sphere of 
the unproduced. The natural potential is emptiness and in nature it is not dependent on 
the senses for its existence. As Nagarjuna says in Chapter 24 of his Treatise on the Middle 
Way: 
To whatever emptiness is applicable,  
All is applicable to that.  
To whatever emptiness is not applicable,  
All is not applicable to that. 
Here Nagarjuna is emphasising that emptiness must necessarily be the underlying nature 
of all phenomena. By this underlying nature being applicable, all other things are possible. 
The process of production, the relationship between causes and effects, the relationship 
between virtue and happiness, non-virtue and suffering, nirvana and samsara, the progress 
on the path and the attainment of enlightenment are only possible within the context of 
having a nature of emptiness. If the nature of phenomena were not emptiness, none of these 
things would be possible. Causes would always be inherently causes and could thus not 
transform into effects. Sentient beings would be inherently deluded and could thus never 
progress to enlightenment. There would be no relationship between non-virtue and 
suffering because they would be inherently other. As Nagarjuna says in his Treatise on the 
Middle Way:  
As there are no phenomena  
That are not dependent arisings,  
There are no phenomena  
That are not empty. 
All phenomena exist and function as mere dependent arisings with a final nature of 
emptiness. No phenomenon comes into existence without a nature of emptiness. Nagarjuna 
goes on in Chapter 24 of his Treatise on the Middle Way:  
If all these are not empty,  
There is no production and no disintegration.  
That would imply that the four noble truths  
Could not exist for you. 
Without causes and effects having a nature of emptiness there could be no production 
of new effects from causes and no disintegrati on of that which has been produced. This is 
because, were they not mere dependent arisings with a nature of emptiness, causes and 
effects would exist inherently, independently, and by their own power and thus bear no 
relation to each other. Nagarjuna illustrates this by showing that in such a case, true 
causes could not produce true suffering and true paths could not bring about the 
cessation of suffering, and therefore the four noble truths would not apply to us. So 
without there being a nature of emptiness, phenomena could neither be produced nor 
disintegrate. 
The Sublime Continuum continues with the analogy of space as follows: 
Just as space has never before 
Been burnt by fires. 
So this (suchness) is not burnt by the fires of 
Death, sickness and ageing. 
Space can never be burnt by fire. Similarly the true nature of the mind, its suchness or 
its Buddha potential, though it be stained by defilements, cannot itself be harmed by the 
fire of sickness, the fire of ageing and the fire of death. 
Free of birth, death, sickness and ageing, 
They have realised the nature as it is. 
Through this cause, and by generating compassion for beings, 
Though separated from the poverty of birth and so on, 
The wise depend on (birth and so on). 
This verse refers to a Superior Bodhisattva. Due to her realisation of the natural 
potential, or suchness, conjoined specifically with the special method of bodhichitta, she is 
free from samsaric birth, death, sickness and ageing. However, such beings still take 
rebirth in samsara in order to benefit others and to complete their accumulations of merit 
and wisdom. Their births, though, are not conditioned by afflicted karma and delusion as 
in the case of ordinary beings. A Superior Bodhisattva takes birth through the causes of 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre                           Basic Program – Module 10
                                                                                        The Tathagata Essence  
Lesson 23 
Page 10 of 10                                                                                                                                                                                           
her direct realisation of suchness and through having generated great compassion for all 
living beings.  
Such a Bodhisattva is referred to as being both 'pure and impure'. She is pure in being 
free from the bondage of samsaric birth, sickness, ageing and death. The Superior 
Bodhisattva is called impure because she nonetheless shows the actions of birth, 
sickness, ageing and death within samsara, even though this is entirely due to com-
passion. 
Though they are not bound to samsara through delusion and afflicted karma, 
Superior Bodhisattvas see the suffering, sickne ss, ageing and so on of other beings and 
this stimulates their compassion. It is through this compassion that Superior 
Bodhisattvas show the actions of taking rebirth in the place of samsara. 
The Superiors have completely abandoned  
The suffering of death, sickness and ageing.  
It does not (apply) to them because their birth is  
Not through the influence of karma and delusions. 
A Superior Bodhisattva does not have the sufferings of samsara because he has 
abandoned the experiences of birth, sickness , old age and death that arise due to karma 
and delusions. A Superior Bodhisattva no longer takes birth under the influence of karma 
and delusions. In contrast, however, a Superior Hearer or Solitary Realiser can still take 
rebirth under the influence of karma and delusion because, though they have the wisdom 
which directly perceives emptiness, this wisdom is not conjoined with the special method 
of bodhichitta. 
A first ground Bodhisattva (who has not prev iously completed the hinayana path) still 
has delusions, but these delusions are unable to affect him. Due to the power of his 
bodhichitta and wisdom he can completely control the delusions, just as a powerful 
antidote can overcome the effect of any poison that one may have eaten. Though we may 
refer to the delusions within the continuum of a Superior, the connotation of the delusions 
afflicting the mind does not apply. This is because the Superior Bodhisattva's bodhichitta 
and wisdom completely control the effect of th e delusions and they are unable to harm him. 
Because of perceiving immaculate suchness,  
They have passed beyond birth and so on. 
 Still, the compassionate-natured display  
Birth, death, ageing and sickness. 
Because they directly perceive the immaculate suchness of Buddha potential and are 
empowered by the special method of bodhichitta, Superior Bodhisattvas have passed 
beyond rebirth under the influence of karma and delusions. However, they continue to 
display birth, death, ageing, sickness and so on within samsara due to their compassionate nature and the power of their prayers. ( The Fundamental Potential for 
Enlightenment by Geshe Archarya Thubten Loden –  pp 107) 
 
5 Momentariness, the doctrine that everything that exists in time exists only for a moment, is a 
keynote doctrine of Buddhism. It analyses appa rently continuous existence into something like 
the apparently continuous existence of the image cast by projected movie film: a succession of discrete momentary existences come to appear as a continuous existence. 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 24 
Page 1 of 8 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating the Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra-ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation Jeffrey 
Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and Wilson, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
Commentary from The Tath›gata Essence, Commentary to the First 
Chapter by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen, translation Gavin Kilty, © FPMT, Inc. 
January 2007, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
  
Root verses are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added 
 
Lesson No: 24                            Date: 24th April 2008  
Chapter One: The Essen ce of a One Gone Thus 
Verses 50-56 
 
In the last lesson, we saw how suchness is temporarily divided into three 
states though its entity does not change. The suchness that is considered 
impure is possessed by ordinary beings and the bodhisattvas while the very 
pure suchness is possessed by a buddha.  
 
A qualm may arise that since suchness is classified into impure and pure 
states, it is incorrect to assert it does not change. The response to this qualm 
can be found in the first two lines of verse 50: “ [Even when the essential 
constituent is together with defileme nt,] those faults are adventitious [and 
suitable to be removed, thus they are not its nature], and its good qualities are 
naturally indivisible [unfit to be removed and thus not adventitious].”   
 (1,50) 
[Even when the essential constituent is to gether with defilement,] those faults 
are adventitious [and suitable to be removed, thus they are not its nature], 
And its good qualities are naturally indivi sible [unfit to be removed and thus not 
adventitious]. 
Therefore, as it was before [when in cyclic  existence] so it is  later in [nirvana, 
Always] of unchangeable nature. 
 
How do “ those faults of the defilements are adventitious and its good qualities 
are naturally indivisible ’” answer the qualm? This is further elaborated in pg. 
97 of the commentary. 
 
“There is no contradiction here. The faul ts are adventitious in that they can be 
removed, every quality of the buddha can be developed and the focus for the 
development of these qualitie s exists innately. Therefor e, the mere negation of 
existence by way of its own nature cannot  be changed by the faults, nor can it 
be altered by the qualities also, because just as every drop of water is of one 
taste with the ocean, so every phenomenon is of one taste within natural emptiness. Therefore, the ultimate truth cannot take any form other than the 
mere negation of existence by way of its own nature. Moreover, when perceived 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 24 
Page 2 of 8 in the meditative placement of every arya being, it abides in that state and does 
not differ in form in the slightest. That is the meaning of immutability.” 1
 
“Those faults are adventitious”: Suchness, the emptiness of the mind, does not 
change but the adventitious defilements do when we apply the antidotes to 
them, gradually removing them.  When the defilements are removed, that 
suchness acquires a different name but suchness itself has not changed.  
 
“Its good qualities are naturally indivisible”:  This does not mean that sentient 
beings already have the qualities of a buddha within them. Otherwise, this 
would suggest that sentient beings are already buddhas, but this is not the 
case. Rather than taking this to mean that good qualities are already naturally 
abiding within sentient beings, we can say that in the mental continua of  sentient beings, there exist the potential for the development  of the qualities of 
the Buddha. 
 
It is stated in some commentaries that, during the time of sentient beings, the 
suchness they possess is accompanied by defilements. At the time when the suchness is very pure and at its ultimate state, that suchness is endowed with 
good qualities and is indivisible from the qualities of the Buddha.   
 
Gyaltsab Je is saying that the faults are adventitious and every quality of the 
Buddha can be developed. In the earlier lessons, we had looked at the meaning of the phrase, ‘the nature of mind is clear light.’  One way of understanding 
this is to see it in terms of the emptiness of the mind.  
• Because the mind is empty of inherent existence therefore the adventitious 
defilements can be eliminated.  
• Because the defilements can be eliminated, therefore they are adventitious.  
• Because the mind is empty of inherent existence, all good qualities can be 
developed.  
 
Now, we look at the suchness that is immutable (or eternally unchanging) 
during the three different states: 
1. immutability during the impure state, 
2. immutability during the impure and pure state and  
3. immutability during the totally pure state. 
There are many outlines and subsections on this topic but we are not going 
through every one of them. We will just look at immutability during the 
impure state. 2 The brief presentation of this is covered in Verses 51 and 52. 
(1, 51) 
Just as space pervades all [physical phenomena] 
But due to being subtle is not affected [by the faults of the impermanence and so 
forth of forms], 
So this [essential constituent] dwelling in all sentient beings 
Is not affected [by the faults of sentient beings]. 
(1, 52) 
Just as the world [of the environment] in all ways 
Is [initially] produced and [finally] disintegrates in space [but space is not 
produced and does not disintegrate], 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 24 
Page 3 of 8 So the sense powers [of sentient beings] are [initially] produced and [finally] 
disintegrate 
In the basic element which is not produc ed [by causes and conditions, but that 
basic element is not produced and does not disintegrate]. 
 
 “Untainted by the phenomena of mental afflictions (v.51)  
Space pervades this entire receptacle-like world and yet because it exists as the 
mere negation of obstructing tangibility and is therefore an unformed phenomenon, and because it is not an object  directly held by the senses, it is a 
subtle phenomenon and consequently remains untainted by the faults of this 
world such as dirt and dust. Similarly,  the naturally pure basic element, this 
non-afflicted state, pervades the minds of all sentient beings and yet because it is not transformed or altered by karma and affliction it remains untainted. 
 
Untainted by birth and destruct ion caused by the above (v.52)  
In every receptacle-like world all depende nt phenomena commencing from the air 
mandala are born in space and will be destroyed in space by the fire at the end 
of time, and so forth,. Similarly, the senses are born and destroyed within this 
unformed and naturally pure sphere and yet it remains unchanged by these 
phenomena.” (Pg. 98-99 of the commentary)    
 
Verse 51 states that space is not tainted in any way by the faults of the 
physical world such as dust and dirt. Therefore it is unchanging. Similarly, the 
“naturally pure basic element, this non-afflicted state” of sentient beings cannot 
be transformed or tainted by karma and afflictions. 
  
The commentary of Verse 52 refers to the process by which this physical world 
is formed. Ultimately, the universe is fo rmed on the basis of space. The wind 
mandala is formed on the basis of space. On the basis of the wind mandala, 
the water mandala is formed and on the basis of that comes the earth 
mandala.   Earth is based on the water, water is based on the wind and the wind is ultimately based on the space element. This is the process of the 
formation of the physical world which can also be destroyed, for example, by 
fire. 
 
The formation and destruction of the world are situated in space but that 
space does not alter in any way. That is the fundamental nature of space. 
Likewise within the state of emptiness, incorrect attention (i.e., grasping at 
true existence) arises. From that, affliction arises and then we accumulate 
karma. Due to karma, we acquire the appropriated physical and mental 
aggregates, which is how the aggregates are formed. They too will undergo 
disintegration. However the emptiness of the mind remains unchanged. 
 
The extensive explanation of immutability during the impure state is covered 
in 12 verses from Verses 53 to 64.  
(1,53) 
Just as space has never been burned in the past 
By the fires [of the end of an eon, hells, or ordinary fire], 
So this [essential constituent] has not been burned 
By the fires of death, sickness, and aging. 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 24 
Page 4 of 8 Space has never been burnt in anyway or destroyed by fire. Likewise, the 
emptiness of the mind, the tathagata essence, has never been burnt by the fires of death, sickness and aging. 
 
Verse 54 uses an analogy. 
(1,54) 
[The sphere of] earth [forms in dependence] upon water; 
Water [depends] on wind; wi nd subsists in space, 
But space [does not depend on causes and conditions and thus] does not subsist 
[In dependence] upon the constituents of wind, water, and earth. 
 
Earth depends on water, water depends on wind and wind subsists in space. The constituents depend on one another and they all depend on space but 
space does not depend on them.  The intended meaning of this analogy can be 
found in Verses 55 and 56. 
(1,55) 
Similarly, the mental and physical aggr egates, constituents, and sense powers 
Subsist on [contaminated] actions and afflictive emotions [as their causes]. 
Actions and afflictive emotions always subsist [in dependence] 
Upon improper mental application [such as conceiving the impermanent to be 
permanent]. 
(1,56) 
Improper mental application su bsists on [the basic element 
Of natural clear light,] the purity of the mind. 
The phenomena included in the [clear light] nature of the mind 
Do not subsist on any [improper mental application, contaminated actions, or 
afflictive emotions, and so forth]. 
 
Most of the verses are quite straightforward. The challenging part is how the 
improper (or incorrect) attention subsists on something that is by nature 
empty. Yet this basic element does not subsist on the improper mental 
attention as in stated Verse 56: “ Improper mental application subsists on [the 
basic element of natural clear light,] the purity of the mind. The phenomena 
included in the [clear light] nature of the mind do not subsist on any [improper mental application, contaminated actions, or afflictive emotions, and so forth].”. 
 
This is important : “The meaning of these two verses is that when examining 
karma and affliction, etc., to see if they ex ist by way of their own nature or not, 
one finds not a trace of anything existing by way of its own nature, and 
therefore finally one comes to a understanding of emptiness by nature, beyond 
which one does not go. When one searches  for the true state of this natural 
emptiness one sees that it does not pa ss beyond natural emptiness itself, and 
therefore will never become anything else or change into karma and affliction. 
Therefore, this section means that e ven during the impure state emptiness by 
nature cannot be altered or affected by karma and affliction.” (Pg. 100 of the 
commentary).   
 
When I read this paragraph, my own interpretation is that whether it is the 
improper mental application or karma and afflictions, they all depend on emptiness. When we analyse and look fo r the improper mental application or 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 24 
Page 5 of 8 karma and afflictions, they are not findable but what we discover at the end is 
emptiness. From that, one has to posit karma and affliction depend on this emptiness. Improper mental application also arises within the state of 
emptiness and therefore depends on it. We can therefore say improper mental 
application and karma and afflictions subsist in emptiness but emptiness does 
not subsist on improper mental application or karma and afflictions. I am expressing my own interpretation. 
 
When we look for the improper mental application or karma and afflictions, we 
cannot find them but what we can find is emptiness. When we look for this 
emptiness, what we then find is the emptiness of that emptiness . We do not get 
something that is other than emptiness. Therefore, we say emptiness does not 
subsist in the improper mental application. Is this OK? From my own side, this is what the commentary was driving at. 
 
Question :  
When the superior being is in meditative equipoise focusing on the emptiness 
of form and realising the emptiness of form, while within  that state, can the 
bodhisattva posit form onto the emptiness that is appearing to him? 
Answer :  
No, because during the bodhisattva’s meditative equipoise focussing on emptiness, nothing appears except emptiness. What appears to the bodhisattva who has realised the emptiness of form is emptiness, not form.  
That wisdom of meditative equipoise does not label that is form. The labelling 
or imputation of form is done during the post-meditative equipoise state.  
 
“This analysis is concentrating on the mi nd's emptiness by nature, its emptiness 
of existing by way its own characteristics,  its emptiness of true existence, its 
existence as a natural purity, as the true state of phenomena, and as the 
ultimate truth. By doing this, one establishes incidentally that the defilements 
are adventitious. Later on in the text th e nine examples, as explicitly taught in 
the Tathagata Essence Sutra, concentrate on establishing the defilements as 
adventitious while the mind as empty of true existence and free of elaboration is 
explained incidentally.” (Pg. 100 of the commentary)   
 
There are 12 verses giving an extensive explanation of  immutability during the 
impure state. They are not difficult to understand, basically explaining the relationship between the analogies used and their meanings. Verses 65 to 77 
explain immutability during the impure and pure states and the  explanation 
of immutability during the totally pure state is explained in seven  verses from Verse 78 to 84.
3   
 
The tenth aspect, undifferentiability [of the final] qualities starts from 
Verses 85 to the first two lines of Verse 96. We will discuss this in the next 
class. 
 
Question :  
Are the Buddha’s qualities indivisible with suchness? 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 24 
Page 6 of 8                                                           Answer: 
 We do not have the Buddha’s qualities but we do have the potential that 
makes it possible for us to develop those qualities. The suchness of sentient beings’ minds and of the Buddha’s mind have the same nature. Just as the 
quality of the Buddha is indivisible with the suchness of his mind, it seems 
that we have to say that the quality of the Buddha would have to exist indivisibly with the suchness of sentient beings’ minds. We may then think, “The Buddha’s qualities are there but for us sentient beings, they are obscured 
by our defilements.” This is posited by some traditions but this is not our 
position.  
 
To understand this view, we can think of the example of gold being covered 
with filth. Gold which is precious does not change even though it is covered by 
filth. After cleaning, the gold will shine, which is part of its nature. Similarly 
the Buddha qualities are there but we don’t realise them.   
 
Question: 
This is related to Verse 149. How does seeing suchness of the mind cause 
virtue to increase?  
Answer:  
When we realise the mind is empty of inherent existence, then we can 
understand that the afflictions being adventitious can be removed. From 
understanding that the mind is empty of inherent existence, we can then 
understand that all good qualities can be developed.  
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
 
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng, Alison Wong & Angie Xiao 
 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong 
 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
 
1 Root text (v.50) 
Just as emptiness by nature exists in the mind s of ordinary sentient beings, likewise in the 
later states of the Hearer and Solitary Realizer arya, the bodhisattva arya, and the totally pure 
state, it remains as suchness, which is the mere negation of existence by its own nature. Just 
as it exists in the third state, so it was in the first and second state. Therefore it is an 
unchanging suchness. 
You may ask, "If the first two states are with fault and the third state is without fault and 
endowed with excellent qualities, then how can it  be claimed that the latter exists in the same 
way as the former?" There is no contradiction here. The faults are adventitious in that they can be removed, every quality of the buddha can be  developed and the focus for the development of 
these qualities exists innately. Therefore, the mere negation of existence by way of its own 
nature cannot be changed by the faults, nor can it be altered by the qualities also, because 
just as every drop of water is of one taste with the ocean, so every phenomenon is of one taste 
within natural emptiness. Therefore, the ultimate truth cannot take any form other than the 
mere negation of existence by way of its own nature. Moreover, when perceived in the 
meditative placement of every arya being, it ab ides in that state and does not differ in form in 
the slightest. That is the meaning of immuta bility, whereas the assertion of a permanent 
functional phenomenon does not belong to the tradition of this dharma.’ ( Gyaltsab Je’s 
commentary , pg. 97)  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 24 
Page 7 of 8                                                                                                                                                                                           
2 Description of each category  
These are in the fourteen verses. "The fourteenth verse explains that in the totally pure state," 
from the perspective of their nature and of be ing separable, the qualities "are indivisible and 
inseparable." 
Individual explanations 
1. Immutable during the impure state 
2. Immutable during the impure and pure state 
3. Immutable during the totally pure state  
Immutable during the impure state 
This begins with the question, "What are the twelve verses (v.51-62) that begin the teaching on immutability in the impure state?" The answer is under two headings: 
1. Unchanged by karma and affliction, creators of the aggregates 
2. Unchanged by old age, etc., destroyer of the aggregates, and likened to fire 
Brief teaching 
1. Untainted by the phenomena of mental afflictions 
2. Untainted by birth and destruction caused by the above ( Gyaltsab Je’s commentary , pg. 
97-98)  
 
3 Expanded explanation  
1. Untainted by the phenomena of destruction 
2. Untainted by the phenomena of birth 
 
Untainted by the phenomena of destruction (v.53) 
Just as space has never been burned by fires, so suchness with defilement is not subject to 
destruction and has never been burnt by the fires of death, illness and old ag e. "Fires" is in the 
plural and refers to the three fires.1 The expl anation on being untainted by the phenomena of 
destruction is therefore shorter and is dealt with first. 
Untainted by the phenomena of birth 
1. Simile 
2. Phenomenon illustrated by simile 
3. Correspondence of simile to phenomenon 
Simile (v.54) 
The earth mandala rests in the water mandala; wa ter rests in air, and the air mandala rests in 
space. Unformed space, however, does not dwe ll in the spheres of air, water and earth. 
Phenomenon illustrated by simile (v.55/6) 
Similarly, the aggregates, as summarized by afflicted ripening, and the constituents and 
sensory sources, such as the sense of sight, dwell in their own causes, namely karma and 
affliction. Karma and affliction , such as desire, constantly dwell in the incorrect mental 
engagement of holding to the true existence of the person and aggregates. This incorrect mental engagement abides in the natural purity  of the true state of the mind. However, the 
ultimate truth of the mind, being the final mode of existence, does not dwell in any of the 
phenomena of karma and delusion, etc. 
The meaning of these two verses is that when examining karma and affliction, etc., to see if 
they exist by way of their own nature or not, one finds not a trace of anything existing by way 
of its own nature, and therefore finally one comes to a understanding of emptiness by nature, 
beyond which one does not go. When one searches for the true state of this natural emptiness 
one sees that it does not pass beyond natural emptiness itself, and therefore will never become 
anything else or change into karma and afflic tion. Therefore, this section means that even 
during the impure state emptiness by nature cannot be altered or affected by karma and 
affliction. It does not mean that suchness with defilement cannot be transformed into 
suchness without defilement by the power of the antidotes. 
This analysis is concentrating on the mind's emptiness by nature, its emptiness of existing 
by way its own characteristics, its emptiness of  true existence, its existence as a natural 
purity, as the true state of phenomena, and as the ultimate truth. By doing this, one 
establishes incidentally that the defilements ar e adventitious. Later on in the text the nine 
examples, as explicitly taught in the Tathagat a Essence Sutra, concentrate on establishing the 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 24 
Page 8 of 8                                                                                                                                                                                           
defilements as adventitious while the mind as empty of true exis tence and free of elaboration is 
explained incidentally. ( Gyaltsab Je’s commentary , pg. 99-101)  
 
 
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 25 
Page 1 of 8 Transcript of the teac hings by Geshe Chonyi 
Root verses  from The Tathagata Essence: Great Vehicle Treatise on the 
Sublime Continuum Differentiating the Lineage of the Three Jewels 
(mahayanottaratantra-ratnagotravibhanga) by Maitreya,  translation Jeffrey 
Hopkins and Joe B. Wilson, Draft, January 2007, © Hopkins and Wilson, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
Commentary from The Tath›gata Essence, Commentary to the First 
Chapter by Gyaltsap Darma Rinchen, translation Gavin Kilty, © FPMT, Inc. 
January 2007, with permission for use in FPMT Basic Programs. 
  
Root verses are centred, in italics, with verse numbers added 
 
Lesson No: 25                            Date:27th April 2008  
Chapter One: The Essen ce of a One Gone Thus 
Verses 90-93 
 
The commentary on page 91 uses these lines from the Heart Sutra : ‘Form is 
emptiness, emptiness is form’ to help explain the meaning of the tathagata 
essence: “To explain that in more detail, in  the Heart Sutra it says, "Form is 
emptiness, emptiness is form." When look ing to see how form actually exists, one 
comes to understand that there is not a trace of form existing by way of its own nature. Without losing the core of that understanding one looks to understand how the base for the imputation of form exists, and one sees that a phenomenon 
not existing by its own nature is conventi onalized as "form." Similarly, here, to 
understand how a phenomenon not ex isting by its own nature is 
conventionalized as the three kinds of person, is to perceive the meaning of the 
tathagata essence.” 
 
It will be helpful to reflect on this paragraph and see what it is trying to say. 
The statement, ‘Form is emptiness, emptiness is form,’  is clearly explained in 
this commentary.  
 
To summarise what we have covered in the previous lesson, we looked at the 
analogy of the formation of the physical world which is basically based on the 
earth element. The earth element is dependent on the water element which is 
dependent on the wind mandala. The wind mandala is based on space. This is 
how the elements depend on one another. But space does not depend on wind and so forth.  
 
In the same way, our appropriated (or contaminated) physical and mental 
aggregates are dependent on karma and afflictions. Karma and afflictions are dependent on incorrect mental application which in turn is based on 
emptiness. This emptiness however does not depend on incorrect mental 
application.  This is an important point because we always say all phenomena 
are by nature empty. Our appropriated physical and mental aggregates are by nature empty. When we look for the final basis of designation, it is emptiness.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 25 
Page 2 of 8 From this, it becomes clear that there is no phenomenon that can exist from 
its own side. Phenomena exist by being merely imputed onto something which has the nature of emptiness. The person, for example, the ‘I’, is imputed in 
dependence  on emptiness. We have to see whether we can also say the person 
is imputed onto  this emptiness.  
 
We always use or see statements such as, ‘Everything is by nature empty,’   
‘Everything is the play of emptiness’ or ‘Everything arises within the state of 
emptiness.’ These are all different ways of expressing the same thing. 
 
The wind subsists in space but it is incorrect to say that it arises  from space as 
this would suggest the wind is the product of space. This is wrong as 
uncomposed space is a permanent phenomenon that cannot produce 
anything. How then does the wind arise? When we analyse the origins of the 
wind, we have to say that the wind has no beginning.  
 
The point is that understanding that all phenomena are empty by nature, this 
makes it possible for all obscurations to be removed and for every quality to be developed. By understanding the analogy, we will be able to understand how 
the tathagata essence is based on emptiness.  
 
This section is basically saying that although our minds and bodies undergo 
change, being produced and disintegrating, the tathagata essence of sentient beings does not undergo change. This is the meaning of immutability, which 
is presented in three sections:- 
1. immutability during the impure state, 
2. immutability during the impure and pure state and  
3. immutability during the totally pure state. 
 
The tenth aspect, the undifferentiability [of the final] qualities (or the 
indivisible quality) starts from verse 85. 
 
When the tathagata essence is purified of all defilements, it transforms into the 
Truth Body, the dharmakaya. When one achieves the dharmakaya, when one 
achieves enlightenment, one possesses the qualities of realisation and 
abandonment in an indivisible manner. When one achieves the final wisdom 
(i.e. one attains enlightenment) which understands the phenomena as they are and understands the diversity of phenomena, these two wisdoms are 
inseparable. The wisdom of meditative equipoise and post meditative equipoise 
of the Buddha are of one entity.  
 
Answer to student’s question:   
The Wisdom Truth Body that realises both conventionalities and the emptiness 
of all phenomena in non-dual way is a composed body. Only the Nature Body is an uncomposed body.  
 
The Truth Body possesses the quality of realisation and the quality of abandonment in an inseparable manner. Just like the sun, its purity and its radiance existing together as one, likewise the wisdom of the Buddha that 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 25 
Page 3 of 8 realises the modes and diversities of phenomena together with nirvana are 
possessed by the Buddha in an inseparable way. 
 
In summary, all required causes must be present in order to achieve the 
dharmakaya. If any of the required causes for achieving the dharmakaya is 
missing, then it will not be attained. To help us understand this, an analogy of 
a painter is used in Verses 90 to 92, with the intended meaning explained in 
Verse 93. When one achieves enlightenment, one possesses all those qualities in an indivisible manner.  
(1, 90) 
For example, painters who are skilled 
In [only] individual [parts such as the head or limbs] 
Would not ascertain how to paint 
Parts other than those they know. 
(1, 91) 
In [such a situation] the mighty ruling king  gives to them a canvas with his order, 
“On this all of you paint my form!” 
Having heard that from him, they start to work 
On painting [the part that they know]. 
(1,92) 
From among those working on [the painting] one has gone to another area. 
Since he who paints [the head, for instance,] has gone to another area, 
That part [which is his lot] is not complete whereby the painting 
Is not complete in all parts. So it is to be known here too. 
(1,93)  
The painters [of those parts are all the factors of method]— 
Giving, ethics, patience, and so forth [i.e ., effort, concentration, and wisdom]. 
[The Truth Body which is] the emptiness endowed 
With all the supreme aspects [of method] is depicted (in the example) as the 
(king’s) form. 
[In brief, if from among the individual painters even one is not present, the 
complete form will not occur since that pa rticular part will not be complete. In 
the same way, the final emptiness is the Truth Body, and, like the painting 
of a complete form, if even one of the fa ctors of method is not present, it is 
not achieved whereas it is achieved when  all are present. Thus, there is no 
way to separate abandonment and realisation, qualities and nirvana, 
emptiness and appearance .]12
 
An Overview of The Tathagata Essence  
If you really want to understand this topic, you would benefit from reading and 
reflecting on the commentary. There is no better commentary on this subject. 
It is difficult and challenging. But it can also be rewarding if you persist. In my 
own case, I had to read the commentary because I had to teach this class and 
of course, I found it challenging as well but I also found it rewarding as I got a 
chance to read the commentary.  
 
You should know what is the subject matter of this text, Maitreya’s Sublime 
Continuum. They are the seven vajra points (or the seven diamond topics).  
1. Buddha Jewel 
2. Dharma Jewel 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 25 
Page 4 of 8 3. Sangha Jewel 
4. Basic constituent (or buddha nature) 
5. Enlightenment 
6. Qualities 
7. Buddha activities 
Why are there these seven topics in this text and what is their relationship to 
one another? 
 
The aim is to achieve the Three Jewels - The Buddha, Dharma and Sangha - in 
their final forms. These Final Jewels come about through causes and 
conditions and to achieve them, we need the substantial cause and the 
cooperative conditions.  
 
We then have the four remaining topics: the tathagata essence, enlightenment, 
qualities and enlightened activities. The tathagata essence (or buddha nature, basic constituent) is the substantial cause for achieving the Three Final 
Jewels. The cooperative conditions  are enlightenment, qualities and the 
Buddha activities.  
 
When we say that the tathagata essence is the substantial cause for achieving the Three Final Jewels, we have to understand that it is not the fully qualified 
substantial cause. What is being transformed into the dharmakaya? It is the 
tathagata essence, the suchness of sentient beings. When sentient beings 
become buddhas, it transform into the entity of the dharmakaya. 
 
In order to generate an aspiration to achieve the Three Final Jewels, we should 
know the qualities that are possessed by the Buddha, Dharma and the 
Sangha.  
 
This text starts with the explanation of the qualities of the Buddha Jewel. The 
first quality of the Buddha Jewel, that it is uncomposed refers to the factor of 
natural purity of the Buddha and is connected with the tathagata essence.  
 
Similarly, the first quality of the Dharma Jewel being unthinkable is related to 
emptiness. Within that, it is related to truth of cessation and within that, it is 
related to the factor of purity.  
 
When we look at the first quality of the Sangha Jewel, again we can see the 
relation between that quality and emptiness. The first quality of the Sangha 
Jewel is the perception of the mode of phenomena which refers to the wisdom 
directly perceiving emptiness.  
 
The Buddha Jewel, Dharma Jewel and Sangha Jewel each possess eight 
qualities. It is good to understand what those qualities are. The deeper your 
understanding, the stronger will be your faith of conviction.  The stronger your 
faith of conviction, the stronger will be your aspiration wanting to become the 
Three Jewels. 
 
Why is it important to understand correctly what is the tathagata essence?  
Because we then come to understand that each and every living being can 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 25 
Page 5 of 8 become enlightened and that everyone can free himself from all his 
defilements. Even though he may be suffering in different ways, those sufferings are impermanent and his defilements are adventitious. When we 
understand this, it helps us to generate compassion for everyone without 
discrimination.  
 
Since the potential to achieve enlightenment is there and all those defilements 
are temporary, we should strive to overcome them. Understanding all these points gives us hope and we see that we can achieve the Three Jewels. It is not 
merely a dream or fantasy. Other living beings also possess the tathagata 
essence like us. This helps us extend a sense of concern, affection and compassion towards them without any discrimination. 
  
The tathagata essence is the emptiness of our minds. Without realising the 
emptiness of our minds, we will continue to circle in samsara, taking repeated rebirths in cyclic existence. The only way to stop this suffering once and for all 
is to realise emptiness, particularly the emptiness of our own minds.  This is 
another essential point to understand from studying this topic. 
 
In order to achieve enlightenment, we must have the tathagata essence, the 
emptiness of our minds and we do. It is like the cause, even though it is not 
the fully qualified cause, for enlightenment.  
 
When we say that the nature of the mind is clear light, the defilements or 
afflictions are not in the nature of the mind. Because this is so, they are adventitious and they can be removed. The defilements however obscure the 
tathagata essence. In order to help us to understand the nature of the mind is 
clear light, there is the presentation of the ten aspects in Maitreya’s text. There is a Tathagata Essence Sutra  but these ten aspects are not explicitly stated 
there. However, the presentation of the ten aspects appears in Asanga’s 
commentary on the Sublime Continuum.  
 
The first aspect is entity  which states that the tathagata essence is the 
emptiness of the mind which is analogous to space.   
 
How can we increase the clarity of the tathagata essence? There are four 
causes for purifying the tathagata essence of its stains. These are discussed 
under the second aspect, causes - the devotion to the Mahayana doctrine, 
wisdom, meditative stabilisation and compassion.  
 
What happens then when the tathagata essence is purified? The third aspect  
is the results of the four perfections. We achieve the Truth Body (dharmakaya) when we have purified the tathagata essence of its defilements.  The Truth 
Body here refers to the Nature Truth Body.  
 
The fourth aspect  is the function  of the tathagata essence. Why can we 
achieve the result when we purify the tathagata essence of the defilements?  
This is because the tathagata essence, the emptiness of the mind, exists. 
Without the emptiness of the mind, the result is not possible.  
 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 25 
Page 6 of 8                                                           The fifth aspect is possession . What are the qualities that are possessed at 
the final state?  Whilst a sentient being, at the time of the cause, one 
possesses the four causes. At the time of the final result, one possesses the 
seven qualities in an indivisible manner. 
  
The remaining five aspects explain that we can divide suchness from the perspective of the persons who possess it. That division is not done on the premise that these suchnesses at different times are of different nature.  
 
The ten aspects are presented to establish the nature of mind is clear light, to establish the emptiness of our minds. Incidentally through that, we come to understand that the defilements are adventitious.  
 
The presentation of the nine analogies with the explanations of their intended meanings is to establish the fact that defilements are adventitious. Incidentally through understanding that, we come to understand that the nature of the 
mind is clear light.    
 
It is mentioned in the Tathagata Essence Sutra  by the Buddha that all sentient 
beings possess the tathagata essence. Why is this so?  
• One of the reasons put forth is that all sentient beings are suitable 
receptacles to be engaged by the Buddha’s enlightened activities. Because all 
sentient beings are receptive to the buddha activities, therefore all sentient 
beings possess the tathagata essence.  
• Next, all sentient beings possess the tathagata essence because suchness is 
without differentiation. The emptiness of the minds of sentient beings and the 
emptiness of the Buddha’s mind are of the same nature and because of this, 
it is said that all sentient beings possess the tathagata essence. 
• All sentient beings possess the potential that can transform into the Truth 
Body and the Form Body of the Buddha. Realising that, the Buddha said all 
sentient beings possess the tathagata essence.  
 
Answer to student’s question: The first quality (uncompounded) and the second 
quality (that of spontaneity) of the Buddha are related to the Nature Truth 
Body. The first is related to the factor of natural purity of the Nature Truth 
Body and the second quality refers to the state of abandonment of the 
obstructions to omniscience, the factor of purity from the adventitious defilements of the Nature Truth Body.  
 
Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme  
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng, Alison Wong & Angie Xiao 
Edited by Cecilia Tsong 
Checked by Yap Siew Kee  
 
1 Root text (v.90-93)  
1. Example 
2. Meaning 
Example 
The method to create of these four aspects of enlightened qualities is the wisdom perceiving 
the emptiness, perfected in every excellent quality such as the perfection of giving, and which 
can be summarized as being the path of the practitioner because from the completion of this 
path arises the qualities of the buddha. For example, there is a group of painters who are 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 25 
Page 7 of 8                                                                                                                                                                                           
individually skilled in drawing different parts of the body, such as the head. Those who know 
how to draw the head, for example, are not sure how to draw other parts. The king orders 
them, "All of you, paint my complete portrait on  this canvas," and hands them the canvas. The 
painters hear the command of the king and each sets about drawing what he is skilled in. One 
of the painters leaves his work and goes to another country, which means that a painter 
skilled in drawing a particular part of the body , is missing. Therefore, the complete painting 
cannot be finished. ( Gyaltsab Je’s commentary , pg. 141)  
 
2 Indivisible quality  
Wisdom, pristine awareness and release!  
These are Clear, illuminating and pure and are  
Inseparable by reason of similarity to  
The light, the rays and the sun itself. 
The sun, its light and rays are inseparable. One never exists without the others. Similarly, 
there are three factors at the point of attaining enlightenment that are said to be inseparable. 
The first is wisdom, and this refers to the wisdom directly perceiving the ultimate truth. It is 
said to be clear because it makes reality, or suchness, very clear and in this way is like the 
clear light of the sun. The second is pristine awareness, and this refers to the simultaneous 
realisation of all manner of conventional truths. It is said to be 'illuminating' because it 
illuminates the various aspects of all objects of  knowledge like the illuminating rays of the 
sun. The third is release and this refers to the final path of release from the obstructions to 
omniscience, which is the attainment of buddhah ood. It is said to be pure because it is 
totally and finally freed from the last vestige of the two obstructions. In this way it is like 
the sun freed from obscuring clouds. These three, wisdom, pristine awareness and path of 
release, which are respectively clear, illuminating  and pure, are inseparable. At the level of 
buddhahood, one does not exist without the othe r. Within the sphere of the ultimate there 
is no difference in entity between these three. A Buddha's wisdom perceiving the ultimate, 
her wisdom knowing all conventionalities and her final path of release are inseparably one 
as are the sun, its light and rays. 
In contrast to all other beings, including te nth ground Bodhisattvas, a Buddha's wisdom 
perceiving the ultimate truth simultaneously perceives conventional truths. Her wisdom 
perceiving conventional truths simultaneously perceives ultimate truth. Again in contrast 
to all other beings, a Buddha's view of ultimate  and conventional truths during meditative 
equipoise and post meditation are not in any way different. 
Thus, until buddhahood is attained, 
There is no attainment of passing beyond sorrow, 
Just as the sun cannot be seen 
Without its light and rays . 
For liberation to be an ultimate liberation four characteristics must be present. Such a 
liberation must have: all qualities, countless qu alities, inconceivable qualities, and purity 
from all stains, including the obstructions to omniscience. Therefore, an ultimate liberation 
is not attained without attaining perfect buddhahood which has all four of these 
characteristics, just as the sun is not seen without its light and rays. The liberation 
attained by Hearers and Solitary Realisers is no t an ultimate liberation because it does not 
have any of the above four characteristics. 
In summary  
Like this the essence of the Buddha has been  
Explained through the presentation of ten aspects. 
The ten points that we have examined explain specifically the nature of the purity of Buddha 
potential. They also refer in a general way to the adventitious stains obscuring the pure 
nature of the Buddha potential. Through the presentation of these ten points we are able 
to establish the existence of the pure nature of  the mind which is, in fact, Buddha potential. 
Through the following presentation of nine examples we are able to establish that the 
obscuring defilements to this pure nature are adventitious. 
The benefits of the above presentation of ten aspects  
Because the obscurations do not penetrate the nature of mind, there is the benefit of 
knowing that they can be separated from the mind. By analogy, pollution does not penetrate the nature of water, nor does tarnish penetrat e the nature of gold, nor clouds the nature 
Amitabha Buddhist Centre  Basic Program – Module 10 
  The Tathagata Essence 
Lesson 25 
Page 8 of 8                                                                                                                                                                                           
of space. We can therefore assert that water is free from pollution, gold free from tarnish and 
space free from clouds. ( The Fundamental Potential for Enlightenment by Geshe Archarya 
Thubten Loden) 
 
 