Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L21 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.499241
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


   Lesson No: 21                   Date: 30th August 2011


You should ask yourself  every  now  and  then,  “Why  should  I  learn  and
practise the Dharma?” Certainly all of us want to achieve happiness in  this
life. But what you need is not just the happiness of this  life  alone.  You
need happiness in all your future lives to come, to be happy  from  life  to
life.

As mentioned in the teachings, the method for achieving happiness from  life
to life is none other than the Dharma.  But  you  have  to  investigate  for
yourself whether this is true or not. Having asked  yourself  that  question
and when you are clear as to the need  to  practise  the  Dharma,  then  the
second question that you have to ask yourself is  this,  “Am  I  capable  of
practising the Dharma or not? Am I in a position to  practise  it  or  not?”
The answer is yes. Why? Because all the favourable conditions are  here  now
for you to practise the Dharma. You have to see this for yourself.

These two questions are extremely important. Every now and then, you  should
ask yourself these questions. When you are able  to  see  for  yourself  the
need to practice the Buddhadharma, you will then practise it.

In order to be able to practise the Dharma, you must understand  how  to  go
about doing it. You must understand what practices you need to do. When  you
practise the Dharma, you do so through the threefold activities  of  hearing
the teachings and reflecting and meditating on them. In  order  to  meditate
and familiarise yourself with the teachings, this must first be preceded  by
having reflected well on them. In order to be able to engage  in  reasonable
reflection on  the  Buddha’s  teachings,  you  first  must  have  heard  the
Buddha’s teachings and studied them extensively. Therefore, there is a  need
to learn and study the teachings of the Buddha. You have to  see  the  point
of doing so. Once you have seen the point, you should act on it. You  should
then strive and put effort into your studies.

As you saw in the text, you now have a human life with  its  eight  freedoms
and ten endowments. These are the  favourable  conditions  for  putting  the
Dharma into practice.
Having achieved such a human life of freedoms and endowments,  how  are  you
supposed to take full advantage of it? The text then talks about  the  three
ways in which you can take full advantage of this  human  life  of  freedoms
and endowments:
1. the practices for the person of small capacity,
2. the practices for the person of medium capacity, and
3. the practices for the person of great capacity.

How does a person of small capacity take full advantage of a human  life  of
freedoms and endowments? Such a person is motivated to achieve high  status,
i.e. a good rebirth, in the next life.  Motivated  by  this  goal,  he  then
engages in the unmistaken method to achieve such a good  rebirth.  A  person
of small capacity  has  to  overcome  his  current  preoccupation  with  the
happiness of this life in order to seek the happiness of future lives.

How does a person of medium capacity take full advantage of a human life  of
freedoms and endowments? Such a person is primarily interested in  achieving
liberation from suffering. With that goal in mind, he  trains  in  the  path
that will enable him to  achieve  the  liberation  that  is  devoid  of  all
suffering. A person with medium capacity not  only  needs  to  overcome  the
preoccupation with the happiness of this life, he also has to do  away  with
any attraction to  the  happiness  of  future  lives.  A  person  of  medium
capacity trains in  developing  disenchantment  with  cyclic  existence  and
seeks to achieve the state of liberation from suffering.  However,  he  does
this primarily for himself.

A person of great capacity is someone who trains in the Mahayana  path,  the
path  of  the  Great  Vehicle,  in  order  to  achieve  the  state  of  full
enlightenment not for himself but for others. The person who trains  in  the
Mahayana  path  has  the  thought,   “I   must   definitely   achieve   full
enlightenment for the benefit of all sentient beings.”

These are the different ways in which persons of the three  capacities  take
full advantage of a human life of freedoms and endowments.

    2B4B-2A2A    The purpose of guiding someone by means of the three
    beings’ path (Page 44)

Having said that, you must understand that in the context  of  the  Lam-Rim,
the stages of the path to enlightenment, the paths of the persons  of  small
and medium capacities are described not just to develop  the  mere  interest
in achieving a good rebirth or to achieve liberation alone. In  the  context
of the Lam-Rim, the paths of the persons of small and medium capacities  are
taught as preliminaries, i.e., something to be practised for someone who  is
either aspiring to become or is a person of great capacity.

You should understand  that  the  paths  of  persons  of  small  and  medium
capacities are branches of the Mahayana path, i.e., they  are  the  branches
of the path of a person of great capacity. In the context  of  the  Lam-Rim,
the paths of the three types of persons - small, medium and  great  capacity
– are the methods that lead any single  individual  to  the  state  of  full
enlightenment. Such instructions are called the Lam-Rim, the stages  of  the
path to enlightenment.

    2B4B-2A2B-1A The entry gate to the Mahayana (Page 45)

There are a few important things that you must  understand.  When  does  the
Mahayana path start for any individual?
• In order to enter the Mahayana, you must develop uncontrived  bodhicitta,
  the altruistic intention to achieve full enlightenment for the benefit of
  all sentient beings. A person of great capacity needs to develop that.

    2B4B-2A2B-1E       How the lesser and intermediate [branches of the
    path] are necessary when training in the actual mind (Page 46)

• In order for that bodhicitta realisation to arise,  it  is  indispensable
  for that person to first generate the realisations of love and compassion
  that necessarily precede the development of bodhicitta.
• In order to develop love and compassion, you must  first  understand  how
  you yourself suffer and are devoid of happiness. First, you must see  for
  yourself how you are stuck in samsara. This feeling should come from  the
  depths of your heart and move your heart and mind. That realisation  must
  necessarily precede the development of love and compassion.
• When you realise how you are tormented by the various sufferings  of  and
  how you are devoid of  happiness  in  cyclic  existence,  based  on  that
  personal experience, you then switch your attention to the  situation  of
  other sentient beings in  cyclic  existence.  You  then  contemplate  how
  sentient beings are also tormented by various sufferings and how they are
  also devoid  of  happiness  in  samsara.  That  is  the  correct  way  of
  reflecting on the suffering of other sentient beings.

What is love and what is compassion?
 • Love is a mind that wishes others to be happy.
 • Compassion is a mind that wishes others to be free of suffering.
On the basis of having understood your own suffering in  samsara,  when  you
turn our attention to other sentient beings and  contemplate  how  they  are
also  suffering  in  samsara,  that  contemplation  becomes  perfect.   This
contemplation then serves  as  the  prerequisite  for  you  to  develop  and
generate some real love and compassion for them.

When you think about and understand these points, you will  then  understand
that the practices of a person  of  medium  capacity  are  a  necessity  for
someone who aspires to be a person of great  capacity.  In  order  to  be  a
person of great capacity, you need  to  understand  the  sufferings  of  the
lower realms. That understanding becomes a condition for you to be  able  to
become a person of great capacity.

You have to reflect  on  how  you  will  have  to  endure  those  unbearable
sufferings of the lower realms if you were born there. It  is  only  on  the
basis  of  that  reflection  and  the  realisation  of  your  own   personal
experience of how you are stuck in samsara and are devoid of real  happiness
can you then come to  empathise  with  others  and  develop  real  love  and
compassion. You will then be able to enter  the  Mahayana  path  to  develop
bodhicitta. Without developing this real love and compassion,  there  is  no
way you will ever develop pure bodhicitta.

    2B4B-2A2B-1G       Advice to cherish the way that the teaching cycles
    of lesser and intermediate beings become branches of that of great
    beings (Page 46)

It becomes so important to see how the paths of the three types  of  persons
are related. When you have this feeling  that  they  are  unrelated  to  one
another, that is a huge mistake. It becomes very important for you to  gain,
not only an understanding but a thorough  and  decisive  ascertainment  that
these three paths are related and that they assist one another.

The next section then deals with the training in the  path  that  is  shared
with the person of small capacity.

Question: Please explain the two  great  purposes  for  differentiating  the
three types of persons and guiding students:

    2B4B-2A2B-2A       The actual purpose

         1  Question

Second: If the dharma-cycles of lesser and  intermediate  beings  constitute
the preparatory practices of great beings, it should indeed be all right  to
consider them the stages of the path of great beings. What  is  the  use  of
saying “the stages of the  path  in  common  with  lesser  and  intermediate
beings”? (Page 48)

Answer: As I mentioned earlier, you should be clear as  to  what  the  three
types of persons are. I have also said that the Lam-Rim  is  an  instruction
to lead a single individual to achieve the state of full enlightenment.  The
Lam-Rim does not teach a person of  small  or  medium  capacity  to  achieve
their goals alone. The primarily purpose of the Lam-Rim is to  show  how  an
individual can be led on to the path of enlightenment.

The reason why the expressions, “the path that is shared with the person  of
small capacity” or “the path that  is  shared  with  the  person  of  medium
capacity,” are used is to stop any kind of pride that a person  without  any
training may have, thinking right from the beginning, “I am a person of  the
great capacity, therefore, I do not have to do other practices.”  It  is  to
destroy that kind of pride. The other reason of why we  use  the  expression
“the path that is shared with the  persons  of  small  capacity  and  medium
capacity” is to benefit these three types of persons. The answer is  in  the
text:

         2  Answer

There are two major purposes for classifying  and  guiding  three  kinds  of
beings. In this way, (1) the conceit of  claiming  oneself  to  be  a  great
being, while the mental attitudes that are common to lesser or  intermediate
beings have not even arisen is overcome and (2) all  three  -  the  highest,
intermediate and least mental attitudes - have great benefits (Page 48).
The Lam-Rim essentially helps an individual  to  achieve  enlightenment  and
become a person of great capacity. We can then say it is the Stages  of  the
Path to Enlightenment but the Lam-Rim  is  not  called  that  alone.  It  is
usually referred to as the Stages of the Path of the Three Types of  Beings.
Why do we to call it that? It  is  precisely  for  the  reason  that  I  had
explained earlier.

Question: Do enlightenment and full enlightenment mean the  same  thing?  If
we  say  ‘full  enlightenment,’  does  that  mean  that   there   is   ‘half
enlightenment’?

Answer: The English translation is enlightenment but the word in Tibetan  is
jang chub of which there are three types:
(1)  the hearers’ enlightenment,
(2)  the solitary realisers’ enlightenment, and
(3) the Mahayana enlightenment or the enlightenment of the Great Vehicle.
Since there are three paths – the hearers path, solitary realisers path  and
Mahayana path - so there are also the  three  enlightenments  of  the  three
respective paths.

Are the hearers’ enlightenment and  the  solitary  realisers’  enlightenment
full and complete? The answer has to be no because neither the hearers’  nor
the solitary realisers’ enlightenments  are  full  and  complete.  Only  the
Mahayana enlightenment is considered to be full and complete.

In order for the state of enlightenment to be full and  complete,  you  must
have  freed  yourself  from  the  two  obscurations,  the  obscurations   to
liberation  and  the  obscurations  to  omniscience,  together  with   their
imprints. Only after having eliminated them can it be  said  that  you  have
achieved full and complete enlightenment.

If you remember from an  earlier  lesson,  we  talked  about  achieving  the
welfare of sentient beings. That welfare consists of  both  the  provisional
(temporary) goal and the ultimate (final) goal:
  • The temporary goal is achieving high status or a good rebirth.
  • The final goal refers to definite goodness,  which  is  further  divided
    into (1) liberation from cyclic existence and (2)  omniscience  or  full
    enlightenment.

Question: Khen Rinpoche,  earlier  you  mentioned  that  in  order  to  have
bodhicitta, we first have to understand the sufferings of the lower  realms.
My question is: If I have not been there how can I experience  it?  I  can’t
remember whether I have been to the lower realms.

Answer:  When  you  really  know  what  suffering  is   through   your   own
experiences, then obviously  when  you  see  the  same  thing  happening  to
others, it is easy to empathise with or feel their suffering.

Khen Rinpoche: There was a monk who had never had a toothache in  his  life.
When his friend, another monk, had a toothache  and  told  him  how  he  was
feeling sick and was in great pain, he did  not  understand  the  situation.
One year later when he had a toothache, then he realised how painful it  is.


When you, on an individual basis, understand suffering,  then  you  will  be
able to understand what others are going through.  As  a  human  being,  you
have your fair  share  of  problems.  How  you  are  under  the  control  of
suffering, how your wishes are not fulfilled, your desires  not  met.  Based
on that, you can infer that other sentient beings have  the  same  problems.
With that inference, you are able to  understand  the  suffering  of  others
based on your own experience. You don’t have to take rebirth as  that  human
being and to become  them  in  order  to  understand  what  they  are  going
through.

For beings who are lower than you, let’s say  animals,  based  on  your  own
experience as a human being, you can  infer  and  understand  the  suffering
that animals experience. They are ignorant and are unable to tell  you  what
they want. Unlike you, they are unable to speak. So,  based  on  your  human
experience, you can understand what they are going through.

The hungry  ghosts  are  in  a  far  worse  state  than  animals.  Generally
speaking, you don’t directly perceive hungry ghosts, but you  can  use  your
human experience to infer their existence and their suffering. In our  human
world, there are many human beings who are  suffering  like  hungry  ghosts,
who are sick and deprived of sustenance and  so  forth.  When  you  look  at
these human beings, you can have a reasonable understanding of  what  it  is
like to be a hungry ghost. When you watch  the  news,  you  can  see  places
where there is water but it is not fit for drinking and  there  is  also  no
food. People there are like hungry ghosts. They do not have  even  a  decent
existence. Based on your own  experience  of  being  deprived  of  food  and
water, you can infer what others are going through when  they  do  not  have
food and water like the hungry ghosts.

Even though you can see the animal realm, but  within  the  animal  kingdom,
there are so many species. You cannot claim to know  every  single  species.
Then when we talk about the hungry ghosts and the hell  realms  that  people
are not even able to  see,  how  then  can  you  come  to  understand  their
existence?  You  can  do  so  through  logic  and  reasoning.  You  need  to
understand the logic and reasoning that can help you to infer the  existence
of these rebirths. You can only achieve such an inference through  studying.
This will takes a bit of time. We will get into this as we go along.

One way to think about this is karma. All your  actions  have  consequences.
Your virtuous actions will lead to the  result,  happiness,  and  your  non-
virtuous actions will lead to the result, suffering. The suffering that  you
will experience due to your negative actions will be commensurate  with  the
weight of those negative actions. The  heavier  the  negative  actions,  the
heavier will be the suffering. The worst state of  existence  is  the  lower
realms. This is one way of looking at it.

You can also use your own experience. When you  are  happy  and  in  a  good
mood, generally speaking, you will appear pleasant and  happy.  But  in  the
very next moment, due to some causes and conditions, your  mood  can  change
and you become upset. Your demeanour  will  change  as  well.  The  way  you
present yourself to others and the way you look also change.  You  may  even
look as terrifying as the hell guardians!

When you are upset and angry, everything looks different to  you.  All  your
surroundings and the people around you appear as  unpleasant.  The  way  the
environment and the people around you appear to  you  depend  very  much  on
your state of mind. When you have that kind of feeling, you  feel  miserable
and unhappy.

When you talk about the mind, there are virtuous states  of  mind  and  non-
virtuous states of mind that  lead  to  the  results,  either  happiness  or
suffering. From this, you can infer the possibility of different  states  of
existence. As there is negative and positive karma, it is possible  to  talk
about relatively happier  states  of  existences  and  relatively  difficult
states of existences that are filled with problems  and  suffering.  Through
logic and reasoning, you can posit the different states  of  existences  as,
depending on your state of mind, you have different karma.

So when we talk about the lower realms, it is not that you  have  to  accept
it because it is the Buddha’s teachings or that someone created  this  idea.
This is something that can be established through logic and reasoning.

Depending on the states of existences that you are born into, the lower  the
state of existence, the more suffering you  will  experience.  You  can  say
that. Can’t you say that? Comparing an animal rebirth with  a  hungry  ghost
rebirth, a hungry ghost has more suffering. Then comparing  a  hungry  ghost
rebirth with a hell being rebirth, a hell being has  more  suffering.   This
is due to the varying degrees of negative karma created  as  the  weight  of
negative  karma  differs  from  action  to  action.  Relatively  less  heavy
negative karma would lead to rebirth as an animal.  Heavier  negative  karma
would throw you into a hungry ghost  rebirth.  Then  the  heaviest  negative
karma would land you in the hell realms. The result that you  experience  is
commensurate with the negative actions you created.

You can now understand that these are the various states of  existences  and
their accompanying suffering.  This is something for  you  to  think  about.
Therefore it is not necessary that you have to do something to trigger  your
memory of having been in the hell realm before.


The point is that you start  with  something  that  is  based  on  your  own
experiences. In order for you to empathise with the suffering of others  and
to know  what  others  has  gone  through,  you  must  at  least  have  some
understanding of what is  suffering.  It  is  impossible  not  to  have  any
suffering at all.  But there are some  people  who,  because  everything  is
going well for them, they have no idea what suffering is.  It  is  difficult
for such people to understand what others have gone through.

When you don’t get food for one day, how do you feel? When you do  not   get
water for one day, how do you feel? For example, when you  have  experienced
headaches before, then you will know what  others  are  talking  about  when
they complain about having a headache.

The best way of empathising with the suffering of others  is  to  understand
suffering based on your individual experience so that  you  can  infer  what
others are going through.

Question: I refer to the root text, Page 48:

         2  Answer

……Moreover, through being taught  the  common  path  and  through  training,
those with the good fortune of superior capacity will soon develop  positive
qualities that had or had not arisen before whereby they can  be  guided  to
higher and higher [levels], once the lower  ones  have  arisen.  Their  path
will not be prolonged.

Who are those “with the good fortune”  and  why  do  they  need  to  develop
positive qualities when they had already arisen?

Answer: “Those with the good fortune” refer to persons  of  great  capacity.
They are persons who have the fortune to have already  produced  the  higher
paths in past lives. These persons have trained in these paths  before,  the
paths that are shared with persons of other capacities. So when  they  train
again in these paths in this life, they will  produce  these  paths  quickly
and those qualities that are not produced will be developed quickly.

Question:  Would  you  agree  that  full  enlightenment  means,  ‘no  longer
existing,’ i.e., one has broken the chain of samsara so that  one  will  not
be born again in any other realms? If full  enlightenment  means  that,  how
can a being who has  attained  enlightenment  due  to  his  bodhicitta  help
sentient beings?

Answer: When you achieve omniscience, the state of full enlightenment,   you
do not become nothing.
• In the beginning of the path, the purpose of generating bodhicitta is for
  sentient beings.
• In the middle of the path, you  train  in  the  path  to  accumulate  the
  collections of merit and wisdom for sentient beings.
• At the end of the path, you become a buddha for sentient beings.
It is incorrect to say that after having done all these,  in  the  end,  you
become nothing. When you have achieved enlightenment, you  will  never  take
rebirth again under the control of karma  and  the  afflictions,  i.e.,  the
continuity of taking rebirth under karma and afflictions is completely  cut.
As a buddha, you are able to benefit sentient beings in  various  forms.  In
order to understand this, you must understand what a buddha is.

There are four bodies  of  the  Buddha.  You  need  to  have  a  very  clear
understanding of what these four bodies of the Buddha are:
1. Nature truth body (svabhavadharmakaya)
2. Exalted wisdom truth body (jnanadharmakaya)
3. Complete enjoyment body (sambhogakaya)
4. Emanation body (nirmanakaya)
When you have a good understanding of what these four  bodies  of  a  Buddha
are, then you will be able to decisively conclude that you do not  disappear
into nothingness when you achieve enlightenment.

According  to  the  lowest  philosophical  school  in  Buddhism,  the  Great
Exposition School (or the Vaibhashikas) assert that when  you  achieve  both
the nirvana with remainder and nirvana without remainder,  in  that   sense,
you do become nothing. This is the lowest school of thought and this is  not
the ultimate view. According  to  them,  when  you  achieve  liberation  (or
nirvana), the continuity of the body and mind will be forever severed.

[pic]


Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng
Edited by Cecilia Tsong
Checked by Shirley Soh



