Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L31(upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.326715
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


   Lesson No: 31                  Date: 2nd February 2012


The great Nagarjuna said in one of his compositions, “Through  amassing  the
two collections, may we achieve the two bodies of the Buddha.” He is  saying
that in order for us to actualise the two bodies of the Buddha -  the  truth
body and the form body - we need to amass the collection of  merit  and  the
collection of wisdom. These two collections are the fundamental  causes  for
actualising the form body and the truth body of the Buddha respectively.

Although there is such an aspirational prayer, it is insufficient to  merely
make this prayer. We have to know what the causes are and we have  to  train
in them before we can actualise the two bodies.

In order to complete the collections of merit and wisdom  to  actualise  the
two bodies of the Buddha, we need joyous perseverance. Without that it  will
not be possible to accumulate and to complete the two  collections  (or  the
two accumulations) of merit and wisdom.

For an example, take a candle. For there to be a candle, there must be  wax.
You need the wax or the butter to light  the  candle.  Without  the  wax  or
butter, you will not get light. Likewise, you need  both  the  accumulations
of merit and wisdom as the causes  for  achieving  the  two  bodies  of  the
Buddha. You need joyous perseverance in order to accumulate and  to  empower
your accumulations of merit and wisdom to ultimately achieve the two  bodies
of the Buddha.

In  our  case,  we  are  here  to  learn  the  Buddha’s  teachings.   Joyous
perseverance is absolutely necessary. It is very important. Without  it,  we
will not be able  to  learn  the  Buddha’s  teachings.  So  we  need  joyous
perseverance.

The main obstacle to joyous perseverance is laziness. There are three  kinds
of laziness:
   1) The laziness of procrastination
   2) The laziness of attraction to meaningless activities
   3) The laziness of defeatism
The laziness of procrastination
The laziness of procrastination is basically the  enjoyment  of  inactivity,
of doing nothing. We derive  some  kind  of  happiness  from  this.  We  are
attached to the bliss that comes from simply doing nothing.

We are all in that situation. That was our mind-set for the past few  months
during this long break. We were attached to the bliss and happiness  of  not
having classes! It is time spent not doing anything beneficial or virtuous.

Joyous perseverance is a mind that is enthusiastic about  virtue.  It  is  a
mind that wants to engage in beneficial and  virtuous  activities.  That  is
the complete opposite of this type of laziness where one is  satisfied  with
not doing anything virtuous. This is the first kind of  laziness,  the  type
of laziness we are usually acquainted with.

The practices of the person of small capacity are the  methods  to  overcome
this particular kind of laziness. In the practices of the  person  of  small
capacity, there is  the  reflection  on  the  difficulty  of  obtaining  the
perfect human rebirth that we have.

There is also the reflection on death and impermanence; in  particular,  how
the time of death is uncertain. It is  important  that  we  counteract  this
form of laziness. One of the best methods is to think of  the  fragility  of
life: how death is certain and the time of death is uncertain. Through  such
reflections, we will then be able to  counteract  this  particular  kind  of
laziness.

The laziness of attraction to meaningless activities
The second kind of laziness is the  attraction  to  meaningless  activities,
i.e., the laziness  of  engaging  in  non-virtuous  actions.  This  kind  of
laziness refers to engaging in actions that do not accord with  the  Dharma.
This is how most people spend their  lives,  i.e.,  engaging  in  activities
that do not accord  with  the  Dharma,  that  do  not  accord  with  virtue.
Therefore it is considered to be a form of laziness.

In order to counteract this kind of laziness, we  have  to  reflect  on  how
anything that is contaminated is in the nature of suffering.

In worldly terms, we may refer to people who work very  hard  earning  money
as hard-working. But their hard  work  falls  into  this  kind  of  laziness
because if that person is engaging in actions that are  not  beneficial  and
not in accordance with the Dharma, then  that  is  working  against  virtue.
Therefore it becomes a kind of laziness.

We can counteract this by realising that when we come  under  the  influence
of this  kind  of  laziness,  our  actions  will  ultimately  only  lead  to
dissatisfaction, suffering, and problems. With that realisation, we will  be
able to counteract the attraction to such activities.

The laziness of defeatism
The third kind of laziness, the laziness of defeatism, is having  low  self-
esteem  and  believing  that  you  are  incapable  of  achieving   anything,
thinking, “I cannot do this. I am not cut out for this. This is beyond  me.”


In the context of studying the Buddhadharma, there are people who may  think
that such studies are really beyond them. They think, “I cannot  read  this.
I don’t understand anything. I am too old.” Such thoughts are considered  to
be the laziness of defeatism.

Khen Rinpoche: So, don’t be like that!

I think this kind of laziness of  defeatism  with  regard  to  learning  the
Dharma, the teachings of the Buddha, comes when  you  don’t  have  a  strong
interest or intention to learn in the first place.

When you have the real intention to learn and you really want  to  know  the
Buddha’s teachings, I don’t think this kind of laziness will arise  in  your
mind. But when the interest is not strong in the first  place,  we  convince
ourselves with various reasons that we can’t do it.

At the end of the day, we are the ones who make ourselves  unable  to  study
by thinking,  “I  cannot  read  this.  I  cannot  see  the  point.  I  don’t
understand. I am too old.”  It becomes extremely  important  to  uplift  our
minds and our confidence. We must tell ourselves, “If I work hard, I can  do
it. If others can do it, so can I.”

Khen Rinpoche: I saw on TV this Chinese cooking program, “If Yan  can  cook,
I can cook!”

Also I saw one guy running in the marathon. He had only one  leg  but  still
he wanted to run in the marathon. This is because of his interest.

Here it is the same thing. When you have the  interest  to  study,  you  can
make it somehow. You may not  come  out  top  in  class  but  you  will  get
somewhere. The idea is not to discourage yourself. This is important.

It is difficult when you have a long break of  about  three  months  between
classes. When you come back, it is like starting up an  old  car.  It  takes
time to start. It is the same for everyone.  Even  for  myself,  it  is  not
easy. Once class starts,  then  things  will  be  much  better  but  in  the
beginning, there will always be some difficulty.

As  I  always  say  you  must  develop  this  confidence,  perseverance  and
determination to study. You must strive and tell yourself that  you  can  do
it and then put in the effort. Age doesn’t really matter. We  just  have  to
work hard. Even just hearing  and  understanding  the  teachings  have  many
benefits: e.g., just gaining a simple  understanding  of  how  a  particular
action is non-virtue. That understanding will have some  beneficial  effects
as it enables us to engage in virtue that is the opposite of  that  negative
action.

When we listen to the teachings, we also  place  virtuous  imprints  in  our
minds. The more we learn about the Dharma, the better we become  because  we
leave more imprints in our mental continua. These imprints  will  stay  with
us as we move from life to life. It makes our learning and practice  in  the
future easier. So, you can become better and better. The main  thing  is  to
work hard, to put in the effort, and to persevere joyously.  Whether  it  is
accumulating the collections of merit and wisdom or whether it  is  learning
the Buddha’s teachings, we need joyous perseverance.  Without  it,  we  will
not be able to accomplish anything.

Khen Rinpoche:  I remember when I was in Sera, there was a  monk  who  lived
next door to me. Every morning we have  to  memorise  the  text.  Maybe  for
about an hour, we have to memorise six or seven lines or half a page of  the
text. It may take one or  two  hours  to  do  that.  This  monk  could  only
memorise two lines in an hour and a half. No matter how  long  he  took,  he
would put in the effort from morning to night. He would  keep  on  repeating
the same words, the same sentence, repeating and repeating those two  lines.
Only then could he memorise the words.

Compared to him, I was much better. I could memorise maybe half a page.  But
another one of my classmates could memorise two pages within an hour!

But when I looked at that monk, he would put in the effort. And it  was  not
just for one day. Whatever he memorised in  the  morning,  by  nighttime  he
would have forgotten it. So he had to  memorise  again  at  night.  So,  the
first day he remembered but by the next day, he  had  forgotten  everything.
He needed to make that kind of effort.

The same thing happens when  you  memorise  the  text.  The  first  day  you
remember, the next day you forget. After one week,  you  forget  everything.
You have to repeat again. It takes months and years to put the text  in  the
memory chip up here (pointing at his  head).  It  is  not  easy  to  put  it
inside. Sometimes it disappears and again you need to put it back.

But I saw how that monk would put  in  effort  morning  to  night.  So  much
effort. He  doesn’t  have  much  intelligence  or  wisdom  but  he  had  the
determination to do that. I think in  the  end  he  completed  his  studies,
graduated and became a Lharampa Geshe.  Now  he  has  gone  to  Mongolia  to
teach.

Another one of my classmates is exactly the  same.  He  would  memorise  one
line and then he would forget. It was  also  so  difficult  for  him.  Every
morning his teacher would examine him on those one or two lines.  He  didn’t
have much intelligence but somehow, at the end of the  day,  he  accumulated
thousands of pages to be recited at the examinations. He wasn’t  intelligent
but he put in the effort. Whether it was joyous effort  or  not,  I  am  not
sure. His teacher would keep on pushing him so he had to do this;  otherwise
his teacher would beat him. I could  hear  him  crying  behind  my  bedroom.
Sometimes his teacher would beat him if he forgot one line. If the next  day
he forgot again, he would get another beating.

Unfortunately, he didn’t have the intelligence to debate. With  his  effort,
he could memorise thousands of pages of  all  the  philosophical  texts.  He
could recite them from memory but he didn’t have the wisdom  to  debate  and
analyse the texts. So some of my classmates were like that.  This  classmate
he could memorise but he didn’t have the wisdom to analyse  the  meaning  of
the texts. It is like with mathematics. He just didn’t  have  this  kind  of
aptitude. Compared to him, I had a little bit of intelligence and  was  able
to debate. He could memorise so many  quotations.  Sometimes  when  we  were
debating and we needed a quotation. We won’t know how to recite  it  but  he
would know. We would tell him to repeat the words.

One of my other classmates is much more intelligent than me. He was good  in
debate and good in memorisation. Sometimes I would think I  wished  to  have
his wisdom but this was also not possible.

What I am trying to say here is that what counts is mainly the  effort.  All
of us here have different  levels  of  wisdom  and  intelligence,  different
karma, different bodies, different ways of thinking. But, at the end of  the
day, it boils down to your  effort.  Your  level  of  understanding  of  the
topics you learn depends on how much effort you put in.

I also mentioned before that when I went to America, I  met  a  teacher  who
taught us English. He is an Englishman. He said he  memorised  some  of  the
philosophical definitions  in  Tibetan  by  reciting  them  like  a  mantra,
counting each bead of his mala. He would recite  over  a  hundred  times  to
memorise one definition. By then, he would remember the definition.

I hope you would find what I have said so far helpful.

Just before the holiday break, we had looked briefly at  the  criteria  that
make an action very powerful. The strength of the action can  be  influenced
by:
   1) The recipients of the action
   2) By way of the support
   3) In terms of the object that is involved
   4) In terms of the attitude or motivation behind the action

    2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A2B     Incidentally[?]: Summary indication of the
    gates of strong karma


            1     Great strength by way of the field

         2  Great strength by way of the support
         3  Great strength by way of the thing
         4  Great strength by way of the attitude

The second one has four points: great strength by way of  the  field,  great
strength by way of the support, great strength by  way  of  the  thing,  and
great strength by way of the attitude

    2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A2B-1   Great strength by way of the field

         A  The field of the three jewels [?*- doesn't really do justice to
         what follows]

First: the three jewels, the guru, someone like the guru,  parents,  and  so
forth [?*missing in German]:  [are  gates  of  strong  karma]  because  with
these, even if the thoughts for them are not  intense  and  the  benefit  or
harm done [to them] are small, the merit {108} and  misdeed  are  great.  In
this regard it says in  Establishment  of  Mindfulness  that  the  karma  of
stealing even [?/if only] a little thing from the three jewels  is  purified
- in the case of the Buddha  and  the  Dharma  -  if  it  [/the  object]  is
returned (Page 89).

There is strength in actions directed towards very powerful objects such  as
the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, and one’s gurus and  parents  and  so  forth.
Even if your motivation is weak, any action directed towards these  powerful
recipients, by virtue of their status as the Buddha, Dharma  and  Sangha  or
as one’s parents or teachers, becomes extremely powerful.

         C  The field of bodhisattvas

Bodhisattvas are an extremely powerful [/forceful] field of virtue and  non-
virtue. In the Sutra of the Seal of Engagement  in  the  Generation  of  the
Power  of  Confidence  it  says   that   compared   to   someone   who,   in
anger[/angered], puts all the sentient beings of the ten directions  into  a
dark prison, if someone [else], in anger[/angered],  turns  his  back  on  a
bodhisattva, saying “I shall not look upon this  horrible  person  [again],”
he generates incalculably greater negativity. Also compared to  someone  who
has destroyed and burnt down stupas as numerous  as  sand  [grains]  of  the
river Ganges, if someone [else] generates anger and harmful  intent  towards
a  bodhisattva  and  says  unpleasant  things  [the  relationship]  is  like
before[?*why is this not a proper quotation?]. In the Sutra of the  Seal  of
Entering Certainty and Uncertainty [?] it says that compared to someone  who
with a mind of love makes eyes develop again in the sentient beings  of  the
ten directions  whose  eyes  have  been  plucked  out,  [?]  and  who  after
releasing the previous sentient beings from prison, establishes them in  the
happiness of a universal monarch or Brahma, if  someone  [else]  with  clear
faith looks at and with clear faith wishes to look  at  a  bodhisattva  with
devotion to the Mahayana and proclaims [/sings]  his  praise,  he  generates
incalculably more merit. Also, in the Sutra of the  Magic  of  the  Complete
Certainty of Total Peace it says that compared to killing all  the  sentient
beings of Jambudvipa or seizing all their possessions, obstructing  even  as
little as the virtue of a  bodhisattva  giving  a  handful  of  food  to  an
animal, generates incalculably greater negativity. {109} so  you  should  be
very careful with respect to this point (Pages 89 – 90).

Any action that is done in relation to a bodhisattva is extremely  powerful.
Whether  you  commit  a  positive  or  negative  action  in  relation  to  a
bodhisattva, it becomes very powerful. The example given here is of  someone
who with malice or anger  criticises  a  bodhisattva.  That  single  act  of
criticising the bodhisattva is more  powerful  than  someone  destroying  as
many stupas as there are grains of sand in the Ganges River.

Imagine that all the people in this world are blind. Let’s say you are  able
to restore their sight. This would be an extremely meritorious  action.  But
simply looking at a bodhisattva with faith will accumulate even more merit.

You may find this difficult to accept, not understanding the  reason  behind
it. You may question, “How can this be?”

I think the main lesson that one should draw from this example  is  that  of
respect for others. We should respect and cherish our parents who have  been
most kind to us in this life. Likewise, we should  respect  the  objects  of
our faith such as the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha.

Likewise, we should respect and cultivate faith  in  those  beings  who  are
helping others in an extensive way  such  as  the  bodhisattvas.  We  should
praise them and not speak harshly to them.

The example given here is that of a bodhisattva.   On  the  basis  of  being
able to respect the Buddha, Dharma and  Sangha,  the  bodhisattvas,  and  so
forth, we should gradually extend that level of treatment to  others,  i.e.,
to those sentient beings who are of equal or lower  status  than  ourselves.
We should treat others with respect and not insult  or  speak  badly  of  or
unpleasantly to them. When we see what the text says with  relation  to  the
bodhisattva, we should be able to extrapolate from that  and  relate  it  to
our interactions with others.


    2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A2B-2   Great strength by way of the support

         A  The difference between the skilful [?*] and the unskilful

Second: Even a small lump of iron sinks to the bottom, but a container  made
from it floats on the surface. It has been  set  out  that,  similarly,  the
negativities committed by the skilful and unskilful are heavy or  light.  In
fact,  it  is  said  that  with  for  the  skilful   who   regret   previous
negativities, restrain future ones, do  not  keep  them  secret,  and  apply
their virtuous antidotes, they are light whereas for  those  who  arrogantly
assume  they  are  skilful  and  do  not  do  this,  but  out  of   contempt
deliberately engage in them, they are heavy (Page 90).

What does support here mean? There is a difference  between  those  who  are
knowledgeable and those who are not knowledgeable. In  this  context,  being
knowledgeable refers to those who regret  having  committed  non-virtues  in
the past and those who intend to restrain themselves  from  committing  such
actions again in the future. It is said that  the  negativities  of  such  a
knowledgeable person is lighter.


In this context, not being knowledgeable refers to those  who  do  not  have
any regret for their non-virtues committed in the past and who also  do  not
have any intention of wanting to stop creating such  negativities  again  in
the future. Their negativities are said to be heavier.

There is no exception. There may be some who pride themselves as being well-
learned, thinking, “I know what I am doing.  I  am  a  Buddhist.”  Yet  they
disregard their actions at the same time. They don’t regret their past  non-
virtues and they don’t care  about  refraining  from  such  actions.   Their
negativities committed out of disregard for such  actions  are  said  to  be
heavy.

It is said that for those people who regret  their  non-virtues  accumulated
in the past and who intend to refrain from doing these actions again in  the
future, their negativities are lighter when compared  to  someone  who  does
not have such regret or sense of restraint. Therefore  it  is  important  to
have these two:
   1. regret for past non-virtues and
   2. restraint from future negative actions

         B  The actual strength of the support

In the Jewel Heap Sutra it also says: if all  the  sentient  beings  of  the
billion universes having entered the Mahayana, were to possess  the  kingdom
of universal monarchs and each of them offered butter lamps in  vessels  the
size of an ocean and with wicks the size of Mount Meru to  a  stupa  of  the
Buddha, this would not  match  even  the  hundredth  part  of  the  merit  a
bodhisattva who has left his home [/a renunciate bodhisattva] and who  holds
up a little bit of wick smeared with butter  in  front  of  a  stupa.   This
makes clear the strength of the support even if there is  no  difference  in
the attitude and the  field  and  even  if  the  object  [offered]  is  very
different (Page 90).

Here is another example that  illustrates  the  strength  in  terms  of  the
support. Imagine that all living beings in not only this  universe  but  the
universes of the  three  billion  world  systems,  who  having  entered  the
Mahayana and having great  possessions,  make  offerings  to  a  stupa  with
butter lamps in vessels the size of an ocean  and  the  wicks  the  size  of
Mount Meru. That  would  be  a  lot  of  merit,  right?  Compare  the  merit
accumulated by all these living  beings  to  the  merit  accumulated  by  an
ordained bodhisattva making a small butter lamp offering with a  little  bit
of butter to a stupa. It is said that the bodhisattva’s  merit  is  greater.
What is the reason for this?
   • The difference doesn’t come from their motivation because all of  them
     have the same motivation. They have entered the Mahayana path and have
     the bodhicitta motivation.
   • It also doesn’t come from the object to  which  they  are  making  the
     offering, i.e., a stupa.
   • Obviously the difference  cannot  come  from  the  offering  substance
     itself. The ordained person has only one butter lamp while the  others
     have numberless butter lamps.

The difference comes in terms  of  the  support  of  the  vows  because  the
bodhisattva has the pratimoksha vows of an ordained person.  He  holds  more
vows. Therefore his action of making the butter lamp offering is  much  more
powerful.

This reasoning also makes  clear  that  depending  on  whether  or  not  the
support has vows and,  if  so,  whether  it  has  one,  two  or  three,  the
cultivation of the path will be the more effective the more it  has.   There
is a great difference in the strength of the roots of  virtue  whether,  for
instance, a householder, at the time  of  handing  [/giving]  out  donations
etc., acts on the basis of keeping vows like for instance one-day  vows,  or
whether he acts without any vows (Page 90).

This is what happens when we engage in virtue with the support of the  vows,
whether they are pratimoksha vows, bodhisattva vows  or  tantric  vows.  The
more vows that we have, the more powerful will  be  our  actions  even  when
they are very small virtues. Because of the support  of  the  vows,  even  a
small virtue can become very powerful.

Lama Tsongkhapa says very clearly here that even in the case of lay  people,
the more vows one holds, the better it is because it makes a  difference  in
the merit that one accumulates. Lama Tsongkhapa says that is so whether  one
holds one, two, or three pratimoksha vows. He even mentions the eight  vows.


You should keep this in  mind.   From  your  side,  according  to  your  own
ability or capacity, you should take as many vows as  you  can.  Take  them,
protect them, and live your life with the vows.

But like everything is life, when there is an upside, then there is  also  a
downside. It is the same here. There are these  benefits  with  relation  to
taking vows. But when one takes many vows and are  not  able  to  keep  them
well and one transgresses them, the non-virtues that follow are  very  heavy
as well. The negativities accumulated by a person who is living in the  vows
are heavier than the negativities accumulated by a person who does not  live
in the vows.


    2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A2B-3   Great strength by way of the thing

Third: With regard to giving gifts to sentient  beings,  giving  Dharma  [is
far more excellent] and with regard to  making  offerings  to  the  budhhas,
offering one’s realizations is far more excellent than gifts  and  offerings
of material things. From that example [/By  that  token?]  you  should  also
understand the [differing strength of] other[ thing]s (Pages 90 – 91).

When we practise giving to sentient beings, we can give material things.  We
can also give the gift of Dharma. It is said that  the  gift  of  Dharma  is
vastly superior to the gift of material things. The  benefit  from  material
gifts are temporary and last only for a short time whereas the gift  of  the
Dharma benefits the recipient from life to life. Therefore the gift  of  the
Dharma is said to be vastly superior to the gift of material things.

In the case of making offerings to  the  Buddha,  one  can  make  the  usual
offering of material things. But there is also the offering of practice.  If
you were to compare these two, the offering of practice  is  more  important
and more powerful. The merit that you accumulate by offering  your  practice
is much more  powerful  than  offering  material  things.  The  offering  of
practice usually means learning  and  putting  into  practice  the  Buddha’s
teachings.

These are important points that we should keep in mind. We should apply  the
information given here. The text is telling you that if you want  to  engage
in virtue, what kind of virtue is the most  powerful,  the  most  effective,
and the most beneficial. When we know this, then we should  engage  in  such
virtues. By knowing what  negative  actions  are  more  powerful,  then  you
should try to avoid those extremely powerful negative actions.  We  have  to
understand how, for example, the recipient  of  the  action  determines  the
weight of the action. There  are  also  the  differences  in  terms  of  the
support, i.e., whether you have vows or not, whether you  are  knowledgeable
or not, and so forth. There is also the difference  in  the  objects  of  an
action.

From this you can see that if you are someone who  is  truly  interested  in
engaging in virtue and you want to do something beneficial and good, if  you
don’t study, you will not understand what we  have  covered  so  far.    You
will actually be making a loss. You  may  be  working  hard  but  you  don’t
really get anything out of it. So, just using this as an example,  it  shows
how important learning and studying is.

As I have always said, please work hard and try your best. You have to  read
the text and think about what you have read. When you  have  questions  then
you should ask. We also have a monthly discussion session. It  is  important
that you attend this. This is my wish and  my  request.  Please  try  to  do
this.



Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng
Edited by Cecilia Tsong
Checked by Shirley Soh



