Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L32 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.606371
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


   Lesson No: 32                  Date: 7th February 2012


In order for us to learn the teachings of the Buddha and to have success  in
our practice, having wisdom is very important. In fact it is  indispensable.
In order for us to develop this wisdom, one  way  is  to  make  requests  to
Manjushri.

We should try to visualise Manjushri in the space in front  of  us  and,  on
that basis, we recite the Praise to Manjushri and  make  heartfelt  requests
to him to be able to complete our Dharma studies and for our practice to  be
successful. The requests have to come from the heart. You have to  feel  it.
When you make such special requests, it will make a difference.  One  reason
for making such heartfelt requests is that when they  are  from  the  heart,
they will move the heart. Then it will help you to generate  a  very  strong
determination to succeed in your studies and practice.

Many people often wonder, “What is the point of making these  prayers?  What
is the benefit of doing so?” The practical benefit is  that  by  visualising
and making requests to the special deity of wisdom you  are  expressing  the
desire to be like him. When you have the determination, “I want to  be  like
you. Please help me,” that makes a difference because  it  strengthens  your
conviction and determination. This is one of the benefits.

Just  making  requests  and  praying  to   Manjushri   alone   without   any
determination from your side will not bring you any  real  benefit.  So  you
should  pray  and  generate  that  determination.  On  the  basis  of   that
determination, you have to work hard to study, learn,  and  reflect  on  the
teachings. When you study and learn the teachings, you  will  definitely  be
able to develop wisdom and become like  Manjushri.  Prayers  alone  are  not
sufficient. Just praying, not doing  anything,  and  wishing  that  you  are
going to be like Manjushri … I think this is probably not going to happen.
   • The visualisation of Manjushri in the space in front of you should  be
     made of light.
   • Manjushri’s exalted body is orange in colour.
   • He wields a sword in his right hand and holds a volume of texts in his
     left.
   • You then mentally present beautiful offering substances to Manjushri.
   • You then visualise light rays and nectar coming from Manjushri flowing
     into you and purifying you of all your negativities and  obscurations;
     in particular your ignorance, the unknowing mind.
   • Next you again visualise light rays and nectar coming  from  Manjushri
     flowing into you. You then think that you receive the special blessing
     for success and the special wisdom to be able  to  actualise  all  the
     realisations of the path to enlightenment.

Do this practice for a few minutes.  We  will  then  recite  the  Praise  to
Manjushri and the mantra of Manjushri.

                             ******************

The glorious Chandrakirti said: “At the time when you have  the  choice  and
the ability, when you have control and independence, whatever  you  wish  to
do, you should do it. Otherwise, when the time  comes  when  you  lose  that
independence, when you don’t have any choice and you lack  the  capacity  to
do it, then it is too late.”

This advice from the glorious Chandrakirti can be  applied  to  anything  we
want to do. It does not only apply to our Dharma studies but also  to   when
we have the opportunity, time, ability, capacity,  and  the  freedom  to  do
something that we want to do. When we don’t do it, then when the time  comes
when we lose the ability or the option to do so, then it is too  late.  Even
if we want to do something then, we will not be able to do so.

In particular, with respect to our learning the  perfect  teachings  of  the
Buddha at this time in our lives when we have  some  interest  to  find  out
more about the Buddha’s teachings, we have to  grasp  this  opportunity  and
put in effort. Of course there will be challenges. It is not easy. But  when
we still have this interest and if we don’t put in the effort, then when  we
lose our interest, it will be difficult for us to continue learning.

Generally speaking, it is very difficult to have an interest  to  learn  the
Buddha’s teachings. It is even more difficult to have the interest  to  want
to study the Buddha’s teachings in an in-depth  manner.  Furthermore  it  is
even more difficult to practise the Buddha’s teachings.

Therefore we are all very lucky and  fortunate  to  be  able  to  have  this
interest in the Buddha’s teachings, to want to listen,  study,  and  reflect
on them. So we should continue with our studies.  When  all  the  conditions
are there for us to learn the Buddha’s teachings, we should  not  take  them
for granted, thinking that  things  will  always  remain  the  same  because
things do change.


At this time you have teachers who can teach you and  from  your  own  side,
you have the interest  and  ability  to  learn.  Your  faculties  are  still
working. So when the conditions are there,  we  have  to  make  use  of  the
opportunity to study. We should not think, “I will do this sometime  in  the
future.”  We should not procrastinate. Why? Because we never know what  will
happen, as things are uncertain.

                               **************

    2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A2B     Incidentally[?]: Summary indication of the
    gates of strong karma

         1 Great strength by way of the field
       2    Great strength by way of the support
       3    Great strength by way of the thing
       4    Great strength by way of the attitude


We have been talking about the practices of  a  person  of  small  capacity.
Going for refuge to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha is  an  integral  part  of
such a person’s practice. Having gone for refuge to the Buddha,  Dharma  and
Sangha, we need to live our life according to the  refuge  precepts.  If  we
are able to do this, it is said that we will get a good rebirth.

Another very  important  and  integral  practice  of  the  person  of  small
capacity is living one’s life according to the law of cause and  effect.  In
the text, this particular  outline  is  titled,  “Generating  the  faith  of
conviction in karma and its results (Page 78).”

In general, what we need to  do  is  to  develop  the  conviction  that  all
virtuous actions will result in happiness whereas non-virtuous actions  will
result in suffering. Once we have developed  this  conviction  or  certainty
about karma, then we would have generated the correct worldly view.

On the basis of having developed this faith of conviction in karma, we  then
live our life according to this  conviction.  We  will  know  what  are  the
actions we need to abandon and what are the actions we  need  to  cultivate.
When we live our life correctly in this way, we will  create  the  cause  to
have happiness from life to life.

The text in its presentation on karma refers  to  black  and  white  actions
(bad and good karma). The text also discusses the criteria for the  strength
of the action: what are the actions that are considered  powerful  and  what
are the actions that are considered not powerful. There is also going to  be
a discussion about karmic effects, i.e., what are some  of  the  results  of
certain actions.

With reference to the black actions or negative karma, this  text  primarily
focuses on the ten non-virtuous paths of action. In that  discussion,  there
is also a discussion on the basis, perception, attitude, and so forth.


In the last lesson we talked about the criteria for a powerful action.  What
makes an action particularly powerful? An action can  be  made  powerful  in
dependence on:
   1. the recipient of the action
   2. the support (or vow)
   3. the object
   4. the attitude

Today we will talk about “Great strength by way of the attitude”: how  one’s
attitude can make a particular action powerful or weak.


    2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A2B-4   Great strength by way of the attitude

         A  Greatness by way of the intensity of the attitude, its [/the]
         duration etc.

Fourth: In the Heap of Jewels Sutra it says that compared  to  each  one  of
the sentient beings of the billion universes  creating  a  buddha  stupa  as
massive as Mount Meru and all  those  who  are  objects  of  respect  paying
respect to them for ten million eons,  a  bodhisattva  undivorced  from  the
mind of omniscience who throws one  single  flower  [generates]  more  merit
(Page 91).

When we talk about accumulating the collections of  merit  and  wisdom,  one
very important thing that you need to keep in mind is that it  is  primarily
a mental activity. Both these collections are primarily accumulated  by  the
mind. It is not about how the action looks externally.  It  depends  on  the
attitude. If you were to make an offering motivated by a desire  to  achieve
full  enlightenment  for  the  benefit  of  sentient  beings,  because  this
attitude is so vast, even though you are offering something very small,  the
merit that you accumulate is  immeasurable.  This  is  because  whether  you
accumulate powerful merit or not depends on your attitude or motivation.  It
is not  determined  by  how  the  action  looks  externally  or  the  object
involved.

That being so [/likewise]  you  should  understand  this  in  terms  of  the
differences in attitude – whether what you want to attain  [/the  object  of
attainment] is superior or inferior, whether you observe  your  own  benefit
or that of others and so forth - as well as  the  effect  of  intensity  and
duration (Page 31)[?].

   • If you were to make an offering motivated by a desire to achieve  full
     enlightenment for the  benefit  of  all  sentient  beings,  the  merit
     becomes immeasurable.
   • If you were to make an offering motivated by the wish to achieve  your
     own individual liberation from cyclic existence, you  accumulate  less
     merit.
   • If you were to make an offering motivated by the desire to get a  good
     rebirth, the merit that you accumulate will be even less.

So depending on your mental perspective  and  goal,  the  merit  accumulated
will be commensurate with that. Similarly if you were to  make  an  offering
motivated only by the desire to benefit others,  then  the  merit  would  be
much stronger as compared to making an offering motivated by your own  self-
interest.

Let’s say  you  perform  an  action  motivated  by  the  desire  to  achieve
enlightenment, if the motivation is very strong, the ensuing merit that  you
accumulate from that action is much stronger compared  to  having  the  same
desire to achieve enlightenment where the motivation  is  weak.  Of  course,
the ensuing merit will also be weak.

Similarly as mentioned in the text, if you had  that  attitude  for  a  long
period of time, the strength of the merit  will  be  commensurate  with  the
duration of that attitude.

When it comes  to  [/With  regard  to]  faulty  conduct  a  strong  mentally
afflicted attitude [/attitude of mental affliction] {111} and long  duration
also have more strength (Page 91).

We all want to accumulate merit. We believe that it is good for us and  that
it leaves virtuous imprints in our minds so that we will have good  results.
So far we can see  it  is  very  clear  that  having  a  positive  attitude,
particularly having a good heart and a good motivation, is  very  important.
It makes our actions very powerful.

What counts is not external appearance. We do  accumulate  merit  by  making
offerings but when we do it for our own interest, then  the  merit  is  much
smaller. All of us want to accumulate merit and  it  is  essential  that  we
know how to do it well. Here the attitude is very important.

When you make an offering, even if the offering is  small  but  it  is  done
with a good motivation, not for yourself but to benefit  others,  the  merit
that you accumulate will be very powerful. So it is all in having the  know-
how of how to accumulate merit. When we know that, then in  each  and  every
single second, we can  easily  accumulate  a  lot  of  merit.  This  is  the
essential point.

This is in  line  with  the  overall  presentation  of  the  teachings.  The
emphasis is on the mind, i.e., adopting a  positive  mental  perspective  or
generating a virtuous motivation. That is the  main  thing  that  determines
whether a particular action is powerful or not.

With regard to negative actions such as the ten non-virtuous  actions,  when
the attitude behind those ten non-virtuous actions is very strong, then  the
ensuing negative result, suffering, will be  much  stronger.  A  person  may
engage in one of the ten non-virtuous actions but if his  attitude  and  the
underlying  affliction  are  not  that  strong,  that  person   will   still
accumulate negative karma but it will not be as  powerful  as  the  negative
karma of someone whose afflictions are very  strong.  Similarly  the  longer
these strong afflictions last, if they are always there in one’s mind,  then
of course the negative actions are more powerful.

After knowing the above, we should put them into practice. Whenever we  have
a chance to engage in virtue and to accumulate merit, make sure that  it  is
done with a good heart, a virtuous motivation, and with an expansive  mental
attitude.

When we find ourselves engaging in some negative actions, we should try  our
best to reduce the strength and intensity of the  afflictions  behind  those
actions and also to reduce the duration of the afflictions  manifesting.  By
doing all this, we can reduce the strength of those negative actions.

         B  How anger is particularly strong

Among  [mental  afflictions],  again,  anger  is  particularly  strong.   In
Engaging in [Bodhisattva] Behaviour it says:

         Whatever good conduct was amassed
         In thousand eons by giving and worship
         To the sugatas and the like
         All is destroyed by one [flash of] anger (Page 91).
The teachings say that all the merit that had been amassed  for  a  thousand
eons through giving to sentient beings,  making  offerings  to  the  Buddha,
keeping ethics, developing concentration, and so forth, can be destroyed  by
just a single moment of very strong anger or hatred.

In this regard anger towards those whose conduct accords  with  purity  [/is
chaste] weighs very heavily, [and] anger towards the  jinas’  children  more
heavily still. In the King of Concentration [Sutra] it says:

         If one has harboured harmful intent for another,
         Discipline and study cannot save [/help] one,
         Nor can concentration or a retreat place,
         Nor can gifts, nor worship of the Buddha (Page 91).

Anger is very destructive. A single moment of  anger  can  destroy  so  much
merit accumulated over such a long period of time. An example  that  we  can
relate to is how a single moment of anger  can  destroy  a  relationship  or
friendship that was built up over a period of, say, thirty or  forty  years.
Good relationships between friends or couples that  were  built  up  over  a
long period of time can be destroyed by a short moment of intense hatred  or
anger. We are not even talking about two or five minutes of anger  but  just
a single moment of heartfelt anger or hatred.

Therefore we should try to restrain our anger  and  not  let  it  become  so
powerful. Particularly we need to be careful  not  to  develop  such  strong
hatred or anger towards karmically powerful  objects  because  when  we  get
upset or angry at such objects, first, the negative karma  is  very  strong,
and second, it also destroys a lot of merit. We have  to  pay  attention  to
these essential points.

Next is the presentation of the effects of the ten paths  of  action.  There
is an action. There is a basis for that action. You  carry  out  the  action
and the action is completed. When these three come together,  what  kind  of
effects will there be?

    2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A3 Indication of their effects

         A  The fully ripened effect
         B  The effect in conformity [/concordant] with the cause
         C  The conditioning or empowering[/decisive or dominant] [/decisive
         or dominant] effect [?] (Page 91)

The three effects are:
1. the fully ripened effect (or fruitional effect)
2. the effect in conformity with the cause (or causally concordant effect)
3. the conditioning or empowering effect (or environmental effect)

There is also a presentation of four effects that are:
1. the fruitional effect
2. the causally concordant experiential effect
3. the causally concordant behavioural effect
4. the environmental effect

         A  The fully ripened effect

First: As each of the  ten  unwholesome  paths  of  action  depends  on  the
[/a]basis, the three poisons, and whether it is[?*missing in German]  great,
intermediate, or small, the fully  ripened  effect  is  also  threefold.  In
Actual Basis of the Levels [?] it says that  through  each  of  the  ten,  a
great [act of] killing and so on, you are reborn as a  hell  being,  through
each of the ten intermediate ones you are  reborn  as  a  hungry  ghost  and
through each of the ten small ones you are  reborn  as  an  animal.  In  the
Sutra on the Ten Levels the effects of small and intermediate ones are  said
to be [/presented] the other way around (Pages 91 – 92).

For example, when the action of killing is:
   • very powerful, one will be reborn in the hells.
   • of medium strength, one will be reborn as a hungry ghost.
   • small, one will be reborn as an animal.

However, the Sutra on the  Ten  Levels  reverses  the  effects  of  a  small
killing and a killing of medium strength:
   • a killing of medium strength will lead one to an animal rebirth.
   • a small act of killing will lead one to rebirth as a hungry ghost.
In terms of the ranking of the lower realms, we usually talk about the  hell
realms, the realm of the hungry ghosts, and then the animal  realm.  But  in
the Sutra on the Ten Levels, the order is the hell realms, the animal  realm
and then the hungry ghost realm.

The order of arrangement depends on the criteria used. When you arrange  the
order  in  accordance  with  the  level  of  intelligence  that  the   being
possesses, then the hungry ghost is said to  be  more  intelligent  than  an
animal. It is even said that some hungry ghosts are able to  understand  and
receive teachings. So from the perspective  of  intelligence,  we  have  the
arrangement of the hell beings, animals and then the hungry ghosts.

But from the perspective  of  the  intensity  of  the  suffering  that  they
experience, the usual  order  is  this:  hell  beings,  hungry  ghosts,  and
animals. Hungry ghosts experience much more suffering than animals.

         B  The effect in conformity [/concordant] with the cause

Second: The effects in conformity [/concordant]  with  the  cause  are  that
even having left the bad migrations and taken  rebirth  as  a  human  being,
respectively, your life will be short, you will be lacking  in  possessions,
you will not keep your partner, there will be a lot of slander, you will  be
separated from loved ones, you will hear unpleasant sounds, others will  not
listen to your words, and  the  three  [poisons],  attachment,  hatred,  and
delusion will predominate (Page 92).

Using killing as an example, when we engage  in  the  act  of  killing,  the
causally concordant effect is a short life. Even when you  are  reborn  from
the lower realms as a human being, because of having killed in the past  and
shortened someone’s lifespan, you will have a  short  life.  The  result  is
thus commensurate with what you had done in  the  past.  Therefore  this  is
called a causally concordant effect.
   • When you have to experience an effect that is similar to what you  had
     done in the past, this is called a  causally  concordant  experiential
     effect.
   • There is also a causally concordant behavioural effect. Even when  you
     are reborn from the lower realms as a human being, because  of  having
     killed in the past and due to the imprint left on your mind, you  will
     have the tendency to kill, i.e., you will like killing. Naturally, you
     will want to engage in killing.

So from here we can see that whenever  we  engage  in  a  single  action  of
killing, four effects will have to be experienced:
1. the fruitional effect of going to the lower realms.
2. the causally concordant experiential effect.  Even  when  we  are  reborn
   from the lower realms as a human being, we have  to  experience  a  short
   life.
3. the causally concordant behavioural  effect.  We  have  the  tendency  to
   kill. We find it easy and have a liking  for  killing.  Because  of  this
   habituation, when  we  engage  in  killing  again,  we  accumulate  fresh
   negative karma that will once again take us to the lower realms.
4. the environmental effect. Food, drink, and  medicines  will  have  little
   strength. The food and drink that  are  available  to  you  will  not  be
   nutritious. The medicine that you take does not help you.

When we understand how one action of killing has all these effects and  when
we think about them and develop the conviction that these effects are  real,
naturally we will put an end to us killing.

So far we have been talking about the non-virtuous action of  killing.  Each
of the ten non-virtuous actions has these three effects: fruitional  effect,
causally concordant effect, and environmental effect.

Negative actions
- fruitional effect
So with actions such as stealing, sexual misconduct, and so forth,  each  of
them will have their corresponding fruitional effect  that  can  be  further
divided into great, middling, and small depending on  the  strength  of  the
action.

- causally concordant effect
Even when you are reborn from the miserable realms as  a  human  being,  you
will still experience the effects of non-virtuous actions as follows:
   • the effect of killing is a short lifespan
   • the effect of stealing is that you will lack possessions
   • the effect of sexual misconduct is that you will  be  unable  to  keep
     your partner
   • the effect of lying is to experience much slander
   • the effect of divisive speech is to be separated from your loved ones
   • the effect of harsh words is to hear unpleasant sounds
   • the effect of idle talk is that others will not listen to your words
   • the effect of the three poisons is  the  predominance  of  attachment,
     hatred, and delusion

- environmental result

         C  The conditioning effect

Third: The conditioning effect:
      - of killing is that in future worlds [?*-  der  äußeren  Welt],  food
and drink, medicine, harvests and  the  like  have  little  power;  that  of
stealing great droughts and rains and {112} poor harvests, etc.;
       -  that  of  sexual  misconduct  swamps,   much   filth,   unpleasant
experiences, etc.;
      - that of lying, that field work and work to do with  boats  will  not
succeed etc.;
      - that of divisive speech that the location [where you live]  will  be
bumpy and uneven, and it will be difficult to travel, and so on;
      - that of harsh words that the location [where you live] will be  full
of logs, brambles, rocks, pebbles, potsherds, etc.;
      - that of idle talk that fruit trees do not bear fruit or only out  of
season, etc.;
      - that of covetousness that everything excellent deteriorates year  by
year, month by month, and day by day, etc.;
      - that of harmful intent a lot  of  epidemics,  injuries,  infections,
disputes, wars with enemy troops, etc. and
      - that of wrong views that  in  the  world  [you  live  in]  the  best
resources will decline, etc (Page 92).

The ten virtuous actions are completely opposite  to  the  ten  non-virtuous
actions. For example, the opposite of killing is restraining  from  killing.
How does one accumulate the virtuous action of  not  killing?  In  order  to
accumulate the virtuous action of not killing:
1. You must have an understanding and  the  conviction  in  your  mind  that
   killing is bad.
2. You must then complete the action by making the  decision,  “I  will  not
   kill.”
Only when these  two  factors  are  present  in  your  mind  will  you  then
accumulate the good karma of not killing.

Many people do not have the proper understanding of this and  thinking  that
not doing anything is  not  killing.  This  does  not  help  the  person  to
accumulate the good karma of not killing.  For  example,  when  there  is  a
danger of you engaging in killing but  because  you  are  able  to  restrain
yourself on the basis of knowing and being convinced that  killing  is  bad,
you make the decision to stop the act of killing, only then  do  you  create
the good karma, the virtuous action of not  killing.  Simply  doing  nothing
and not engaging in killing does not mean that you are engaged  in  the  act
of not killing and thus accumulate the good karma of not killing.

    2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2B1 White actions

         A  Brief indication by means of [/through] scripture

First: They  are  the  bodily  actions  of  correctly  abstaining  [?]  from
killing, stealing, and sexual misconduct due to possessing a wholesome  mind
having thought about their disadvantages, and of  carrying  this  abstention
to its conclusion (Page 92).

So this is how one accumulates the virtuous karma of not killing.

Similarly, this is to be applied to the  four  verbal  ones  and  the  three
mental ones, the difference being that they are called “actions  of  speech”
and “actions of mind”[?*]. This is how it is stated in Actual Basis  of  the
Levels.

         B  Extensive explanation

This should therefore be related to the  basis,  attitude,  performance  and
completion as appropriate. When applied to the path of action of  abandoning
killing, the basis is another sentient being. The attitude is  the  wish  to
give it up having seen its disadvantages. The performance is to  put  effort
into completely  abstaining  from  killing.  {113}  The  completion  is  the
physical action of correct [/true] abstention  having  been  completed.  The
other [path]s [of action] should also be understood in this manner.

    2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2B2      The effects

Second: From among the three [effects  of  virtuous  paths  of  action]  the
fully ripened effect is to be born as a human, a desire  realm  god,  and  a
god of the two upper realms though a small, intermediate and great  virtuous
action.  As for the effect in conformity [/concordant] with  the  cause  and
the conditioning effect the opposites of the [respective effects from]  non-
virtuous actions [?*why don't you translate it and put "paths of action"  in
brackets?] apply (Pages 92 – 93).

The effects of the ten virtuous actions are also threefold: the  fruitional,
causally concordant, and environmental effects.  The  ten  virtuous  actions
also come in different forms: powerful, middling, and weak.

White (or virtuous) actions
- fruitional effect
The fruitional effect is that of a good rebirth.
   • A weak virtuous action will lead one to be reborn as a human being.
   • A middling virtuous action will lead one to be reborn as a god in  the
     desire realm.
   • A powerful virtuous action will lead one to be reborn in the form  and
     formless realms.

- causally concordant effect
The causally concordant effect of, for example, not  killing  will  be  that
one will have a long life.
   • Being born as a human being with a long life is the result  of  having
     abandoned  killing.  That  is  the  causally  concordant  experiential
     effect.
   • The causally concordant behavioural effect  is  that,  due  to  having
     abandoned killing  in  the  past,  then  in  the  next  life,  out  of
     habituation, one will have the liking for not killing.

- environmental effect
The environmental effect of not killing is that you will be born in a  place
where you will enjoy good  food  and  drink,  effective  medicines,  and  so
forth.

There is also another classification of karma:
   • the difference between projecting and completing karma
   • the karma that you will definitely experience and the karma  that  you
     will only possibly experience

There are four possibilities between karma that is  created  (or  done)  and
karma that is accumulated:
1. Karma that is created but not accumulated
2. Karma that is accumulated but not created
3. Karma that is both
4. Karma that is neither

Please read up and think about this and give an illustration of:
1. An action that is created but not accumulated
2. An action that is accumulated but not created
3. An action that is both accumulated and created
4. An action that is neither accumulated nor created

The answer is in the text. So I request you to read.

Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; Transcribed by Phuah Soon  Ek  and  Vivien
Ng; Edited by Cecilia Tsong; Checked by Shirley Soh
