Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L54 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.251547
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


   Lesson No: 54                       Date: 10th May 2012


(Meditation on Manjushri)

At this time in our life when we have all the  favourable  outer  and  inner
conditions, it is insufficient to merely have faith in the  Buddha  and  his
teachings. We must work at knowing  and  understanding  those  teachings  as
well.

We have this human body, this human mind,  and  intelligence.  Our  mind  is
still alert and  working.  Our  faculties  are  complete.  It  becomes  very
important for us to make use of this opportunity  and  our  intelligence  to
listen to the teachings and to reflect on them as much as  we  can.  We  are
then able to leave stable imprints in our mind.

It is extremely important for us to generate faith in the Buddha, the  faith
that comes from knowledge and understanding. Such faith becomes very  stable
and will stay with us from life to life. Then there is always hope  that  we
will be able to continue in our hearing, reflection, and meditation  on  the
Buddha’s teachings in the future.

Therefore, as much as possible, when you are studying or  listening  to  the
teachings, please do so attentively. When you are able to do this,  I  think
we have made this human life meaningful. It is difficult for us  to  develop
the realisations mentioned in the teachings but when we are  able  to  leave
as many strong and stable imprints as we can in our mind from  listening  to
and reflecting on the teachings, we can say  that  we  have  made  our  life
meaningful.
                           **********************

We have been looking at the sevenfold  cause  and  effect  instructions  for
developing the mind generation:
 • In order to practise these instructions from the outset, we must  develop
   equanimity. Developing equanimity is said to be the basis for  practising
   these instructions. That is very important.
 • On the basis of having developed equanimity,  next  we  have  to  develop
   affection for all living beings. That is also very important.
 • In order to develop  affection  for  all  sentient  beings,  we  have  to
   practise the instructions of recognising that all  sentient  beings  have
   been our mothers, recollecting their kindness when they were our mothers,
   and developing  the  wish  to  repay  their  kindness.  Practising  these
   instructions will enable us to develop affection for sentient beings  and
   to develop the kind of love that sees everyone as very precious and  that
   they matter to us.
 • After having developed affection for all sentient beings, next we need to
   develop in our minds the intent or desire to accomplish the happiness and
   the welfare of others.
 • In order to achieve that, we need to meditate on  love,  compassion,  and
   wholehearted resolve. By cultivating love, compassion,  and  wholehearted
   resolve, we develop the intent to accomplish the happiness and welfare of
   all sentient beings.
 • After that comes the development of mind generation. Mind  generation  is
   the mind that is intent on achieving full enlightenment.

In order for that mind to arise, we must have  already  developed  well  the
intent on accomplishing the welfare of all sentient beings.  The  intent  on
accomplishing the welfare of all sentient beings becomes the  cause  for  us
to  be  able  to  develop  the  mind  that  is  intent  on  achieving   full
enlightenment.

|Basis                      |Sevenfold cause and effect instructions |
|Equanimity towards all     |Recognition that all sentient beings    |
|sentient beings            |have been our mothers                   |
|                           |Remembering their kindness when they    |
|                           |were our mothers                        |
|                           |3. Wish to repay our mothers’ kindness  |
|Affection for all beings   |4. Love                                 |
|                           |5.Compassion                            |
|                           |6. Wholehearted resolve                 |
|Intent on accomplishing the|7. Mind generation                      |
|welfare of all sentient    |                                        |
|beings                     |                                        |

When we talk about developing the mind that is intent on  accomplishing  the
happiness and welfare of all sentient beings, we first have to understand:
1. what does the happiness of all sentient beings mean?
2. what does the welfare of all sentient beings mean?
3. what is it that we are trying to accomplish?

The welfare and the happiness that we are talking here  is  not  just  their
temporary happiness but their nirvana, which refers here to the  non-abiding
or final nirvana. In order to be able to  develop  well  the  mind  that  is
intent on accomplishing the welfare of  all  sentient  beings,  we  need  at
least an understanding of emptiness that will allow  us  to  understand  how
all sentient beings can achieve nirvana or liberation.

In order to develop the mind that is intent on enlightenment, we  also  need
an  understanding  of  emptiness,  particularly  the  understanding  of  and
conviction in how:
1. the nature of our mind is clear light and
2. the stains or defilements in our mind are adventitious

You can see here that in order to be able  to  develop  the  realisation  of
mind generation, based on an understanding of emptiness, we have to see  how
sentient beings, including ourselves, have the potential and the ability  to
achieve liberation and enlightenment. We need conviction in  this  in  order
to be able to develop mind generation.

In the treatises, mind generation is defined as the mind that possesses  two
aspirations. Mind generation has, as  its  cause,  the  aspiration  for  the
welfare of others accompanied by the aspiration for enlightenment.

It is mentioned in the teachings that once the uncontrived  mind  generation
arises, that person will not feel any difficulty in working for the  welfare
of others no matter how great the difficulty may  be.  The  person  who  has
actualised uncontrived mind generation feels only enthusiasm and is able  to
cultivate very strong joyous perseverance. Hence those  with     uncontrived
mind generation have great enthusiasm and joyous  perseverance.  With  these
qualities, they are able to accomplish many great things for themselves  and
for others. With uncontrived mind generation, they are also able to  achieve
the final goal, full enlightenment.

Mind generation has two divisions: (1) aspirational mind generation and  (2)
engaged mind generation.

         2  Divisions

Engaging  in  Bodhisattva  Behaviour,  following  the  Gandavyuha   [Sutra],
teaches the two -  the  aspiring  and  engaging  [mind  generations]  saying
[/entrance]:

         The wish to go and actually going -
         The way that difference is understood
         Is how the discerning should understand
         The difference between those two in turn.             [19]

The example given here is that of  having  the  wish  to  go  somewhere  and
actually acting on that wish, i.e., one sets off on the journey.
 • Aspirational mind generation is the mind that  thinks,  “I  will  achieve
   enlightenment for the benefit of all sentient beings,” and is a mind that
   is not directly conjoined with the activity of engaging in  the  practice
   of the deeds.
 • Engaged mind generation is the mind that is directly conjoined  with  the
   activity of engaging in the practice of the deeds.

Having said this, one may ask, what is the meaning  of  “directly  conjoined
with the activity of engaging in the practice  of  the  deeds”  versus  “not
directly conjoined with the activity of engaging  in  the  practice  of  the
deeds”?

Khen Rinpoche: Does anyone have an idea?

Take the example of giving. What is giving? It is the mind  that  wishes  or
is willing to give. When you are actually engaged  in  the  act  of  giving,
that act has to be conjoined with or accompanied by a  very  strong  thought
of wanting to achieve full enlightenment for the  benefit  of  all  sentient
beings. This is the meaning of “directly  conjoined  with  the  activity  of
engaging in the practice of the deeds.”

The bodhisattva conduct is the practice of the six  perfections,  which  are
the  perfections   of   generosity,   ethics,   patience,   joyous   effort,
concentration, and wisdom. When the bodhisattva is engaged in  the  practice
of one of these perfections and, at that time, manifests  a  strong  thought
of wanting to achieve full enlightenment, that is referred to  as  “directly
conjoined with the activity of engaging in the bodhisattva deeds.”

The reason for explaining this is because:
 • The boundary of aspirational mind generation  exists  from  the  Mahayana
   path of accumulation through to the end of the continuum  of  a  sentient
   being.
 • The boundary of engaged mind generation exists from the Mahayana path  of
   accumulation up to the buddha ground.

|           |Meaning                        |Boundary                 |
|Mind       |Is the Mahayana main knower    |Exists from the Mahayana |
|generation |that is concomitant with the   |path of accumulation     |
|           |intention to achieve full      |through to the buddha    |
|           |enlightenment in order to      |ground                   |
|           |accomplish the welfare of      |                         |
|           |others                         |                         |
|Aspirationa|The mind that is not directly  |Exists from the Mahayana |
|l mind     |conjoined with the activity of |path of accumulation     |
|generation |engaging in the practice of the|through to the end of the|
|           |deeds                          |continuum of a sentient  |
|           |                               |being                    |
|Engaged    |The mind that is directly      |Exists from the Mahayana |
|mind       |conjoined with the activity of |path of accumulation up  |
|generation |engaging in the practice of the|to the buddha ground     |
|           |deeds                          |                         |

Question: Does the Buddha have bodhicitta or not?  Is  mind  generation  and
bodhicitta the same thing?

Answer: We cannot posit bodhicitta and the Mahayana mind  generation  to  be
the same thing:
 • Whatever is bodhicitta is necessarily the Mahayana mind generation.
 •  But  whatever  is  the  Mahayana  mind  generation  is  not  necessarily
   bodhicitta.

Khen Rinpoche: Is this something new? You are surprised or you don’t agree?

Question: Can we say then  that  the  Mahayana  mind  generation  is  not  a
motivation but bodhicitta is a kind of motivation?

Khen Rinpoche: I think both are not motivations.

In the treatises, engaged mind generation exists even on the buddha  ground,
whereas aspirational mind generation  exists  through  to  the  end  of  the
continuum of a sentient being. Why is there this discussion?

 • For someone who is in meditative equipoise focusing  on  emptiness,  does
   mind generation exist in his mind or not? Yes, it exists in his mind.
 • Which mind generation is existing in that mind, aspirational or  engaged?
   It is aspirational mind generation.
 • Why? Because it is not directly conjoined with the activity  of  engaging
   in the practice of the deeds.

Engaged mind generation exists on the buddha ground. The  Buddha  works  for
the benefit of all sentient beings.

Question from Khen Rinpoche:  Does  Buddha  have  the  intent  of  achieving
enlightenment? Does Buddha have mind generation? Yes.

If Buddha has mind generation then we have to say that the  Buddha  has  the
intent of achieving omniscience or enlightenment for the benefit of  others.
But the Buddha has already achieved enlightenment.

Does the Buddha have mind generation? Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: You have to say yes.

Does Buddha have the mind that is the  intent  on  achieving  enlightenment?
You have to say yes.

But hasn’t Buddha already achieved enlightenment? Yes, he has.

What is the problem with having the intent  to  achieve  enlightenment  when
you have  already  achieved  enlightenment?  For  example,  after  you  have
finished eating and with your stomach still full, is there any problem  with
having the wish to eat?

Khen Rinpoche: It is something similar to this. I am not sure.  Think  about
this.

It is clear in the treatises that the Buddha has  mind  generation  but  the
Buddha does not have bodhicitta that only exists  in  the  continua  of  the
bodhisattvas. The Buddha is not a bodhisattva.

The definition of the Mahayana mind generation is the Mahayana  main  knower
that is concomitant with the intention  to  achieve  full  enlightenment  in
order to accomplish the welfare of others.

Does the Buddha possess mind generation? Yes.

Does the Buddha have the intention to achieve omniscience? Yes.

Has the Buddha already achieved enlightenment? Yes.

Question: Does the Buddha have engaged bodhicitta?

Answer: Strictly speaking, we have to say that the Buddha has  engaged  mind
generation.

Question: Does the Buddha have refuge or not?

Khen Rinpoche: What do you think?  Does  the  Buddha  have  refuge?  Is  the
Buddha a Buddhist? He gives refuge to us but he doesn’t have refuge?

In order for refuge to arise, one must have the fear  of  the  lower  realms
and cyclic existence. Does the Buddha fear suffering or not?

Question: Engaged mind generation exists on the buddha ground.  Aspirational
bodhicitta exists through to the end of the continuum  of  sentient  beings.
How about engaged bodhicitta then?

Answer: Engaged bodhicitta exists through to the end  of  the  continuum  of
sentient beings.

Question: Since both aspirational and engaged bodhicitta  exist  through  to
the  end  of  the  continuum  of  sentient  beings,  how   then   are   they
differentiated?

Answer: It boils down to the understanding of what it  means  when  we  say,
“directly conjoined  with  the  activity  of  engaging  in  the  bodhisattva
deeds.” Returning to the example of giving,  giving  is  the  mind  that  is
willing  to  give.  During  the  process  of  giving,  the  mind  of  giving
manifests.  At  the  same  time,  the  intention  to   achieve   omniscience
manifests. That is engaged bodhicitta.

Khen Rinpoche: You are not listening carefully.

 • Bodhicitta and mind generation are not the same. Mind  generation  has  a
   bigger pervasion.
      o  If  it  is  bodhicitta,  it  is  necessarily  the  Mahayana   mind
        generation.
      o If it is the  Mahayana  mind  generation,  it  is  not  necessarily
        bodhicitta.
 • There is the Mahayana mind generation but there is no bodhicitta  on  the
   buddha ground.
 • Who has bodhicitta? Only the bodhisattvas.
 • Is the Buddha a bodhisattva? No.

Khen Rinpoche: Is the Buddha a Mahayanist? Yes. Don’t say no!

 • It is stated clearly in the beginning that the entrance to  the  Mahayana
   is the Mahayana mind generation.
 • Whether a  person  is  a  Mahayanist  depends  on  whether  he  has  mind
   generation.
 • Therefore, we have to say that the Buddha is a Mahayanist but he is not a
   bodhisattva.
 • The Buddha has mind generation but does not have bodhicitta.

Khen Rinpoche: These two things are different. But, in the  context  of  the
bodhisattva path, the two terms are used to mean the same thing.

When we want to analyse things in more detail,  you  will  have  to  clearly
make the distinction between these two.

Question: How then do you differentiate between aspirational bodhicitta  and
engaged bodhicitta?

Answer: If that bodhicitta  is  directly  conjoined  with  the  activity  of
engaging the bodhisattva deeds, then it is engaged bodhictta.

Question: We have established that the  pervasion  of  the  mind  generation
exists on the buddha ground. It seems that now there are three  things:  (1)
aspiring bodhicitta,  (2)  engaged  bodhicitta,  and  (3)  mind  generation.
These three are not the same.

We have established the difference between mind generation  and  bodhicitta.
What  is  the  difference  then  between  aspiring  bodhicitta  and  engaged
bodhicitta? According to the root text, is it  someone  with  the  vows  and
without the vows?

Answer:  The  difference  between  aspirational   bodhicitta   and   engaged
bodhicitta boils down to the  definition.  Aspirational  bodhicitta  is  the
mind that is not directly conjoined with the activity  of  engaging  in  the
bodhisattva deeds.

We need to understand the meaning of “directly conjoined.” For those of  you
from the previous Basic Program, do you  remember  the  discussion  about  a
person on the Mahayana path of seeing? Does bodhicitta exist in  the  wisdom
of meditative equipoise of a person on the Mahayana path of seeing?
Khen Rinpoche: Why does it exist there?

Student: Because he is a bodhisattva.

Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): It exists because he is a bodhisattva.

Someone who is in meditative equipoise directly  focusing  on  emptiness  on
the Mahayana path of seeing has bodhicitta in his mind.  Is  the  bodhicitta
manifest or not?

If you say no, are you saying that the mind to achieve enlightenment is  not
manifest?

 • For the bodhisattva who is in meditative equipoise on the  Mahayana  path
   of seeing, only the mind realising emptiness manifests.
 • Bodhicitta is not manifest. Mind generation is not manifest.
 • Does this bodhisattva have mind generation? Yes.
 • What kind of mind generation does he have? Aspirational mind generation.
 • Why? Because it is not directly conjoined with the activity  of  engaging
   in the practice of the deeds.

To make it easy, going back to Shantideva’s example, the  aspirational  mind
generation is just a thought that thinks, “I will achieve enlightenment.”

At the actual time of engaging in the  practice  of  the  deeds,  that  mind
becomes the engaged mind generation.

Khen Rinpoche: It is as simple as that. No need to think  too  much.  I  was
just checking the memory of the older students. That’s all.

Next are the instructions for exchanging self and others.

                    Explanation of how to train the mind
            through equalizing and exchanging oneself and others


    2B4B-2B3B-2A2      The training based on the texts by Shantideva

         A  Thinking about the advantages of exchanging and the
         disadvantages of not exchanging oneself with others
         B  Demonstrating that you can generate this mind if you familiarize
         yourself with it
         C  The stages of meditating on how to exchange oneself and others

The second one - the training based on the texts by Shantideva -  has  three
[points]: Thinking about the advantages and disadvantages of exchanging  and
not exchanging oneself with others respectively, demonstrating that you  can
generate this mind if you familiarize yourself with it  and  the  stages  of
meditating on how to exchange yourself and others.

    2B4B-2B3B-2A2A     Thinking about the advantages of exchanging and the
    disadvantages of not exchanging oneself with others

         1   To quickly accomplish the two welfares, it is appropriate to
         exchange oneself with others

First: In Engaging in Bodhisattva Behaviour it says:

         Whoever wishes to protect
         Himself and others rapidly
         Should practice the secret instructions [which
         Consist in] exchanging  oneself  and  others  (Pages  147  –  148).


Next, the quotation discusses the benefits of  exchanging  self  and  others
and the faults of not doing so.


         2  The advantages of exchanging and the disadvantages of not
         exchanging oneself with others

         All happiness that exists in the world
         Arises from wanting others’ happiness.
         All suffering that exists in the world
         Arises from wanting one’s own happiness.


         What need is there to say any more:
         The childish work for their own welfare
         The Munis for the welfare of others.
         Look at the difference between the two! (Page 148)

The text goes on to explain that when we do not exchange  self  for  others,
enlightenment  aside,  even  achieving  the  happiness  of  this   life   is
difficult.


         3  Therefore buddhahood etc. are therefore difficult to attain if
         one does not exchange oneself with others.

         One’s happiness and the suffering of others -
         If one fails to exchange them correctly,
         One will not reach buddhahood,
                  Samsara will be without happiness too.”

Just as it is expressed here[?], you should think of cherishing  oneself  as
the door to all problems and cherishing [/appreciating] others as the  basis
of all excellences (Page 148).

Here is something for you to think about. The  argument  here  is  that  all
happiness comes  from  cherishing  others  and  all  problems  and  unwanted
sufferings come from cherishing  oneself.  You  have  to  see  for  yourself
whether this is true or not.


    2B4B-2B3B-2A2B     Demonstrating that you can generate this mind if you
    familiarize yourself with it

         1  The actual [topic]

Second: In the same way that fear used to arise in us [/may have  arisen  in
us previously]eveneven upon hearing our[/a certain] enemy’s name  but  later
on, having come to an agreement, we befriended him and got very  sad  if  he
was absent, likewise due to the mind following habits, we can  get  used  to
seeing oneself like someone else and others like oneself. In the  same  text
[it says]:

         Do not avoid things because they are difficult
         By the strength of familiarisation
         One whose name was frightful to hear
         Will make you sad, if he is away.
And:
         It is not all that difficult
         To posit my body as that of others (Page 148).
The text is saying that when we are accustomed to this way of  thinking,  it
is possible to exchange self for others. A qualm is then raised.


         2  Clearing up doubt

If you think: “As someone else’s body is not my own body, how  could  it  be
appropriate to generate the same attitude towards  it  [as  to]  to  my  own
one?’ - This body was also created from the semen and blood of  our  parents
and even though it was created from parts of others’ bodies, we hold  it  to
be “I” b[/I]by the power of previous familiarisation;[/habits]  likewise  if
we familiarize ourselves with cherishing others’ bodies as if they were  our
own, [this mind] will arise[/if you get used to it]. The same text says:

         Therefore, with regard to the drops
         Of someone else’s semen and blood,
         You hold them to be “I” – like that
         Get used to it with regard to others!


Through thorough reflection on the advantages and disadvantages along  these
lines, a strong {176} enthusiasm for this meditation will develop  from  the
depths of the heart. Having seen that, if you familiarize yourself with  it,
you can generate [this attitude], you should meditate on it.

    2B4B-2B3B-2A2C     The stages of meditation on how to exchange yourself
    and others

         1  Removing obstacles
         2  The actual way to meditate

The third one has two [points]: Removing obstacles and  the  actual  way  to
meditate.

    2B4B-2B3B-2A2C-1   Removing obstacles

         A  Identifying the mind of exchanging oneself and others
         B  Removing obstacles to it [/for it?]

    2B4B-2B3B-2A2C-1A  Identifying the mind of exchanging oneself and
    others

First: To say “exchanging oneself and  others”,  “making  oneself  into  the
other and making others into oneself” does not mean to  train  in  the  mind
that thinks[?]: “That other [person] is me” and “His eyes and so  forth  are
my eyes and so forth.” Rather it is to  exchange  the  rank  [/order]of  the
two[?]: (1) the mind that cherishes oneself and (2) the mind  that  neglects
others, and to generate the mind that cherishes others like we do  ourselves
and neglects ourselves like we do others. That is  also  why  it  is  taught
[/the reason for the teaching to exchange]  that  one’s  own  happiness  and
others’ suffering should be exchanged. Having perceived  self-cherishing  as
our enemy, we will stop considering our own  happiness  to  be  a  priority.
[and]Hav Having  perceived  cherishing  others  as  a  quality  and  stopped
neglecting[?/virtue] t  the suffering of others, it will become  a  priority
to eliminate it. In short, we will act  for  the  sake  of  eliminating  the
suffering of others without concern for  our  own  happiness  (Pages  148  –
149).

We are trying to  identify  here  the  meaning  of  exchanging  oneself  and
others. Exchanging oneself  for  others  does  not  mean  that  one  becomes
someone else and that person becomes oneself. This will never happen. It  is
not possible.

Up to now we have  been  cherishing  ourselves.  We  have  the  attitude  of
cherishing ourselves and  neglecting  others.  Exchanging  self  and  others
means to switch  these  two,  i.e.,  instead  of  cherishing  ourselves,  we
cherish others, and instead of neglecting the welfare of others, we  neglect
our own happiness.

Exchanging self for others means to cherish others and  to  disregard  one’s
own happiness. You should be aware that there is the practice of  taking  on
the suffering of others and giving away our happiness to others.
 • The practice of taking on the  suffering  of  others  is  to  reduce  the
   influence of self-cherishing in our life.
 • The practice of giving away our happiness to others is  to  increase  the
   thought of cherishing others.

In order to be able to do these practices of  taking  on  the  suffering  of
others and giving away one’s own  happiness,  first,  one  must  be  utterly
convinced of the faults of  self-cherishing,  that  self-cherishing  is  the
ultimate enemy. As the text says, “cherishing oneself is  the  door  to  all
problems.”

On the basis of having that conviction, we take on the suffering  of  others
in  order  to  weaken  our  self-cherishing.  With  the  conviction  of  how
cherishing others is “the basis of all excellences,” in  order  to  increase
one’s consideration for and the attitude of cherishing others,  one  engages
in the practice of dedicating one’s happiness to others.

Whether it is the practice of  exchanging  self  and  others  or  doing  the
practice of tonglen (taking and giving), these practices  are  done  on  the
basis of seeing how eliminating others’ suffering  is  more  important  than
eliminating one’s own suffering and how the happiness  of  others  happiness
is more important than one’s own happiness.

You can see how challenging these practices are  because  they  have  to  be
founded on the realisation and the  conviction  that  others  are  kind  and
precious:
 • How do you look at the person who is helpful to you? When  something  bad
   happens to that person, you are unable to bear  it  and  you  try  to  do
   something for that person. Why do you react in this way? It boils down to
   having feelings for the person who has helped you.
 • When something bad happens to someone with whom  you  do  not  have  much
   connection or someone who has not helped you, you do not  feel  anything,
   i.e., you don’t feel it is unbearable.

We are all like that. In order to be able to  feel  that  the  suffering  of
others is unbearable, first, we must see how kind they are. We must  feel  a
connection with them that comes from reflecting how there isn’t  anyone  who
has not been our mother. Everyone has been our  mother  not  just  once  but
numberless times and they will continue to be our  mothers  in  the  future.
They have been kind to us. By reflecting in this way in  relation  to  every
sentient being, only then will we be able to have this  special  feeling  of
connectedness with everyone.

What we want is happiness.  We  need  food  and  clothes.  We  want  a  good
reputation. Where does the food come from? No matter from which  perspective
you think about this, the conclusion has to be that the food comes from  the
existence of  others.  For  meat-eaters,  the  food  definitely  comes  from
someone else. Even for vegetarians, the  food  still  has  to  come  through
someone. So the food we need comes from the kindness of others.

Similarly, the clothes we wear, our good standing in the community,  or  the
good reputation we all desire, they all have to come  through  the  kindness
of others. How are you going to be famous if you are all alone?

When we think about this, it becomes very clear that the happiness  we  seek
comes in dependence on others. When we  sincerely  help  someone  by  giving
him, say, some financial  assistance,  a  very  special  kind  of  happiness
arises in our heart. All of you will have experienced that.

When we think of the ten non-virtues that we had engaged in, basically  they
came about from not respecting others and, particularly,  due  to  our  very
strong self-cherishing that places  so  much  more  importance  on  our  own
happiness. That becomes the cause for us to engage in the ten non-virtues.

Having committed the ten non-virtuous actions, we  have  to  experience  the
results in the future by taking rebirth in the lower realms, such as in  the
hell realms, and we have to stay there for a very long time. These  unwanted
sufferings come from non-virtue. We had engaged in non-virtue  motivated  by
our self-cherishing attitude. It  all  boils  down  to  the  self-cherishing
attitude.

When we look at the positive qualities that we can achieve in both  temporal
and ultimate terms, including the realisations of love and compassion up  to
enlightenment, all these realisations come about in dependence  on  sentient
beings and  from  cherishing  others.  They  do  not  come  from  cherishing
ourselves.

We have to figure out for ourselves how self-cherishing is the door for  all
sufferings and how cherishing others is the basis  of  all  excellences.  We
have to develop this very strong  conviction  and  once  that  is  achieved,
slowly we can start to exchange ourselves for others.

Basically, these are the instructions for reducing our  self-cherishing  and
increasing our cherishing of other people and generating  consideration  and
respect for them.

The text then talks  about  the  two  obstacles  in  training  the  mind  in
exchanging self for others. First  you  have  to  understand  what  the  two
obstacles are and then the antidotes  to  them.  Please  read  the  relevant
pages.



Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng

Edited by Cecilia Tsong

