Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L43 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.554672
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


   Lesson No: 43                    Date: 20th March 2012


(Meditation on Manjushri)

Remember the four permutations between karma that is accumulated  and  karma
that is done that we discussed before:
   1. karma that is done but is not accumulated
   2. karma that is accumulated but is not done
   3. karma that is both accumulated and done
   4. karma that is neither accumulated nor done?

It is important to understand what it means to accumulate  karma.  You  need
to think about this.

Under what conditions is karma  accumulated?   In  order  for  karma  to  be
accumulated: (1) the action has to be done in a powerful way by  putting  in
strong effort and (2) the action has to last for some time.

If the action is not forcefully done and is  done  for  only  a  very  short
period of time, that karma is not accumulated. In order  for  an  action  to
fully ripen, i.e., for the result of that action to  materialise,  one  must
first accumulate the karma for  that  to  happen.  When  the  karma  is  not
accumulated, it will not ripen.

We have to move our minds in the direction of  virtue.  There  are  so  many
kinds of virtue  that  one  can  engage  in.  Let  us  take  as  an  example
generating faith in the Buddha. In order for us  to  accumulate  the  strong
karma of having faith in the Buddha, our faith must be strong and  last  for
a long time. When we are able to generate that kind of strong  and  enduring
faith in the Buddha, we accumulate the karma.

When this karma is accumulated, strong positive imprints  are  left  in  the
mental continuum and we will  experience  the  fruitional  effects  and  the
positive results of that action from life to  life.  When  we  are  able  to
accumulate the virtuous karma  that  leaves  such  strong  imprints  on  the
mental continuum, we will  definitely  experience  the  causally  concordant
effects of that action. Causally concordant effects  can  be  divided  into:
(1) causally concordant experiential effects  and  (2)  causally  concordant
behavioural  effects.  We  will  definitely  be  able  to  experience  those
effects.

In order to accumulate this strong karma, we first must have  faith  in  the
Buddha. Not just any faith but a faith that is strong and  enduring  without
which karma will not be accumulated.

How does such strong and enduring faith arise? Such faith in the Buddha  can
only arise on the basis of knowing who the  Buddha  is.  It  arises  on  the
basis of knowing in your heart that the enlightenment of the Buddha  exists,
that it is not some fairy tale. With such knowledge, you will  generate  the
strong enduring faith that enables you to accumulate strong virtuous  karma.


Knowing who the Buddha really is, what a buddha is,  that  buddhahood  is  a
possibility and so forth – all this must be preceded  by  the  understanding
and knowledge that come from learning the Dharma. You can see from this  why
it is important to study, learn, and reflect on the Dharma. It is  important
that we understand this; otherwise it is possible that  we  may  think  that
these studies are only an intellectual exercise. This is not the case.  This
is something we have to think about for ourselves.

What does it mean to accumulate karma? How is karma accumulated? We have  to
think about this especially in relation to virtue because  we  do  not  only
want to do virtuous actions but we also want to accumulate  virtuous  karma.
In order for that karma to  ripen  in  the  future  and  to  experience  the
positive results of the virtuous actions that we had been  engaging  in,  we
have to think about the best way to accumulate virtuous karma.

In order for karma to be accumulated, the  attitude  underlying  the  action
has to be forceful, strong, and powerful. Furthermore, it  should  not  only
be present for a short time but it has to be long-lasting. Do  we  have  the
means to do that? We  need  to  think  about  this  and  then  put  it  into
practice.

In the example of having faith in  the  Buddha,  if  our  faith  is  neither
strong nor long-lasting, it is questionable whether we accumulate the  karma
of having faith in the Buddha. Even if we did accumulate the  karma  but  it
is not strong, forceful, and long-lasting, we have to question  whether  the
effects of that action will actually arise in the future or not.

Khen Rinpoche: I have a good example for you. When you must  wake  up  at  5
o’clock in the morning, before you go  to  bed  you  should  have  a  strong
thought, “I have to wake up at 5 o’clock.” Then somehow you  will  wake  up.
You may even wake up before  that  time.  This  is  my  own  experience.  My
problem is that I then wake up at 3 o’clock, I wake up at 4 o’clock!
But this shows that with a strong mind to wake up,  i.e.,  before  going  to
bed, you think, “I need to wake up,” that leaves a strong  imprint  in  your
mind. You may fall asleep very soundly for two to three  hours  but  somehow
because of the imprint, it pushes you to wake up in  time.  When  you  don’t
think seriously, “I have to wake up at 5 o’clock tomorrow,”  you  will  fall
asleep till 6 or 7 o’clock and you won’t wake up at 5 o’clock.

This is an example of how your way  of  thinking  leaves  imprints  in  your
mind. I put it in this way for easier understanding.

Sleep is like death. When you die in this life and go on to the  next  life,
waking up is like the next life. When your imprints  are  strong,  when  you
die and go on to the next life, you can wake up with  the  understanding  of
the importance of leading a virtuous life. When you  don’t  know  this,  you
would have spent this life sleeping and the next life sleeping as well.

With regard to placing strong imprints on  our  mental  continuum,  imprints
that can actually move on to the next life, we have to think about  what  we
can do about this. When we don’t put strong imprints in our  mind,  imprints
that will move on to the next life and manifest  themselves,  things  become
quite difficult.

In order to leave strong imprints in  our  mental  continuum,  the  virtuous
actions that we engage in have to be strong and long-lasting.  As  we  carry
on with our life, we really have  to  examine  whether  we  are  engaged  in
leaving strong imprints on our  mental  continuum.  Whenever  we  engage  in
virtue, we should ensure that those virtuous actions are  strong  and  long-
lasting. When we do that, then the imprints will move  on  with  us  to  our
future lives and we would have made our present life meaningful.

When the  text  discussed  the  four  permutations  between  karma  that  is
accumulated and karma that  is  done,  the  example  of  the  non-virtue  of
killing is used. We simply substitute that example with a  virtuous  action.
The process is the same. In relation to virtue, it  becomes  very  important
for us to understand when karma is accumulated and how  it  is  accumulated.
We have to  understand  these  essential  points  and  then  put  them  into
practice.

In the Lamrim Chenmo,  the  faults  of  the  afflictions  are  described  as
follows:

      When an affliction arises, at first it completely afflicts your  mind,
      causing you to err with regard to what you are observing,  reinforcing
      your latent proclivities, and causing the same sort of  affliction  to
      recur. It may harm you, others, or both; it leads to misdeeds in  this
      life, in future lives, or in both. It creates experiences of pain  and
      anguish, as well as the sufferings of birth, and the  like.  It  takes
      you far from nirvana, your virtue is destroyed and your resources  are
      depleted. In society you feel apprehensive,  joyless,  and  devoid  of
      confidence, while  your  notoriety  spreads  in  all  directions,  and
      excellent persons such as teachers and protectors rebuke you. You  die
      with regret, your aims unfulfilled, and after  death  you  are  reborn
      into a miserable realm (Page 301).

In the root text, the faults of  the  afflictions  are  highlighted  in  the
quotations from the Ornament of the Sutras  and  Engaging  in  [Bodhisattva]
Behaviour.


    2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-1B3 The faults of the mental afflictions


         A  How to see the mental afflictions as enemies because of their
         great shortcomings

Third: In Ornament of the Sutras it says:

         The mental afflictions destroy oneself,  destroy  sentient  beings,
         and destroy ethical discipline.
         Once that is debased, you become inferior in gain and guardians and
         teachers revile you.
         There will be nasty disputes, you take rebirth elsewhere in  unfree
         states.
         Through the  debasement  of  what  you’ve  attained  or  not  [yet]
         attained   there   is   great   mental   suffering   (Page    118).


The Ornament for the Sutras says that because  of  afflictions,  we  destroy
ourselves, others are also harmed and destroyed, and  we  also  destroy  our
ethical discipline. Because of this, we will  be  reborn  in  a  leisureless
condition and whatever good qualities we may have will degenerate.  We  will
be hindered and obstructed from gaining new qualities.

And in Engaging in [Bodhisattva] Behaviour:

         Enemies such as hatred and craving,
         Do not have arms or legs nor other [limbs],
         They have no valour either, so why is it
         That they have reduced me to servitude? (Pages 118 – 119)

This verse is saying that we are slaves  of  our  afflictions.  Due  to  the
afflictions we have lost our independence as we are under their control.

         While residing in my mind they keep
         Inflicting harm on me who lets them be[/is satisfied].
         But the patience that’s not angry at them
         Is unsuitable patience – the object [/ground] of blame.


         Even if the gods and demigods
         Were all to rise as enemies [against me],
         They would not be able to lead or put me
         Into the fires of the Incessant Hell.


         However, the mental afflictions, these powerful foes,
         Within a single moment they throw me in there,
         Where whatever meets with it, even Mount Meru,
         [Is burnt so that] nothing is left - not even ashes (Page 119).


Our afflictions lead us to so much suffering. No  matter  how  powerful  our
external enemies may be, they can never make us go to the  hell  realms  but
our afflictions can do this. The afflictions enslave us, making  us  totally
lose our independence. The afflictions throw us into the  lower  realms  and
the miserable states of existence. Since that is the case, we must  work  at
destroying the afflictions. This is the essential advice.

         Compared to those foes of mine, the mental afflictions,
         Which have been with me without beginning nor end
         None of all the other enemies
         Would be able to last for such a long time (Page 119)[/while].

This verse is saying that the enemy, our afflictions, have been  around  for
a very long time.

         If everyone benefits you and makes you happy,
         If you had acted with reverence and in agreement –
         In case you have attended to mental afflictions,
         They inflict suffering and harm on you in return (Page 119).

The afflictions have been harming  us  since  time  without  beginning.  The
verse is saying that we should not befriend the  afflictions.  The  more  we
become friends with the afflictions, the more  harm  we  will  receive  from
them. Because the afflictions have been with us for a very long time,  i.e.,
since time without beginning, therefore the afflictions are not going to  be
destroyed just by cultivating their antidotes for a short  period  of  time.
In order to destroy the afflictions we have to work at the antidotes  for  a
long time. The verse is saying that not only  should  we  not  befriend  the
afflictions but rather we should destroy them.  The  more  we  are  able  to
subdue the afflictions, the closer we will be to a state of happiness.

You should reflect on the shortcomings stated here (Page 119)

We  may  wonder:  “Why  do  we  have  to  think  about  the  faults  of  the
afflictions? Why do we have to know the characteristics and  definitions  of
all the afflictions? Why do we need to do this?” The answers  are  given  in
the text.

         B  Relating the cultivation of antidotes to the words of former
         master saints [?*][/eminent former masters]

Gonpapo said: “In order to abandon [/For giving up] the  mental  afflictions
it is necessary to know their  shortcomings,  their  characteristics,  their
antidotes, and the causes for their arising. Once you have understood  their
shortcomings, you should see them as drawbacks, apprehend them  as  enemies.
If you do not understand their shortcomings, you will  not  understand  them
to be[/as][?] enemies. Therefore you [should] consider them along the  lines
of [/in  accordance  with]  statements  from  Ornament  of  the  Sutras  and
Engaging  in  [Bodhisattva]  Behaviour.”  And:  “In  order   to   know   the
characteristics [/characteristics] of the  mental  afflictions,  you  should
also study abhidharma, at least the Differentiation of the Five  Aggregates.
Once you have got acquainted with the root and  secondary  afflictions,  you
will identify attachment, hatred, and so forth, whatever it is, as  soon  as
they arise in  your  continuum  thinking  “This  is  that.  Oh  no!  It  has
arisen,[/emerged/come  into  being]”  and  you   will   fight   the   mental
afflictions.” That kind of understanding is necessary (Page 119).

I think a number of  you  are  wondering  why  we  need  such  an  elaborate
discussion about the  afflictions:  their  definitions,  divisions,  and  so
forth. The purpose of doing this is because by knowing the  afflictions,  we
will know hostility, attachment, ignorance, pride, doubt, and the  afflicted
views and the terminology. By learning this, we can be very precise when  it
comes to identifying the afflictions in the mind.  We  will  also  know  the
antidotes  that  can  counteract  those  afflictions.  That  is  why  it  is
important for us to learn Buddhist philosophy such as this  presentation  on
the afflictions.

The purpose of extensively studying the afflictions in detail is to be  very
clear with regard to the divisions of the  afflictions  so  that  when  they
arise in our mind we can eliminate them, “This is that. Now it  has  arisen.
This is what I need to do.” The whole point is to have the tools to be  able
to identify them correctly and to do something about them. We need  to  deal
with the afflictions because they cause us suffering. In  order  for  us  to
deal with suffering, we have to deal with its causes, i.e., the  afflictions
that bring about suffering.

To deal with the afflictions, we have to know  them  well  so  that  we  can
identify them correctly. It is for this reason that  people  engage  in  the
extensive study of Buddhist philosophy. It is important that you  understand
the reason why people engage in such studies. People often  wonder  what  is
the point of studying all these topics. They  think  there  is  no  need  to
study them at all.

We have been discussing the afflictions for a fair bit. What is the  context
of our discussion? It is the four noble truths, in particular, true  origins
or the truth of the origins of suffering. Next is how karma is  accumulated.



    2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-2        How karma is accumulated by [the mental
    afflictions]

         A  Identifying the karma that is [/will be] accumulated
         B  How [karma] is accumulated

The second one has two points: identifying the  karma  that  is  [/will  be]
accumulated, and how it is accumulated.

    2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-2A  Identifying the karma that is [/will be] accumulated

         1  Intending action
         2  Intended action

    2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-2A1 Intending action

First: Intending action - the mental factor that makes its concomitant  mind
move and urges it towards objects - is action of mind.

    2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-2A2  Intended action

         A  The actions that have actually been intended
         B  Its essence
         C  Identifying three kinds of karma

         A  The actions that have actually been intended

First: The actions of body and speech that are motivated by  that  intention
…(Pages 119 – 120).

Karma that is intended action is “the actions of body and  speech  that  are
motivated by that intention.”

There are four Buddhist philosophical systems or  tenets.  The  Vaibhashikas
(or proponents of the Great Exposition School) consider intended  action  to
be form of which there are two types:
   • the revelatory (or perceptible) form. An example: by  looking  at  the
     mannerisms of a person, one can infer whether the person is  upset  or
     angry.
   • the non-revelatory (or imperceptible) form. An example:  by looking at
     the mannerisms of an individual, one cannot tell what  his  intentions
     are.

With reference to the ten  non-virtuous  actions,  the  seven  physical  and
verbal non-virtues are both paths of action  and  actions  while  the  three
mental non-virtues are paths of action.

For a physical and verbal action, during the motivational  phase,  there  is
an intention. That intention, the mental factor that moves the mind  towards
its object, is the karma that is intention. This intention is  expressed  in
the form of either a physical or verbal action. The action that  is  carried
out takes on a form. This is the karma that is the intended action.

According to the Vaibhashikas:
   • the karma that is intention is a mental factor
   • the karma that is the intended action is a form

However the other tenets - the Sutra School, the Mind Only  School  and  the
Middle Way Schools (including the Consequence Middle Way  School)  –  assert
that it is incorrect to posit that the karma that is the intended action  to
be a form. For them karma that is the intended action has to be  posited  as
a mental factor also. For the proponents of the Sutra School and the  tenets
above that, they assert that at the time when the physical or verbal  action
is being carried out, there is a mental factor of intention. For them,  they
consider this mental factor at that time when the physical or verbal  action
is carried out to be the karma that is the intended  action.  Therefore  the
Sutra School, the Mind Only School, and the Middle Way Schools consider  the
karma that is the intended action to be a mental factor.

         B  Their essence

… are [/were]divided into the revelatory and non-revelatory and  posited  as
only having form by the Vaibhashikas[?*bh]. Master Vasubandhu  refutes  that
and maintains that they  are  the  intentions  that  operate  together  with
[/accompanying] the  revelatory  physical  and  verbal  actions  whereby  he
explains both actions to be intentions (Page 120).

As explained in the Lamrim Chenmo:

      The Vaibhasikas divide physical and verbal karma into two  types,  the
      perceptible and the imperceptible, and hold  that  both  types  always
      have form. Vasubandhu refutes this, asserting that physical and verbal
      karma are intentions that work along  with  perceptible  physical  and
      verbal behavior; thus, both forms of karma  [intention  and  intended]
      are actually intentions (Page 303).

An illustration of karma that is intention: at the motivational phase  of  a
physical or verbal action, there is a mental  factor  that  moves  the  mind
towards its  object.  Therefore  karma  that  is  intention  exists  at  the
motivational phase of a physical or verbal action.

Let us say you then engage in a physical or verbal action such  as  killing.
At the time of carrying out the action of killing, that action manifests  in
a particular manner:
   • For some, they consider the physical act of killing to  be  the  karma
     that is the intended action that is a form.
   • However there are others who assert, “No, karma that is  the  intended
     action cannot be a form.” For them, the karma  that  is  the  intended
     action is a mental factor of intention present  at  the  time  of  the
     actual performance of the act of killing that moves the  mind  towards
     its object.

We have to get used to these  technical  terms.  We  can  talk  about  their
meaning and give examples without using such terms. One of  the  reasons  we
use  these  technical  terms  is  to  prepare  for  the  study  of  Buddhist
philosophy. When you look at the Buddhist  philosophical  texts,  the  words
are very precise. That is why the terms are very specific. These  are  terms
that are used in the texts.

If we don’t get used to these terms now, in the future we may face  problems
when we study the Buddhist philosophical texts. It is quite  challenging  to
learn these technical terms.  It is a matter of getting used to  them.  When
you read them once or twice, after a while, you will pick  them  up.  As  we
are seeing these terms for the first time, it is not realistic to expect  to
understand them correctly after hearing them for the  first  time.  This  is
not going to happen to anyone. When you get discouraged because you did  not
understand them after  hearing  them  for  the  first  time,  this  kind  of
expectation is not right.

We have to become more  familiar  with  and  accustomed  to  some  of  these
technical terms. They are difficult. We have to accustom  ourselves  to  and
remember these terms because the different  teachings  and  different  texts
are linked to one another. With regard to the two kinds of  karma,  we  need
to know what they are.

We have to understand that  the  current  discussion  of  karma  is  in  the
context of the second  noble  truth,  the  true  origins  of  suffering.  In
relation to the karma that projects rebirth into cyclic existence, there  is
then a discussion of the three types of karma: virtuous,  non-virtuous,  and
ethically neutral. In general these are the three types of karma.

When we talk about the projecting karma  that  throws  us  into  rebirth  in
cyclic existence, there is meritorious, non-meritorious, and  immovable  (or
invariable) karma.


         C  Identifying three kinds of action [?*Karma or Handlung?]

In  this  regard   non-virtuous   actions   are   non-meritorious   actions.
Meritorious actions are virtuous  actions  included  in  the  level  of  the
desire realm. {142} Immovable [?] actions are contaminated virtuous  actions
included in the levels of the form and formless realms (Page 120).

The Lamrim Chenmo explains:

      Why is it called immovable (or invariable) karma? In the desire realm,
      karma that should bear fruit while you are a deity  may  instead  bear
      fruit while you are a human, an animal, or a hungry ghost;  thus,  its
      effect is variable. In the higher [deities'] realms, karma that should
      bear fruit at a certain level does not mature  at  levels  other  than
      that; thus, it is invariable. Thus, the Treasury of Knowledge:


           Why? Because the fruition of karma
           On these levels is not variable (Page 304).

What gives rise to the effects of karma is feeling. We desire  the  pleasant
sensations and feelings that arise from contact  with  the  object;  certain
pleasant forms, pleasant sounds, and so forth.  Due  to  our  attachment  to
these pleasant sensations, we enjoy  the  object  and  accumulate  the  non-
meritorious karma that throws us into the miserable realms.

There are individuals who  desire  rebirth  as  a  human  being  or  a  god.
Motivated by this desire, they accumulate the  karma  that  causes  them  to
have such a rebirth. The karma that they accumulate  is  called  meritorious
karma. Due to accumulating meritorious karma,  they  will  be  reborn  as  a
human or a desire realm god.

There are also individuals who are not  so  inclined  towards  the  pleasant
sensations and feelings that  arise  due  to  enjoying  the  five  desirable
external objects.  Rather they are more interested  in  experiencing  mental
pleasant  feelings,  especially  the  pleasant  feelings   associated   with
concentration. Motivated by that desire they  engage  in  the  actions  that
accumulate the karma that will cause them to  be  reborn  in  the  form  and
formless realms. The karma  they  accumulate  is  called  invariable  karma.
These individuals are attached to the pleasant sensations and feelings  that
arise from concentration. They accumulate the  projecting  karma  that  will
cause them to be reborn in the first, second, or third concentrations.

There are also individuals who go beyond and transcend the  desire  for  the
bliss arising from concentration. They become attached  to  the  feeling  of
equanimity instead of being attached  to  the  blissful  sensations  arising
from concentration. Such individuals accumulate the karma to  be  reborn  in
the fourth concentration of the form realm. They also create the  projecting
karma to be reborn in the formless realm.

The text then goes on to discuss the types of persons who accumulate  karma.



    2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-2B  How [karma] [?*/karma- compare headings] is
    accumulated

         1  Explaining who accumulates the karma to be thrown [into a
         rebirth] within cyclic existence
         2  How [karma] is accumulated by that [person]

         1  Explaining who accumulates the karma to be thrown [into a
         rebirth] within cyclic existence

Second: Once you have directly  realized  selflessness,  you  can  still  be
reborn in cyclic existence under the power of karma and mental  afflictions,
however, you do not newly accumulate any throwing  karma.  Therefore,  those
who accumulate the karma  to  be  thrown  [into  a  rebirth]  within  cyclic
existence are all ordinary beings up to and including  those  [dwelling]  on
the  great  [level  of]   highest  [mundane]  qualities  on   the   Mahayana
[?*missing] path of preparation (Page 120).

Those who have  the  direct  realisation  of  emptiness  do  not  accumulate
projecting karma. They are called aryas or superior beings. Those  who  have
not perceived emptiness  directly  are  called  ordinary  beings.  Therefore
aryas or superior beings do not accumulate projecting karma.  Only  ordinary
beings  accumulate  projecting  karma.  Who  accumulates  projecting  karma?
Ordinary beings.


         2  How [karma] is accumulated by that [person]

If, with that basis, you create non-virtuous actions by means of  the  three
doors, for instance killing, you will accumulate non-meritorious  karma.  If
you create virtuous actions, such  as  giving  gifts  and  guarding  ethical
discipline, you will accumulate meritorious  karma.  If  you  cultivate  the
calm abiding and so forth included in the levels of the  concentrations  and
the formless realm you will accumulate immovable karma (Page 120).

In the next class we will cover  how  one  dies  and  is  reborn  in  cyclic
existence. Please read up on this.

                                *************

Exam date: Sunday, 3 June 2012 at 1.30pm. Classes will continue after  Vesak
Day. There will be no class on Thursday, 31 May 2012. What  will  the  exams
cover? Everything covered up to the last class.

Khen Rinpoche: The exam will be easy. It will not be so difficult  but  that
doesn’t mean you don’t need to study now.





Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng

Edited by Cecilia Tsong

