Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L33 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.514876
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


   Lesson No: 33                  Date: 9th February 2012


In the space in front of you visualise Manjushri in  the  nature  of  light.
With your mind abiding in that visualisation, try to  develop  some  clarity
and stability. Then visualise:
1. Presenting all kinds of offerings to Manjushri
2. Making requesting prayers to him to be able to develop wisdom
3. Then visualise that you receive light  rays  and  nectar  from  Manjushri
   purifying you of your ignorance and then developing your wisdom.

It is extremely important:
1. To make aspirational prayers continuously to the special deity  Manjushri


2. To always set a good motivation
3. To dedicate your merit at the end
These three things are very important. We should do them all the time.   You
have to keep this in mind.

In our context we are trying to learn the Buddha’s teachings. Along the  way
we are bound to meet with obstacles.  Before  these  obstacles  come  it  is
important to avert them. So these three things are very important:
1. Making single-pointed requests
2. Always setting a good motivation
3. Dedicating the merit for success

When we do not do these three things continuously, there  is  a  possibility
of obstacles arising and obstructing our  studies.  In  the  course  of  our
studies learning the teachings of the Buddha, we will meet  with  challenges
and either external or  internal  obstacles.  The  main  obstacles  are  the
internal obstacles that come from within us. The biggest internal  obstacles
are:
   • coming under the control of laziness and
   • losing the interest in learning the Dharma

Initially you may have some interest to learn the Buddhadharma  but  somehow
along the way obstacles may arise and even that  little  interest  is  gone.
Therefore it is very important to avert the obstacles before they arise.

At the practical level, the whole point of generating  a  strong  motivation
and dedicating the  merit  is  to  help  you  develop  and  strengthen  your
determination to learn. When we talk about setting  the  motivation,  it  is
not just about reciting some prayers. Your motivation has to  be  heartfelt.
You have to think, “Yes, this is what I want to do.  This  is  what  I  will
do.” It makes a difference when your heart is moved. So these  are  some  of
the things that you need to do regularly.

Question: Regarding white karma, the fact that it is  called  karma,  is  it
still in the nature of suffering? If that is so, how  then  do  we  ordinary
human beings go about achieving pure actions that are not in the  nature  of
suffering?

Answer: You have to think about the meaning of karma  and  not  the  English
word, “action” (for karma). Action  or  karma  is  not  necessarily  in  the
nature of suffering. What is karma? It is essentially a mental  factor  that
is concomitant with a main mind, i.e., it accompanies a main mind.  What  it
does is that it directs that main mind towards a particular object. In  that
sense karma is not necessarily in the nature of suffering.

But at this particular point in the Lam-Rim, we are  talking  about  actions
that are motivated by the afflictions. These actions can be either  virtuous
or non-virtuous. The discussion here is that the white virtuous actions  are
motivated by the afflictions. We are talking about the karma that causes  us
to circle in samsara, the karma that projects or throws  us  either  into  a
good or miserable rebirth in samsara.  Anyway,  actions  that  cause  us  to
circle in cyclic existence are motivated by the afflictions.

You have to keep in mind that  our  discussion  of  karma  here  is  in  the
context of the practices associated with a person of small capacity.

Question: On page 238 of the Lamrim Chenmo, it says, “The fruitional  effect
is that you are born as a human, a deity of the desire realm, or a deity  in
one of the two upper  realms  through  small,  medium,  and  great  virtuous
actions, respectively.” When we do small virtuous actions, we  are  born  in
the human realm and if we do medium and great virtuous actions, we are  born
as deities of the desire realm. Does that mean  that  if  we  do  medium  or
great virtuous actions,  there  is  a  possibility  that  we  won’t  have  a
precious human rebirth?

Answer: Here we are talking about  the  kind  of  rebirths  that  are  found
within cyclic existence. When you look at the three supposedly  good  realms
of higher rebirth - the human realm, the gods in the desire realm,  and  the
gods in the upper realms - the happiness experienced  by  the  gods  in  the
desire realm is definitely much more than that experienced by human  beings.
The happiness experienced by the gods in the form  and  formless  realms  is
even  more  blissful  that  that,  i.e.,  even  better  than  the  happiness
experienced by the gods in the desire realm. Since there is a difference  in
the level of  resultant  happiness  that  they  experience  while  still  in
samsara, then there must be a difference in the cause for such happiness.

It is said here that by doing great virtuous actions, one will be reborn  as
a god either in the form  or  formless  realms.  But  doing  great  virtuous
actions alone will not lead you to such a rebirth. You  definitely  need  to
achieve calm-abiding and one of the concentrations that lead  to  a  rebirth
as a god in the form or formless realms. Otherwise, without having  achieved
calm-abiding and one  of  the  concentrations,  even  if  you  create  great
virtuous actions, you will not be reborn there.

Having said that, it does not mean that you will necessarily be reborn as  a
god in the form or formless  realms  even  after  you  have  achieved  calm-
abiding and one of  the  concentrations.  Even  if  you  have  achieved  the
relevant concentration, I guess that due to your own prayers  you  need  not
take rebirth as one of those gods.

The order that is presented in the text is a  human  being,  a  god  in  the
desire realm, and a god in the form or formless realm. Perhaps  that  is  in
terms of the happiness that is experienced.

However, if you were to look at these three rebirths  from  the  perspective
of them being suitable bases for generating  the  path  in  the  mind,  then
amongst the three, the best basis is a human rebirth followed by rebirth  as
a god in the desire realm and then rebirth as a god in the form or  formless
realm. So from the perspective of generating  the  path  in  the  mind,  the
order is reverse.

I am not exactly sure but if you analyse and think  about  it,  perhaps  one
can say that a great virtuous action can lead one to be reborn  as  a  human
being, considering that being a human being is the best basis for  producing
the path in the mind.

                             *******************


    2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2C  Indication of other classifications of actions
    [/karma]

         1  The classification of throwing and completing ones [/actions]
         2  The classification of what will definitely be experienced and
         what will not [?*I'm a bit confused here: is this Je's “myong bar
         nges...” or Trijang's header “nges ma nges kyi dbye ba”?]

    2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2C1 The classification of throwing and completing ones
    [/actions]

         1  [Presentation of the first classification]

The third one has two points the first of which  is  the  classification  of
throwing and completing [actions].
      Throwing [?*what's wrong with "throwing"?] actions  for  [rebirth  in]
the happy  migrations  are  virtuous  [actions]  and  throwing  actions  for
[rebirth in] the bad migrations are non-virtuous [actions].
      The  completing  ones  are  uncertain,  however,  even  in  the  happy
migrations, incomplete limbs, minor body  parts  or  sense  powers,  hideous
looks, a short life-span, many illnesses, poverty, and so  forth  [/poverty]
are caused by non-virtue.  Also  for  animals  and  hungry  ghosts,  perfect
prosperity is caused by virtue.

         2  The four possible combinations of virtuous and non-virtuous
         throwing and completing actions [/The four alternative
         classifications of wholesome and unwholesome throwing and
         completing actions]

There are thus four alternatives:
      - projected by  a  virtuous  throwing  [action]  and  completed  by  a
virtuous or a non-virtuous completing [action],
      - projected by a non-virtuous throwing [action] and completed by  non-
virtuous  or  a  virtuous  completing  [action]  (Page  93).  [?*Alle   vier
Kombinationen sind möglich?- "mu": Fälle or Kombinationen?]

There are different ways of classifying throwing (or projecting)  karma  and
completing karma.

Projecting karma can either be virtuous or non-virtuous:
1. Virtuous projecting karma throws  one  into  a  good  rebirth  in  cyclic
   existence.
2. Non-virtuous projecting karma throws one into a miserable rebirth in  the
   lower realms.

Even though we may be reborn as a human being, we may experience  all  kinds
of problems such as having incomplete faculties, an  unpleasant  appearance,
a short lifespan, poverty, and many different kinds  of  sicknesses.  It  is
virtuous projecting karma that causes us to have a good rebirth as  a  human
being but our whole life, with all  its  problems,  suffering,  poverty  and
sicknesses, is determined by completing karma. These  difficulties  are  the
result of non-virtuous completing karma.

For example,  being  born  as  an  animal  is  the  result  of  non-virtuous
projecting karma that has led to such a rebirth in  the  lower  realms,  but
there are animals that live quite a good life. That  life  is  completed  by
virtuous completing karma.

Khen Rinpoche: I heard on the news that some  pets  are  richer  than  their
owners. There was one report that when the owner passed away,  he  left  all
his money, many millions of dollars, in the dog’s name. I am  not  sure  how
the dog is going to use the money!

There are four possibilities between projecting karma and completing karma:
1. Virtuous projecting karma and non-virtuous completing karma
2. Non-virtuous projecting karma and virtuous completing karma
3. Virtuous projecting karma and virtuous completing karma
4. Non-virtuous projecting karma and non-virtuous completing karma

If you think about it, you should be able to figure out  examples  for  each
of these possibilities.

    2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2C2 The classification of what will definitely be
    experienced and what will not [/The classification of what is definite
    and what is not (Trijang)]

         3  [Presentation of the second classification]

With respect to what will definitely be experienced and what will not,  what
will definitely be experienced is  what  has  been  done  intentionally  and
accumulated. What will not definitely be experienced is what has [not]  been
done intentionally but not accumulated[?*missing in German].

         4  Classification of what has been done and [what has been]
         accumulated

The difference between what has been done and what has been accumulated  [is
as follows]. What has been done is  what  has  been  intended  or  what  has
manifested through the body or speech after having been intended.  What  has
been accumulated are actions apart from the ten [exceptions][1]  like  those
done in a dream. What has not been  accumulated  are  the  ten  [exceptions]
such as those done in a dream (Page 93) [?*missing in German].

Another classification of karma is:
1. Karma whose result you will definitely experience
2. Karma whose result you may possibly experience.

Between karma that is done and karma that is  accumulated,  there  are  four
permutations:
1. Karma that is done and accumulated
2. Karma that is not done but is accumulated
3. Karma that is done but that is not accumulated
4. Karma that is neither done nor accumulated

Of these four, (1) the karma that is both done and accumulated and  (2)  the
karma that is not done but that is accumulated are karma whose  results  you
will definitely experience.

(3) For the karma that is done but that is not  accumulated  and  (4)  karma
that is neither done nor accumulated is karma whose results  you  will  only
possibly experience.

Karma that is both done and that is accumulated
Here the preliminaries, the  actual  performance  of  the  action,  and  its
conclusion are complete. These have been covered in the earlier  discussions
of the ten non-virtuous actions.

Karma that is not done but that is accumulated
An example will be when you entertain the thought of killing someone  for  a
long period of time. Due to the force of that thought,  that  very  powerful
wish, you accumulate the karma of killing but the  karma  is  not  done.  In
this case for the karma to be done, you will  actually  have  to  physically
carry out the killing.

Karma that is done but that is not accumulated
Examples of this type of karma is when you kill someone in  your  dream,  or
while you are asleep and dreaming you say something bad about someone.  That
is karma that is done but not accumulated.

Khen Rinpoche: So if you are unhappy with someone, it is  good  to  say  bad
things to them in your dream. You benefit because you  have  done  what  you
wanted to do but no karma is created. So make sure you do that  in  a  dream
but not during the day!

Karma that is neither done nor accumulated
You are supposed to come up with an illustration for this.

This is supposed to be your homework. Can anyone give  me  an  illustration?
Give me an example that is not related to a dream but occurs while  you  are
awake.

In the  earlier  example  of  the  karma  that  is  not  done  but  that  is
accumulated, you  accumulate  the  karma  of  killing  by  entertaining  the
thought of killing for a long time.

Sometimes however you may  have  a  fleeting  thought  of  wanting  to  kill
someone. You recognise that thought and you stop it. The thought goes  away.
You generate regret. That is an action or karma.  Perhaps  this  can  be  an
illustration of the karma that is not done and that is not accumulated.

You should have a rough understanding of what is  karma  that  is  done  and
that is accumulated, and the different permutations between these  two.  You
have to be able to come out with examples of karma  that  is  not  done  but
that is accumulated and karma that is done but that is not accumulated.

When you look at the text, it seems that in order for something to be  karma
that is done, it has to  be  carried  out  either  physically  or  verbally:
whereas this is not necessarily so for karma that is accumulated.

Question from Khen Rinpoche: When you are doing  a  Nyung-Nay,  the  fasting
retreat, on the second day, you make a promise not to drink.  Say you  drink
something on that day because you forgot you are not supposed to drink.   Do
you accumulate karma or not?

Answer  from  student:  That  is  karma  that  is  done  but  that  is   not
accumulated.

Khen Rinpoche: So, it is all right to do so?
If you say that, there are a lot of  people  who  accumulate  all  kinds  of
karma because they are ignorant. They don’t know any better.  Does  it  mean
that  just  because  they  don’t  know,  it  follows  that  they  would  not
accumulate any karma? If that is the case then it  is  better  not  to  know
rather than to know the Buddha’s teachings, right?

There are many things to think about. For people who  create  all  kinds  of
different karma without knowing  what  they  are  doing,  do  they  actually
accumulate karma or not? When people forgot that they are  not  supposed  to
do certain things but they do them, do they accumulate karma or not?
It is not here in the Middle Length Lam-Rim but the Lamrim  Chenmo[2]  gives
some examples.  It seems that they are classified as karma that is done  but
that is not accumulated.

Question: The illustration given of the fourth permutation - karma  that  is
not done and that is not accumulated - was of a fleeting  thought  of  doing
something but not carrying it out. The example I was thinking about  was  of
someone who has never had the thought of killing anybody and  therefore  has
never killed anybody. So he doesn’t  kill  and  he  doesn’t  accumulate  the
karma of killing. I would like to clarify: Does the fourth permutation  have
to be a thought that arises in that person’s mind?

Answer: The illustration given in the text is the act of killing and how  an
act of killing can have four permutations: the act of killing  that  is  (1)
karma that is both done and accumulated, (2) karma  that  is  not  done  but
that is accumulated, (3) karma that is done but  that  is  not  accumulated,
and (4) karma that is neither done nor accumulated. It has to be  karma.  It
cannot be something that is not karma.

Question: What is the Consequence Middle Way School  (CMWS)’s  assertion  of
physical and verbal actions? The tenets root text  mentions  that  the  CMWS
asserts that both physical and verbal actions  have  form.  Does  that  mean
that they are necessarily only form or can they  be  both  form  and  mental
actions?

Answer: Physical and verbal actions are asserted to be  non-revelatory  form
by the Great Exposition School (GES) and CMWS.

Question: So, according to the CMWS, the physical and verbal karma  are  not
mental factors?

Answer: This is something for you to think about: whether  it  is  karma  or
not? According to the CMWS, for physical and verbal actions, there are  both
instances of revelatory form and non-revelatory form:
 • Revelatory form here means that judging from  the  person’s  physical  or
   verbal actions, you can roughly infer his  motivation  so  it  is  a  bit
   coarse.
 • Non-revelatory form means that when you look at the  action,  you  cannot
   tell what the motivation behind it is.

One should analyse whether these two are karma or not. If it is  form,  then
it is necessarily not a mental factor. The question then arises:  if  it  is
karma, is it necessarily a mental factor? That has to be analysed.

Student: In other words,  one  accumulates  karma  not  through  the  mental
factor of intended action because the  karma  that  is  accumulated  is  the
physical or verbal intended action that is the basis of  intended  operation
of the previous motivation.

If that is the case, then that intended operation that is the basis  of  the
prior motivation, at the attitude phase, that is a  mental  factor.  At  the
performance stage when the intended operation is carried out,  that  is  the
result. The action performed  must  necessarily  also  be  a  mental  factor
because its cause was a mental factor.

Khen Rinpoche: If we assert that  karma  is  necessarily  a  mental  factor,
there is karma at the causal motivation phase and karma at the time  of  the
result.

In terms of physical and verbal actions, is there not  a  mental  factor  at
the time when the action is performed? That is  the  mental  factor  at  the
time of the result.

When we assert that karma is necessarily a mental factor that is  the  karma
we are referring to. Karma here does not refer to  the  physical  or  verbal
part of the action. When we say then that  karma  is  necessarily  a  mental
factor, it is not a problem, right?

Student: But the CMWS also asserts that there is physical and  verbal  karma
that is non-revelatory form. It is form but it is not a  mental  factor.  So
then there are two types of karma.

Khen Rinpoche: It basically depends on how we talk about it.  It  is  not  a
problem.

Karma is a mental factor. There is a  mental  factor  at  the  time  of  the
performance of physical and verbal actions. That is karma.  But  the  action
itself, i.e., the  physical  or  verbal  activity,  is  also  called  karma.
However, if you were to analyse this further, this is not actually karma.

Question: The basis of intended operation is a result of a prior  intention.
That is a motivation. If  that  motivation  is  a  virtuous  one,  e.g.,  to
benefit others, would the physical and verbal intended operations  that  are
its results necessarily be  virtuous  accumulated  karma  even  though  this
intended action may be labelled as killing?

Khen Rinpoche: Even if the motivation is good but if we were to,  e.g.,  say
something harsh to someone, that is still non-virtuous.

I think it is non-virtuous. Your  good  motivation  of  killing  someone  is
still killing.

Student: That means that there will be a result that is discordant with  its
cause.

Khen Rinpoche: When you kill someone, it is still  negative  even  when  you
have a good motivation

Student: The intended operation, the performance, is a  karma  that  is  the
basis of intended operation of its cause, the  prior  motivation.  Here  the
cause is a virtuous intention but it  results  in  a  non-virtuous  intended
action. So there can be a result that is discordant with  its  cause,  i.e.,
something virtuous that leads to something non-virtuous.

Ven Gyurme: Basically you are saying that if  the  motivation  is  virtuous,
then the intended operation is necessarily virtuous.

Answer: I think not necessarily so. When we talk about motivation, there  is
the causal motivation and the resultant motivation, i.e., the motivation  at
the time of the result.

Let us  say  then  that  at  the  time  of  the  cause,  the  motivation  is
compassion. You have a good reason for doing it. But  at  the  time  of  the
result, i.e. when you are committing the action, the thought of  killing  is
manifest and that is considered to be a non-virtuous motivation.

Student: So there can be a mixture of the complete path of action  or  there
are two sets of the paths of action …

Khen Rinpoche: The act of killing is one karma. At the time of  the  result,
that is when you are actually killing the  person,  there  is  the  mind  of
killing that is non-virtuous. You have to say the act is non-virtuous.

Student: So one complete path of  action  can  be  both  virtuous  and  non-
virtuous …

Khen Rinpoche: Killing is only a negative action. There is nothing  virtuous
about killing. Beginning part (the motivation) is virtuous  but  later  part
(the act of killing) becomes negative so the karma becomes negative.

                                 ***********
The next section is quite straightforward.  You  should  read  it.  I  don’t
think it is difficult. It talks  about  the  eight  special  characteristics
that one can have as a human being.  After  that,  there  is  the  topic  of
purification, purifying negative karma through applying  the  four  opponent
powers.

Summary
   • We looked at the difference between projecting  karma  and  completing
     karma.
   • We also looked at the difference between karma that is done and  karma
     that is accumulated and the different permutations between them.
What you have to do is to put in the effort to get a  clearer  idea  of  our
discussion today. You should do it by reading and engaging in discussions.

There is a discussion in the Lamrim Chenmo (Page 240)[3] that is not in  the
Middle Length Lam-Rim regarding whether a single action  projects  a  single
rebirth or many  rebirths.   There  are  different  assertions  between  the
Treasury of Knowledge and the Compendium of Knowledge. For those of you  who
have the Lamrim Chenmo and if you are interested, you should look at that.





Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng
Edited by Cecilia Tsong
Checked by Shirley Soh


-----------------------
[1] The ten exceptions are set out in Je Tsongkhapa's Great Treatise of  the
Stages of the Path: Actions carried out (1) in  a  dream,  (2)  unknowingly,
(3) unconsciously, (4) without intensity or long duration,  (5)  mistakenly,
(6) forgetfully, (7) without meaning to,  (8)  actions  that  are  naturally
neutral, (9)  that  have  been  purified  through  regret  or  (10)  through
antidotes (Note 87, Page 330).

[2] “The Compendium of Determinations …not intentionally done nor are there
any that you are forced by another to commit.” Page 21, Vol. 1, The Great
Treatise on the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment by Tsong-kha-pa
(hereinafter referred to as the Lamrim Chenmo).
[3] “The Treasury of Knowledge explains … a succession of lifetimes.” Page
240, Lamrim Chenmo.

