Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L51 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.590768
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


   Lesson No: 51                      Date: 19th April 2012


Let us review what we have covered so  far.  Of  the  two  instructions  for
developing the spirit of enlightenment or bodhicitta  –  (1)  the  sevenfold
cause and effect instructions and (2) the instructions  on  exchanging  self
and others – we have started with the first one,  the  sevenfold  cause  and
effect instructions where there is:
   • the instruction to recognise all sentient beings as  having  been  our
     mothers
   • on that basis, we recollect their kindness
   • we then develop the wish to repay their kindness

The purpose of reflecting on these three instructions is  to  enable  us  to
see every living being as attractive so that we will be able  to  feel  that
they are precious and that they matter to us.  When  you  are  able  to  see
everyone as precious and very attractive and pleasant, you will be  able  to
develop the love that arises through the force of such attraction. You  will
then be able to develop great compassion.

We were discussing, in this context, how great compassion  is  important  in
the beginning, in the middle, and at the end.

In the sevenfold cause and effect instructions, these four  reflections  are
the causes for generating great compassion:
1. how all sentient beings have been our mothers
2. remembering their kindness
3. developing the wish to repay their kindness
4. developing the love that sees all sentient beings as  very  pleasant  and
   precious

In the last three instructions, these two (6, 7) are the  effects  of  great
compassion:
5. Generating great compassion
6. Wholehearted resolve
7. Actual spirit of enlightenment/ bodhicitta


    2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1B2 The manner in which the extraordinary attitude [?]
    and the generation of the mind [of enlightenment] are effects

         A  Doubt
         B  Response

    2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1B2A           Doubt

Second: It should really be sufficient, if, compassion having arisen due  to
such  a  gradual  training  of  the  mind,  the  wish   arises   to   attain
enlightenment  for  the  welfare  of  all  sentient  beings.  Why   is   the
extraordinary attitude inserted between them?

    2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1B2B           Response

         1  Although there is immeasurable compassion, there may not be [/is
         not]the extraordinary attitude that takes responsibility

Although  Hearers  and  Solitary  Realizers  also  have   the   immeasurable
compassion and the love that think, “If only sentient beings  were  to  meet
with happiness and  if  only  they  were  free  [/rid]fromfrom  suffering!,”
still, those who are not Mahayanists  do  not  take  the  responsibility  to
accomplish  happiness  for  all  sentient  beings  and  to  eliminate  their
suffering.  Therefore  it  is  necessary  to  generate   the   extraordinary
attitude, an attitude of those with courageous [/brave] hearts. You come  to
understand this [?] from a quotation  of  the  Sagaramatipariphriccha  Sutra
[/Sutra Requested by Sagaramati]  in  the  commentary  on  the  Uttaratantra
(Page 139).

(Khen Rinpoche checks with the class if they had read the text  and  whether
they understood the response to the qualm that was raised.)

First you must get the qualm. The qualm is: once great compassion arises  in
someone’s mind, how would that person feel? When that person sees  suffering
sentient beings, he would want to free  those  sentient  beings  from  their
suffering. As a result of that wish, logically  he  would  seek  to  achieve
enlightenment in order to be able  to  actualise  his  wish.  Therefore  the
wholehearted resolve is unnecessary. You can  have  the  sixfold  cause  and
effect instructions rather than the sevenfold instructions.

Khen Rinpoche: It will be faster as there is one less instruction!

In general, if you take the thought wishing others to be  happy  and  to  be
free from suffering to be immeasurable love and immeasurable compassion  and
taking the latter to be the same  as  great  compassion,  even  the  hearers
(sravakas)  and  the  solitary  realisers   (pratyekabuddhas)   have   these
thoughts.

But  for  a  Mahayana  practitioner,  simply  having  great  compassion   is
insufficient. On top  of  having  the  wish  for  others  to  be  free  from
suffering, you must have the determination to act on it by  yourself  alone,
i.e., you need wholehearted resolve.

Therefore the response to the qualm is this: in order to enter the ranks  of
the Mahayanist, you need wholehearted resolve that enables  you  to  develop
bodhicitta.


Having great compassion alone does not enable you  to  become  a  Mahayanist
because even the Hinayanists, i.e., the hearers and the solitary  realisers,
have great compassion. I don’t think there is a  problem  explaining  it  in
this way, that is, saying that great  compassion  is  also  present  in  the
minds of the hearers and solitary realisers.  Why?   Because,  assuming  the
responsibility of freeing others from suffering does not occur in the  minds
of the hearers and the solitary realisers.

The essence of the answer is this: just having great compassion  alone  does
not enable one to develop  the  spirit  of  enlightenment,  bodhicitta.  The
wholehearted resolve, i.e.,  assuming  a  personal  responsibility  to  free
others from suffering, must be generated before bodhicitta can  arise.  When
you look at the text, it is saying that having  great  compassion  alone  is
not enough. Even the hearers and the solitary  realisers  have  this.  There
must be something additional to this. The additional  something  that  comes
before  bodhicitta  is  the   wholehearted   resolve   (or   the   universal
responsibility).

The wholehearted resolve is a very  strong  compassion  because  it  is  not
simply a wish but it is a  wish  that  comes  with  the  sense  of  personal
responsibility for freeing others from suffering. You actually take on  that
responsibility, thinking, “I will do it by myself, alone.”

Is there a difference between compassion and great compassion? You can  make
a difference between the two:
   • When you are  simply  talking  about  compassion,  it  can  be  biased
     compassion or compassion with partiality.
   • When you talk about great compassion, you can say that it is generated
     on the basis of impartiality towards all sentient beings. Impartiality
     towards everyone is the basis for great compassion that  is  generally
     not required for compassion alone.

The distinction between immeasurable compassion and great compassion:
In the major philosophical treatises, it  is  explained  that  you  need  to
attain one of the actual concentrations before  you  can  have  immeasurable
compassion.  Only  then  can  one   talk   about   developing   immeasurable
compassion. This does not apply to great compassion. In that sense,  we  can
make a distinction between immeasurable compassion and great compassion.

|Compassion (In      |                                               |
|general)            |Can be compassion with partiality              |
|Great compassion    |Generated based on impartiality towards all    |
|                    |sentient beings                                |
|Immeasurable        |Can only be generated after attaining one of   |
|compassion          |the actual concentrations                      |


We can think about whether  the  hearers  and  solitary  realisers  actually
possess great compassion in their minds or not. Some  scholars  assert  that
they do have great compassion while others assert that they do not.
So going back to the answer again, having  great  compassion  alone  is  not
sufficient. The great compassion generated must become so  strong  that  you
actually assume a personal responsibility to  free  others  from  suffering.
That is the wholehearted resolve. This must  be  present  before  bodhicitta
can be developed.

As  to  how  the  wholehearted  resolve  will  lead  to  the  generation  of
bodhicitta, this is explained in the text:

         2  How the extraordinary attitude induces the generation of the
         mind [of enlightenment]

Once the mind of freeing living beings has arisen [/been generated] in  this
manner, owing to your current situation you  could  not  complete  even  the
welfare of one sentient being. Not only that, even if  you  were  to  attain
the state of the two [kinds of] arhats, {165} you would  only  [be  able  to
complete the welfare of] very few beings  and  their  welfare  would  be  to
merely  accomplish  liberation.  Since  they  cannot   establish   them   in
omniscience[/As they cannot establish [anyone] in  omniscience],  who  could
perfect the temporary and final [/ultimate] welfare of limitless beings?  If
you reflect in this vein[/these ideas], you will  come  to  understand  that
only a Buddha is able to do this, and you will generate the wish  to  attain
buddhahood for the welfare of sentient beings (Page 139).

   • First, you generate great compassion, the wish for all sentient beings
     to be free from suffering.
   • That great compassion increases  to  the  point  where  you  assume  a
     personal responsibility  to  do  this,  thinking,  “I  will  free  all
     sentient beings from suffering by myself.”
   • Once you develop this wholehearted resolve, you then begin  to  wonder
     if you can actually do so or not. You may have the wish but with  your
     present conditions, there is no way you can achieve this.
   • Analysing who can do this job, you discover that only the  Buddha  has
     the ability to do this.
   • You then have the desire to become a buddha, a fully enlightened  one,
     yourself.

    2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2 The actual gradual training

         A  Training of the mind to strive for the welfare of others
         B  Training the mind to strive for enlightenment
         C  The result of the training: Identifying the generation of the
         mind [of enlightenment]

The second one - the actual training - has three [points]: training  of  the
mind to strive for the welfare of others, training the mind  to  strive  for
enlightenment and the result of the training: identifying the generation  of
the mind [of enlightenment].

    2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A       Training of the mind to strive for the welfare
    of others

         1  Laying the foundation for generating this mind
         2  Actual generation of that mind

Concerning  the  first  [unit]  there  are  two  [statements:]  Laying   the
foundation for generating this mind and actual generation of that mind.

    2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A1 Laying the foundation for generating this mind


         A  Producing an equanimous mind towards sentient beings

         B  Establishing them all as having an attractive aspect

The first [of  those]  has  two  [phrases]:  Producing  an  equanimous  mind
towards sentient beings and establishing them all as  having  an  attractive
aspect
(Pages 139 – 140).

The practice of “producing an equanimous mind towards sentient  beings,”  is
preceded  by  some  preparatory  steps.  After  having   engaged   in   this
preliminary practice, the text then goes on to explain the  actual  training
in a mind of equanimity or impartiality. Lama Tsongkhapa says;


    2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A1A     Producing an equanimous mind towards sentient
    beings

         1  The preparatory steps
         2  How to meditate on equanimity

    2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A1A-1   The preparatory steps

First: The preparatory steps etc. as explained  before  in  the  context  of
beings  of  lesser  and  intermediate  beings  [?]  should  be  adopted  and
sustained here as well (Page 140).

We have to engage in these preparatory steps before we can  try  to  develop
equanimity. These steps are taught in the context of the  persons  of  small
and medium capacity, e.g., the reflections on karma, the  faults  of  cyclic
existence, and so forth. These have to be cultivated first.

We are cultivating equanimity as the basis  for  developing  bodhicitta.  To
achieve equanimity, we have to stop the mind that  relates  to  others  with
either attachment or anger.

         2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A1A-2    How to meditate on equanimity

         A  The need for an equanimous mind where attachment and hatred have
         been stopped [/hostility]

To start with, if you do not accomplish an equanimous mind,  having  stopped
the bias of attachment towards some sentient beings and hatred towards,  any
love and compassion that arise will arise with partiality. As this does  not
occur [/come about/happen] if you observe  them  without  impartiality,  you
should cultivate equanimity (Page 140).

We are looking at the instructions  for  developing  impartial  or  unbiased
love and compassion. The obstacles to developing unbiased love and  unbiased
compassion are attachment and anger. Relating  this  to  your  own  mind,  I
think what is said here is quite obvious. There is nothing much to add.  The
text is saying  that  we  do  not  have  this  unbiased  love  and  unbiased
compassion for everyone. Our love and compassion is not even-minded. Why  is
this so?  As the text says, it is due to our attachment and anger.  Is  this
true or not? You should figure this out for yourself. What is  the  kind  of
equanimity we are trying to achieve here?


         B  What kind of equanimity needs to be meditated

Among the two types of equanimous mind that have been taught,  one  [/mental
attitude] that has the aspect of establishing[/imagines]  living  beings  as
lacking mental afflictions, such as attachment, hatred, and  so  forth,  and
one in which oneself is free from attachment  and  hatred  towards  sentient
beings, here it is the latter (Page 140).

Two types of equanimous mind are mentioned. In this  context,  do  you  know
which mind is being referred to here? When you read the text,  do  you  know
what the two types of equanimous mind are? This is the time to lift up  your
heads and give me an answer! When a  question  is  asked,  if  you  did  not
understand, you say no. If you understood what I said, you have to say yes.

Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know whether you understand or not because  there  is
no reaction from you.

(Khen Rinpoche asks a student to explain the differences between the two).

Student: The first one is that you want others to be free from bias  due  to
their attachment and hostility. The second one is you want  yourself  to  be
free from bias due to attachment  and  hostility.  I  think  they  refer  to
different objects.

Khen Rinpoche: Good.

It is just as he said. There are two types  of  equanimity  mentioned  here.
The first has more to do with others. Focusing on others, you wish for  them
to abide in equanimity, free of attachment and hostility. That is  one  kind
of equanimity.

The kind of equanimity that we are talking about here in the  context  of  a
practitioner who is trying to develop bodhicitta, i.e. the  equanimity  that
is the basis of bodhicitta, pertains to oneself. We  have  to  become  even-
minded  by  removing  our  feelings  of  attachment  or  hostility   towards
everyone. This is the kind of equanimity that we are supposed to  cultivate.


If this is the kind of equanimity that we need to cultivate, how  do  we  go
about doing this?

         C   The order of meditation

Since this is the order  of  meditation  by  which  it  will  easily  arise,
initially, you should take a person  who  has  neither  done  you  harm  nor
benefit  as  your  object  of  meditation,  {166}  and  through  eliminating
attachment and anger accomplish an equanimous mind (Page 140).

   • You take as your object of meditation a person towards whom  you  have
     neutral feelings, i.e., someone who has neither helped nor harmed you.
     You eliminate any feeling  of  attachment  or  hostility  and  try  to
     develop a mind of equanimity towards that person.
   • When you are able to generate such a mind, you switch your  meditation
     object to focus on a loved one, friend, or relative. Focusing on  that
     person, you try to generate equanimity  by  removing  any  feeling  of
     attachment or hostility towards that person.
   • Once you are able to achieve equanimity towards your  loved  one,  you
     move on to your enemy. Bring the enemy to mind and, as before, develop
     equanimity towards your enemy by removing any feeling of hostility.
This is the order of meditation.

When an equanimous mind toward that person has been accomplished,  you  then
need  to  accomplish  an  equanimous  mind  with  respect  to  friends   and
relatives. A non-equanimous mind towards [/with respect to] them  is  to  be
biased due to attachment and hatred or not to be equanimous  due  to  lesser
or greater attachment. When you are equanimous towards  that  [person],  you
should cultivate an equanimous  mind  towards  your  enemies.  The  lack  of
equanimity towards them is due to hatred that derives from  seeing  them  as
totally incompatible [with yourself]. Having become equanimous toward  them,
you should cultivate an equanimous mind[/developed with respect] toward  all
sentient beings (Page 140 – 141).

Usually when we think about a loved  one,  attachment  arises  because  this
person matters to us. “This person is  on  my  side,  supports  me,  and  so
forth.”  When we think about our enemy, we are not happy with  this  person.
“This person is not on my side,”  and  we  generate  hatred.  This  is  what
usually happens. From this, it is quite apparent that it is  our  attachment
and hostility that prevents us  from  having  equanimity  towards  everyone.
Without getting rid of this attachment for loved ones and hostility  towards
the enemy, there is no way to develop equanimity whatsoever.

If attachment and hostility interfere with and obstruct the  achievement  of
equanimity towards every living being, how  are  we  supposed  to  think  in
order to stop such attachment and hostility?

         D  By meditating on what are attachment and aversion stopped.

Moreover, the following two thoughts are taught in [Kamalashila’s]  Middling
Stages of Mediation  (Bhavanakrama):  “Since  from  their  side  all  living
beings are the same in wanting  happiness  and  not  wanting  suffering,  it
would be inappropriate for me to benefit some  whom  I  consider  close  and
harm or fail to benefit others whom I consider  distant.”  “Since,  from  my
own side there is no [single] being who in  beginningless  cyclic  existence
has not been my relative hundreds of times, who  should  I  have  attachment
for and who should I have hatred for?” (Page 141)

Stopping these feelings of attachment  and  hostility  towards  friends  and
enemies respectively is no mean feat.  It  is  really  tough.  But  when  we
reflect on the two approaches given in the text, I think definitely  we  can
do something about our attachment and hostility.  At  least  we  can  reduce
them.

The first approach is considering from the viewpoint of all  living  beings,
whether friends or enemies, that everyone is  equal  in  the  sense  of  not
wanting problems and wanting only happiness. We can think about  this.  From
that perspective, they are both the same. That being the case,  we  can  ask
ourselves: “Is there any need then to be attached to one and to  be  hostile
towards the other?” Thinking in this way, perhaps we can see that  from  the
viewpoint of all living beings, there is no reason for that  bias  to  being
attached to one and hostile towards the other.

What happens when you switch this to your personal perspective?  Considering
our own situation, we have been taking  rebirth  since  beginningless  time.
Everyone has been our loved one numberless times. Our enemies of  this  life
have been our loved ones and have benefited us numberless times.  Similarly,
our loved ones of this life have also harmed  us  numberless  times  in  the
past. In that sense, our loved ones and our enemies are equal.

The text is saying that it is a very narrow way of thinking  when  we  limit
our scope to this life alone – this person is my enemy, that  person  is  my
friend. When we extend the  scope  of  our  thinking  beyond  this  life  to
thinking about our entire existence  since  beginningless  time,  from  that
perspective, the concept of enemy and friend with our feelings of  hostility
and attachment is inappropriate.

Whenever attachment arises for people who are from our  side,  such  as  our
loved ones or relatives, we should remind ourselves that  they  have  harmed
us numberless times in the past so that we  will  not  get  too  emotionally
involved with them.

We usually feel upset with and develop hostility  towards  someone  who  has
harmed or caused problems for us in this  life.  However  by  thinking  more
expansively from a broader perspective, we see that  that  person  has  also
been a loved one and has been helpful to us numberless times. This helps  to
reduce the hostility towards that person.

Even simply thinking about these two approaches is not easy. Why?
   • Because it presupposes that you already have an understanding  of  and
     conviction in reincarnation, in the  beginningless  nature  of  cyclic
     existence.
   • Secondly, you need to have conviction in karma.
   • On top of that, you also need to have the thorough conviction in  what
     was taught in the path of the person of medium capacity. Remember  the
     discussion on how, in cyclic existence, friends and enemies are  never
     certain because they do change?
So, you need to have the conviction in all these things  in  order  for  the
mind to accept these instructions.

Anyway these are the instructions. We have to study them, think about  them,
and see whether they work or not. When someone bothers us or does  something
that we do not like, we usually get  disturbed.  If  we  don’t  do  anything
about it, we will  get  increasingly  disturbed  as  the  hostility  becomes
stronger. At such times, we should think about these  instructions  and  see
whether they help or not.

Similarly, when people help us, we  automatically  feel  attached  to  them.
That is fine but  when  we  are  too  emotionally  involved,  it  becomes  a
problem. At such times, we should think about the instructions  stated  here
and see whether they help or not. We have to try  them  out  and  experience
them for ourselves.

At this juncture, the text raises a qualm: Are you telling me that there  is
no such thing as  friends  and  enemies?  The  answer  is  no.  We  are  not
eliminating the notion of friend and enemy. They exist and will continue  to
exist. But what we have to stop is the attachment that arises when we  think
of our loved ones. What we have to stop is the hostility  that  arises  when
we focus on our enemies. We are not here to stop the notion  of  friend  and
enemy.


         E  Ceasing attachment and hatred, although the mind of friend and
         enemy has not been ceased [?controlled/neutralised]

{167}  We  need  to  differentiate  between  friends  and   enemies   having
apprehended them to be the basis of respective features. Therefore, what  is
to be ceased is the mind that  is  biased  due  to  attachment  and  hatred,
taking as a reason that someone  is  [claiming/alleging  someone  to  be]  a
friend or enemy, whereas the mind of friend and enemy does not  need  to  be
averted (Page 141).

The actual instructions of the sevenfold cause and effect  tradition  starts
with the meditation on how all sentient beings have  been  our  mothers.  We
will start this in the next lesson. I asked you to read  on  your  own  this
whole section on developing bodhicitta. It is quite straightforward. If  you
read the text, it is very clear. From my side, I don’t think I can  make  it
any clearer. It is so straightforward. Those of you who have  not  read  the
text beforehand, perhaps there is some benefit  for  me  to  say  all  these
things in class. Otherwise it is all there in the text.

Questions for discussion on Sunday, 22nd April 2012

   1. How do the attachment and hostility that were discussed under the path
      of the person of medium capacity harm us?
   2. What is the difference between action (or karma) that is intention and
      action (or karma) that is intended action?
   3. What is the difference between projecting karma for  a  human  rebirth
      and projecting karma for rebirth as a desire realm god?
   4. (a) What is the lifespan of an intermediate state being?
    (b) Once one reaches the intermediate  state,  can  one  change  to  the
intermediate form of another rebirth?*
   5. In order to take rebirth in cyclic existence, does one  need  to  have
      the ignorance that is part of the twelve links of dependent-arising?
*According to the Lower Abhidharma, Abhidharmakosa, the  intermediate  state
cannot be changed. According to Compendium of  Knowledge,  the  intermediate
state can be changed. Here I am not asking whether  the  intermediate  state
is  changing  from  moment  to  moment.  I  am  not  asking  whether  it  is
impermanent or not. E.g., when you enter the intermediate state  of  a  hell
being, before you enter the hell realms, can the  intermediate  state  of  a
hell being be changed into the intermediate state of a human being? That  is
what I am asking.




Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng

Edited by Cecilia Tsong

