Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L14 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.167237
================================================================================



Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi

Root text: The Middle Length Lam-Rim by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by  Trijiang  Rinpoche  are
in small lettertype, to be distinguished from Lama Tsongkhapa’s own  outline
that is in larger lettertype.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


Lesson No: 14                        Date: 2nd August 2011


The great master Nagabodhi said :


      Enlightenment is not owned by anyone.
      Enlightenment is not given to us by anyone.
      But rather, through recognising the nature of our own mind,
      That is what we refer to as the Buddha.

Enlightenment is not owned by a single individual. That is  the  meaning  of
the first line. The second line means that enlightenment is not a gift  that
can be bestowed upon us by someone  else.  Enlightenment  is  when  we  have
completely realised and understood the nature of our own mind. This is  what
is referred to as enlightenment. That is Buddha.

You have been circling in cyclic existence or  samsara  since  time  without
beginning. When you analyse carefully what causes you to be  in  this  state
up to now, it has got to do with the fact that you have  not  realised  your
own mind. You do not have the complete understanding of your own mind.  That
is the reason. And because this is so, therefore you are still  circling  in
cyclic existence and have been doing so since beginningless time.

Why is it that you have not realised or fully understood your own mind?  The
main reason is that your mind is obscured.

Why is it that your mind is still  obscured  since  beginningless  time?  It
boils  down  to  you  not  understanding  the  methods  to  accumulate   the
collection of  merit.  Because  you  do  not  know  how  to  accumulate  the
collection of merit perfectly, therefore your  mind  has  remained  obscured
since beginningless time.

Why is it that you do not know how to accumulate  the  collection  of  merit
perfectly?  When you think about it, it boils down  to  lack  of  faith.  We
talked about this in the previous lessons. Everything boils down  to  faith.
When you have faith, then you will be able to accumulate the  collection  of
merit perfectly and purify the obscurations. Through that process, you  will
definitely achieve buddhahood.

Therefore enlightenment boils down to faith. You  should  think  about  this
point constantly,  using  logic  and  reasoning  to  see  why  faith  is  so
important and how you can develop it.

                            ********************

This may be useful for the senior students. In order to train your  mind  in
seeing the guru as a buddha, it is  mentioned  in  the  teachings  that  you
should reflect and meditate on the four outlines to prove to  yourself  that
your guru is a buddha. Vajradhara himself had stated that  your  guru  is  a
buddha. That is the thesis  that  has  to  be  proven  through  the  use  of
scriptural authority and reasoning.

The four outlines are:
1. Vajradhara himself stated that the guru is a buddha.
2. The guru is the agent of all the buddhas’ enlightened activities.
3. Even at this time, the buddhas are  still  working  for  the  benefit  of
   sentient beings. Remembering this, you can then establish that your  guru
   is a buddha.
4. What appears to us cannot be trusted and are not certain or definite.

These are the four outlines that you should meditate on, in order  to  prove
to yourself that your guru is a  buddha.  This  is  mainly  for  the  senior
students, not the new students. I thought this may be useful for you.

So we have completed the section on guru devotion, correctly relying on  the
virtuous friend in thought and in action.


    2B4A-2 The condensed presentation of how to sustain it

         A  The actual way to sustain it
         B  The reason why it needs to be sustained by means of two modes of
         sustaining

The second one has two points: the actual way how  to  sustain  it  and  the
reason why it needs to be sustained by means of two modes of sustaining.

    2B4A-2A      The actual way to sustain it

         1  What to do during the meditation session itself
         2  What to do during the periods between sessions

The first one has two points: what  to  do  during  the  meditation  session
itself and what to do during the periods between sessions.

    2B4A-2A1     What to do during the meditation session itself

         A  What to do in preparation
         B  What to do during the actual [meditation session]
         C  What to do at the end (Pages 28 – 29)

What do you do after you have correctly relied on  the  virtuous  friend  in
thought and in action? What are the stages of  training?  In  terms  of  the
practices,  there  are  the  preliminaries,  the  actual  session  and   the
conclusion. In this context, the preliminaries refer to the six  preparatory
practices.

The first one has three points:  what  to  do  in  preparation,  during  the
actual [meditation session] and at the end.

    2B4A-2A1A    What to do in preparation

         1  [Cleaning your dwelling and setting up representations of body,
         speech and mind]
         2  [Laying out offerings]
         3  [Sitting posture and mental attitude]
         4  [Visualiazation of the merit field]
         5  [Accumulation of merit and purification of negativities]
         6  [Mandala offering and request for blessings]

First: the six preparatory practices:

    2B4A-2A1A-1  [Cleaning your dwelling and setting up representations of
    body, speech and mind]

Following the life story of Serlingpa you should  clean  your  dwelling  and
set up representations of the exalted body, speech and mind (Page 29).

It is mentioned in the teachings that  it  is  very  important  to  do  your
practices in a clean environment. When cleaning  the  place  where  you  are
going to do your practice, it is not just about cleaning  the  dirt  on  the
outside. It is important that while you clean the room  or  the  environment
externally, you should also clean your mind. You  should  do  both  external
and internal cleaning. When you are cleaning the room, with each  action  of
cleaning, you can also think that you  are  purifying  whatever  afflictions
there are in your mind. You can think that the dirt outside represents  your
afflictions. It is said that  when  you  think  in  this  way,  it  is  very
beneficial.

When you keep the place of your practice clean, it  makes  a  difference  to
the  celestial  beings  who  are  on  the  white  side,  supporting   Dharma
practitioners. You will receive their help and support.

Since it is good to  set  up  the  representations  of  the  Buddha's  body,
speech, and mind, it is important that you place these  holy  objects  in  a
clean place. It is not good to set up the representations  of  the  Buddha's
body, speech, and  mind  in  a  dirty,  filthy  place.  By  setting  up  the
representations of the Buddha's body, speech, and mind  in  a  clean  place,
that helps in the accumulation of merit.

You can get your maid to clean the place. If you do not  have  a  maid,  you
have to clean it yourself. The point is to keep the place  clean.  It  helps
the mind a lot.

Singapore is considered to be a very clean country. When you go  to  certain
homes where they have a maid, then the place is usually very clean.  I  have
been to places where people do not have any maids and,  usually,  the  place
is quite messy. So I think it is very important to put aside  time  to  keep
your living environment and the place where  you  are  doing  your  practice
clean. Whether you are talking about it from a Dharma point of  view,  as  a
preparatory practice or from the hygiene point of view, it is  important  to
keep the place clean. That will be very  helpful  and  beneficial.  I  guess
when that does not happen, it is probably due to laziness.

Next is arranging the representations of  the  Buddha's  body,  speech,  and
mind. There are many reasons for arranging such holy objects. One  of  them,
I guess, is that it does help in your meditation. When  you  have  something
to focus on, it makes a difference  to  your  visualisation  helping  it  to
arise easily.

Also when you have holy objects, the representations of the  Buddha's  body,
speech, and mind, on the altar, you are more likely to  make  offerings  and
prostrations and so forth.  It  induces  you  to  engage  in  such  virtuous
activities. The point I am making is that you should understand why  you  do
certain things. Why do you do the  preparatory  practices  of  cleaning  the
room and arranging the representations of the  Buddha's  body,  speech,  and
mind? Having an altar and setting up the  representations  of  the  Buddha's
body, speech, and mind is not an absolute  necessity.  However  it  is  said
that it is very useful for beginners like us. But you must  understand  that
it is not an absolute must.


    2B4A-2A1A-2  [Laying out offerings]

Beautifully lay out an arrangement of offerings that were honestly  acquired
(Page 29).

The offerings that you set up on the altar should not  be  obtained  through
deceit. When you obtain the offerings with deceit – let us  say  you  bought
the offerings  with  money  obtained  through  non-virtuous  means  such  as
stealing, cheating, and fooling others in order to get something  in  return
and so forth - these offerings  are  not  considered  good.  The  motivation
should also not be deceitful. When you make  offerings,  you  should  do  so
sincerely with pure motivation and not to show off or to try  and  please  a
sponsor.

With regard to making offerings, it is beneficial  to  recite  the  Offering
Cloud Dharani because the  numerous  buddhas  will  then  receive  skies  of
offerings.


    2B4A-2A1A-3  [Sitting posture and mental attitude]

On a comfortable seat straighten up your body. Assume  a  suitable  position
in cross-legged or half cross-legged posture making sure that  the  mind  is
fused with going for refuge and bodhicitta (Page 29).

You sit up straight in a comfortable seat, in a suitable posture  with  your
legs in either the full or half-lotus  position.  You  then  engage  in  the
practices of going for refuge and generating bodhicitta. It is mentioned  in
the teachings that it is beneficial to do  your  practices  sitting  in  the
seven-point Vairochana posture:
1. You sit in the full or half-lotus position.
2. Your back is straight.
3. Your hands are in the lap in the meditation posture.
4. You leave your mouth and tongue in a natural position.
5. You keep your eyes  slightly  opened,  letting  your  gaze  fall  in  the
   direction of the tip of your nose.
6. You tilt your head slightly forward
7. Your two shoulders should be at an equal level.

When you sit in this seven-point Vairochana posture, you will be able to  do
your practice session for a long time without  any  difficulties.  When  you
sit in other positions, although they may be  comfortable  temporarily,  you
will not be able to sustain those postures for a long time.

When you are able to sit in this posture,  while  doing  your  practice,  it
makes your body serviceable. It also helps you generate a clear  mind.  When
you are constantly engaged in practices,  sitting  in  this  posture  helps.
Here we are not talking about sitting in this posture for just one  session,
but we are talking about practising in the long run. Of course you  do  have
to get used to sitting in such  a  posture.  It  may  be  difficult  in  the
beginning because you are not used to it. You just  have  to  get  into  the
habit.

After sitting down in this seven-point Vairochana posture, you  then  absorb
yourself in the practices of refuge and bodhicitta. At  this  point,  it  is
important to check the state of your mind.

If the mind is in a negative state with the afflictions manifesting,  it  is
important to transform the mind into, at least, a neutral  state.  There  is
the practice of the nine-round breathing exercise. It is good if you can  do
that. The point is to make the afflictions go away and place the mind  in  a
neutral state.

You can place your attention on your breathing. As you  exhale,  think  that
the manifest afflictions are expelled from the body in  the  form  of  black
smoke. They leave the body and dissolve into space. During  the  inhalation,
think  that  you  are  inhaling  the  blessings  of  all  the  buddhas   and
bodhisattvas in the form of white light that  go  into  you,  blessing  your
mental continuum and transforming your  mind  into  virtue.  This  breathing
meditation does make a difference.

When you are feeling stressed, when you breathe in deeply and then  let  out
a long breath like air being released from a punctured  tyre,  it  helps  to
relieve the tension in your body.

When you are able to do this breathing meditation with  some  attention  and
focus, it makes a difference as it will make it easier  for  you  to  engage
your mind in virtue. Basically you are  trying  to  move  the  mind  in  the
direction of virtue or a positive state.

With that virtuous state of mind, you then visualise the object  of  refuge.
You then go for refuge and develop the altruistic intention.


After  doing  well  the  practices  of  going  for  refuge  and   developing
bodhicitta, you dissolve the object of refuge that you  have  visualised  in
front of you  and  absorb  it  into  you  through  the  point  between  your
eyebrows.


    2B4A-2A1A-4  [Visualisation of the merit field]

In the space in front of you should imagine that  there  abide  the  lineage
lamas  of  vast  conduct  and   profound   view   and   countless   buddhas,
bodhisattvas, arhats, arya hearers, and  pratyekabuddhas  along  with  their
attendants[1], [thus] visualising the merit field (Page 29).

The field of merit you  are  visualising  in  the  space  in  front  of  you
consists  primarily  of  the  gurus  of  the  vast  and  profound  lineages,
countless buddhas and bodhisattvas,  pratyekabuddhas  (solitary  realisers),
sravakas (hearers), and those who abide in  the  Buddha's  word,  i.e.,  the
Dharma protectors.

When you visualise the  merit  field,  you  can  visualise  Guru  Shakyamuni
Buddha. To his right are the lineage gurus of the extensive  deeds  or  vast
conduct. To his left are the lineage gurus of the profound view.

Surrounding them are all the meditational  deities,  buddhas,  bodhisattvas,
solitary realisers, hearers, dakas,  dakinis,  and  the  Dharma  protectors.
Visualise as well as you are able this field of merit as  it  is  the  field
for you to accumulate the collection of merit.


    2B4A-2A1A-5  [Accumulation of merit and purification of negativities]

         A  The reason why it is necessary to accumulate [merit] and purify
         [negativities]
         B  Explanation of accumulation and purification in detail
         C  Categorization of the individual [elements]


    2B4A-2A1A-5A       The reason why it is necessary to accumulate [merit]
    and purify [negativities]

It  is  exceedingly  difficult  for  [wholesome]  paths  to  arise  in  your
continuum,  if  the   favourable   conditions   for   their   arising,   the
accumulations, have not been accumulated, and their adverse conditions,  the
obscurations, have not been purified. Therefore you need to purify the  mind
by means of the seven-limb practice, which brings together  the  key  points
of accumulation and purification (Page 29).

This paragraph is telling you what you need to do when you want  to  develop
your Dharma experiences and realisations of the path in your mind.

You need to do two things: (1) accumulate the collection of  merit  and  (2)
purify your mind of obscurations.  Accumulating  merit  and  purifying  your
mind of obscurations  are  the  cooperative  conditions  (or  the  assisting
factors) for developing the realisations.

The substantial cause (or the main cause) for  developing  the  realisations
in your mind is sustaining the relevant meditations of the path.

So  in  order  to  develop  realisations,  you  need  both  the  cooperative
conditions and the substantial cause. It is  not  enough  for  you  only  to
accumulate merit and engage in purification practices for  the  realisations
to arise. That is just  one  part  of  the  equation.  These  are  only  the
cooperative conditions.

The substantial or main cause for developing the realisations is  sustaining
the relevant meditations of the path.

These two terms, substantial cause and cooperative  conditions,  will  recur
frequently  as  you  progress  in  your  Dharma  studies.  Therefore  it  is
important that you have an understanding of their meaning.

This is an illustration: the seed transforms into a sprout. The seed is  the
substantial cause of the sprout but the seed alone cannot give rise  to  the
sprout. In order for the seed to become a sprout,  you  need  the  assisting
factors or cooperative conditions. The cooperative conditions for  producing
the sprout are the  water,  fertiliser,  the  correct  temperature,  and  so
forth. These are the conditions that assist the seed  to  transform  into  a
sprout.

Therefore you need both the cooperative conditions and a substantial  cause.
Similarly the substantial cause for all the realisations  in  your  mind  is
sustaining the relevant meditations on the path. But if you were to do  just
that  without  making  the  effort  to  accumulate  merit  and   engage   in
purification practices, the realisations will  not  arise.  Therefore  while
sustaining the relevant meditations on the path,  you  also  need  to  bring
together the cooperative conditions in the form of  accumulating  merit  and
purifying your mind of obscurations. How should you go about doing this?  By
engaging in the seven-limb practice (also translated as the  seven  branches
of worship).


    2B4A-2A1A-5B       Explanation of accumulation and purification in
    detail

         1  The actual detailed explanation
         2  The need to take the meaning of the words to heart

    2B4A-2A1A-5B1      The actual detailed explanation

         A  [The limb of prostration]
         B  [Offerings]
         C  [Confession of evil deeds]
         D  [Rejoicing]
         E  [Requesting for the wheel of Dharma to be turned]
         F  [Supplication]
         G  [Dedication]

    2B4A-2A1A-5B1A     [The limb of prostration]

         1  [Prostration combining the three doors]
         2  [Prostrations of the three individual doors]

    2B4A-2A1A-5B1A-1   [Prostration combining the three doors]

{37} With regard to the limb of prostration, the prostration  combining  the
three doors is [set out] in the  single  stanza  “Whoever...”  This  is  not
[prostration] to the world spheres of one direction and to  the  buddhas  of
one time. Rather, focusing on all the Jinas residing in  the  10  directions
and three times, you prostrate body, speech and mind to  them  with  respect
and from the bottom of your heart (Pages 29 – 30).

The first of  the  seven-limb  practice  is  the  limb  of  prostration  (or
obeisance) and is referred to in the first verse  of  the  King  of  Prayers
[2]:


      You lions among humans,
      Gone to freedom in the present, past and future
      In the worlds of ten directions,
      To all of you, with body, speech, and sincere mind, I bow down.


This verse brings together the practice of paying  homage  with  your  body,
speech, and mind.


    2B4A-2A1A-5B1A-2   [The prostrations of the three individual doors]

         A  [Physical prostration]

As regards the prostrations of the three individual doors, there  are  three
points::
      Physical prostration [is set out  in]  the  single  stanza  “excellent
behaviour...” You focus on all the Jinas belonging  to  the  directions  and
times as the objects of your mind, as though  you  directly  perceive  them.
Emanating your own body in manifestations as numerous as fine particles  you
should prostrate. Furthermore, having generated the power of  confidence  in
the excellent conduct of the objects, you are motivated by that (Page 31).

      Verse 2
      With the energy of aspiration for the bodhisattva way
      With the sense of deep respect
      And with as many bodies as atoms of the world,
      To all you buddhas visualized as real, I bow down.

With regard to physical,  verbal,  and  mental  obeisance,  it  is  physical
obeisance that is expressed in the second verse.

The motivation at the beginning of paying  homage  is  extremely  important.
Here you are asked to reflect on the bodhisattva  activities  of  the  merit
field in front of you to enable you to develop  faith.  With  that  mind  of
faith, you then pay homage and make prostrations.

You should imagine that you are prostrating to all the buddhas,  abiding  in
all the ten directions and the three times, as if you  are  perceiving  them
directly. First, bring all the buddhas of the past, present, and  future  to
mind. As you prostrate,  visualise  emanating  replicas  of  your  own  body
equalling the number of atoms in the world. With all these bodies, you  then
prostrate to all the buddhas of all the ten directions and the three  times.


What is the reason for telling you to prostrate to  the  numberless  buddhas
with these countless  number  of  bodies?  When  you  compare  this  way  of
prostrating to simply prostrating to a single buddha with  one  body,  there
is a great difference in terms of outlook, i.e., who  you  are  bringing  to
mind and  the  number  of  buddhas  you  are  prostrating  to.  It  makes  a
difference in terms of the amount of merit you accumulate. It is  said  that
there are immeasurable benefits.

These are the important points that you need to remember:
   • In the beginning, when  you  make  prostrations,  your  motivation  is
     important.
   • When you prostrate, you  should  bring  to  mind  all  the  numberless
     buddhas of all the ten directions and the three times.
   •  You  prostrate  to  them,  while  visualising   emanating   countless
     duplicates of your body in a number equal to the atoms of the world.
When you are able to this, you will accumulate  an  immeasurable  amount  of
merit compared to just making one  prostration,  without  thinking,  to  one
buddha with one body. There is no comparison at all.

Is there any difference in prostrating thoughtlessly and  prostrating  while
performing all the visualisations? Do  you  accept  that  there  is  greater
benefit in doing the latter?

Is  there  any  difference  then  between   doing   one   hundred   thousand
prostrations with one body versus doing one prostration by  visualising  one
hundred thousand bodies?

Perhaps the wider your perspective, the  more  merit  you  will  accumulate.
That is the point. When your mind is  expansive,  then  the  merit  you  can
accumulate will be much greater. When your mind is  not  as  expansive,  the
merit you can accumulate will be less.


         B  [Mental prostration]

Mental  prostration  [is  set  out  in]  the  single  stanza  “on  one  fine
particle...” - on top of each minute  particle  buddhas  as  innumerable  as
dust particles reside encircled by bodhisattvas. You generate  the  resolute
faith of recollecting their positive qualities (Page 30).

      Verse 3
      On every atom are buddhas numberless as atoms,
      Each amidst a host of bodhisattvas,
      And I am confident the sphere of all phenomena
      Is entirely filled with buddhas in this way.


This verse refers to paying homage with your mind.

“On every atom are buddhas numberless  as  atoms”:  imagine  that  on  every
atom, there are buddhas equal in number to the numberless  atoms,  and  that
each of these numberless buddhas is surrounded by bodhisattvas. By  bringing
this to mind, you then reflect  on  the  qualities  of  their  holy  bodies,
speech, and minds. You then develop faith.

Khen Rinpoche: Kyabje Lama Zopa Rinpoche  said  that  when  you  think  like
that, it is mind-blowing!

You then emanate countless duplicates of your body and prostrate  with  this
mind of faith. Again this has to do with your mental perspective.  When  you
can think  that  there  are  numberless  buddhas  equal  in  number  to  the
numberless atoms, because your mental perspective  is  vaster,  it  makes  a
difference to the amount of merit that you accumulate.


         C  [Verbal prostration]

Verbal prostration [is set out in] the  single  stanza  “praising  those...”
From each of the bodies innumerable heads  emanate  and  from  each  of  the
heads again innumerable tongues which  sing  inexhaustible  praises  of  the
objects’ positive qualities to sweet melodies. Here “melodies”  are  praises
and their “branches”, that is  their  causes,  are  the  tongues.  The  word
“ocean” refers to a lot (Page 30).

      Verse 4
      With infinite oceans of praise for you,
      And oceans of sound from the aspects of my voice,
      I sing the breathtaking excellence of buddhas,
      And celebrate all of you gone to bliss.

This is paying homage to the buddhas and bodhisattvas with your  speech.  As
mentioned before, you bring to  mind  the  qualities  of  the  holy  bodies,
speech, and  minds  of  the  numberless  buddhas  equal  in  number  to  the
numberless  atoms.  Each  of  these  numberless  buddhas  is  surrounded  by
bodhisattvas. You generate faith. At the same time, you think that  you  are
emanating countless duplicates  of  your  body,  verbally  expressing  these
praises.

It is important to know  that  when  you  pay  homage,  there  is  physical,
mental, and verbal homage. You should  know  what  they  entail,  what  they
mean: what is physical homage, what is mental homage,  and  what  is  verbal
homage.

You should know how to exact the most out of your  prostrations.  While  you
are  making  prostrations,  you  should  know  the  factors  that  make  the
prostrations very powerful in terms of the accumulation of merit;  what  you
have to think, i.e., the kind of mind-set you  should  have,  and  what  you
should visualise. These are the important points.

The teachings mention the  immeasurable  benefits  of  making  prostrations.
When you make a physical prostration, you cover numberless atoms  when  your
body is on the ground. Each of these numberless atoms from  the  surface  of
the ground to the core of the earth (known as the golden ground in  Tibetan)
becomes a cause for you to be reborn as a Wheel Turning  king  one  thousand
times. This is the immeasurable benefit that is stated in the teachings.

The benefits are, literally, hidden from you in the sense  that  it  is  not
something that you can easily realise or see for  yourself.  Therefore  from
time to time, you should do some prostrations with this  attitude.  As  much
as possible, when you prostrate, first, do  it  with  a  virtuous  state  of
mind.  Then  with  a  positive  motivation,  you  prostrate  with  all   the
visualisations that have been described. You visualise  emanating  countless
duplicates of your body in a  number  equal  to  the  atoms  of  the  world,
prostrating to all the numberless buddhas of  the  ten  directions  and  the
three times. Even if you are able to  do  only  one  prostration  with  this
visualisation and this attitude, you would have accomplished your  goal  and
purpose. So as much as possible, you should do this all the time.

I think we should be able to finish the rest of the seven limbs in the  next
lesson. The senior students are already aware  of  what  we  have  discussed
today on prostrations.

Generally speaking, when you talk to someone who is new  to  Buddhism,  they
may be aware of the practice of doing prostrations, but it is very  rare  to
find people who actually know what a  prostration  is,  how  to  think  when
making prostrations and how to get the most out of each prostration.

From this example, you can see that by studying and  learning  about  making
prostrations, it does  make  a  huge  difference  to  the  quality  of  your
prostrations, the merit that you accumulate, and so forth.  That  is  why  I
always say that studying is so  important  because  studying  makes  a  huge
difference to your practice. In terms of accumulating  merit,  after  having
done some studies, you definitely will accumulate more merit and  the  merit
that you accumulate will be more powerful.

This example here clearly shows that studying and learning can only  benefit
your practice, not harm  or  disrupt  it.  You  can  see  that  there  is  a
connection between studying and practising by  using  this  example  of  the
topic of making prostrations. You see how studying improves the  quality  of
your practice.

As we had seen in the earlier section on listening to the Dharma, it is  not
sufficient just to listen to the teachings. You have  to  put  whatever  you
have heard into practice. Then you will enjoy  all  the  benefits  that  are
mentioned in the teachings. Of course, by just listening  to  the  teaching,
there are some benefits. But in order to extract the full benefit, you  have
to put those teachings into practice.

Question: Why do we need to prostrate three  times  instead  of  just  once?
Why are certain verses in the prayers repeated three times?

Answer: I guess in the case of making three prostrations, it  may  symbolise
the three objects of refuge, the Buddha,  Dharma,  and  Sangha.  Perhaps  it
also represents paying homage with your body, speech, and mind.

But the point is that there is no fixed number and repeating three times  is
not a must.  Every time, before each class or any teachings, you recite  the
prayer of refuge and bodhicitta three  times.  The  point  of  reciting  the
prayer is  to  give  yourself  the  time  and  opportunity  to  adjust  your
motivation.

If you are able to generate the attitude of refuge and bodhicitta with  just
one recitation, then you only need to recite  the  prayer  once.  You  don’t
have to recite it three times. Even if you recite  the  prayer  three  times
but you are unable to generate any feeling at all, then, strictly  speaking,
you need to recite it as long as possible even for one hundred times,  until
the attitude of refuge and bodhicitta arise.

Question: Although  Lama  Atisha  had  many  teachers,  he  considered  Lama
Serlingpa one of his main teachers. The qualm is that, from his side, is  he
not biased then?

Answer: Lama Atisha considered Lama Serlingpa as one of  his  main  teachers
not because Lama Serlingpa had more qualities than his other teachers.  From
the perspective of qualities, his teachers were all about the same.

But there is a difference in the kindness that is shown to  the  individual.
There is a difference in the kindness that we see from  different  teachers.
In the case of Lama Atisha, he regarded Lama  Serlingpa  as  very  important
because it was from Lama Serlingpa that  he  received  the  instructions  on
developing the kind heart,  bodhicitta.  It  was  through  Lama  Serlingpa’s
guidance that he was able to develop bodhicitta. Based on that, he  regarded
Lama Serlingpa to be very kind indeed.



Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Angie Xiao
Edited by Cecilia Tsong
Checked by Shirley Soh

-----------------------
[1] “Along with their attendants” should be deleted.
[2] The King of Prayers appears in pages 249 – 258, The Essential Buddhist
Prayers, An FPMT Prayer Book, Volume 1, Basic Prayers and Practices,
Copyright: FPMT Inc., 2008. The verses quoted in this section on the seven-
limb practice all refer to the King of Prayers.

