Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L16(upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.379346
================================================================================



Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi

Root text: The Middle Length Lam-Rim by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by  Trijiang  Rinpoche  are
in small lettertype, to be distinguished from Lama Tsongkhapa’s own  outline
that is in larger lettertype.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


Lesson No: 16                        Date:11thAugust 2011


Question: Why did  the  Buddha  not  teach  immediately  after  he  achieved
enlightenment?

Answer: Once you are enlightened your compassion  extends  to  all  sentient
beings. In fact your compassion is fully developed at that time. The  Buddha
had the ability to teach at any time but the  timing  had  to  do  with  the
objects to be subdued, the disciples.

With regard to the Dharma usually you only teach when you are  requested  to
do so, i.e., when people have the interest in the Dharma, they must  request
for the teachings. Only then will the teachings  be  given.  It  was  stated
clearly in the earlier section on how to teach the Dharma  that  you  should
not teach unless requested to do so.

Of  course  there  are  exceptions.  There  may  be  times  that  when   the
circumstances and situation are right, you are allowed to  teach  even  when
you are not requested to do so. I guess this is the reason  why  the  Buddha
manifested the  deed  of  not  teaching  the  Dharma  immediately  after  he
achieved enlightenment.

It is important that you have questions,  but  the  questions  should  arise
from your own reflections outside of class, so that you have  the  questions
ready once you are given the opportunity to ask them. When I say that it  is
the time to ask questions, it does not mean  that  you  come  to  class  and
start to think up questions!

                           ***********************


    2B4A-2A1A-6  [Mandala offering and request for blessings]

Then, with a clear visualisation of the objects, offer a  mandala  and  with
strong  aspiration  supplicate  many  times:  “I  pray  that  all   mistaken
attitudes towards the spiritual teacher such as  disrespect  may  cease  and
that all the non-mistaken attitudes towards him may  come  about  with  ease
and I request blessings for a complete pacification of all outer  and  inner
obstacles” (Page 32).


The sixth preparatory practice is making request. At this  juncture  of  the
practice, having already visualised the merit field in the  space  in  front
of oneself, you make supplications and offer a mandala. Then  you  make  the
request  for  the  three  great  purposes.  The  three  great  purposes  are
requesting the merit field:
1. to stop quickly all  the  flawed  states  of  mind,  beginning  with  not
   respecting the teacher and so forth,
2. to grant blessings so that you will be able to generate  easily  all  the
   realisations of the  path,  beginning  with  correctly  devoting  to  the
   virtuous friend, and
3. to grant blessings so that all inner and outer hindrances  and  obstacles
   are pacified. In order to achieve the first two great purposes, there are
   all  sorts  of  obstacles.  Therefore  you  make  request  here  for  the
   pacification of all inner and outer hindrances and obstacles.

When you are a practitioner, this request  consisting  of  the  three  great
purposes  condenses  every  single  request  that  you  need  to  make.  The
practices of accumulating merit and purifying your  mind  from  obscurations
help you to ripen your mind. By making  request  to  the  merit  field,  you
create the cause for the blessings to enter your mind.

In order to generate all the realisations of the paths quickly  within  your
mental continuum, it is important that the blessings enter it. In order  for
that to happen you have to supplicate  the  merit  field  and  make  single-
pointed request to the guru.

You visualise the merit field in the  space  in  front  of  you,  with  Guru
Shakyamuni Buddha as the principal figure. On  his  right  are  the  lineage
gurus of the extensive deeds. On his left  are  the  lineage  gurus  of  the
profound view. Above Guru Shakyamuni Buddha are the  lineage  lamas  of  the
tantric practices. Surrounding them are the root and  other  lineage  gurus,
and the meditational deities.

The way to visualise the dissolution of the merit field is as follows:
 • Rays of light emanate from the heart of Guru Shakyamuni Buddha and go  to
   the edge of the merit field.
 • The Dharma protectors dissolve into the dakas and dakinis.
 • The dakas and dakinis dissolve into the hearers and solitary realisers.
 • They dissolve into the bodhisattvas.
 • The bodhisattvas then dissolve into the buddhas.
 • The buddhas dissolve into the meditational deities of the four classes of
   tantra.
 • All the lineage gurus of the extensive deeds dissolve into Maitreya.
 • All the lineage gurus of the profound view dissolve into Manjushri.
 • Above Guru Shakyamuni Buddha, the lineage lamas of the tantric  practices
   dissolve into Vajradhara.
 • In front of Guru Shakyamuni Buddha all the gurus with  whom  you  have  a
   Dharma connection in this life dissolve into your root guru. Up  to  this
   point what is left are the five sets of gurus.  In  their  presence,  you
   feel how fortunate you are able to do this practice.
 • On the right  and  left  of  Guru  Shakyamuni  Buddha  are  Maitreya  and
   Manjushri respectively. Both dissolve into Guru Shakyamuni Buddha.
 • Vajradhara also dissolves into Guru Shakyamuni Buddha.
 • What remains is your root guru who is in front of Guru Shakyamuni Buddha.
   You visualise him dissolving into the principal  figure  Guru  Shakyamuni
   Buddha. For reasons of auspiciousness, you should not visualise your guru
   dissolving into light and then dissolving into  Guru  Shakyamuni  Buddha.
   You visualise your root guru dissolving into Guru Shakyamuni Buddha  like
   a grain being pushed into a slab of butter.

Now all the gurus surrounding Guru Shakyamuni  Buddha  have  dissolved  into
him. You then focus on Guru Shakyamuni Buddha. At his heart  is  Vajradhara.
At the heart of Vajradhara is the blue  syllable  HUM.  After  performing  a
short seven-limb practice you make single-pointed request, using this  verse
from the Guru Puja practice:
      Verse 53
      You are my guru, you are my yidam,
      You are the dakinis and Dharma protectors.
      From now until enlightenment I shall seek no other refuge than you.
      In this life, the bardo, and all future lives,
      Hold me with your hook of compassion;
      Free me from samsara and nirvana’s fears,
      Grant all attainments,
      Be my constant friend and guard me from interferences.

You are stacking up the requests in this way in a single session.  You  then
make single-pointed whole-hearted request to  the  guru  with  the  attitude
that everything is now in the hands of the guru.

What we  covered  so  far  up  to  the  seven-limb  practice  and  so  forth
constitute the preparatory practices for the main meditation  session.   Now
we start with the main practice that sustains the relevant meditation.

Depending on what you are going to meditate on, you sustain that  object  of
meditation in that session. At the conclusion of the practice you  visualise
that a replica of Guru  Shakyamuni  Buddha  dissolves  into  you.  Then  you
yourself transform into  Guru  Shakyamuni  Buddha  and  in  this  form,  you
emanate light rays that go out and touch all sentient  beings,  transforming
them into Shakyamuni Buddhas.

    2B4A-2A1B    What to do during the main part

         1  How to sustain [meditation] in general
         2  How to sustain [meditation] in this context

The second one has two points: how to sustain [meditation]  in  general  and
in this context.

    2B4A-2A1B-1        How to sustain [meditation] in general

         A  Identification of and need for meditation

First: Meditation on the path as it will be explained here  serves  to  make
you fit to make use of any virtuous object you wish (Page 32).

There is an introduction to (1)  the  meaning  of  meditation  and  (2)  the
purpose of meditation.

What is meditation? Meditation refers to  the  act  of  repeatedly  focusing
your mind upon a  virtuous  object  of  meditation.  The  Tibetan  word  for
meditation is gom that has the connotation of  familiarising  yourself  with
something repeatedly. In this context,  meditation  refers  to  the  act  of
repeatedly familiarising your mind with a virtuous object of meditation.

There are many forms  of  meditation.  For  example,  you  can  meditate  on
impermanence, familiarising your mind with the meaning  of  impermanence  by
repeatedly focusing your mind on it. That process should bring about a  very
strong feeling for impermanence. In the case of meditating on  impermanence,
you take that as the object of meditation and  familiarise  your  mind  with
it. That is one form of meditation.

But in the case of the meditation on compassion, you don’t  take  compassion
as the object of meditation.  When  you  meditate  on  compassion,  you  are
trying to transform the entity of your mind into compassion.

Therefore the teachings talk about (1) meditation that  has  the  aspect  of
the object and (2) meditation that has the aspect of the consciousness.

What is the purpose of meditation? It is  to  bring  your  mind  under  your
control. What is wrong with the mind being uncontrolled? When  the  mind  is
uncontrolled, it means that you will be under the control of your  mind  and
that mind is controlled by the afflictions. When  you  let  your  mind  come
under the control of the afflictions, that will give rise to all the  faults
and mistakes that lead to the accumulation of negative actions.

Meditation here means to bring your mind under your control.  Once  you  are
able to control your own mind, you can direct your mind as you wish  towards
a virtuous object of meditation for  as  long  as  you  want.  That  is  the
meaning of making the mind serviceable.

It is very important that you understand the  meaning  and  the  purpose  of
meditation. You need to keep them in mind. It is very common for  people  to
ask, “What is meditation? Why should we  meditate?”  The  answers  are  very
clearly given here.

Meditation means the act of repeatedly focusing your mind  upon  a  virtuous
object of meditation. This means that you should  focus  your  mind  upon  a
virtuous object all the time. It is important  that  you  do  that  all  the
time. Why? Because when the mind is not focusing on  a  virtuous  object  of
meditation, that means your mind is not  under  your  control.  Rather  your
mind is under the control of your afflictions. So the purpose of  meditation
is to bring your mind under your control. When your  mind  is  uncontrolled,
that  gives  rise  to  all  the  faults  and  mistakes  that  lead  to   the
accumulation of negative actions.

             B       The faults of bad[1] meditation

Moreover, if you attend to this and that object,  thinking  to  take  merely
this number of virtuous objects in any order you wish, nothing will come  of
it and having gone wrong from the beginning, your  spiritual  practice  will
continue to be faulty throughout your life (Page 32).

Before you familiarise your mind with a virtuous object of  meditation,  you
must know very clearly what you are meditating on, how you are going  to  go
about doing it, and what is the order of the  different  meditation  topics.
You then meditate based on that knowledge.

Therefore before you meditate, you must project the  intention  to  meditate
exactly according to what you have decided, based on your knowledge  of  the
meditation  topics  and  their  specific  order.  Without  any  addition  or
omission, you project the intention to meditate exactly according to how  it
should be done.

It is said that when you meditate in such a way  then  the  meditation  will
turn up well. When you  do  not  follow  this  discipline  but  rather,  you
meditate on whatever comes to mind, i.e. you meditate on whatever you   feel
like meditating on or you have no clear idea what you want  to  meditate  on
or you meditate with no  specific  order,  then  no  positive  results  will
follow. When you meditate in such a way and make it a habit, then  you  will
have difficulties meditating properly and it will be difficult  for  you  to
be able  to  focus  your  mind  on  a  virtuous  object.  Therefore  at  the
beginning, it is very important for you not to get into this habit.

      C           How to sustain good meditation

Therefore, you should first of all develop certainty concerning  the  number
and order of objects to be sustained,  then  you  should  unleash  a  strong
driving  force  that  does  not  allow  thoughts  to  arise  other  than  in
accordance with what has been ascertained, and sustain with mindfulness  and
alertness what has been ascertained  without  omission  nor  addition  (Page
32).

Please read pages 32 to 38 on your own. You  should  think  of  this  as  an
assignment.
                            *********************
Khen Rinpoche: Today we are going  to  make  eight  different  groups.  Each
group has about 20 people. Each group has a leader. We will form  the  group
later.

The whole idea of having these groups is to improve your studies. It is  not
to stress you out so don’t misunderstand that. If you don’t  want  to  study
but just want to come and enjoy the class, listening to  the  teachings  and
you are happy with that, that’s fine. The decision is up  to  you.  You  can
relax and enjoy the class, whatever makes you comfortable.

These groups are for those who wish to  study  and  who  have  committed  to
studying for five years. I thought to form  the  groups  in  order  to  help
improve your studies. That is the whole point.

If you find being in the group stressful, then  you  can  leave  the  group,
relax when you come to class and not bother with the group. That  is  up  to
you.

The purpose of appointing the group leaders is to  address  your  questions.
Sometimes people have difficulties or they  find  it  difficult  to  ask  me
directly; so now anything you don’t  understand,  you  can  ask  your  group
leader by email before class or whatever way is convenient for you.  So  now
you can discuss your questions with your leader. That  is  the  whole  idea.


Later the group leaders will explain to you how  we  can  help  you  improve
your studies, what is the best way of  helping  you  improve  your  studies,
e.g. by making charts. Whatever kind of help you  need,  you  have  to  tell
your group leader. Hopefully we can provide  what  you  need  to  understand
more, to understand better. That is the idea.

This group will last for the entire five-year Basic Program. But  this  does
not refer to the monthly Sunday discussion sessions.  The  groups  for  that
will be different. This group is for you  to  come  together,  develop  some
kind of family feeling and closeness within your group, and  encourage  each
other. When someone is absent from class, you should find out what  happened
to them, whether they need some help.

We can’t manage this in a  large  group.  Sometimes  people  don’t  come  to
class. People fall sick. What happened to them? We can’t reach out to  them.
But in a smaller group of about 20 people, this is something we  can  do  to
help such people.

Also, in order to help build group energy, every week before class for half-
an-hour at around 7 o’clock, each group should come  and  clean  the  gompa,
set up the tables, and clear the water-bowls. This way you can get  to  know
one another better and work together like a family. That is the whole  idea.
At the same time, you create  merit  by  cleaning  the  gompa  and  offering
voluntary service. So each group will take care of one week.  Not  everyday.
Just before the class.  Tuesdays  and  Thursdays.  Your  group  leader  will
decide how you manage this. We have eight groups so,  up  to  October,  each
group will take its turn.

Sometimes, when we set up this kind of system, with leaders  and  so  forth,
some people feel very stressed. I don’t want that. As I  mentioned  earlier,
the whole idea is to help you with your studies. You must not  misunderstand
that.

So if you really don’t want to be part of a group, you want to do  your  own
thing and you are happy to just come and listen to  the  teachings  and  you
are happy with that, then that is your decision.






Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Angie Xiao
Edited by Cecilia Tsong
Checked by Shirley Soh



-----------------------
[1] “Bad” should be understood to mean “imperfect.”

