Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L17 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.453400
================================================================================



Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


Lesson No: 17                      Date: 16th August 2011


It is  important  to  constantly  remember  and  reflect  on  how  extremely
fortunate you are. Take the example of your coming to class:
 • In spite of a full day at work, you still come to class with  a  virtuous
   motivation to seek  out  the  Dharma.  Because  of  this  aspiration  and
   virtuous motivation, you collect merit just by coming to class.
 • When you come to the  centre,  there  are  many  representations  of  the
   Buddha’s exalted body, speech and mind and other holy  objects,  and  you
   create merit by just seeing them.
 • Then you recite the prayer Praise to Shakyamuni Buddha during class. When
   you recite these praises, you  bring  the  Buddha  to  mind.  Again  such
   activities and prayers collect merit.
 • You also engage in the seven branches  of  worship  and,  by  doing  this
   practice, you again collect merit.
You should remember that you collect all  these  benefits  and  merit  every
time when you come to class and  you  should  rejoice.  Just  by  coming  to
class, you are able to collect  so  much  merit  and  purify  your  mind  of
obscurations and negativities.

You come to class to hear the teachings of the Buddha that  shows  the  path
to enlightenment. When you hear these teachings, you get  a  clear  idea  of
what you have to abandon and what you have to  cultivate.   Through  hearing
the teachings, you leave very strong imprints in your mental continuum.

You should continue to study and to  hear  the  teachings  with  a  virtuous
motivation. You need to remember this constantly. Having a  good  motivation
for hearing  and  explaining  the  teachings  is  extremely  important.  The
subject  matter  here  is  the  Lam-Rim,  the  Stages   of   the   Path   to
Enlightenment. By studying and  actualising  the  Lam-Rim  and  gaining  the
realisation of the path, you can share your knowledge  and  experience  with
other sentient beings. By  doing  this,  you  remove  the  darkness  of  the
ignorance enclosing their mind and have caused the teachings of  the  Buddha
to be upheld in  this  world.  Therefore  you  have  to  remember  this  and
generate the motivation to continue your studies.
Meditation refers to the  act  of  repeatedly  focusing  your  mind  upon  a
virtuous object of meditation.  By doing so, you  transform  the  entity  of
your mind into one of virtue, i.e.,  what  meditation  seeks  to  do  is  to
transform your mind into a virtuous state. You have to try to  do  this  all
the time, i.e., making your mind remain in a virtuous state.  When  you  are
able to do this, then you will not engage in negative actions.

What we have covered so far is the outline, “How to sustain  the  meditation
in  general.”  Next  is  the  outline,  “How  to  sustain   the   meditation
specifically.” In this context, the topic is guru devotion.


    2B4A-2A1B-2        How to sustain [the meditation] in this context

         A  By thinking about the benefits of reliance and the faults of non-
         reliance

Second: You should first think about the benefits of reliance and about  the
faults of non-reliance (Page 32).

When meditating on  the  topic  of  guru  devotion,  first  reflect  on  the
benefits of relying on the teacher such as quickly achieving  enlightenment.
You can bring to mind all the benefits that you had experienced  so  far  by
relying on the teacher and then reflect on them. It is  best  when  you  can
relate this meditation to your own experience. You should think of  all  the
specific benefits that you had received by relying on the teacher.  You  can
compare the state of  your  mind  and  your  conduct,  before  you  met  the
teachings and started to rely on the teacher and after  you  relied  on  the
teacher. So bring to mind your own experiences in  relation  to  relying  on
the teacher.

Before meeting the teacher, your thoughts and  conduct  are  basically  non-
virtuous. Those actions would have  led  you  to  suffering  and  the  lower
realms. But after having met the teacher, you come to know about virtue  and
non-virtue. Then you are able to abandon non-virtue and  to  transform  your
mind into virtue as much as possible. Did this happen to you?

You should reflect on this based on your own experience. This  is  something
that you have to see for yourself. By relying on the teacher each and  every
single day, you become closer to enlightenment. When you had not  relied  on
the  teacher  each  and  every  single  day,  you  were  further  away  from
enlightenment. Is this true for you? Have you experienced this? You have  to
think about this for yourself.

By reflecting on the benefits of relying on the teacher and  the  faults  of
not relying on the teacher and relating that to your own experience, at  the
end of that process, you need to have some feeling in your heart.


         B  How to train in faith by means of thinking about his positive
         qualities

Then you repeatedly resolve  never  to  allow  your  mind  to  get  lost  in
conceiving faults in the guru and think of  qualities  like  discipline  and
meditative  stabilisation  that  you  yourself  have   perceived   in   him,
cultivating the faith that is a mind having the aspect  of  faith  until  it
arises (Page 32).

In the context of training the mind to cultivate  faith  in  the  guru,  you
have to try as much as possible to stop the  conception  of  faults  in  the
guru. By relying on that attitude of restraint  as  much  as  possible,  you
stop all conception of faults in the guru. You need to  meditate  repeatedly
on the good qualities that the guru possesses such  as  ethical  discipline,
concentration, wisdom, and being learned. You should not  restrict  yourself
only to those few qualities but you can also think of other qualities,  such
as having a good heart and so forth. It is important that you bring to  mind
whatever good qualities that you have  seen  in  your  guru  and  repeatedly
meditate on them until you develop faith.

         C  Training in the respect that remembers kindness

Then you should, in accordance with the  above  quotations  from  the  sutra
collection,  consider  the  [instances  of]  beneficial  kindness  that  you
received and are still receiving and sincerely cultivate  respect  until  it
arises (Page 32).

It is solely through the kindness of the guru that you are  able  to  engage
in virtue and it is only through the kindness of the guru that you are  able
to accumulate merit. It is also through the kindness of the  guru  that  you
are able to take the very first step towards the state of liberation.  Again
when you relate this to your own life experience, then you will be  able  to
see this clearly.

Before relying on the teacher, you are not able to  engage  in  virtue,  but
after relying on the teacher and through  his  kindness,  you  are  able  to
engage in some virtue, collect merit, make some positive changes,  and  take
the first step on the path towards liberation. All these happen due  to  the
kindness of the guru. When you think about these points, you can  understand
how extremely kind  your  teacher  is.  When  you  look  at  your  own  life
experience, you can  see  that  whatever  small  positive  change  and  good
qualities that you have are due to having met and  relied  on  the  teacher,
not anyone else. Although there are buddhas and bodhisattvas out there,  but
who is the person in your life that enable  you  to  achieve  even  a  small
change for the better? It is the guru. It is obviously due to  the  kindness
of the teacher. You can relate this to your own life experience.

As mentioned in the teachings, the teacher is kinder than all  the  buddhas.
You have to see for yourself why such a statement is  made.  Although  there
are numberless buddhas, actually the person who is guiding you on  the  path
is the virtuous friend, your guru. That is why the guru is  so  much  kinder
than the numberless buddhas.

Remember at the  beginning  of  this  section,  before  you  engage  in  the
meditation session, you have to engage  in  the  six  preparatory  practices
that are the preliminaries to the meditation session.
For the  actual  meditation  session,  you  have  to  sustain  the  relevant
meditation during the session. When you are  sustaining  the  meditation  on
guru devotion, then you have to do what have just been  covered:  meditating
on the benefits of reliance and  the  faults  of  non-reliance,  cultivating
faith, generating respect, and so forth. That is the specific context.


    2B4A-2A1C    What to do at the end

         1  What should actually be done at the end
         2  Times and duration of meditation


    2B4A-2A1C-1  What should actually be done at the end

Third: By means of the Prayer  of  Good  Behaviour  and  the  Seventy  about
Aspiration  the  accumulated  virtue  should  be   dedicated   with   strong
determination to the temporary and ultimate aspirations (Pages 32 – 33).

By means of such prayers as the Prayer of Samantabhadra (here translated  as
the Prayer of  Good  Behaviour)  and  Aspiration  in  Seventy  Verses  (here
translated as the Seventy about Aspiration), dedicate the  virtue  that  you
have accumulated. Do it with an aspiration so strong that  it  will  be  the
cause for fulfilling your provisional and final aims.


    2B4A-2A1C-2  Times and duration of meditation

         A  Indication of the times of meditation

Thus you should meditate in four sessions - at dawn, in the morning, in  the
afternoon and in the evening (Page 33).

If you are serious about your meditation, then you should meditate  in  four
sessions:
1. at predawn that is between 3~ 4am,
2. in the morning when there is some brightness in the sky,
3. in the afternoon after mid-day between 3~4pm, and
4. at nightfall after sunset between 7~8pm.
Basically, there are two sessions before 12 noon and two sessions  after  12
noon.

         B  How to meditate in the beginning

Moreover, if [your sessions are] long in the beginning it is  easy  to  fall
under the power of laxity and excitement. As  it  is  difficult  to  correct
this state of mind once you have got used to it, you should have many  short
sessions. If you break off the session when  there  is  still  a  desire  to
meditate, you will really want to enter meditation the next time, too.  They
say that otherwise, you will be overcome by nausea  at  the  sight  of  your
practice place (Page 33).

In the beginning, you should have short not long  sessions  and  you  should
have many short sessions. When you start by meditating for a very long  time
from the beginning, it will  make  you  susceptible  to  falling  under  the
influence of laxity and excitement. When you  constantly  experience  laxity
and excitement and this becomes a habit, it will be  difficult  for  you  to
correct that bad habit in the future. Therefore right  from  the  beginning,
you should have short sessions.

I would like to give you some idea what laxity is.  Laxity  can  be  divided
into:
1. Coarse laxity: in the case of coarse laxity, when you  bring  the  object
of meditation to mind, you are  able  to  abide  on  the  chosen  object  of
meditation but the object does not appear clearly. There is  the  factor  of
stability but there is no factor of clarity.
2. Subtle laxity: during the meditation session,  there  will  come  a  time
when you have both the factors of clarity and stability, but your mind  does
not  hold  the  object  of  meditation  firmly,  i.e.,   the   strength   of
apprehending the object may not  be  strong.  This  happens  when  there  is
subtle laxity in the mind.

An ideal meditation session should possess both the factor of stability  and
the factor of clarity. What are the  two  primary  hindrances  to  achieving
them?  They are laxity and excitement:
 • Laxity hinders the development of clarity. When there is  laxity  in  the
   mind, the factor of clarity is not there although there is the factor  of
   stability.
 • Excitement hinders the development of stability. Excitement  happens  due
   mainly to attachment where the mind is distracted by another object. That
   is a clear sign that the mind is under the influence of excitement.  When
   there is stability, the mind abides on the object of meditation.
There will be an extensive discussion on laxity and excitement when we  come
to the topic of meditative serenity and calm-abiding. For now,  this  is  to
give you some idea of what laxity and excitement is. Keep them in mind.

         C  How to sustain [the meditation] once it has stabilized a bit and
         advice on how to avoid exhaustion

When it has stabilized a bit, you should prolong  the  sessions,  sustaining
them all {42} free from the faults of being excessively  tense  or  relaxed.
Thereby small obstacles, over-exhaustion and  drowsiness  will  be  pacified
(Page 33).


    2B4A-2A2     What to do during the periods between sessions

         A  General practices enhancing the object [of meditation]
         B  The causes of calm abiding and special insight

    2B4A-2A2A    General practices enhancing the object [of meditation]

Generally speaking, there are numerous practices enhancing the  object  such
as prostration, circumambulation and recitation, however, the main point  is
that, having made an effort at the essence of  the  session[1],  if,  during
the intervals where you leave the session, you  let  go  carelessly  without
relying on mindfulness  and  introspection  with  respect  to  the  observed
object and aspect - which is the cause of sustaining [the meditation] -  the
outcome will be very little. Therefore, you should also  be  concerned  with
the Dharma [texts] teaching that [object] in between  sessions,  and  recall
it again and again. By various means you should  accumulate  the  collection
of conditions favourable to  the  arising  of  positive  qualities,  and  by
various  means  purify  the  adverse  conditions,  the  obscurations.   Your
determination with respect to the discipline you have  accepted,  the  basis
of everything, should be reaffirmed a lot[2] (Page 33).

This section refers to the activities that you should engage in  during  the
periods between sessions:
 • Whatever the object of meditation during the meditation session,  between
   sessions, you should read and consult texts that will help you to sustain
   the chosen object of meditation. When you do this then when you  re-enter
   the session, it will help and benefit you  in  that  meditation  session.
   Otherwise you may completely forget  the  object  of  meditation  between
   sessions. That will not help you  when  you  enter  the  next  meditation
   session. So it is extremely important to consult texts  that  talk  about
   the object of meditation that you are sustaining in your main practice.
 • During the periods between sessions, you can also engage in the practices
   of accumulating merit and purifying the mind of obscurations.
 • It is also very important to keep properly whatever vows you  have  taken
   during these periods between sessions.
In general, these are  the  practices  to  be  done  during  the  in-between
sessions.

Next are the different  conditions  that  are  helpful  in  achieving  calm-
abiding and special insight. If you are a serious practitioner who wants  to
meditate to achieve calm-abiding and special insight, then you should  train
in the collection of these four conditions.

    2B4A-2A2B    The causes of calm abiding and special insight

         1  Controlling the sense doors
         2  Vigilant behaviour
         3  Knowing the right measure of food
         4  Exerting oneself not sleeping and practicing yoga, and what to
         do when lying down to sleep

Apart from that, train in the collection of four causes for an easy  arising
of the paths of calm abiding and special insight, the four accumulations.

    2B4A-2A2B-1        Controlling the sense doors

In this regard: When  the  six  consciousnesses  arise  in  dependence  upon
objects and sense powers, after that attachment and  aversion  arise  toward
the six pleasant and the six unpleasant  objects  of  mental  consciousness.
Controlling the sense doors guards against their arising (Page 33).

Before any  sensory  consciousness  is  generated,  there  must  be  contact
between the sense object  and  its  respective  sensory  faculty.  When  the
object and the sensory faculty meet, the  respective  sensory  consciousness
is generated:
 • When the sensory faculty comes into contact with  an  attractive  object,
   attachment arises.
 • When the sensory faculty comes into contact with  an  unpleasant  object,
   then hostility (or anger) arises.
As a beginner you should try to  avoid  the  object,  be  it  attractive  or
otherwise. If for whatever  reason,  there  is  a  meeting  of  the  sensory
faculty with the object, you have to try as much as  possible  to  stop  the
afflictions from arising.   When  the  afflictions  arise  be  it  anger  or
attachment,  then  by  remembering  their  faults,  you  should  apply   the
antidotes immediately to overcome them. As  much  as  possible,  you  should
stop the arising of the afflictions, in particular, anger and attachment.


    2B4A-2A2B-2        Vigilant behaviour

Vigilant behaviour - in Engaging in Bodhisattva Behaviour it says:

         To examine time and time again,
         the situation of one’s mind and body-
         put concisely that and only that
         is the sign of protective vigilance.

Following this, whenever the body etc. engages in such and such  an  action,
you come to  understand  whether  or  not  it  should  be  done  and  behave
accordingly (Page 34).

You also have to be vigilant at all times, checking what your body,  speech,
and mind are up to. You have to maintain your vigilance whenever  you  carry
out physical activities such as moving, speaking, or thinking.


    2B4A-2A2B-3        Knowing the right measure of food

Knowing the right measure of food means to give up eating too  much  or  too
little and to eat only the amount that does not do damage to one’s  virtuous
activities. Furthermore, having meditated upon the drawbacks of craving  for
food, you should also remember what is said in the scriptures  about  eating
thinking that it should be without mental afflictions, that it should be  of
benefit to the giver, {43} that you now bring together  the  micro-organisms
of your body by means of material things and that in  the  future  you  will
bring them together by means of the Dharma, and that you  will  bring  about
the welfare of all sentient beings. In the Letter to a Friend it also says:

         Reasoning that foodstuffs are like medicine
         depend on them without attachment or hatred
         they are not meant for conceit nor for arrogance
         they are not meant to fatten you - just keep you going (Page 34).


You have to eat the right amount of food; not eating too little or too  much
as these will interfere with the  practice  of  virtue.  When  you  eat  too
little, you will become weak. When you eat too  much,  your  body  and  mind
become heavy, and lethargy increases. It is important  not  to  eat  out  of
afflictions. When you eat out  of  attachment,  you  have  to  remember  the
faults of food[3].

You are also advised to think about the following when you are eating:
  • to have the intention to benefit the person who is providing the food
  • that you are making charity by giving the food to the micro-organisms in
    your body. Through making this  connection,  in  the  future,  you  will
    gather these beings together by offering them the Dharma.
  • that you will accomplish the welfare of all living beings
In essence, when you eat, you should do so with the  thought  of  benefiting
all living beings. When  you  eat,  you  should  not  be  motivated  by  the
afflictions such as  anger  or  attachment.  You  can  think  that  you  are
eating in order to maintain this body so that you  can  continue  with  your
practice.


    2B4A-2A2B-4  Exerting oneself in yoga without sleeping, and what to do
    when lying down to sleep

         A  What to do when lying down to sleep
         B  How to apply [all this] to the intervals between all the
         meditations


    2B4A-2A2B-4A What to do when lying down to sleep

         1  [The time to lie down]

Exerting oneself not sleeping and practicing  yoga,  and  what  to  do  when
lying down to sleep. In the Letter to a Friend it says:

         Sensible one, great being  after all the day’s sessions,
         as well as the first and last ones of the night
         also sleep with mindfulness in between these
         so that during sleep, too, fruit will not be absent.


The essence of the sessions of both the entire day and the  first  and  last
part of the night as well as  what  should  be  done  in  between  is  being
explained.  Therefore,  having  walked  about  and  sat  down,  you   should
completely  purify  your  mind  of  the  five  obscurations  and  thus  make
[whatever you do] meaningful (Pages 34).

You should strive in virtue during the day. That means that you  should  not
sleep during the day. You should also be striving in  virtue  in  the  first
and last periods of the night. That means that you should only sleep in  the
intermediate period of the night.

Question: What are the five obstructions?

Answer: According to the endnote in page 388 of  the  Lamrim  Chenmo,  these
are: excitement and regret, malice, lethargy  and  sleepiness,  longing  for
desires, and doubt.


         2  The behaviour of sleep

As the behaviour of sleep occurs between sessions, it  should  also  not  be
wasted meaninglessly. In this regard, the conduct of the  body  consists  in
lying down, during the middle of three parts of the  night,  on  your  right
side placing the left leg on top of the right one and sleeping like  a  lion
(Page 35).

As sleep occurs between sessions, you should also make  it  meaningful.  How
should you sleep? During the middle portion  of  the  night,  you  sleep  by
lying on your right side, placing your left leg on  top  of  the  right  and
sleeping like a lion. You have to experiment  with  this  for  yourself.  By
sleeping like a lion, your sleep does not become heavy. The  sleep  will  be
light.


         3  Mindfulness

As for mindfulness, you should  rely  on  the  fact  that,  until  you  fall
asleep, it pursues the predominant virtuous action that you have  cultivated
during the day. Therefore, you can sustain your spiritual practice  such  as
meditative stabilisation even while asleep similarly to  when  you  are  not
asleep (Page 35).

Before it is time to sleep, you spend your time  cultivating  virtue,  i.e.,
training the mind in the entity of virtue. Just as you  are  about  to  fall
asleep, you should sustain that mindfulness on virtue. When you fall  asleep
while the mind is in  a  virtuous  state,  then  the  entire  sleep  becomes
virtuous. When you fall asleep while the mind is in  a  non-virtuous  state,
then the entire sleep becomes non-virtuous. Therefore you have to strive  to
ensure that you sleep with a virtuous state of mind.

         4  Vigilance

Vigilance: If any mental afflictions arise while you cultivate  mindfulness,
{44} you become aware of them and rather than grasping them eagerly  abandon
them.


         5  The discrimination of getting up

The discrimination of getting up  consists  in  projecting  the  thought  of
getting up at this and that hour (Page 35).

Before you go to sleep, you should project the  strong  intention  that  you
will wake up at a certain time. This practice will leave an imprint in  your
mind so that you  will  wake  up  at  the  desired  time.  It  does  make  a
difference.

Summary
  • During the actual meditation session, it is  important  to  sustain  the
    relevant meditation correctly.
  • With regard to the number of  sessions  that  you  should  have  in  the
    beginning, in general, you should enter into four meditation sessions  a
    day.
  • As a beginner, it is better to have many short sessions.
  • During  the  periods  between  sessions,  you  should  engage  in  those
    activities that will benefit you when  you  enter  the  next  meditation
    session. In particular, during the in-between sessions, you should  read
    and consult the texts that deal specifically with your chosen object  of
    meditation.
  • When you have to eat between sessions, you eat with a proper motivation,
    thinking, “I am going to eat in order to sustain this body so that I can
    continue with my practice.”
  • It is important to  eat  without  any  afflictions  such  as  anger  and
    attachment.
  • When it is time to  sleep,  which  occurs  during  the  periods  between
    meditation sessions, it is important to  fall  asleep  with  a  virtuous
    state of mind. It is said that when you  fall  asleep  with  a  virtuous
    state of mind, the entire sleep becomes virtuous.

The next lesson pertains to the  need  to  engage  in  both  analytical  and
stabilising meditations.

Question: How does a lion sleep?

Answer: By lying on your right side, place your left  leg  on  top  of  your
right leg and sleep like a lion. The Buddha showed  the  aspect  of  passing
away into the sorrowless state while lying in that  position.  You  can  see
some statues of the Buddha in that aspect.  When you go  to  sleep  in  that
way, it also becomes a practice of recollecting the Buddha.

Question: What is the length of a short meditation session?

Answer: That is up to the individual but it  should  not  be  more  than  an
hour. If you wish to start your practice at  predawn  that  is  around  3am,
then you have to sleep by 9pm. If you want to  wake  up  at  5am,  then  you
probably have to sleep at 10pm. I guess  then  you  should  have  sufficient
rest. When you are disciplined and with sufficient rest at night,  you  will
be able to do your practice in the morning. The mind  tends  to  be  clearer
and the memory works better in the morning.

Khen Rinpoche: Based on my own  experience,  when  you  do  so  many  things
during the day, the mind is tired. When you go  home  and  try  to  meditate
your mind is not as fresh as it is already tired. Whatever practice you  do,
it may look like you are doing something but nothing much will be  achieved.


So it is better that you sleep and have some rest. After you wake up in  the
morning, you do some exercise and then  you  do  your  meditation  practice.
Also your memory is much better at that time.

When I tried to remember some texts when  I  go  back  to  my  room,  it  is
extremely difficult. When I wake up in the morning and  I  try  to  remember
the same thing, it becomes easier. So that is the difference.

Many people say that they are not morning persons but night  people.  It  is
very difficult for me to understand that because your mind is too  tired  at
night due to lack of rest. If you want to practise at night,  how  can  that
be?

When you have proper rest during the night, your mind is at its best in  the
morning and you can focus on your practice. You can check whether  there  is
any difference when you try to  remember  something  at  night  and  in  the
morning. It seems that you can remember better  in  the  morning.  Therefore
you can also meditate better in the morning.




Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng
Edited by Cecilia Tsong
Checked by Shirley Soh



-----------------------
[1]  “The essence of the session” should  be  understood  to  refer  to  the
actual session.
[2] “Your determination with respect to the discipline  you  have  accepted,
the basis of everything, should be  reaffirmed  a  lot”  refers  to  keeping
whatever vows you have taken as they are the basis of everything.


[3] These are enumerated in Pages 105-106  of  The  Great  Treatise  on  the
Stages of the Path to Enlightenment by Tsong-kha-pa, Volume One,  translated
by  The  Lamrim  Chenmo  Translation  Committee,  First  Edition  USA  2000.
Copyright: Tibetan Buddhist Learning Center 2000. For the sake  of  brevity,
this text will be referred to henceforth as the Lamrim Chenmo.

