Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L10 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.472007
================================================================================



Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi

Root text: The Middle Length Lam-Rim by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by  Trijiang  Rinpoche  are
in small lettertype, to be distinguished from Lama Tsongkhapa’s own  outline
that is in larger lettertype.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


Lesson No: 10                       Date: 19th July 2011


Khen Rinpoche[1]: Last week, we didn’t have class. You probably all  enjoyed
that! I went to visit Rinpoche, supposedly for just four days but it  turned
out to be seven days. Rinpoche wrote a postcard to everyone that  says,  “My
dear devoted students, how are you? Please study the Dharma  and  enjoy  the
life with bodhicitta. Thank you very much.”

I was supposed to come back on Wednesday. In the  morning,  I  went  to  see
Rinpoche and he wrote the postcard.  Normally,  he  cannot  write  with  his
right hand but he wrote this postcard with his right hand. He said  that  he
is  trying  his  best  to  recover  by  exercising  and  doing  whatever  is
necessary.  That morning, I went at 10 o’clock to offer khata as  my  flight
was at 1 o’clock. He wrote the postcard and I was supposed to leave.

But, suddenly, he checked his mo and he told me not to leave right then.  So
I had to change my ticket. The next day, there was a  small  ceremony.  That
is why we postponed the Thursday class.

After he wrote the postcard and  looked  at  it,  he  started  to  laugh  at
himself. Rinpoche is extremely happy that so many people  are  studying  the
Buddhadharma in Singapore. He always says that the  whole  point  of  having
centres is to make it possible for many people to  study  the  Buddhadharma.
He is extremely happy that there are so many people joining  the  teachings.
He said, “Thank you,” to everyone in ABC who have prayed for  him  and  also
performed many animal liberations.

Someone teased me that half my hair is already white. Now, having  this  new
title (Khen Rinpoche), my hair will soon turn completely  white.  They  said
that maybe that may look even nicer!

At this moment, I need to do two jobs,  here  and  in  Kopan.  I  could  not
really reject their request because Khensur Rinpoche is  sick  and  Rinpoche
is not feeling well. I have accepted their request but I  am  not  sure  for
how long.

Lama Zopa Rinpoche has mentioned and, in particular, His Holiness the  Dalai
Lama, has emphasised in recent times, that it is important for all of us  to
be 21st century Buddhists. You may have  adopted  Buddhism  as  a  religion,
practising it merely out  of  belief  and  faith,  or  practising  it  as  a
continuation of the tradition of your forefathers, or staying as a  Buddhist
by making simple prayers and being happy with that alone. His  Holiness  has
mentioned and emphasised many times, that  is  not  the  way.  You  need  to
remember and keep in your heart this particular advice  from  His  Holiness.
Remembering that advice as much as possible, you  should  pay  attention  to
your studies.

I think all of  you  are  educated  and  have  received  a  modern,  secular
education. You have gone through the whole system. Studying hard and  taking
exams were part of  that  system.  You  had  finished  with  that  and  were
probably sick of it.

In spite of that,  you  have  now  developed  this  interest  to  study  the
Buddha’s teachings. When I think about  this,  I  find  it  amazing.  It  is
really wonderful that all  of  you  have  an  interest  to  study.  That  is
amazing.

But just having the interest and some determination  from  your  side,  that
does not necessarily mean  that  you  will  complete  your  studies.  It  is
important to work continuously at your studies.  Just  having  the  interest
and determination alone is not enough. In particular,  when  you  are  doing
something like this, during the course of your studies, you  may  experience
all kinds of problems  and  obstacles.  Some  people  may  not  be  able  to
overcome these obstacles. Others  may  drop  out  in  the  course  of  their
studies.  These  things  happen.  Therefore,   having   the   interest   and
determination alone does not necessarily mean that you  will  complete  your
studies.

You must gather the conditions for you to be able to  finish  your  studies.
One of them is to make aspirational prayers and  single-pointed  request  to
the Buddha or your special meditational deity for success in  your  studies.
When you make such single-pointed requests, it is not just  for  success  in
your studies in this life. You have to continuously pray to be able to  meet
these teachings, the extensive and  profound  path  to  enlightenment,  from
life to life.  Making  strong  aspirational  prayers  for  success  in  your
studies and practice is very important. Do that continuously.

You can see that, in order  to  be  able  to  complete  your  studies,  many
conditions and factors must come together. Take  my  own  example.  I  never
thought that I would be able to  complete  my  studies,  simply  due  to  my
intelligence. I think that, perhaps, there may be some karma  from  my  past
lives. But I made it a point to always  make  aspirational  prayers  in  the
course of my studies. While  studying  in  the  monastery,  usually  in  the
morning, we will have morning prayers in the main  assembly  hall,  starting
from about 5.30am. I will make it a point to pray in the assembly hall.

In Sera Je Monastery,  we  have  a  shrine  dedicated  to  the  Most  Secret
Hayagriva, the deity of the college. I don’t  think  I  ever  missed  making
prayers, on a regular basis, in front of that shrine. This was  what  others
did as well. It is common  for  the  monks  studying  in  Sera  Je  to  make
prayers. I attributed my success in being  able  to  finish  my  studies  to
those prayers I made, especially to Hayagriva.

Therefore, it is important  to  have  the  determination  to  continue  your
studies and, also to constantly make aspirational prayers and requests  and,
also to constantly accumulate the conditions for success, such as doing  the
practice of the seven-limb. When you do all these things, then it  helps  to
further increase  and  strengthen  your  determination  to  study.   In  the
process, your faith in and devotion to the Buddha, Dharma  and  Sangha  will
also gradually increase.

There are many different modules in this Basic Program. We will  be  looking
at different topics and texts. When you compare this Middle  Length  Lam-Rim
to  the  other  topics  in  the  Basic  Program,  it  is   relatively   less
challenging. Some of the other texts in the Program are more challenging.

Because of that, in the future, when studying these texts,  it  is  possible
that you may think, “What on earth has this got to do  with  my  life?”  You
may not see how the  text  relates  to  or  benefits  your  life.  “How  can
studying this benefit me?”

At that time, it is important to make aspirational prayers  to  be  able  to
continue and to change your perspective  by  thinking  that  there  must  be
something in these texts because they are the Buddha’s teachings. Then,  you
just have to work at it.

Generally speaking, I think it  is  normal  that,  in  the  course  of  your
studies, especially with regard to certain topics or texts, you may not  see
their relevance to your life and how they can benefit you.  It  is  only  at
the end, when you have completed all the different topics and you then  look
back, that you will appreciate their relevance  and  benefit.  This  is  the
experience of many people. When they finished their studies, they  say,  “Oh
yes. There is something in this.”  But while they were  studying,  they  did
not realise how relevant it was.

Rinpoche said that you should  approach  our  studies  with  enthusiasm  and
delight. You should remind yourself how  fortunate  you  are  to  have  this
opportunity and also to have the interest to want  to  study  these  topics.
You should remember that you are very fortunate to even have an interest  to
study some of the complicated and difficult texts in the Basic Program.  You
should remind yourself of that.

You should ensure that you remain a fortunate  being.  If  you  began  as  a
fortunate being and, in the process, end up as an unfortunate  being,  then,
that is completely pointless. Would it not be better if you  were  to  start
off and remain as a fortunate being? So, let’s all try to remain within  the
ranks of the fortunate ones.

                         **************************
Generally, in life, whenever you  have  to  learn  something,  you  have  to
depend on a teacher or instructor. Likewise here, if you  want  to  progress
to the state of enlightenment, you need to depend or  rely  on  a  spiritual
teacher or a virtuous friend, who is capable of guiding and leading  you  to
that state. That being the case, you  need  to  search  for  and  find  that
Mahayana teacher, who is able  to  guide  and  lead  you  to  the  state  of
enlightenment.

What are the defining characteristics of a qualified  Mahayana  teacher  who
can lead you to enlightenment?  These qualities were stated by  Maitreya  in
his Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras.

In Ornament of the Sutras it says that the  disciple  needs  to  rely  on  a
spiritual teacher possessed of ten properties:

         A spiritual teacher with discipline, calm, complete peace,
         more qualities, effort, rich in scriptural transmissions,
         who has thoroughly realized suchness, is eloquent,
         loving, and no more discouraged - on that one rely (Pages 19 –  20)
         !

In the text, the  quality  of  being  at  “complete  peace”  (or  thoroughly
pacified) is said to mean possessing  the  higher  training  in  wisdom  and
having  “thoroughly  realised  suchness”  means  having  the  knowledge   of
reality.

This quotation comes from the Ornament for the Mahayana Sutras. The view  of
reality expounded in that text is that which is common  to  or  shared  with
the Mind Only School (MOS) and the Middle Way School (MWS).

Therefore, with regard to selflessness  in  accordance  with  these  tenets,
there is a distinction in the subtlety between the selflessness  of  persons
and the selflessness of phenomena. That being the case here, the quality  of
being thoroughly pacified refers to the higher training in wisdom.  In  this
context,  that  is  interpreted  to  mean  having  the  realisation  of  the
selflessness of persons, whereas having a thorough knowledge of  reality  is
interpreted  to  mean  having  the  realisation  of  the   selflessness   of
phenomena. For example, it can mean having the realisation  of  selflessness
of phenomena, as asserted by the MOS. But here, in  this  context,  you  can
also interpret  this  from  the  perspective  of  the  highest  school,  the
Consequence Middle Way School (the CMWS). That means taking the  meaning  of
the selflessness of phenomena according to  the  viewpoint  of  the  highest
school. This is one way of looking  at  the  difference  between  these  two
qualities.
To summarise, there is a difference between the quality of being  thoroughly
pacified and the quality of the thorough knowledge of reality:
   • The quality of being thoroughly pacified means having the  realisation
     of the selflessness of persons.
   • The quality of the thorough knowledge  of  reality  means  having  the
     realisation of the selflessness of phenomena.

Those of you who did the previous Basic Program will probably have  an  idea
of what I  said.  As  for  the  newer  students,  I  don’t  think  you  will
understand what I said, but it is only a matter of  time.  Slowly,  it  will
all become crystal clear.

Furthermore it says that someone who has not disciplined himself,  for  that
reason is not in a position to discipline someone else. A  spiritual  master
disciplining others has to be someone who  has  first  disciplined  his  own
mind. You  may  wonder:  “Well  then,  in  what  way  does  it  need  to  be
disciplined?” To accomplish anything at all that  occurs  to  you  and  then
label it a realizational quality because it exists in the  mind,  is  of  no
benefit. This is why a system  of  mental  discipline  compatible  with  the
general teachings of the Jinas is necessary. That has  been  ascertained  as
the three precious trainings, and  therefore,  ethical  discipline  and  the
other two have been set forth. In this regard “disciplined”  refers  to  the
training in ethical discipline. In the Individual Liberation it says:

         In accord with the unruly horse of the mind
         always wilfully straying away:
         a bridle strutted with hundred sharp nails -
         that’s individual liberation


Someone skilled at breaking in wild horses tames them by  means  of  a  good
bridle. The sense  powers  pursue  wrong  objects  {26}  like  wild  horses.
Ethical  discipline  subjugates  them  as  one  engages   in   inappropriate
activities and through many efforts makes one engage in  what  ought  to  be
done. Someone trained in it has likewise tamed the horse of the  mind  (Page
20).

“Disciplined’ means training  in  the  ethics  of  the  vinaya.  This  means
controlling one’s senses such that one does not follow  after  inappropriate
objects and engage in  inappropriate  behaviour.  Instead,  one  engages  in
appropriate behaviour.  That is what is meant by abiding in ethics.

      “Calm” means having developed the  training  of  concentration  where,
based on mindfulness and introspection with regard to engaging  in  positive
and counteracting unwholesome behaviour, the  mind  abides  in  a  state  of
inner calm (Page 20).

The quality of being “calm” (or serene) means that,  by  relying  constantly
on mindfulness and introspection (or vigilance), one is aware not to  engage
in inappropriate actions and one is aware that one should engage  in  proper
actions. This then leads to a stable mind.

“Complete peace” means that based on calm abiding of a serviceable mind  the
training of wisdom has been developed through  individual  analysis  of  the
correct meaning [of reality] (Page 20).

The quality of “complete peace” (or being thoroughly pacified)  means  being
able to analyse, with reasoning, and then coming to an ascertainment of  the
selflessness of persons.

When you  look  at  these  three  qualities,  “disciplined,  calm,  complete
peace,” they are basically pointing out that the prospective  teacher  needs
to possess good behaviour and a stable mind. But  that  is  not  enough.  He
also needs wisdom, in particular, the wisdom that is able  to  differentiate
between good and bad.

However, it is not enough merely to have developed - thus, by means  of  the
three trainings - the qualities of realization that act to  tame  the  mind.
As the quality of scriptural knowledge is also needed, [we  have]  “rich  in
scriptural transmissions” meaning that the three collections  and  so  forth
have been studied extensively. According to Geshe [Drom] Tonpa:

         For someone  to  be  called  a  Mahayana  guru,  he  must  generate
         boundless understanding when he explains, and when he practices, he
         must show what is of benefit and direct significance  in  the  last
         days of the teachings.


“Realization of suchness” refers to the training in wisdom[2] -  realization
of the selflessness of phenomena. Alternatively, it is  mainly  held  to  be
manifest suchness. However, even if this is not present,  it  is  said  that
this [criterion] is also fulfilled by a realization through  scriptures  and
reasonings.
      That being so, even if he has scriptural knowledge  and  realizations,
it is not enough for them to be inferior or equal to that  of  the  disciple
and therefore someone with more qualities is needed. In the Verse it says:

         People relying on someone inferior wither,
         those relying on one of their peers stay the same,
         those relying on leaders achieve excellence.
         Therefore rely on those ahead of you
         Possessed of discipline, perfect peace,
         and the most exalted wisdom-
         if you rely on any such a lord,
         {27} you even end up ahead of him.


That is why. Puchungwa said: “As I listen to the accounts of the  saints,  I
look up to them” and Tashi: “I take the old men  at  Radreng  as  a  model.”
Accordingly, we need someone with more qualities as a model to look  up  to.
Those six properties like this are qualities you yourself attain  [for  your
own welfare] (Pages 20 – 21).

 “The old men at Radreng”: “old men” means someone senior or elder. In  this
context, it could be referring to the elders, who include holy  beings  such
as Drom Tonpa, who was not an ordained person. He took the aspect of  a  lay
person.

These six qualities are obtained for oneself. For someone to be  a  Mahayana
teacher, these are the six qualities that he should possess.


         B  Positive qualities necessary for the welfare of others

The remaining ones are qualities for taking care of others. As they say:

         The Capable Ones do not wash away evil with water,
         they do not remove the suffering of beings by hand,
         they do not graft their realizations on others-
         they liberate, teaching the truth of reality’s nature.

As is being expressed here, apart from taking care of others, having  taught
them the path in an unmistaken manner, nothing  can  be  done  washing  away
negativities with water and the like (Page 21).

Now is a question for  the  “elders”  of  the  class.  Can  negativities  be
purified by water or not?

In this verse, Buddha said that the buddhas do not purify  the  negativities
of sentient beings with water. But, in the Nyung-Na  practice,  there  is  a
ritual where you take three sips of water. When you take the  first  sip  of
water, you imagine that it purifies  the  obscurations  to  liberation.  The
second sip purifies the obscurations to omniscience and  the  third  sip  is
when you realise the dharmakaya.

This is something to think about but it is very clear what is  being  stated
here:

         The Capable Ones do not wash away evil with water,
         they do not remove the suffering of beings by hand,
         they do not graft their realizations on others-
         they liberate, teaching the truth of reality’s nature.

The buddhas liberate by  teaching  the  Dharma  and  showing  the  path.  In
particular, they liberate by teaching the meaning of dependent  origination.
What sentient  beings  have  to  do  is  to  understand  the  teachings  and
ascertain them in their own  minds.  That  is  how  one  is  liberated  from
samsara and cyclic existence. This is the approach of the Buddhist path.

Out of the four characteristics for this, “eloquent” means experienced  with
regard to the stages of guidance and skilled at putting the  meaning  across
to the minds of those to be tamed (Page 21).

“Eloquent” (or skilled in instructing disciples) refers to being skilled  in
both the process of leading disciples and being adept  at  causing  them  to
understand. The teacher can lead  his  respective  disciples,  according  to
their paths, and is skilled in giving concise  instructions,  in  accordance
with whatever they may need.

“Loving” means having a pure motivation to teach  the  Dharma  and  teaching
motivated by compassion without regard for material gain  or  respect  (Page
21).

The Mahayana teacher must teach, motivated  by  concern  and  love  for  the
listeners.

We need someone like Potowa [who] said to Chengawa: “Son  of  Lima,  however
many explanations of the Dharma I have given, not once have  I  claimed  the
applause as my own. There is no migrating being that is not  pitiable  (Page
21).”

This quality of possessing loving concern means that, when  you  teach,  you
should teach without being motivated by desire or attachment.  For  example,
you may be looking for praise. “They will  think  I  am  so  good,”  and  so
forth. So, without such thoughts and  motivation,  you  must  teach  out  of
loving concern for the listeners.

“Energetic” (“with energy”) means constantly delighting in  the  welfare  of
others (Page 21).

“Energetic” refers to joyous perseverance, a mind that  delights  in  virtue
and the welfare of others.  So,  when  a  teacher  teaches,  his  motivation
should not be mixed with anger.

Having abandoned  discouragement”  (“no  more  discouraged”)  means  not  to
become weary due to explaining things over and over  again,  but  rather  to
bear the hardships of explaining (Page 21).

When you examine the teacher, the ideal teacher  is  someone  who  possesses
all these ten qualities. But if you are unable to find such a teacher,  then
you look for one with middling qualifications. Here,  the  text  is  talking
about a teacher who possesses the best  defining  characteristics.  This  is
followed by a discussion of what constitutes the middling  and  the  minimum
qualifications.

    2B4A-1B1B-2  Middling characteristics

Potowa said: “The three trainings, realization  of  suchness  and  a  loving
heart - those five are the main thing. My master Shangtsun is not very  {28}
learned in everything, as he cannot bear disenchantment either, he does  not
impress on his mind the kindness he received. However, as he has the above[-
mentioned] five, whoever is in his  presence  benefits.  Nyanton  is  by  no
means eloquent and each time he makes a dedication the only thing  he  knows
is that, again, nobody understood  anything,  but  as  he  has  those  five,
people near him benefit.”

    2B4A-1B1B-3  Minimum characteristics

         A  The actual minimum of characteristics

Even if it is difficult, due to the times,  to  find  someone  who  has  the
complete set of characteristics like that, it is said that  you  should  not
rely on anyone whose  faults  are  greater  or  whose  faults  and  positive
qualities are equal, but on someone  whose  positive  qualities  exceed  the
faults (Pages 20 – 21).

With regard to the  minimum  qualifications  of  a  Mahayana  teacher,  when
comparing his qualities versus his faults, that teacher’s  qualities  should
exceed  his  faults.  In  particular,  that  teacher  should  emphasise  the
happiness of future lives more than the happiness of this life. In  weighing
the  interest  of  others  versus  his  own  interest,  the  teacher  should
emphasise benefiting others. These are the  minimum  qualifications  that  a
Mahayana teacher should have.

Next is some very important advice from Lama Tsongkhapa.


         B  The expediency of association with the characteristics

Such a spiritual master bringing about complete liberation  is  a  perpetual
root of aspiration. Therefore, those wishing to rely on a spiritual  teacher
should be aware  of  them  and  make  an  effort  looking  for  someone  who
possesses the characteristics. Those wishing to have disciples rely on  them
should also strive to acquire these characteristics (Page 22).

Lama Tsongkhapa paid great attention  to  stating  very  clearly,  from  the
onset, the importance of relying on a qualified teacher.  The  problem  with
many people is that they overlook this point. They do not pay  attention  to
this and run into a lot of complications later.

You need to depend on a teacher for guidance. You must  know  what  kind  of
teacher you need. That means that you  need  to  look  for  someone  who  is
qualified. In order to be able to find a qualified teacher,  you  must  know
what to look for.

Therefore, from the very beginning, you should be very sure of the  defining
characteristics that you must look for in a teacher. You  should  understand
what they are, ascertain them well and then check  whether  the  prospective
teacher possesses these qualities. After analysing the  prospective  teacher
to check whether he possesses these qualities and you are confident of  your
choice, then you can take that person as  your  teacher,  and  rely  on  and
devote yourself to that person.

It says in the Lam-Rim that, after having found your teacher, you must  rely
on him correctly. By doing so, you establish the very  root  of  the  entire
path to enlightenment.

Only when you are confident  that  the  prospective  teacher  possesses  the
requisite qualities, after you have done your analysis,  only  then  do  you
establish a guru-disciple relationship,  with  the  recognition,  from  your
side,  that  this  person  is  now  your  guru.  After  you  developed  that
recognition, from then on, you have to devote  yourself  to  him  correctly.
You should pay attention to whatever teachings or advice is  given  by  your
teacher.

People ask me, “Geshe-la, can I take this person as my  guru?”  I  will  not
say no but I will not say yes either. Rather, my usual reply  is,  “What  do
you want to receive from that teacher? Why do you want to take  that  person
as your teacher?” This is what I usually ask them.

People have a variety of reasons for taking on someone as  a  teacher.  Some
people take on a person as their guru because that person is  famous.  There
are some who take a lama as a guru because that lama is able to heal  others
by reciting mantras and blowing on them. They take this healing  ability  as
a qualification. Everybody has his own reasons.

Basically, you should know what you are looking  for.  If  that  person  can
give you what you are looking for, then it is up to you,  because  you  have
to make your own decision. If that person can give you what you are  looking
for, then you can relate to that person with love and  respect.  That  makes
sense. It boils down to what you are looking for  and  whether  that  person
can give you what you are looking for.

In this context, we have been  discussing  the  qualities  of  the  Mahayana
guru. You must understand that we are talking about  someone  who  can  lead
you to enlightenment. If  you  seek  enlightenment,  you  have  to  rely  on
someone who can bring you there. Someone who can bring you to  enlightenment
is  someone  who  possesses   these   ten   defining   characteristics.   If
enlightenment is what you want, then you have to look for  someone  who  has
these qualities. Once you have found him, you then devote correctly to  that
person as your guru. Then, great benefits will ensue.

Next is  a  discussion  on  the  defining  characteristics  of  the  student
himself. What are the defining characteristics of a student who relies on  a
guru who possesses those ten defining characteristics?

You should be aware by now there  is  a  discussion  session  on  Sunday  at
1.30pm. As I have mentioned before, for those of you who have  committed  to
the program, it is very important that you attend  the  discussion  session.
(Khen Rinpoche then gave the questions for discussion on 24th July 2011)

Question: Lama Atisha’s Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment says,  “From  the
seven types of pratimoksha vows  taught  by  the  Tathagata…,”  but  in  the
previous lesson, you  mentioned  that  there  are  eight  divisions  of  the
pratimoksha vows. Is the one-day vow  or  fasting  vow  something  that  was
added on by Tibetan scholars after Lama Atisha?

Answer: The eight pratimoksha vows are for:
   1. A fully ordained monk
   2. A fully ordained nun
   3. A nun in training for full ordination 
   4. A novice monk
   5. A novice nun 
   6. A male lay practitioner
   7. A female lay practitioner
   8. One-day vows
If you include the one-day vows, then you have the eight vows.

Question: With reference to the third quality of  the  teacher,  “thoroughly
pacified,” according to the commentary by Geshe Sopa,  that  refers  to  the
highest insight into the nature of reality. He mentions a  special  kind  of
wisdom that arises from investigating the ultimate nature of  the  self  and
phenomena. He also mentions the conjoining of  single-pointed  concentration
and highest insight that produces a superior kind of  analytical  wisdom.  I
don’t think that he is talking about generating  the  wisdom  realising  the
selflessness of persons alone. Please comment on this.

Answer: If Geshe Sopa  said  the  qualities  of  “thoroughly  pacified”  and
“knowledge of reality” are the same, you should ask him why he said that.

I think it is difficult to say that these two refer  to  the  same  quality.
They must be different. That is why there are ten qualities and  “thoroughly
pacified” and “knowledge of reality” are enumerated separately.

Lama Tsongkhapa specifically refers to the “knowledge  of  reality”  as  the
special training in wisdom. This means that it is set apart from  the  third
quality, “thoroughly pacified.” There is room here for further discussion.

It is important to consult different opinions from various texts  but  every
individual must come to his own conclusion. I am not saying that what I  had
said here is necessarily the only correct answer.

For sure, some commentaries make the text easier  to  understand  but  these
commentaries should help you to understand the intent or the  position  that
is stated in the root text itself.  Whatever  commentaries  or  explanations
you may refer to must accord  with  the  view  of  the  root  text.   It  is
important to keep in mind, as the basis, the root text itself.

Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme;Transcribed by Phuah  Soon  Ek,  Vivien  Ng
and Angie Xiao; Edited by Cecilia Tsong; Checked by Shirley Soh
-----------------------
[1] Geshe Chonyi has taken over as Khen  Rinpoche  of  Kopan  Monastery.  He
will therefore be referred to, henceforth, as Khen Rinpoche.
[2] This should read as “the special training in wisdom.”

