Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L34 (final).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.223120
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


   Lesson No: 34                Date: 14th February 2012


In the last lesson we looked at the meaning of karma that is done and  karma
that is accumulated.

Let us use studying the Dharma as an illustration.  How does one  accumulate
the karma of studying the Dharma? In order for us to accumulate this  karma,
there must be a very strong and long-lasting drive and intention that  wants
to study the Dharma. Karma is a mental factor. When  you  have  this  strong
and long-lasting intention to study the Dharma, it moves your  mind  towards
the object, i.e., studying. Only then can you say that you are  accumulating
the karma of studying the Dharma.

Khen Rinpoche: So are you accumulating the karma  to  study  the  Dharma  or
not?

In the last lesson we saw that in order for karma  to  be  accumulated,  the
intention has to be strong and long-lasting. If  your  intention  is  strong
and long-lasting, then you will accumulate the karma of studying.  You  will
definitely experience the result of the karma  that  you  have  accumulated.
When you have the strong and  long-lasting  intention  to  study,  you  will
experience the result of being able to complete your studies.  That  is  the
effect.

When you have the strong and long-lasting intention to study, then you  will
actually carry out that intention and physically engage in the  activity  of
studying. You will then also create the karma of studying. In this case  you
will have both the karma that is accumulated and the karma that is done.

The result of having  created  the  karma  of  studying  is  that  you  will
definitely experience the result without which  your  studies  will  not  be
completed. When you do not create and  accumulate  the  karma  of  studying,
then of course you will not have the result of having  studied  the  Dharma.
So it is very important to strive to have these two: to create the karma  of
studying and to accumulate the karma of studying. When you have  these  two,
then you will definitely experience  the  result.  You  may  experience  the
result in this life. If not, then in the next life or  some  other  lifetime
but the result is definite.

                             ******************

         5  [Further classification of that which will definitely be
         experienced]

{114} What will definitely be experienced has three  [categories]  in  terms
of the time when the result is experienced:
      1. That which will be  experienced  as  a  visible  phenomenon  is  an
action [?*Karma?] whose effect will be experienced in this life.
      2. That which will be experienced after taking rebirth is [an  action]
whose effect will be experienced in the following life.
      3. That which will be experienced at another  time  is  what  will  be
experienced from the next but one life onwards (Page 93 – 94).

From the viewpoint of the time when you  will  experience  a  result  of  an
action, there are three:
1. Karma that you experience now as the effects of  actions  that  ripen  in
   the very lifetime in which you did those actions.
2. Karma that you will experience after taking rebirth, i.e., in  your  next
   life.
3. Karma that you will experience at some other time.

Very often people ask, “When will we experience the results  of  a  virtuous
or non-virtuous action?” That information is not here in the  Middle  Length
Lam-Rim but it appears in the Lamrim Chenmo.

The way in which virtuous and non-virtuous karma ripens is as follows:
1. Whether it is a  virtuous  or  non-virtuous  karma,  whichever  karma  is
   heaviest will ripen first.
2. If both karmas are equal, then the karma that manifests at  the  time  of
   death will ripen first.
3. If at the time of death both karmas are  manifest,  the  karma  that  you
   have been predominantly habituated to will ripen first.
4. If you are equally habituated to both karmas, then  the  karma  that  you
   have done first will ripen first.

Is it possible for all those factors to be the same?

A question for the next discussion session:
There aren’t any examples  of  actions  that  are  not  done  but  that  are
accumulated for the three non-virtuous mental actions (covetousness,  malice
and wrong view). Does this mean that if it is a non-virtuous mental  action,
it is necessarily both accumulated and done?

This appears in the Lamrim Chenmo, not in the Middle Length Lam-Rim.

Also think about: Why are the three non-virtuous mental actions  not  karma?
The answer given in the text is that it is  because  they  are  afflictions.
You then have to explain why an affliction cannot be karma.

Khen Rinpoche: Did you get the question? You must  get  the  question.  Then
you can think about it, ask other people, look at  the  text.  That  is  the
best way to learn.


    2B4B-2B1A-2B2B-1        The fully ripened positive qualities and their
    function

         A  Excellent life span
         B  Excellent complexion
         C  Excellent extraction
         D  Excellent power
         E  Respectable words
         F  Renown as being very powerful [/infuential]
         G  Being male
         H  Possessing Strength

The first one has eight points: excellent life span,  excellent  complexion,
excellent extraction, excellent power, respectable words,  renown  as  being
very powerful [/infuential], being male, and having strength.

         A  Excellent life span

The first one means that due to an earlier throwing [action],  a  long  life
has been thrown and one  lives  accordingly.  Due  to  this,  you  undertake
actions for the purpose of yourself and others accumulating a lot of  virtue
over a long period of time.

         B  Excellent complexion

The second one refers to good complexion and shape[/built],  complete  sense
powers  and  balanced  proportions.  Due  to  this,  disciples  having  been
delighted at one’s very sight, are gathered and listen to one’s words.

         C  Excellent extraction

The third one is to be born into an exalted  [/high-ranking][?*you  gave  me
mthun po in brackets, but it's mthon po] and well-known family respected  by
the world.  Due to  this,  one’s  commands  will  be  accomplished  and  not
transgressed.

         D  Excellent power

The fourth one consists in massive resources, friends and followers. Due  to
this, one gathers a lot of sentient beings and ripens them.

         E  Respectable words

Fifth: As you do not deceive others through body or speech, sentient  beings
uphold your words. Due to this, you gather sentient  beings  with  the  four
[ways of] gathering[ disciple]s, and ripen them.

         F  Renown as being very powerful[/infuential]

Sixth: Due to possessing positive qualities such as diligence in  generosity
and so forth, you become an object of veneration of great beings. {115}  Due
to this, they help you with all activities, whereby  they  acknowledge  your
deeds and quickly heed your commands.

         G  Being male

The seventh one is to possess a male organ. Thereby you become a vessel  for
all qualities and, through aspiration and effort[/exertion],  a  vessel  for
expanding wisdom. You  are  not  afraid  [/intimidated]  among  people,  and
nobody will prevent you from going with all sentient  beings  or  living  in
seclusion.

         H  Possessing strength

Eighth: By the power of previous actions, there  naturally  being  only  few
harms and no diseases,  one  will  have  great  [/greater]  enthusiasm  that
arises from the conditions of this life.  Due to that, [?*de ni or des  ni?]
you will not get discouraged by whatever goals you or others may  have,  and
in dependence on intense enthusiasm  you  attain  the  power  of  individual
investigation  [/discriminating  thought]  whereupon  supernormal  cognitive
powers [/super knowledges] will be quick [to develop] (Pages 94 – 95).

When one is reborn as a human being with these eight  fruitions  or  special
qualities, they are the favourable bases for practice:
1. excellent life span
2. excellent complexion
3. excellent extraction (or lineage)
4. excellent power
5. respectable (or trustworthy) words
6. renown as being very powerful (or being a great power)
7. being male
8. possessing strength

  • An excellent life span does not refer only to having a  long  life.  The
    point of having a long life is to be able to work not only for your  own
    welfare but also for the benefit of others. When you are able to have  a
    long life, you will also be able to accumulate more virtuous actions.

  • The effect of having excellent colour is that people will  be  attracted
    to your looks so that you will be able to encourage and  cause  them  to
    engage in virtue.

  • An excellent lineage may be less apparent and important these  days  but
    during ancient times,  one’s  family  lineage  or  caste  would  make  a
    difference. When you are born with a  lineage  or  caste  that  is  well
    regarded in society, you will be able to make people listen to  you  and
    cause them to engage in virtue. If you are born in a  lower  caste,  you
    will not be able to influence others in the same way as  they  are  less
    likely to listen to you.

    I think there is a big difference in terms of the  type  of  lineage  or
    caste that people are born into. In  the  caste  system  in  India,  the
    Brahmin class was considered to be the highest in society. The  Brahmins
    placed a lot of emphasis on external cleanliness in various  aspects  of
    their lives and that definitely had an effect on the development of  the
    intelligence of those born in that caste. People who were  born  in  the
    lower castes in those days did not place much  emphasis  on  cleanliness
    and that had some effect on the development of their intelligence.


    Please take note that we are just talking about things  in  general.  Of
    course, there are always exceptions. I am not saying that is necessarily
    so. We cannot expect all Brahmins to be highly intelligent and that  all
    those born in the lower caste to be  less  intelligent.  We  cannot  say
    that. Here the quality of having excellent lineage is very much  related
    to the time and the situation in which one is born. When you relate this
    to ancient India during the time when there were such social  divisions,
    then there is a difference.


  • When you have excellent power, it means that you  will  have  a  lot  of
    resources at your disposal.  You  will  also  have  many  acquaintances,
    friends, and helpers who can help you. This makes a difference  to  your
    ability to gather sentient beings and to bring them to the Dharma.

  • The next fruition is respectable or trustworthy words.  This  refers  to
    not speaking in a way that will deceive others. When you do not speak in
    a deceitful way, others will see you as a valid authority.  When  people
    consider you a valid authority, you are then in a position to help them.



  • Renown as a great power

  • The attribute of being a male is also related to a particular period  in
    time. We are talking about this in a general way. There was a time  when
    being born male was considered to be a better  rebirth  and  males  were
    considered to be much more capable than women. However,  nowadays  there
    is greater equality between the sexes with women rights  and  so  forth.
    Perhaps one can think whether it is necessary to be born as  a  male  or
    not.

  • Having strength means having  great  enthusiasm  and  determination  for
    virtuous practices and the Dharma.

When one is born as a human being with  these  eight  fruitions,  they  will
make your life very favourable for practising the Dharma as you  will  enjoy
better conditions for Dharma practice and it  will  enhance  your  practice.
Therefore Lama Tsongkhapa advises us to pray to be born  as  a  human  being
with these eight fruitions.

These eight fruitions have their causes. You can read this for  yourself  in
the text. There you will find the causes that you need to  create  in  order
to gain the results of these eight fruitions.





    2B4B-2B1A-2B2B-2B  Threefold division [?]

         1  The first cause: a perfectly pure mind
         [2 The second cause: pure performance
         3  The third cause: a pure field]

If those eight causes are conjoint  [?]  with  three  [more]  causes,  their
fully ripened effects will be outstanding.

    2B4B-2B1A-2B2B-2B1 The first cause: a perfectly pure mind

         A  Aspects relating to oneself
         B  Aspects relating to others

As for the three causes, [the first one,] a  perfectly  pure  mind  has  two
aspects relating to oneself.

         A  Aspects relating to oneself

They are:
       1.  to  dedicate  the  virtues  of  accomplishing  those  causes   to
unsurpassed enlightenment without hoping for a fully ripened effect, and
      2. to accomplish the causes intensely from the bottom of one’s  heart.


         B  Aspects relating to others

The two aspects relating to others are:
      1. to give up envy, competitiveness and scorn  at  the  sight  of  the
highest, intermediate and  least  [practitioners]  in  agreements  with  the
Dharma and
      2. to rejoice, even if you do not manage [completely] to examine  many
times a day what to do (Page 96).

The text then goes on to talk about how when one engages in an  action  with
the three causes:
1. a perfectly pure mind (or pure attitude)
2. pure performance (or application)
3. pure field (or recipient)
then the results will be outstanding.


Having a pure attitude means not hoping for any results but you do  dedicate
the virtue from your actions towards achieving your  own  enlightenment  for
the benefit of others and creating the causes sincerely from the  depths  of
your heart.

When you see other practitioners who are  better  than  you,  who  are  your
equal,  or  who  are  lower  than  you,   you   should   abandon   jealousy,
competitiveness, and contempt. You should admire them and  rejoice  in  what
they are doing. Even if you are unable to do the above,  you  must  generate
the thought many times every day that this is something you must do.


    2B4B-2B1A-2B3      After these considerations how to engage [in
    virtuous actions] and oppose [/avoid][the non-virtuous]

         A  General presentation
         B  Specifically how to purify by means of the four powers (Page 97)

I will not go over some of the things in the text because  we  don’t  really
have the time. If we were to read everything in class, we won’t be  able  to
complete the text. Therefore it is important that you read  the  text.  When
there is anything that you do not understand, then you must bring it  up  in
class.

Now we will talk  about  how,  after  having  reflected  on  karma  and  its
results, are we to put it into practice, i.e., how  do  we  practise  virtue
and turn away from non-virtue.


    2B4B-2B1A-2B3A     General presentation

         1  How to bring forth a mind cultivating this perpetually, every
         day and night

First: In Engaging in [Bodhisattva] Behaviour it says:

         Suffering springs from what is non-virtuous.
         ‘How to reach certain freedom from it?’
         It is appropriate, day and night,
         Always to think about nothing but this.               [51]
And:
         The root of everything that’s virtuous
         Is aspiration, the Muni said.
         Again, the root of that is always
         To meditate on fully ripened effects.


In accordance with this statement you should  come  to  understand  positive
and negative actions with their effects and then meditate on this  over  and
over again, for [the karmic process][/karmic causality]  is  a  very  hidden
phenomenon which is why [/and consequently] it  is  extremely  difficult  to
gain certainty about it (Page 97).

The text is saying that it is difficult to gain conviction in karma and  its
results because the results of karma are very obscure. It is  difficult  for
us to see how a particular action can lead to a particular result.  This  is
beyond us.  Because this is so, therefore it makes it difficult  for  us  to
gain a conviction in karma and its results.

We will talk about this further in the next module on  Buddhist  philosophy.
For now, you just have to know that all phenomena  are  grouped  into  three
categories:
   1. Phenomena that are obvious (or manifest/directly perceptible)
   2. Phenomena that are slightly obscure (or hidden)
   3. Phenomena that are very obscure (or extremely hidden)

It is difficult to gain a full conviction in the workings of karma  and  its
results, especially the subtle points. In order to gain such  conviction  in
the workings of karma, having conviction in the Buddha’s  teachings  becomes
very important.

         2  The vital importance of gaining conviction concerning the
         Buddha’s statements about how actions [bring about] effects

In this regard the King of Concentration [Sutra] says:

         Even if the moon and stars fell [/came] down,
         The earth collapsed with mountains and with towns,
         And if the heaven’s aspect was transformed [/changed withal?] -
         Still no word you say would be untrue.                [52]


You should thus develop  conviction  in  the  words  of  the  Tathagata  and
sustain it. Unless you have gained uncontrived  certainty  about  them,  you
will not gain  the  certainty  with  regard  to  any  Dharma  that  gladdens
[/delights] the Jina (Page 97).

The text goes on to explain how an understanding of emptiness, the  ultimate
nature of reality,  assist  in  and  increase  one’s  understanding  of  and
conviction in karma. A correct understanding of emptiness does  not  in  any
way harm one’s conviction in karma.


         3  Meditation on emptiness becoming helpful for gaining certainty
         with respect to actions and their results

Some profess to have gained  certainty  about  emptiness  and  do  not  have
certainty with respect to actions and their results nor care about it.  They
have arrived at a mistaken understanding of emptiness …(Page 97)

There are people who think that they understand  emptiness  and  think  that
that means everything is empty. With that understanding they don’t give  any
consideration to the workings of karma. They do not value karma.  When  that
happens this shows that the person’s understanding of  emptiness  is  wrong.


… for if you understand emptiness, having seen  it  to  be  the  meaning  of
dependent relation, it becomes helpful for gaining  certainty  with  respect
to actions and their results (Page 97 – 98).

We will look at the meaning of emptiness in detail in  the  coming  modules.
For now we have to know  that  emptiness  here  refers  to  the  absence  of
inherent existence. Emptiness means the  emptiness  of  inherent  existence,
i.e., that things and events  do  not  exist  inherently.  When  things  and
events do not exist inherently, then how do phenomena exist? They  do  exist
but they  exist  as  dependent  originations,  i.e.,  they  are  dependently
arisen.

When one has the correct  understanding  of  emptiness  one  sees  that  its
meaning is dependent-arising. When you have a  very  good  understanding  of
dependent-arising, obviously it will  help  you  in  your  understanding  of
karma and its result.
From the same sutra:
         Like an illusion[/illusions], a bubble, a mirage or lightning,
         All phenomena are like the moon in water.
         Although human beings who after death
         Pass to other worlds do not perceive this, [?*where does Manu  come
         in?]whowhowowoooow
         {118} Actions once they are done do not disappear,
         White or black they cause like effects to ripen.
         The logical approach is good, but the subtle,
         And hard to see is the Jina’s object of thought (Page 98).

This paragraph is advising all of us that just knowing the  presentation  of
karma and its effects alone is not helpful and  will  not  prevent  us  from
going to a bad rebirth. The text continues:

         4  The uselessness of mere knowledge, if you do not think about the
         karmic process

Therefore you should generate certainty about the two [types of] karma,  the
causes along with their effects, and constantly, day and  night,  [?*missing
in German] cut [yourself off from] rebirths in bad migrations  by  means  of
examining the three gates (Page 98).

Here it is saying that we have to be conscientious of what we  do  with  our
body, speech, and mind. When we are able to do that then we will be able  to
put an end to rebirth in the lower realms.

As for how to [?] turn away from faulty conduct having thought about  it  in
this manner, it says in the Chapter of the Truthful One:

         O king, do not commit the act of killing,
         For every being life is a great loss [/very precious]
         Therefore, we all wish to keep it long.
         Even deep down [?] you should not consider killing.        [55]


Like this, you should get used to relying on the mind  of  restraint  a  lot
without your motivation even moving towards [?] misdeeds  such  as  the  ten
non-virtues (Page 98).

And Sharawa  said:  “The  Buddha  [?*missing  in  the  German]  taught  that
whatever errors and faults come about, they should not be blamed  on  [?]  a
bad direction or a bricklayer’s work; it is simply that ‘this action  having
been done this is produced’” (Page 99).

It is extremely important for us to gain an  understanding  of  the  general
characteristics of karma that  were  discussed  in  previous  lessons.   The
characteristics of karma are that:
   1. karma is definite
   2. karma increases.
   3. we will not experience the result of an action that we do not  create.
      4.      an action that we  created  will  not  disappear  on  its  own
      accord.


We have to understand  and  gain  a  conviction  in  these  characteristics.
Whatever problems and suffering that we may experience in life, we  have  to
understand that the main cause is karma.

We have to identify the causes for the happiness that we  desire.  You  have
to work at the main causes of the happiness you seek and  the  problems  you
are encountering. Since we  do  not  want  suffering  then  with  regard  to
whatever unpleasant experience we want to avoid, we  have  to  identify  the
main cause correctly and we should strive to abandon that main cause.  As  a
Buddhist we have to understand that the main cause is karma. The main  cause
of happiness and the main cause of suffering is karma. We have  to  identify
the causes correctly and then try to work on them.

People often miss the point. They don’t look for the  main  causes.  Instead
they work at the temporary conditions. They  blame  the  location  of  their
houses for their problems; the house was not facing  the  correct  direction
or the day was an inauspicious day. They then try to solve  the  problem  by
working at these factors but these are just the conditions and they are  not
the main causes for our suffering or happiness. The main cause is karma.

You have to pay attention to the main cause, i.e., karma. Focussing on  this
then sometimes you can look into those conditions such as the  location  and
direction (of the house). Then it is all right. As long you do  not  neglect
the main cause. But when you neglect the main cause, karma, and do not  work
on karma but try to change the temporary conditions,  then  that  is  wrong.
Even if you do that I do not think you will experience much change.

    2B4B-2B1A-2B3B     Specifically how to purify [non-virtues] by means of
    the four powers


         1  How negativities and downfalls need to be purified by various
         means in accordance with statements of the Teacher Buddha


         [2 How to redress downfalls


         3  How to redress negative actions


         4  How the four powers are complete with all the antidotes

          5 The manner of purification
          6 How it is necessary to strive not to be tainted by faulty
         conduct from the start](Page 99)

The next section in the text talks  about  confessing  negativities  through
applying the four opponent powers.

I do not remember exactly  where  in  the  Lamrim  Chenmo  but  there  is  a
sentence that says, “It is more difficult to realise the subtle workings  of
karma than to realise emptiness.” To realise emptiness is  difficult  enough
but it is really  much  more  difficult  to  gain  full  conviction  in  the
workings of karma. Realising emptiness, the ultimate nature of  reality,  is
really difficult and challenging but it  is  still  possible  to  gain  some
understanding through studying this subject. When you learn about  emptiness
you can apply various lines of reasoning and logic.  When  you  think  about
it, it is possible to gain some idea of emptiness.  But  when  it  comes  to
karma, when we say, “This action will have that result,” even if you try  to
use logic and reasoning, it is difficult  to  conclude,  “It  is  definitely
like that.”

Question: In the previous lesson you mentioned that  the  best  offering  to
the Buddha is the offering of the  practice  of  the  Dharma.  What  is  the
meaning of practice in this context?

Answer: The best offering to the Buddha is the offering of  practice,  i.e.,
putting the Dharma into practice. There are  many  different  practices.  To
give an illustration, the Buddha said, “It  is  good  to  practise  giving.”
When you hear and understand that teaching you then put  it  into  practice.
How do you do this? You increase the wish and your willingness to give.  You
then act on that wish by physically giving away something. That is  carrying
out the practice. Practice does not refer only to hearing the teachings.  It
is what you do after hearing the  teachings  and  you  then  carry  out  the
action with your body, speech, and mind.

Ultimately if you were to ask what  practice  is,  the  conclusion  is  that
practice means to change or transform the mind for the better by  increasing
the positive aspects of the mind. That is practice.

Question: With  regard  to  the  ripening  of  karma,  you  mentioned  karma
manifesting at the time of death. What is the meaning of karma manifesting?

Answer: At the time of death there are twelve  links  of  dependent-arising.
The links of craving and grasping  act  to  nourish  and  give  potency  and
strength to karma, be it good or bad karma; thus making the karma  powerful.


Karma manifesting means that that karma will cause you to take the  relevant
rebirth. That manifest karma is given strength and nourished by craving  and
grasping at the time of death. So karma manifests and causes you  to  go  to
where you are supposed to go.

The next section in the text talks about purifying our negativities  through
the four powers. There are quite a lot of things to  discuss  but  the  text
says, “Meditation on emptiness  is  one  of  the  most  powerful  means  for
purifying negativities.”

How does meditation on emptiness destroy your negativities?

Khen Rinpoche: You need to have the answer by Thursday. The senior  students
will talk and the new students will listen to what the senior students  have
to say.

Student 2:  Regarding your earlier answer on manifest karma,  you  mentioned
that  craving  and  grasping  will  activate  that  karma.  What  about  the
manifestation of good karma such  as  compassion  in  relation  to  a   good
rebirth? How does that answer relate to a good rebirth?

Answer: It does not matter where you are reborn in samsara. Even the  higher
realms - human, demigod, and god realms - are still in samsara. If it  is  a
rebirth in samsara, it  is  definitely  a  rebirth  impelled  by  karma  and
afflictions. If that is the case you have to complete the twelve links.  The
thing that activates karma, whether it is virtuous or non-virtuous karma  or
that which will cause a good rebirth in samsara, has to be  nourished  first
by craving and grasping.

Student: My understanding is this: If I generate an  angry  thought  at  the
time of death, to me, the manifest karma is  anger.  That  will  lead  to  a
negative projecting karma that will lead me to a lower rebirth.  If  however
at the time of death, my last thought  is  one  of  compassion,  that  is  a
positive manifest karma that will activate a positive projecting  karma.  So
to me, manifest karma and projecting karma are  different.  One  is  already
manifested, the other is that which is activated by  the  manifested  karma.


Khen Rinpoche: In the twelve links of  dependent-arising,  at  the  time  of
death,  the  projecting  karma  is  not  there.  The  projecting  karma  was
accumulated a long time ago prior to the time of death.

The sequence of the twelve links is ignorance,  compositional  activity  and
consciousness and so forth. Ignorance motivates the  compositional  activity
(or karma). The imprints of the action are left  on  the  mental  continuum.
This is the third link, consciousness. The imprints  of  all  those  actions
follow the mind to wherever the mind goes.

At the time of death the imprints of the projecting karma  accumulated  long
time ago are nourished and activated by craving and grasping.  Both  craving
and grasping are derivatives of attachment and desire. Craving and  grasping
nourish the seed of the karma such that it become powerful enough  to  throw
you to your next rebirth, be it a good or bad rebirth. That  is  called  the
actualising karma.

The presentation of the twelve links of  dependent-arising  appears  in  the
Lamrim Chenmo, in the section on the  practices  of  the  person  of  medium
capacity after the presentation of the Four Noble Truths.

In the next lesson we will look at purifying negativities  through  applying
the four powers. This is an important section.  Please  read  this  on  your
own. If you have any questions please bring them  up  in  the  next  lesson.
Once we have finished with that, we will move on to  the  practices  of  the
person of medium capacity.

Note that there will be class on the 26th February from  1.30pm  to  3.30pm.
There will be discussion class on the 28th February.

Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; Transcribed by Phuah Soon  Ek  and  Vivien
Ng; Edited by Cecilia Tsong; Checked by Shirley Soh
