Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L36 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.405391
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


   Lesson No: 36                Date: 21st February 2012


As usual we will spend a few minutes to meditate on Manjushri:
 • Visualise Manjushri clearly in the space in front of you.
 • As I explained before, perform the visualisation of the  flow  of  nectar
   from  Manjushri  into  yourself,  purifying  all  your  negativities  and
   obscurations; particularly, ignorance and the obstacles  to  your  Dharma
   studies and practice.
   • Think that your wisdom is developed.
   • Make a heartfelt single-pointed request to Manjushri.

When you are encountering any obstacles in  your  Dharma  studies,  you  can
visualise the nectar that is in the nature  of  Manjushri’s  wisdom  flowing
from  him  into  you,  completely  eliminating  and  purifying   all   those
hindrances. Think that all your ignorance, obscurations, and  obstacles  are
completely purified and that the clear light nature of  your  mind,  due  to
this purification, is now able to shine forth clearly.

Then think that your mind is now no different from the  mind  of  Manjushri.
Your mind becomes like his mind. The teachings say that  the  stronger  your
faith and belief in this, the bigger the difference it  will  make  to  your
mind. When you are able to think that the nature  of  Manjushri’s  mind  and
the nature of your own mind is  inseparable  and  that  both  are  empty  of
existing inherently, that is very good.

If you are also able to contemplate how these three:
   • Manjushri, the object of your meditation,
   • yourself, the person meditating, and
   • your mind
are empty of existing inherently,  that  will  be  good  as  well.  This  is
similar to what we  have  discussed  in  the  previous  lesson  (i.e.,  non-
objectifying the three circles).

Reflect on these points as much as you  can.  Perhaps  you  can  reflect  on
those points that you are more comfortable with.
Actually there are many things that one can meditate on. For example,  while
you are visualising Manjushri  in  the  space  in  front  of  you,  you  can
visualise that at his heart, there is a moon disc,  and  in  the  middle  of
that moon disc is the syllable DHI encircled by the mantra garland OM  A  RA
PA TSA NA DHI. Sometimes you can focus only  on  the  syllable  DHI  at  his
heart. This will help you to develop single-pointedness of mind. The way  to
visualise the syllable DHI is as if your mind is merged with  the  syllable.


Anyway these are the few things you can think about. Perhaps you can  choose
the one that you are comfortable with. So let us do that for a few minutes.

Khen Rinpoche:  Don’t do all of them!

Usually before class we recite a  number  of  prayers.  We  start  with  the
Praise to Shakyamuni Buddha. Reciting this prayer is not just about   saying
the words. When we recite this prayer, we should bring to mind its  meaning.
Many people do not do that.  They  just  recite  the  words  without  really
thinking about their meaning and, for some of them, this  becomes  a  habit.
This is a bad habit. When we recite prayers, we have to recall  the  meaning
of the prayers.

In this case when we recite the prayer, Praise to Shakyamuni Buddha, we  can
bring to mind the Buddha’s holy body, speech, and mind.  By  thinking  about
Shakyamuni Buddha we should try to develop a sense of faith in and  devotion
towards him. Although for now we may not be able to sustain  those  feelings
for even a few minutes, as much as  possible,  we  should  put  effort  into
developing those feelings when we recite the prayer. We have  to  keep  this
in mind and get into  the  habit  of  doing  this.  I  think  this  is  very
important and I will not say this again.

Whenever we recite prayers, right from the very start, we have  to  keep  in
mind that we should put effort into thinking about their  meaning  while  we
are reciting them. In  the  case  of  reciting  this  prayer  in  class,  we
generate faith in the Buddha. We need to get  into  the  habit  of  thinking
about the meaning of the prayers as we recite them. We need  to  put  effort
into developing this habit. I think this is important.

It seems that for most people when it comes to  reciting  the  prayer,  they
just say the words. They may be reciting the prayer but somehow  their  mind
is not really there. There is no feeling in the heart and the  mind  is  not
moved. This is something we need to change.

Also when it comes to the mandala offering, again people simply  recite  it,
regarding it as a traditional practice. That is not the  point.  When  doing
the mandala offering, you have to bring to mind an object in whom  you  have
faith and you then present the mandala to this object.  In  your  heart  you
can visualise all the beautiful offerings and then  present  them.  Even  if
you do this for a short time, for just one minute, while  you  are  reciting
the prayer, you can accumulate so much merit. So you should  bring  to  mind
an object that you have faith in and then offer the mandala with  faith  and
devotion.

After that you make a single-pointed request to  pacify  whatever  obstacles
you may be facing.  In  this  context  here  we  are  trying  to  learn  the
Buddhadharma. So we should make single-pointed  heartfelt  request  for  all
the obstacles and hindrances to our Dharma practice and  Dharma  studies  to
be eliminated.

We also recite the prayer of going for refuge and generating the  altruistic
intention. The purpose of this prayer is to generate your motivation and  to
bring forth the mind of refuge and the altruistic intention. You should  put
effort into generating some of these feelings even if it is only for  a  few
minutes. Although you may not have a lot  of  time,  make  sure  that  while
doing those prayers during that short period of time, the  setting  of  your
motivation is done well and is of good  quality.  At  the  very  least,  you
should try to have some kind of heartfelt  sincere  wish,  thinking,  “I  am
going for refuge and I must achieve enlightenment for  the  benefit  of  all
sentient beings.”

I think it is very important that we change this habit  of  mere  recitation
to reciting the prayers mindfully whilst thinking of  their  meaning.  As  a
start, we should take our first small steps by thinking  about  the  meaning
of those prayers that we are reciting. They do not take long. Make  sure  we
start by taking this small step to get into the habit of reflecting  on  the
meaning of the prayers as we recite them.

                               **************

    2B4B-2B1A-2B3B     Specifically how to purify [non-virtues] by means of
    the four powers

         1  How negativites and downfalls need to be purified by various
         means in accordance with statements of the Teacher Buddha
         [2 How to redress downfalls
         3  How to redress negative actions
         4  How the four powers are complete with all the antidotes
         5  The manner of purification
         6  How it is necessary to strive not to be tainted by faulty
         conduct from the start] (Page 99)

We started with the discussion on how  to  purify  our  negative  karma.  An
ideal purification practice involves a few prerequisites:
 1. First we need to have the conviction in the abilities of the Buddha as a
    valid person and an infallible refuge.
 2. On that basis, one then develops faith and conviction  in  whatever  the
    Buddha taught.
 3. That includes having faith and conviction in the Buddha’s explanation of
    the workings of karma and their results.

When talking about karma in general, the Buddha  explained that:
1. Karma is certain and definite
2. Karma increases
3. You will not experience the result of an action that you did not do
4. Once the action is done its result will not disappear and it  will  ripen
   one day.

Based on understanding these characteristics of karma we  will  be  able  to
engage in the practice of purifying our negativities properly.  One  of  the
most important factors in ensuring this is having heartfelt regret  for  the
non-virtuous actions that we had done in  the  past.  As  discussed  in  the
previous lesson, in order to have such heartfelt regret, we must first  have
a proper understanding of  the  results  of  such  non-virtuous  actions.  A
single non-virtuous action has three results: the  fruitional  effects,  the
causally concordant effects, and the environmental effects.

When we have a good understanding of the effects  of  non-virtuous  actions,
we will be able to generate strong regret from our heart.   We  will  think,
“I definitely must do something about my negative karma. I must purify  it.”
When you have this heartfelt sincere wish to  purify  your  negative  karma,
then naturally you will look at the remedies and  antidotes for doing so.

In the last lesson we looked at the six antidotes or remedies for  purifying
our negative karma.

    2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3B  The power of thorough application of antidotes

         1  Based on the profound sets of sutras
         2  Aspiration for [/Respect for?] emptiness
         3  Based on recitation
         4  Based on images
         5  Based on making offerings[?]
         6  Based on names (Page 99)


When we do  any  of  these  practices  with  the  intention  to  purify  our
negativities  and  obscurations,  it  is  said  that  our  negativities  and
obscurations will be  purified.  We  should  engage  in  these  purification
practices on the basis of  having  generated  strong  regret  for  the  non-
virtuous actions that we had already accumulated.

There is the purification practice of Vajrasattva. Having strong regret  for
the non-virtuous actions that we had accumulated, we perform the  meditation
and recitation practice  of  Vajrasattva.  When  we  recite  the  mantra  of
Vajrasattva twenty-one times a day, it is mentioned in  the  teachings  that
it will stop our negative karma from increasing.

In the future, you should all aspire and work towards being  able  to  do  a
Vajrasattva retreat, doing the practice as  it  is  laid  out  according  to
tradition. When you  can  sustain  well  the  different  visualisations  and
recite the long  Vajrasattva  mantra  for  a  hundred  thousand  times,  the
teachings  mention  that  all  obscurations  and  negative  karmas  can   be
purified. So we should work towards being able to  do  such  a  retreat  one
day.

    2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3C  The power of turning away from [/counteracting]
    faults in the future

         1  The actual [power] and its benefits

The third one - the power of turning away from  [/counteracting]  faults  in
the future – is to completely restrain yourself from  the  ten  non-virtues.
In the Sun Essence [Sutra] it says that thereby actions of the  three  doors
[committed] by means of killing  and  so  on,  as  well  as  the  afflictive
obscurations and obscurations to the Dharma[1],   whatever  you  have  done,
caused others to do, or rejoiced in before, are destroyed.

         2  The importance of sincere restraint

The Extensive Commentary [on Vinaya] [?*this  is  the  first  time  you  use
Lehrrede – is this = sutra?] explains that the  intention  of  the  question
“[Is there] restraint henceforth?” being asked in the [basic][/root?*]  text
is that a  confession  without  sincere  restraint  is  nothing  but  words.
Therefore the mind of restraint of not doing  it  henceforth  is  important.
Its development also depends on the first power (Pages 100 - 101).

The third power is the power of turning away  from  faults  in  the  future,
i.e., restraining yourself from engaging in  the  ten  non-virtuous  actions
again. You make a strong, stable,  and  determined  pledge  and  promise  to
yourself that you will not engage in non-virtuous  actions  again.  You  can
make such a pledge even for a minute or a short period of time  but  it  has
to be heartfelt.

Question from Khen Rinpoche: When we make the pledge, “I will not engage  in
any of the ten non-virtuous actions again,” will that become a lie or not?

Khen Rinpoche:  When you make that promise, is it true or not?

The teachings mention that, in order for us to develop  properly  the  power
of turning away from faults, we must first develop  well  the  first  power,
the power of eradication, i.e., in order to be able to effectively  restrain
ourselves from future non-virtues, it boils down to  whether  we  have  real
regret for the non-virtues we have done.

When we talk about negativities, there are:
   • the negativities that we have already accumulated in the past
   • the negativities that will be accumulated in the future
The first two powers, the power of eradication and  the  power  of  applying
remedies, take care of the negativities that we have already accumulated  in
the past.

With regard to the power of turning away  from  faults,  we  have  to  apply
restraint and control ourselves from engaging in non-virtues again. This  is
said to be important because when we do this, we will not  accumulate  fresh
negativities.


    2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3D  The power of the support


    The fourth one – the power of the support – is to go for refuge and
    cultivate the mind of enlightenment.


    2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-4   How all the antidotes to negativities are complete
    within the four powers

The Jina said that in general there is a  diversity[/multiplicity]  of  ways
for beginners to purify  negativities[?*isn't  shig  an  indefinite  pronoun
here?], however, the altogether perfect  antidote  is  the  four  powers  in
their entirety (Page 101).

    2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-5   The manner of purification

         A  How the karma [?*][?*why is Wirkungsweise in parentheses?] is
         not absolutely certain [depending on] the antidotes being complete
         or incomplete etc. in the one doing the purification etc. [/and
         other factors]

The manner in which negativities are purified is as follows. Whether  causes
for the arising of great suffering in the bad realms become causes  for  the
arising of minor suffering, or whether despite  one’s  rebirth  in  the  bad
realms their sufferings are not experienced or  purified  in  one’s  present
form as a mere headache, and likewise whether something that would  need  to
be experienced for a long time becomes something short or does not  have  to
be experienced at all,  is  not  absolutely  certain,  because  it  is  also
depends on the power of the  one  doing  the  purification  being  great  or
small, as well as the antidote  -  the  four  powers  -  being  complete  or
incomplete, intense or not [intense], the duration being long or  short  and
so on.

         B  How even karma that is certain [to be experienced] is purified
         from the root [/fundamentally purified]

As for the statement in sutra and vinaya “Actions are not  lost  even  in  a
hundred eons”, {122} it implies without  cultivating  the  antidote  of  the
four powers. However, in the commentary on the [Sutra of the  Perfection  of
Wisdom in] Eight Thousand [Verses] it says that through the antidote of  the
four powers, if purified in accordance with  the  explanations,  even  karma
that is certain to be experienced is purified.

The fourth power is the power of the support (or  foundation),  i.e.,  going
for refuge to the Three Jewels and cultivating the spirit of  enlightenment,
bodhicitta. When these two attitudes are generated well in  our  mind,  they
will purify the obscurations and negativities.

In the oral tradition, it is explained that when we create  negative  karma,
it is either (1) in relation to the Three Jewels, or   (2)  in  relation  to
sentient beings. When it is a  negative  karma,  you  can  say  that  it  is
subsumed in one of these.
 • When one goes for refuge sincerely to the Buddha, Dharma and  Sangha,  we
   purify the negativities and  obscurations  that  we  had  accumulated  in
   relation to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha.
 • By generating love and compassion for sentient beings and, in particular,
   when  we  are  able  to  develop  the  altruistic  intention  to  achieve
   enlightenment for sentient beings, then that  purifies  the  negativities
   and obscurations that we had accumulated in relation to them.

The text then goes on to talk about the manner  in  which  the  negativities
are purified. When we say negativities are purified, does it mean that  they
are purified completely or are they purified partially?

    2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-4   How all the antidotes to negativities are complete
    within the four powers

The Jina said that in general there is a  diversity[/multiplicity]  of  ways
for beginners to purify  negativities[?*isn't  shig  an  indefinite  pronoun
here?], however, the altogether perfect  antidote  is  the  four  powers  in
their entirety.

    2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-5   The manner of purification

         A  How the karma [?*][?*why is Wirkungsweise in parentheses?] is
         not absolutely certain [depending on] the antidotes being complete
         or incomplete etc. in the one doing the purification etc. [/and
         other factors]

The manner in which negativities are purified is as follows. Whether  causes
for the arising of great suffering in the bad realms become causes  for  the
arising of minor suffering, or whether despite  one’s  rebirth  in  the  bad
realms their sufferings are not experienced or  purified  in  one’s  present
form as a mere headache, and likewise whether something that would  need  to
be experienced for a long time becomes something short or does not  have  to
be experienced at all,  is  not  absolutely  certain,  because  it  is  also
depends on the power of the  one  doing  the  purification  being  great  or
small, as well as the antidote  -  the  four  powers  -  being  complete  or
incomplete, intense or not [intense], the duration being long or  short  and
so on (Page 101).

Remember that one way of classifying karma is:
   • Karma whose result you will definitely experience
   • Karma whose result you will possibly experience

Let us look at the karma whose result you will  definitely  experience.  Let
us say that you have created a non-virtuous  karma  whose  result  you  will
definitely experience. Is there anything you can do  about  it?  Can  it  be
purified? The answer is “Yes.” The karma whose result  you  will  definitely
experience can be purified when you purify  your  negativities  by  applying
the four powers in their entirety.

There is no contradiction in saying that karma whose result  that  you  will
definitely experience can be purified.  When we refer to karma whose  result
you will definitely experience, what that  means  is  that  if  you  do  not
purify it with the four opponent powers, then you will  have  to  experience
its result. When you purify that karma  whose  result  you  will  definitely
experience by applying the four powers, that karma can  be  purified,  i.e.,
you will not have to experience its effects.

What then is the meaning of purifying one’s negativities? It means that  the
purification practice that you do will weaken the capacity of the  karma  to
bear fruit so that it will not bring forth its result, i.e., the karma  will
lack the capacity to bear fruit but it does not  mean  that  the  karma  has
been eradicated.

         C  Even if the one doing the purification does not completely
         purify karma of little strength, its effect will not come forth due
         to the [/its] full ripening having been weakened

In Blaze of  Reasoning  it  says  that  once  you  have  thus  weakened  the
potential to bring forth fully ripened effects by means of confession,  [the
resolve to exercise] restraint and the like, the fully ripened effects  will
not come about even if other conditions are met. Likewise,  the  destruction
of roots of virtue through wrong views  and  anger  is  also  similar  (Page
101)[?*Karma?].

This is the same as how anger and the development of wrong views weaken  the
ability of merit or virtues to give forth their  effects.  Usually  we  hear
that when we get angry or generate wrong views it will  destroy  our  merit.
What this means is that anger and wrong views weaken  the  ability  of  your
merit to give rise to its positive effects.

It is incorrect to think, “It is all right to accumulate negative  karma  as
it can be purified.” As mentioned in the teachings it is much better not  to
create negative karma from the very beginning.

    2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-6   How it is necessary to make an effort from the start
    not to be tainted by faults

Through confession and [the resolve to exercise] restraint you may  be  able
to [?*chug imp {'jug}?] purify [karma]  so  that  nothing  at  all  remains,
however, there is [still] a big difference between the purity of  not  being
tainted by faults from the beginning and the purity  after  confession.  For
example in the Bodhisattva Levels it says that in case a root  downfall  has
occurred, it  can  be  restored  by  taking  the  bodhisattva  vow  [again],
however, it will be impossible to reach the first ground in  this  life.  In
the Sutra Gathering All the Threads, too, it says that once  the  negativity
of abandoning the Dharma, which is explained in that  sutra,  has  occurred,
it will be purified, if one confesses it three times every  day  over  seven
years, but still it will take ten eons even at the quickest  [?]  to  attain
[the  level  of]  tolerance  [on  the  path   of   preparation].   Therefore
purification without remainder  means  that  the  production  of  unpleasant
effects is purified without remainder. ..  However,  since  the  arising  of
realizations of the path and so forth will be much  delayed[/further  away/a
much longer way to go], you should endeavour not  to  be  tainted  from  the
beginning. Again, for that reason  it  says  that  aryas  do  not  knowingly
engage even in subtle negativities or downfalls not even  for  the  sake  of
their lives,  because  [otherwise],  if  there  was  no  difference  between
purifying them through confession and their not arising from  the  beginning
[?*missing in German] there would be no  need  to  act  like  that.  In  the
world, {123} too, if a wounded arm, leg etc. heals again, it still will  not
be as if it had never been wounded from the start (Pages 101 – 102).

                           **********************
Question: When you are meditating on emptiness as an antidote, you bring  to
mind all  phenomena,  including  our  virtuous  activities.  How  will  that
meditation then also not weaken the positive effects of the  virtuous  karma
that one has accumulated even though they are not the object of  our  regret
and purification?

Answer: In the last lesson we talked about  non-objectifying  of  the  three
circles. I mentioned that when you  reflect  on  emptiness  it  causes  your
virtue to increase and your non-virtue to weaken. When  we  reflect  on  how
virtuous karma does not exist from its own side,  it  causes  that  virtuous
karma to strengthen. The teachings do not  say  that  it  causes  virtue  to
become weaker.
But when we reflect on how non-virtuous karma does not exist from their  own
side, it causes the non-virtuous karma to weaken.  As  I  mentioned  in  the
last lesson, when we reflect on emptiness, the ultimate nature  of  reality,
it causes the apprehension of true existence to weaken and  the  afflictions
to weaken, i.e., it causes the root of cyclic existence and the root of  our
afflictions to weaken.

When we reflect on how our negativities are empty  of  existing  inherently,
it causes our afflictions to  weaken  as  well.  When  our  afflictions  are
weakened, their ability to bring forth effects are also weakened.

(Ensuing discussion is inaudible).

That  is  the  reason  why  the  teachings  say,  “Everything  arises   from
emptiness.”

Question: Does that then mean that when  one  has  realised  emptiness,  one
doesn’t really need all the four powers to purify.  For  example,  when  you
have the realisation of emptiness, do you still need to generate regret  for
every single negative action that you have done in order to purify them?

Khen Rinpoche: When  you  have  directly  perceived  emptiness,  won’t  your
regret become even stronger?

Question: What  I  meant  was  when  I  have  already  achieved  the  direct
perception of emptiness, do I need to focus on all the  non-virtues  that  I
have created in order to purify them?

Answer: I am not sure but I don’t think you need to remember each and  every
single non-virtue in order to be able to  purify  them.  When  you  generate
regret, you are thinking about all the negative karma that you have  created
in this life and all the negative karma created in your   past  lives.  That
is all-encompassing, is it not?

Question: How then will one generate the power of restraint? Don’t you  have
to be quite specific, e.g., “I shall not kill”?

Answer: The ten  non-virtuous  actions  are  not  exhaustive.  They  do  not
represent every negative karma that a person can create  but  the  ten  non-
virtuous actions are the main ones. When you apply restraint, you think,  “I
will not engage in actions such as the ten non-virtuous actions.”

Question: For a non-virtuous  action  to  be  complete,  the  text  mentions
attitude, i.e., there  should  be  the  presence  of  ignorance,  anger,  or
attachment. If that is the case, then for a virtuous action to be  complete,
does it  have  to  be  accompanied  by  non-ignorance,  non-anger,  or  non-
attachment?

Answer: The ten virtuous  actions  are  opposite  to  the  ten  non-virtuous
actions. Like  the  ten  non-virtuous  actions,  the  ten  virtuous  actions
require the basis, attitude, performance, and culmination.

A virtuous action need not necessarily be motivated  by  something  that  is
not an affliction. For most people, their virtuous actions are motivated  by
afflictions with ignorance as their  root.  In  this  context  here,  for  a
person  of  small  capacity,  whatever  he  or  she  does  is  motivated  by
ignorance. The karma that causes us to have  a  good  rebirth  is  primarily
motivated by ignorance.

Student: So, for  a  person  of  small  scope,  a  virtuous  action  can  be
considered complete even though it is accompanied by ignorance.

Question: How then does the meditation on the emptiness  of  virtuous  karma
lead to an increase in virtuous karma especially where such  virtuous  karma
are motivated by an affliction, ignorance?

Answer: When you think about it, what is it that obscures  the  virtues?  It
is our afflictions. So when you reflect on emptiness,  the  affliction  that
obscures that virtue becomes weaker. So we have to  say  the  virtue  become
stronger.

Khen Rinpoche:  This is something for everyone  to  think  about:  When  you
think about the emptiness of the virtues,  how  does  it  make  the  virtues
increase?

I am not sure. This is something to think about.  What  obscure  the  virtue
are the afflictions. When you reflect on the emptiness of  phenomena,  which
includes  the  afflictions,  those  afflictions  become  weaker.   When  the
afflictions that obscure the virtue are weakened, then you have to say  that
the virtue becomes stronger.
   • When you reflect on the emptiness of the afflictions  themselves,  the
     afflictions obviously become weaker. When the afflictions are  weaker,
     then the virtue becomes stronger.
   • When you reflect on the emptiness  of  the  virtue,  you  weaken  your
     apprehension of that virtue to be truly existent. When you weaken your
     apprehension of virtue as truly existent, you can then  say  that  you
     cause the virtue to become stronger.

(Response from student is inaudible)

You cannot apply the same line of reasoning for  non-virtue  because  virtue
and non-virtue are not the same thing. They bring forth different results.

Student: In the  cases  of  virtue  and  non-virtue  that  is  motivated  by
ignorance, the motivating factor, ignorance, is the same. If we  remove  the
base ignorance, then both should be weakened.

This particular section concludes with the measure  of  the  attitude  of  a
person of small capacity.


     2B4B-2B1B   The measure of the attitude [of lesser beings] having
    developed [??change of headline wording which needs to be corrected in
    page {62/63}]

Second: the measure of those thoughts [of lesser beings]  having  developed.
Previously you had an uncontrived interest [/had an interest] in this  world
only,  and  your  interest  in  future  existences  was   just   a   [vague]
understanding fascinated with the words  [?*].  When  those  two  have  been
exchanged[?*], future worlds have become the main interest, and  this  world
nothing but a by-product, [the attitude of lesser beings] has  developed[?].
 As it nevertheless needs to be made stable,  you  should  strive,  that  is
train, in it even after it have arisen (Page 102).

For us our emphasis is on this life. We consider this  life  more  important
than what will happen to us in our future lives. When  these  two  attitudes
switch places, i.e., when  we  consider  that  our  future  lives  are  more
important than this life, then we become a person of small capacity.

We are not persons of small capacity because we still put more  emphasis  on
the happiness of this life. We think that the happiness of this life  is  of
number  one  importance  and  the  happiness  of  future  lives  is  not  as
important. When it comes to choosing which is more important  –  the  Dharma
or the happiness of this life - we will still choose the happiness  of  this
life first and the Dharma becomes secondary. Since this is so, we are  still
not even a person of small capacity.

Khen Rinpoche:  We are not even there.

A person of small capacity is someone who considers his future lives  to  be
the most important thing, i.e., as more important than  this  life.  When  a
person, after having gone for refuge to Buddha, Dharma and Sangha,  live  an
ethical life in accordance with the  law  of  karma,  emphasising  achieving
happiness in future lives, then this person can be called a person of  small
capacity.

    2B4B-2B1C     Eliminating misunderstandings about [the attitude of
    lesser beings]

         1  Setting out the assertion
         [2 Its refutation]


There may then be some qualms regarding the measure of  the  attitude  of  a
person of small capacity. Some people may say, “In the  Buddha’s  teachings,
we are told to renounce all of samsara even though  there  are  good  things
within cyclic existence. If that is the case, then seeking  a  good  rebirth
is a contradiction.” So on the  one  hand,  you  are  supposed  to  renounce
cyclic existence with all its good things such as a  good  rebirth,  a  long
life, resources, and so forth. How then can wanting a good rebirth not be  a
contradiction?



The answer is that we have to understand that there are temporary goals  and
ultimate goals. Seeking a good rebirth is something  that  you  should  look
for but it is a temporary, not the ultimate, goal.  Having  a  good  rebirth
with an excellent body, resources, and so  forth  are  temporary  goals  but
nevertheless they are necessary for  achieving  the  ultimate  goals,  i.e.,
liberation and enlightenment, because it is on the basis of  having  a  good
rebirth with an excellent body, resources, and so forth that  you  can  move
towards liberation and enlightenment.

Another thing to note is that not everything that is considered high  status
such as having an excellent body, resources, attendants,  and  so  forth  is
included in samsara because the most excellent body  is  the  Buddha’s  form
body, the most excellent resources are the enjoyments of  the  pure  realms,
and the most excellent attendants are a buddha’s retinue.

    2B4B-2B1C     Eliminating misunderstandings about [the attitude of
    lesser beings]

         1  Setting out the assertion
         [2 Its refutation]

    2B4B-2B1C-1  Setting out the assertion

In the scriptures[?] it says that it is necessary  to  turn  the  mind  away
from all the excellence of cyclic existence,  which  has  been  a  cause  of
confusion: Some [people] think it is inappropiate  to  develop  interest  in
the high status of an excellent body,  possessions,  and  so  forth  because
they are [part of] cyclic existence.

    2B4B-2B1C-2  Its refutation

         A  How a continuous succession of excellent bodies is necessary

With respect to that which is to be striven for, there  are  both  temporary
and ultimate goals to strive for. Even those who strive for liberation  from
the excellences of  a  body  and  so  forth  of  cyclic  existence  need  to
temporarily strive for them [/it] since definite goodness is  to  be  gained
in the end from a continuous succession of such supports.

         B  Refutation looking at [/from the point of view of] ultimately
         high status

Not all that is the high status  of  an  excellent  body,  possessions,  and
retinue are  included  in  cyclic  existence,  for  the  culmination  of  an
excellent body etc. is the form body [of a buddha], the wealth of its  field
and its retinue. [It is] with  this  intention  that  the  Ornament  of  the
Sutras says that the first four perfections accomplish the  high  status  of
an excellent body, possessions, retinue,  and  undertakings,  {124}  because
many [other] scriptures state that they accomplish the form body.

Question: Usually as beginners, we do not have the ability  to  meditate  on
emptiness as a purification  practice  straightaway.  Emptiness  is  such  a
profound subject, we need to purify to remove obstacles in order to be  able
just to have a correct understanding of what it is! So what is the level  of
meditation on  emptiness  that  one  needs  to  do  for  it  to  work  as  a
purification practice?

Answer: That depends on the level at which you are meditating on  emptiness.
With respect to the meditation on emptiness:
   • you can meditate with the correct belief in emptiness
   • you can meditate on emptiness after having ascertained it already or
• you can meditate on emptiness directly when you have achieved the  direct
  perception of emptiness

The level of purification that you achieve will then  be  commensurate  with
your level of meditation on emptiness.  In order to  destroy  the  seeds  of
the non-virtues, not just to purify but to destroy them, you must  have  the
direct perception of emptiness.

Of  course  it  is  difficult  to  meditate  on  emptiness  right  from  the
beginning. Therefore the Buddha taught many methods such as  the  recitation
of mantras, making offerings,  and  so  forth.  With  these  practices,  the
person will be able to accumulate and strengthen his merit. While we  engage
in these activities to purify the  mind,  merit  is  accumulated.  The  more
merit you  accumulate,  the  weaker  your  negativities  become,  your  mind
becomes clearer, and it will make a difference to you  being  able  to  move
towards the direct realisation of emptiness.  The more merit  that  you  are
able to accumulate, probably you have to say that the non-virtues  that  you
have become weaker.

Khen Rinpoche: Can we say that?  If you accumulate  a  lot  of  merit,  your
negative karma will decrease? When you do these six things  in  relation  to
the Buddha to accumulate merit, your negative karma becomes smaller?

What if I say your negative karma will become weaker because,  through  that
merit,  you  become  closer  to  enlightenment?  When  you  are  nearer   to
enlightenment, your negative karma has to be weaker.





Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng

Edited by Cecilia Tsong

Checked by Shirley Soh











-----------------------
[1] Obscurations caused through abandoning the Dharma.

