Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L30 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.279667
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.

Lesson No: 30                   Date: 11th October 2011

      Do not commit any non-virtuous actions,
      Perform only perfect virtuous actions,
      Subdue your mind thoroughly -
      This is the teaching of the Buddha.

We will learn the meaning of the first line  of  the  above  verse  that  we
usually recite before class.

"Do not commit any  non-virtuous  actions."  This  line  can  refer  to  the
practices for a  person  of  small  capacity.  In  order  for  us  to  avoid
committing any non-virtuous actions, we  must  first  understand  what  non-
virtue is and be able to identify a negative action.

It is not possible to enumerate each and every single negative  action  that
can be committed. We can only look at the main ones. The  main  non-virtuous
actions that sentient beings create  can  be  subsumed  into  the  ten  non-
virtues. Of these ten non-virtues, let’s take  killing  as  an  example.  In
order to know when killing becomes a complete action, we  have  to  look  at
the different elements such as discrimination, the basis of  and  motivation
for the action, how the action is executed, and  how  it  is  deemed  to  be
complete.

"Do not commit any non-virtuous actions" means that  the  Buddha  is  saying
that we should not commit any non-virtuous actions,  regardless  of  whether
it is a small or a heavy negative action. It doesn’t matter if it  is  small
or big non-virtue. The point is not to commit any non-virtue at all.

In order to explain why we have to avoid all negative actions,  we  have  to
explore the presentation of karma, actions, and their effects.

In general, karma has several characteristics:
 • Karma is definite.  When  you  create  an  action,  you  will  definitely
   experience its result. When you engage in non-virtue, you will definitely
   experience suffering.
But it doesn’t end there. There’s more to karma than that.

 • Karma increases; that is, the non-virtue created increases day by day.

 • The karma you have created is not wasted. Karma is such that once  it  is
   created, it will never disappear on its own accord. You  will  definitely
   experience the effects of the actions that you have done.

There are three effects of karma:
     1. The fruitional effect
     2. The concordant effect
     3. The environmental effect
Therefore when we create a single  non-virtuous  action,  we  will  have  to
experience these three effects.

You can see that simply by learning the practices  for  a  person  of  small
capacity, in particular karma, it makes a difference to what comes  to  your
mind when you recite, “Do not commit any non-virtuous actions.”

When you have studied these subjects, there are so many things  for  you  to
think about. Your studies impact the depth and breadth of  your  reflection.
When you have not engaged in such studies, when you recite, “Do  not  commit
any non-virtuous actions,” you will only understand its literal meaning  and
there is nothing much for you to think about. Your understanding is  limited
to those few words.

I am using this as an illustration of the difference between having  studied
and not having studied the Buddhadharma. Obviously there is a difference  as
there are so many things for you to think about  when  you  have  done  such
studies. You are then able to move the mind. It is  important  to  see  that
studying makes a difference.

Many people think, “Studying has nothing to do with my practice. It  is  not
important as it does not make a difference to my practice.” A lot of  people
continue to think and feel that way. The Buddha’s  teachings  are  vast  and
extensive. It does not matter what  teachings  you  are  referring  to.  The
meaning of even a few words of the Buddha’s teachings can be very  deep  and
profound. You can look at them  from  so  many  different  perspectives  and
understand so much from just those few words. That is the profundity of  the
Buddha’s teachings.

From this simple example, “Do not commit any non-virtuous actions," you  can
see how you can actually explain all the  practices  for  a  person  of  the
small capacity in that one line.

You have to see for yourself  the  difference  of  having  studied  and  not
having studied the Buddhadharma. You have to see  the  point  for  yourself.
Once you see the difference, then you will pay attention  to  your  studies.
You should continue to generate the aspiration to be able to  continue  your
studies. As I mentioned before, just reading the Buddha’s teachings  creates
a lot of merit. Therefore you should read  the  course  material,  the  root
text and other relevant materials.  That  is  important.  You  believe  that
there is benefit in reciting mantras. Actually it is no different  when  you
read your root text. You have to see the benefit and the  purpose  of  doing
so for yourself.  Once  you  understand  the  point,  then  you  will  apply
yourself in your studies.

The most important thing for us as individuals is to  see  the  benefit  and
the purpose of learning. Only  when  we  are  convinced  will  we  have  the
determination to press on. Then that will translate  into  the  effort  that
will be followed by the benefit. Otherwise no one can do  anything  for  us.
When we do not see the benefit and the purpose  for  ourselves,  nobody  can
move us. Even if the Buddha were to come directly in front  of  us  now,  he
would not be able to do anything for us. Therefore  this  becomes  the  most
important thing we can do for ourselves.

                               **************

On page 88 of the course material, there is a  section  that  discusses  the
difference between actions and the paths of action.

    2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1B Distinction between actions and paths of action

Among them[?*las or las? – why is “Aktivitäten” in angular  brackets?],  the
intentions in the mind are actions,  but  no  paths  of  action.  The  seven
actions of body and speech are actions, yet they are also paths  of  action,
since they are also the basis for  the  intentions  proceeding.  The  three,
covetousness and so on are paths of actions, but they are no actions.

Let us  take  a  physical  or  verbal  action  as  an  example.  During  the
motivation phase of a physical or verbal action, there  is  a  thought  that
thinks, “I am going to do this.” That is the mental factor of intention.  At
that time, that mental factor of intention is an action (or  karma)  but  it
is not a path of action.

Why is it not a path of action? Because this mental factor of  intention  in
itself is not the basis of engagement of a prior  motivation.  Therefore  it
is not a path of action. It is just action (or karma).

Here we are trying to establish the mental factor of intention. That  mental
factor of intention is karma or action. We are  not  discussing  the  mental
factor of intention in general. Here we are referring to a  specific  mental
factor of intention that motivates  the  physical  or  verbal  action.  This
specific mental factor of intention is action but is not a path  of  action.
Why is it not a path of action? It is not a  path  of  action  because  this
particular mental factor of intention is not the basis of  engagement  of  a
motivation that existed prior to it.

There are seven actions of the body and speech that have  been  accumulated.
These are actions and are also paths of action.  Why?  Because  these  seven
actions of the body and speech are the bases of the intended  operation  for
the mental factor of intention that arose at the time of the motivation.

The three mental non-virtues, covetousness,  malice,  and  wrong  views  are
paths of actions but not actions. They are paths of action because they  are
the bases of intended operation for the  mental  factor  of  intention  that
existed at the time of the motivation. They are  not  actions  because  they
are afflictions. There  isn’t  anything  that  is  both  an  action  and  an
affliction. Action or karma is a mental factor of intention.  An  affliction
is a separate mental factor. Therefore actions and afflictions are  separate
mental factors.

Question: How do you explain  physical  and  verbal  actions  to  be  mental
factors?

Answer: We cannot think of action in the English sense of  the  word.  Karma
(in Sanskrit) and action (in English) means  the  same  thing.  We  have  to
understand that karma/action refers to the mental factor  of  intention  and
does not mean physical or verbal action.  There  is  the  mental  factor  of
intention at the time of the motivation and at the time of the  result.  The
actions of body and speech refer to the mental factor at  the  time  of  the
result.

Question: Why are covetousness, malice, and wrong views paths of action  and
not actions?

Answer: Covetousness is not an action but it is a path of action. Why is  it
not an action? When we say that it is not an  action,  we  are  also  saying
that it is not a mental factor of intention.

We are not saying, however, that covetousness does not  have  a  motivation.
It has  a  motivation  that  exists  prior  to  it.  At  the  time  of  that
motivation, obviously there was the mental factor of intention. What is  the
basis of this mental factor of intention? It is covetousness itself.

Covetousness then becomes the basis of the intended  operation.  That  makes
covetousness  a  path  of  action  but  it  is  not  action.  Why?   Because
covetousness itself is an affliction. There isn’t anything that  is  both  a
mental factor of intention and an affliction.

Question: Can covetousness that is a path of  action  become  the  intention
to steal? The intention of stealing now becomes a path  of  action.  Because
you covet something, that motivates you to want to steal it.  The  intention
to steal becomes a path of action. Then you proceed with the action.

Ven Gyurme: You are asking whether covetousness can become an intention?

Answer: There are different types of mental factors. Intention is  a  mental
factor. Afflictions are a separate class of  mental  factors.  For  example,
anger is an affliction and it is a mental factor.

Is there something that is both intention and anger? No.

Is there something that is both intention and desire? No.

Intention is a separate mental factor from the other mental factors such  as
anger and  attachment  because  they  have  different  functions.  When  you
understand that there are different mental factors, then you can  understand
why covetousness is not intention.

Question: Of the six root  and  twenty  secondary  afflictions,  where  does
covetousness belong?

Answer: Covetousness may not be listed as a separate mental factor,  but  it
is a derivative of attachment. Malice or ill will may not  be  listed  as  a
separate mental factor but it is a derivative of anger.

Question: In this case, intention here is a non-virtuous mental factor?

Answer: Yes.

Student: It follows then that there is something that  is  non-virtuous  but
is not an affliction.

Khen Rinpoche: It is not the same.

Question: What is the significance of making  this  differentiation  between
actions and paths of action?

Answer:  This  discussion  comes  in  Vasubandhu’s  Treasury  of   Knowledge
(Abhidharma) where there is an extensive  discussion  on  karma.  The  words
"karma" and "path of karma" appear there. I am not sure what the purpose  is
but since these words are  there,  we  have  to  understand  the  difference
between them. Therefore there is this explanation  and  discussion  of  what
constitutes paths of action and what constitutes actions.

We also have to understand that there is the mental factor of  intention  at
the time of the motivation and the mental factor of intention  at  the  time
of carrying out the action when the karma is actually accumulated.

At the time of the motivation, it is only an intention but  not  a  path  of
action. In order for it to be a  path  of  action,  the  action  has  to  be
actually carried out. At the time of accumulation of action,  there  is  the
mental factor of intention. That is what is referred to as karma.

Question: Based on this discussion, during the time  of  killing,  there  is
the path of action and it is an action. Does that mean that, at  that  time,
there is no affliction? Intention and affliction cannot exist  at  the  same
time.

Khen Rinpoche: Did I say that?

Student: You said that  the  mental  factors  of  intention  and  affliction
cannot exist at the same time.

Khen Rinpoche: My point is that they cannot be the same but they  can  exist
at the same time.

Question: With regard to the completion of   the  act  of  killing,  is  the
reason why if I were to kill someone but I were to  die  first,  because  of
intention being a mental factor, that act  cannot  be  complete  because  my
metal continuum would have  to move on?

Answer: Correct.

The main thing to think about here is what constitutes a path of action.  In
order for it to be a path of action, it has to be the basis of the  intended
operation. At the time of the motivation, there  is  the  mental  factor  of
intention but that in itself is not the basis of intended operation.  It  is
not a path of action but it is intention.

On page 89 of the root text, there is a  discussion  of  the  criteria  that
make a particular action powerful. We will not go  through  them  in  detail
but you need to know that what is listed here can influence  the  weight  of
an action.

    2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A2B     Incidentally [?]: Summary indication of the
    gates of strong karma

         1  Great strength by way of the field
         2  Great strength by way of the support
         3  Great strength by way of the thing
         4  Great strength by way of the attitude

The second one has four points: great strength by way of  the  field,  great
strength by way of the support, great strength by  way  of  the  thing,  and
great strength by way of the attitude

    2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A2B-1   Great strength by way of the field

         A  The field of the three jewels [?*- doesn't really do justice to
         what follows]

First: the three jewels, the guru, someone like the guru,  parents,  and  so
forth [?*missing in German]:  [are  gates  of  strong  karma]  because  with
these, even if the thoughts for them are not  intense  and  the  benefit  or
harm done [to them] are small, the merit {108} and misdeed are  great  (Page
89).

In relations to these recipients, whether you do something to benefit or  to
harm them, even when the action is very small, the action  can  become  very
powerful. Regardless of the strength of our motivation, the  recipient  from
their own side makes the action very heavy.

We have to remind ourselves of this as we are in constant contact  with  the
objects that are listed here: the Buddha, Dharma and  Sangha  whom  we  have
faith in, the gurus, our parents, and the like. We  have  to  be  respectful
towards and be careful in relation to them because they  are  very  powerful
objects.

When we get upset with our parents or harm them,  because  our  parents  are
very powerful objects, the action we accumulate will be very  heavy.  So  we
have to treat them well and respect them.

There is a discussion of what are the results we will  get  in  relation  to
the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha and the bodhisattvas in the text. Please  read
this on your own.

Also, in the Sutra of the Magic of the Complete Certainty of Total Peace  it
says that compared to killing all  the  sentient  beings  of  Jambudvipa  or
seizing all their possessions, obstructing even as little as the  virtue  of
a bodhisattva giving a handful of food to an animal, generates  incalculably
greater negativity. {109} so you should be  very  careful  with  respect  to
this point (Page 90).

The  point  is  that  you  have  to  be  careful  especially  when  you  are
interacting with very powerful objects. The example given here is that of  a
bodhisattva. The text mentions  the  amazing  benefit  of  helping  or  even
making  a  small  offering  to  a  bodhisattva.  It  also  refers   to   the
unbelievable negative karma one  gets  by  just  interfering  with  a  small
action of the bodhisattva. Just by stopping a bodhisattva from  giving  food
to an animal, the karma is unbelievably heavy.

As there is this danger, therefore you have to be careful and not get  upset
with others, not to harm them, and not to create  obstacles  for  them  when
they are engaging in virtue. You do not  know  who  is  and  who  is  not  a
bodhisattva because a bodhisattva can have countless emanations. To  prevent
that from possibly happening, it is better to be careful.

The essential point is to know the pluses and minuses because we cannot  say
for certain whether a person is a bodhisattva or not.  If  someone  were  to
ask us for something, we should always train ourselves to be able  to  give.
We should not harm or get upset with anyone  by  remembering,  “This  person
may be a bodhisattva.”

We should live our lives and train our minds in  such  a  way.  As  much  as
possible to give, to not harm, and to not get upset just in case we do  meet
with a real bodhisattva. If that particular person in reality happens to  be
a bodhisattva then we  will  get  unbelievable  benefit.  However,  when  we
engage in negative actions such as  offensive  speech  and  that  person  in
reality is a bodhisattva, then it is said that  the  karma  is  unbelievably
heavy. For that reason, we should refrain from such negative actions.

We should also take the teaching in this paragraph as advice  for  ourselves
in particular with regard to our situation here. We are in the  same  class,
mixing with one another, and we are going to see each other for a while.  In
reality, it is really difficult to say, "This person is not a  bodhisattva.”
We cannot say this as he or she may be a bodhisattva. With that in mind,  we
should avoid any ill feelings, offensive speech, or lying  to  one  another.
Rather we should respect one another, have  a  harmonious  relationship  and
sincerely consider one another as friends and help each other.

Question: Can you explain how we can differentiate between  the  weight  and
the strength of the karma? Also, in relation to the "great strength  by  the
way of the field" under the criteria  for  powerful  actions,  how  is  that
different from “the basis” under the weight of the ten paths of action?

Answer: I am not sure but I don’t see any big difference between the  weight
and strength of an action. As for  the  difference  between  the  basis  and
recipient, it is the same because the  basis  also  refers  to  the  Buddha,
Dharma and Sangha, the gurus, and the like. In this context, it is the  same
as the recipients.

                        ****************************

This is the last class. We will  continue  with  the  text  in  the  end  of
January 2012. At that time, we hope to  finish  the  root  text  up  to  the
section on calm-abiding.

Since we are having a break, there is the  danger  of  losing  momentum  and
interest in our studies due to the absence of classes.   In  order  to  keep
the momentum going, we will have two discussion classes in November and  two
in December.[1] There is no obligation for you to  attend  these  discussion
classes but please try to come  if  you  think  they  will  be  helpful  and
beneficial for you.

In that sense, January will be a real holiday. Although we have  no  classes
for the next two to three months, please read your  text  on  what  we  have
covered so far. Perhaps every Tuesday and Thursday evening, you  should  set
some time aside for reading and revising what was  covered  in  class.  When
you make a resolution now to treat all the Tuesdays  and  Thursdays  of  the
next two to three months as class days, it will be  easier  to  fulfil  that
resolution. Whatever questions you may have, you  should  write  them  down.
This is just a suggestion. It will be good if you can do that.

We will use this Final  Lam-Rim  Prayer  as  a  means  for  single-pointedly
aspiring and praying for ourselves to be beneficial to others.  Whatever  we
have learnt, may it be beneficial to all sentient  beings  as  said  in  the
prayer:

     With my heart going out with great compassion
     In whatever direction the most precious teachings
     Have not yet spread, or once spread have declined,
     May I reveal this treasure of happiness and aid.

Let us pray and single-pointedly request that we ourselves may be like  Lama
Tsongkhapa, to be able to do extensive benefit and work  for  the  teachings
of the Buddha, and for other living beings.








Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng
Edited by Cecilia Tsong
Checked by Shirley Soh


























-----------------------
[1] (The discussion classes are on the  following  Thursdays  at  7.30pm  on
November 10th and 24th and December 1st and 22nd).



