Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L41 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.182453
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


   Lesson No: 41                    Date: 13th March 2012


Visualise Manjushri in the  space  in  front  of  you  and  on  that  basis,
accumulate merit and  purify  the  mind  of  all  obscurations  through  the
practice of the seven branches of worship (the seven-limb  practice).  After
that, visualise light and  nectar  flowing  into  you,  purifying  all  your
obscurations. Make a single-pointed request to Manjushri to pacify  all  the
obstacles that hinder your Dharma studies and practice.

Question: According to the Lamrim Chenmo, it states, “Pride means  observing
- either internally or externally - qualities that are high, low,  good,  or
bad, and, based  on  the  reifying  view  of  the  perishing  aggregates[1],
allowing your mind to become inflated; you assume an aspect  of  superiority
(page 299).” How does one develop pride by focusing on  qualities  that  are
low or bad?

Answer: When you focus on someone who is  relatively  lower  than  yourself,
you may hold yourself to be superior to that person.

Question from Khen Rinpoche: We made a  distinction  between  action  and  a
path  of  action.  Amongst  the  three  mental  non-virtues,  is  there   an
illustration that is both an action and a path of action?

                              *****************

In the  previous  lesson,  we  talked  about  the  view  of  the  transitory
collection, i.e., a mind that observes one’s aggregates and  apprehends  the
“I” to  exist  self-sufficiently.  How  does  the  view  of  the  transitory
collection apprehend the self or “I”? The view of the transitory  collection
focuses on the aggregates and apprehends the “I” to  exist  separately  from
the body and mind. This is the mode of  apprehension  of  the  view  of  the
transitory collection.
We apprehend ourselves in such a  way.  We  never  think  that  the  “I”  is
imputed in dependence upon the aggregates. We never think  that  the  person
or the “I” is dependent on the collection of the aggregates.

In reality, our aggregates (our body and mind)  must  first  appear  to  our
mind before we can have the idea of the person or “I.” But that is  not  how
we apprehend ourselves, how we apprehend the “I.” For  us  the  “I”  appears
first. Only then do we think of our aggregates, “This is my  body.  This  is
my mind.” But in reality, it should be the other way round.

We believe that the “I” or the person  is  different  from  the  aggregates,
from either the body or mind. How we can tell that is so? For example,  when
we see an attractive person with a beautiful  physical  appearance,  we  may
think, “How nice if I can exchange my body with that person.”

Why do you think in such a way? This is because we conceive the  “I”  to  be
different from the aggregates. Not only do we  want  to  exchange  our  body
with someone else, sometimes we also wish to have the mind  of  someone  who
is more intelligent than we are. If  we  had  a  choice,  we  would  happily
exchange our mind with that person.

What does this indicate? This shows that we innately hold on  to  the  self,
the person or the “I” and believe that it is something  that  is  completely
different or separate from our body and mind. But according to the  Buddhist
philosophical view, such an “I” that is completely separate  from  the  body
and mind does not exist.

We are not saying that the body and mind is the self, the person or the  “I”
but rather that the “I” exists in dependence upon the  body  and  mind.  The
“I” cannot exist without depending on the body and mind. We must posit  that
the “I” exists in dependence on the body and mind.  An  “I”  that  does  not
depend on the body and mind does not exist.

In short, the mind that apprehends a self-sufficient substantially  existent
person is called the view of the transitory collection.  This  is  something
that we have to work at. We have to read the  text  and  reflect  and  think
about it in order to get some understanding.

In Buddhism we  always  ask  for  blessings  by  reciting  various  prayers.
Blessings are not something that we can receive  overnight.  It  is  not  as
straightforward and easy as that. In order to receive blessings, we have  to
work for them.

The word byin lab in Tibetan is translated  as  blessings  in  English.  The
term has the connotation of transformation or  change  for  the  better.  We
believe positive change or transformation can take place but  in  order  for
that to happen, we need to work at it. For  example,  in  order  for  us  to
generate real faith in the Buddha, we have to  work  at  reflecting  on  the
qualities of the Buddha’s exalted body, speech, and  mind.  By  recollecting
the qualities of the Buddha in this way, some kind of faith  in  the  Buddha
will then arise in the heart. When you have that virtuous  feeling  that  is
what we call blessings.

Let’s take our studies as another example. In order for  us  to  learn  this
text, we have to read it, think  about  it,  pay  attention  in  class,  ask
questions, and so forth. You do all these things on the basis of having  the
desire and the wish to learn the subject. By putting in the effort you  will
finally understand what you have wanted to know. You will  feel  very  happy
and I guess that special kind of happiness is also called blessings.

This also applies to other things. It is not so easy  to  do  well  in  your
studies because you need many conditions to come  together  before  you  can
have any success. We have to keep this in mind all the time.

We are being introduced here to the concept of the view  of  the  transitory
collection. The words alone are challenging. When we talk about the view  of
the transitory collection, in this context, we are talking about  the  self-
sufficient  substantially  existent  person.  The   term,   “self-sufficient
substantially existent person” is also challenging. But  we  have  to  learn
these technical terms and try to understand their meaning.

Simply put, the view of the transitory collection or the apprehension  of  a
self-sufficient substantially existent person refers to the belief that  the
“I” exists separately or differently from the body and mind.

For this topic, if there is anything that  you  don’t  understand,  you  can
clarify now.

Question: (inaudible)

Answer:  The  essential  meanings  of  “self-sufficient”  or  “substantially
existent” are the same. What it  means  is  that  it  is  not  dependent  on
something. There is substantially existent. We  also  talk  about  imputedly
existent.

Question: Who is this “I”? What is this “I”?  I still cannot get it.

Khen Rinpoche: You mean you don’t know who you are?

It is precisely because of not knowing the “I” and never ever being able  to
identify what this “I” is that we have been circling  in  cyclic  existence.
We always think that the self, the person,  or  the  “I”  exists  completely
separately from the body and mind, i.e., without depending on the  body  and
mind. We think of ourselves in this way all the time.

Although the “I” that does not depend on the body and mind  does  not  exist
we believe that such an “I” exists. That is the  reason  why  we  circle  in
cyclic existence. This way of apprehending the “I” is  called  the  view  of
the transitory collection. This is ignorance and this is the root of  cyclic
existence:

   • An “I” that does not depend on the body and mind does not exist.
   • An “I” that is completely separate from the body  and  mind  does  not
     exist.
   • The mind that believes that such an “I” exists is called the  view  of
     the transitory collection. This is ignorance, which  is  the  root  of
     cyclic existence.
   • How then does the “I” exist? The self, the person or the “I” is merely
     imputed in dependence upon the aggregates.

When you eliminate all the aggregates one by one, you will not  be  able  to
find an “I” that is separate from the aggregates. If you  can  find  an  “I”
that is separate and stands apart from the  aggregates,  you  can  then  say
that the “I” is independent and self-sufficient. But after  eliminating  the
aggregates one by one, you will not be able to find an “I” that is  separate
from the aggregates. You will not be able to  find  an  “I”  that  is  self-
sufficient. Therefore the self-sufficient  self,  person  or  “I”  does  not
exist.

But the “I” exists. How then does the “I” exist?   After  having  eliminated
the aggregates one by one, you will not be able to find an “I”  that  exists
without depending  on  the  aggregates.  The  self-sufficient  substantially
existent person does not exist. Having said that we still  have  to  explain
how the “I” exists. The “I” definitely exists. If it does not exist  in  the
way mentioned earlier, it has to exist in some  other  way.  The  conclusion
then is that the “I”  exists  as  merely  imputed  in  dependence  upon  the
aggregates. There is no other way that the “I” can possibly exist.

Question: Does the innate apprehension of  a  self-sufficient  substantially
existent person come about due to being influenced by wrong tenets?

Answer: Not necessarily. The innate apprehension of a self does  not  depend
on being influenced by wrong tenets. The word “innate” shows  that  the  way
of looking at things arises naturally without depending on other factors.

Question: Is it possible for the innate apprehension  of  a  self-sufficient
substantially existent person and the innate apprehension of  an  inherently
existent  person  to  manifest  simultaneously?  Can  you  please  give   an
illustration of the innate apprehension of an inherently existent person?
Answer: I will not talk about  the  innate  apprehension  of  an  inherently
existent person at the present time because  there  are  many  new  students
here. If I were to introduce that now, it may confuse some of them.

For the time being, it is sufficient to think of the view of the  transitory
collection  as  the  apprehension  of  the  person  to  be   self-sufficient
substantially existent. The main thing is to gain an understanding  of  this
now.

For those of you who have studied this topic before, you  can  consider  and
discuss this question:

      The apprehension of a self-sufficient  substantially  existent  person
      and the apprehension of an inherently existent person:  are  they  the
      same mind or are they different  minds?  Can  these  two  minds  arise
      simultaneously?


What is the view of the transitory collection? It  refers  to  a  particular
mind that apprehends or believes that  the  “I”  or  person  exists  without
depending on the body and mind. When we think of the “I,” we think  that  it
is something that is completely separate from and unrelated to our body  and
mind. This way of apprehending the “I” is called the view of the  transitory
collection.

It is sufficient for you to understand this for now.  If  you  are  able  to
explain the meaning of  the  view  of  the  transitory  collection  that  is
enough. We will continue with the other afflictions.


         G  View holding to an extreme

View holding to an extreme: an afflicted intelligence which, observing  that
self apprehended by the view of the transitory collection, views  it  to  be
permanent and eternal or views is to cease without transmigration from  this
[existence] to a future one (Page 117).

The object of observation is the self as apprehended  by  the  view  of  the
transitory collection. What is the self that is apprehended by the  view  of
the transitory collection? The self that is apprehended by the view  of  the
transitory collection is the self-sufficient substantially existent  person.


There is a mind that apprehends this self (that is apprehended by  the  view
of  the  transitory  collection)  to  be  permanent  and  eternal.  Such  an
apprehension is called the view holding to an extreme.


There is  also  an  apprehension  that  this  self-sufficient  substantially
existent person is not going on to a future life. This is  also  called  the
view holding to an extreme. How do you explain that?

The self as apprehended by the view of the transitory  collection  does  not
exist but there is a view that apprehends that this self is not going on  to
the next life. This is an extreme view of annihilation. How does  it  become
a view of annihilation?

Student: The view of the transitory collection believes that that self  does
exist. It holds that object and superimposes the idea that  it  can’t  exist
beyond this lifetime. In dependence on that object of the  misconception  of
the way the “I” exists, it holds that  false  object  and  superimposes  the
idea that it can’t exist when the aggregates  of  this  lifetime  stop.  The
extreme view is built in dependence on this false object  that  is  held  by
the view of the transitory collection. The extreme view  builds  on  top  of
that and constructs it  not to be able to exist beyond this lifetime.

Khen Rinpoche: You did great!

We are trying to look at the self that is apprehended by  the  view  holding
to an extreme. The object that is  observed  by  this  view  holding  to  an
extreme  is  the  self  as  apprehended  by  the  view  of  the   transitory
collection.

Is  this  self  the  self-sufficient  person?  Yes  it  is.  There   is   an
apprehension  of  this  self-sufficient  person  to  exist  permanently  and
eternally. This is holding on to the view of permanence. This is one of  the
views holding to an extreme, holding on to the extreme of permanence.

There is also the belief that this self-sufficient person does not go on  to
the next life. Is this not called the view of annihilation?

But in the very first  place,  the  self-sufficient  substantially  existent
person does not exist. If that self does not  exist,  obviously  it  is  not
going to the next life. If you hold the view it is not going on to the  next
life, how then does that  become  a  view  of  annihilation?  What  are  you
annihilating? What extreme are you falling  into?  Is  it  not  a  factually
concordant mind?

Student: We  may  hold  the  view  that  the  self-sufficient  substantially
existent self does not go on to the next life. At the same time, we  end  up
eliminating also the self that does exist as not going on to the next life.

Khen Rinpoche: It follows  then  that  the  mind  that  believes  the  self-
sufficient substantially existent person is not going on to  the  next  life
is a valid mind, is a correct mind.
Student:  Since the self-sufficient substantially  existent  self  does  not
exist anyway, I have no problem with the idea that it does not go on to  the
next life. Unfortunately, we do not see this  self-sufficient  substantially
existent self as being non-existent. We apprehend it,  thinking  it  is  “I”
and so when we eliminate that from  going  to  the  next  life,  we  end  up
thinking I do not go on to the next life. This is the  association  we  draw
without thinking that (the self-sufficient substantially existent  self)  is
actually non-existent.

Khen Rinpoche: When you take the “I” that is apprehended to  not  go  on  to
the next life to be an existent person,  i.e.,  you  believe  that  such  an
existent “I” does not go on to the next life, then  it  is  straightforward.
It becomes the view of annihilation.

At the same time, is it all right  to  say  that  the  apprehension  of  the
existent “I” to be permanent, eternal, and unchanging  to  be  the  view  of
permanence?
What happens when I raise the qualm: isn’t the mind that apprehends a  self-
sufficient substantially existent person as not going to the  next  life,  a
factually concordant mind? It is factually concordant because,  in  reality,
the self-sufficient substantially existent person does not exist.

Student: There is a difference between the object  of  observation  and  the
mode of apprehension.

The object of observation can be concordant with reality;  for  example,  in
this instance, the person that  exists.  The  mode  of  apprehension  is  to
apprehend the person that  exists  to  be  different  from  the  aggregates.
Therefore it is not a valid cogniser because the  mode  of  apprehension  is
not in accord with reality.

The  mode  of  apprehending  the  person   that   is   annihilatory,   i.e.,
apprehending that person as not moving on to  the  next  life,  that  is  an
afflicted view because the person that is observed by this view exists.  And
since it is apprehended as not moving to the next life, it is  an  afflicted
view.

Khen Rinpoche: There is this view holding to an extreme. It  may  be  easier
when you posit that (1) the object of observation of the view holding to  an
extreme to be the “I” that  exists  and  (2)  the  object  of  the  mode  of
apprehension to be the self-sufficient person.

When you posit the object of observation of the view holding to the  extreme
to be the self or the person that exists, it is easy to  explain  this  view
by focusing on the “I” that  exists  and  apprehending  that  to  be  either
permanent or to cease at the time of death.


If you were to go  one  step  further,  what  about  changing  it  to  truly
existent person? In relation  to  this  view,  again  there  is  a  view  of
permanence and the view of annihilation. So there can  be  a  view  of  non-
existence or the view of true existence.

It is easier if the object of observation of  this  view  is  the  “I”  that
exists. If the self-sufficient person is the object of observation, then  we
have to think about it.

The view holding on to  the  extreme  of  annihilation  is  essentially  the
thought, “Such a thing does  not  exist  whatsoever.”  When  the  object  of
observation of this view is the self-sufficient person, it is  difficult  to
explain how the view that apprehends such a person to not exist  after  this
life to be a view of annihilation.

We always have to be mindful that there is an “I” that exists and  there  is
an “I” that does not exist. In general, we are not saying that the “I”  does
not exist. The “I” exists but it does not  exist  in  the  way  that  it  is
apprehended by the view of the transitory collection.

The “I” that is believed to exist by the ego, that “I” does not  exist.  But
it will be wrong to say that the “I” does not exist. The “I” exists  but  it
does not exist in the way that is apprehended by the ego  or,  for  example,
by the view of the transitory collection. The “I” definitely exists  because
the “I” is established by worldly convention. We say,  “I  am  going.  I  am
coming. I am eating. I am circling in cyclic existence.”  There  is  an  “I”
that exists. When you say that the “I” does not exist, then who is  circling
in samsara? Who is going to achieve  enlightenment?  This  contradicts  even
common sense.

The mind that apprehends that the self does not exist is called a  wrong  or
perverse consciousness.  It  is  very  important  to  distinguish  correctly
between the “I” that exists and the “I” that does not exist whatsoever.  The
problem is that we are unable to distinguish between these two  and  we  mix
them up.

We need to think about whether it is all right to posit that  the  “I”  that
exists to be the object that is observed by the view holding to  an  extreme
and apprehending this “I” that exists to be  permanent  and  eternal  or  to
view it as something that will not go beyond this life.


         H  [The view] holding to a [bad] view as best [?*]

[The view] holding to a [bad] view as  best  is  an  afflicted  intelligence
that observes and holds to be best any of  the  three  –  the  view  of  the
transitory collection, the view holding to an extreme, or  a  wrong  view  –
and the aggregates of the person holding the view that arises in  dependence
on them (Page 117).
The object of observation here is one of the three views: (1)  the  view  of
the transitory collection or (2) the view  holding  to  an  extreme  or  (3)
wrong view and the aggregates of the person holding any one of these views.

For example, the view  that  observes  and  thinks  that  the  view  of  the
transitory collection is supreme is the conception  of  a  bad  view  to  be
supreme. Likewise, when you focus on the  view  holding  to  an  extreme  as
supreme, this is also the conception of a bad view as  supreme.  It  is  the
same when you observe a wrong view and think that that view is  supreme.

Can someone who completed  the  Basic  Program  explain  this:  “…  and  the
aggregates of the person holding the  view  that  arises  in  dependence  on
them”?

There is a person who holds on to one of these three views: the view of  the
transitory collection, the view holding to an extreme or a wrong view.  What
if we take the view holding to a bad view  as  best  to  be  the  view  that
apprehends the five aggregates of the  person  holding  on  to  those  three
views and the view believes that this person’s aggregates are  supreme,  for
example, that they are like the  aggregates  of  someone  who  has  achieved
liberation? This is not conclusive. This is what I think. We need  to  think
about this. What if I say that this is what it means?

So we have completed  the  view  of  the  transitory  collection,  the  view
holding to an extreme and the view holding to a bad view as best. You  first
need to know that there are such views. On that  basis,  you  have  to  know
their meaning.

Summary:
   • The view of the transitory collection is a mind that thinks  that  the
     self, the person or the “I” is completely separate from the  body  and
     mind. The  object  of  observation  of  the  view  of  the  transitory
     collection is the self or “I.”

   • The view holding to an extreme is a view that apprehends the “I”  that
     is observed by the view of the  transitory  collection  to  be  either
     permanent or not going on to the next life.

   • The view holding to a bad view as best is:
     1. a mind that thinks the view of the transitory collection is supreme
     2. a mind that regards the view holding to an extreme to be supreme
     3. a mind that regards a wrong view  to  be  supreme  and  viewing  the
        aggregates of the person holding that view to be supreme

You now know the words and roughly their meanings. You should not  leave  it
at that. You should take it further by thinking about it, reading the  text,
and then discussing it. We have not come to a decisive understanding of  the
views yet so you should not leave them at this level of explanation.

Medicine Buddha Retreat at Kopan Monastery, Oct 20 – Nov 1, 2012

The retreat will last seven to eight days followed by three or four days  of
pilgrimage. I am encouraging the new Basic Program students to go  for  this
retreat. The retreat does not involve the accumulation of  mantras.  If  you
want to accumulate mantras, you can do that during the break  time  but  not
during the retreat itself.

The retreat will be in total silence. The rule is total  silence  throughout
the retreat. If you think you can make it, then you can  join  the  retreat.
If you think that you cannot make it, then don’t join  the  retreat.  It  is
important that you make this decision. Once you go  and  then  you  want  to
talk, that is not correct. Please think about this.

This time Geok Hua is going to help me lead the  retreat  as  she  has  some
meditation experience. I will attend the sessions as much as possible.

Those of you who want to go, please think about it. We have rooms for 60  to
70 people. I can’t accommodate more than that. Geok Hua  and  Catherine  Lau
will announce the details of the costings at a later date.





Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng

Edited by Cecilia Tsong


-----------------------
[1] i.e., the view of the transitory collection.

