Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L56 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.581738
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


   Lesson No: 56                       Date: 17th May 2012


Do you have any questions pertaining to the generation  of  mind  generation
through the instructions  of  either  the  sevenfold  cause  and  effect  or
exchanging self and others that we have covered so far?

Question: Mind generation and bodhicitta  have  different  pervasions  so  I
assume both have different definitions. May I check whether  the  definition
of bodhicitta can be this: bodhicitta is the Mahayana main  mind  generation
that exists in the continuum of bodhisattvas?

Answer: Yes, you can say that.

Question: The aspirational mind generation does  not  exist  on  the  buddha
ground?

Answer: No.

Question: Only the engaged mind generation exists on the buddha ground?

Answer: Yes.

Question: Therefore, the aspirational mind generation should have a  similar
definition  with  the  addition  of  “existing  in  the   continuum   of   a
bodhisattva”?[1]

Answer: It is all right for you to say this but there is  no  need  to  say,
“existing  in  the  continuum  of  a  bodhisattva,”  because  if  it  is  an
aspirational mind generation, it necessarily exists in the  continuum  of  a
bodhisattva.
Question: When we read commentaries  on  the  Lamrim  Chenmo,  it  is  often
mentioned that Lama Tsongkhapa combines the  two  systems  of  instructions.
How is it then that in the  Lamrim  Chenmo,  there  is  no  mention  of  the
combination  of  the  two  methods  of  the  sevenfold  cause   and   effect
instructions and exchanging self and others?

Answer: Yes, this is not mentioned in the Lamrim  Chenmo.  As  mentioned  in
Pabongka Rinpoche’s Liberation in  the  Palm  of  Your  Hand,  in  order  to
practise the instructions of the sevenfold cause  and  effect,  one  doesn’t
need the instructions of exchanging self and others.

However, when you practise the instructions of exchanging self  and  others,
the essential points of the sevenfold cause and effect instructions must  be
present. The instructions  of  exchanging  self  and  others  are  also  for
developing love and compassion. As we have seen in the sevenfold  cause  and
effect instructions, in order to develop love  and  compassion,  first,  one
must be able to see that all sentient beings  are  attractive  and  pleasant
and that they matter to us.

Without having such affection for sentient beings, it  is  not  possible  to
develop the love that arises through the force of affection. Without  having
cultivated strong love and compassion, there is  no  way  to  generate  this
attitude of exchanging self and others.  When  strong  love  and  compassion
have been cultivated, one would then have the  wish  to  exchange  self  and
others, i.e., one will willingly exchange one’s happiness for the  suffering
of others.

Therefore, it is taught that in order to be able to  train  successfully  in
the instructions of exchanging self and others, one’s training must  possess
the essential points of the sevenfold cause and effect instructions.

Next is the ritual for assuming the mind  generation,  which  I  will  cover
briefly.
              Explanation of how to assume the mind generation
                            by means of a ritual

    2B4B-2B3B-2C The way in which to assume it by means of a ritual

         1  Receiving that which has not yet been received
         2  Guarding that which has been received without degenerating it
         3  The method for restoring it if it has been degenerated

The third one has three [points]: receiving that  which  has  not  yet  been
received, guarding that which has been  received  without  degenerating  it,
and the method for restoring it if it has been degenerated.

     2B4B-2B3B-2C1     Receiving that which has not yet been received

         A  From whom: the object from whom it is taken
         B  By whom: the basis that takes it
         C  How: the ritual by which it is taken

The first has three [points]: From whom: the object from whom it  is  taken;
by whom: the basis that takes it; how: the ritual by which it is taken.

    2B4B-2B3B-2C1A     From whom: the object from whom it is taken (Page
    152)


We are talking here about from whom we should assume the  aspirational  mind
generation[2], specifically, generating  the  aspirational  mind  generation
that comes with the commitment. This should  be  done  in  the  presence  of
someone who has received the bodhisattva vows.


    2B4B-2B3B-2C1B     By whom: the basis that takes it (Page 152)


Who can assume  this  aspirational  mind  generation  that  comes  with  the
commitment through a ritual? The person who  is  qualified  to  do  this  is
someone who has trained his mind in either the sevenfold  cause  and  effect
instructions or the instructions of exchanging  self  and  others  and  who,
through such training, have gained at least some  transformative  experience
in relation to mind generation.





    2B4B-2B3B-2C1C     How: the ritual by which it is taken

         1  The preparatory ritual
         2  The actual ritual
         3  The concluding ritual

The third one  has  three  [points]:  the  preparatory  ritual,  the  actual
ritual, and the concluding ritual.

    2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-1   The preparatory ritual

         A  Special going for refuge
         B  Accumulating the collection
         C  Training the mind

The  first  one  has  three  [points]:  the  special  going  for  refuge[?],
accumulating the collection, and training the mind.

    2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-1A  Special going for refuge

         1  Decorating the place, displaying representations, [/displaying
         the representative objecand setting up offering substances
         2  Making a request and going for refuge
         3  Stating the trainings of [/that you should abide by] having gone
         for refuge

The first  one  is  divided  into  three  [points]:  Decorating  the  place,
displaying representations,[? rten bkram +footnote] and setting up  offering
substances;  making  a  request  and  going  for  refuge;  and  stating  the
trainings of [/that you should abide by] having gone for refuge.

    2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-1A1 Decorating the place, displaying
    representations,[/displaying the representative objects] and setting up
    offering substances

         A  General indications [?] concerning the place, the
         representations, offerings, etc (Pages 152 – 153).


You have to make preparations, such as offerings and so forth, for  assuming
the aspirational mind generation that comes with the  commitment  through  a
ritual. What are these preparations?
 • The place where the ritual will be held has to be cleaned well.
 • You should anoint  the  place  with  scented  water,  perfume,  and  make
   beautiful flower offerings.
 • You should arrange the  representation  of  the  Buddha’s  exalted  body,
   speech, and mind.
 • You should prepare a throne for the  teacher,  the  person  who  will  be
   conducting the ritual for you. It is said that the throne should also  be
   decorated with flowers.


         B  Clearing up doubts about this (page 153)


There are reasons why you need to  engage  in  these  preparatory  practices
before the actual assumption of the aspirational mind generation that  comes
with the commitment.

We are talking about generating  a  very  expansive  mind  that  focuses  on
achieving  the  welfare  of  all  living  beings.  Such  a  mind  can  bring
immeasurable benefits even if it is generated for a very short time  because
we are generating this mind for the benefit of countless sentient beings,  a
mind that wants to achieve enlightenment for their welfare and  that  wishes
to place them in the state of enlightenment.

This mind that you wish to generate is so precious and important.  In  order
to generate such a precious mind, you need to develop  respect.  Making  all
these preparations, such as cleaning the place and  setting  up  the  throne
for the qualified person who possesses the vows and  who  will  conduct  the
ritual are all signs of respect.

The preparations for the ritual should be  done  voluntarily,  happily,  and
enthusiastically because you understand the significance and  value  of  the
ritual. If you are able to do so, as far as  possible,  you  should  set  up
very extensive offerings of the very best quality. If you are unable  to  do
so, then that is an exception. Otherwise, you  should  make  as  many  good-
quality offerings as possible. Making such extensive  offerings  become  the
conditions for you to be able to develop this mind. When you understand  the
reason for making extensive offerings, then doing so will not be a  problem.


As I mentioned before, when the aspirational mind generation arises  in  the
mind, you will not find it difficult to  work  for  others,  no  matter  the
hardships and difficulties involved in doing so. Also this  mind  generation
gives a very strong impetus to our development of joyous perseverance.  When
you  have  these  two  qualities,  i.e.,  joyous  perseverance  and   strong
determination, you will amass the collections quickly. When the  collections
are amassed quickly, you will achieve enlightenment quickly.  When  you  see
how important it is to develop this mind generation, you will  not  find  it
difficult to make extensive offerings.





         C  The steps to be performed by the lama and student (Page 153)


The students who are assuming this mind generation through the  ritual  have
to wash and keep themselves clean and put on good clothes. The  master,  the
person who is conducting the ritual, should help the  students  to  generate
faith by talking about the good qualities of the objects of  refuge.  Before
adopting this mind generation through a ritual,  the  students  should  also
engage in the practices of accumulating merit  and  purifying  the  mind  of
obscurations through the seven-limb prayer.





    2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-1A2 Making a request and going for refuge

         A  Making a request
         B  The special going for refuge [?]

    2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-1A2A     Making a request (Page 153 – 154)





In the beginning,  the  person  who  is  developing  the  aspirational  mind
generation that comes with the commitment should generate the attitude  that
the person who is conducting the ritual is a buddha. One prostrates  to  the
master and makes a mandala offering. One then kneels  on  one’s  right  knee
and joining the hands respectfully, one makes a supplication  for  the  mind
generation to be generated. The verse for this supplication is given in  the
text.


         Just  as  the  previous  tathagatas,  arhats,  perfectly  completed
         buddhas, as well as the great bodhisattvas abiding on[?] the  great
         [/bodhisattva?] grounds, first generated the mind  of  unsurpassed,
         perfectly complete enlightenment, likewise  I,  whose  name  is...,
         request the master to generate the mind of  unsurpassed,  perfectly
         complete enlightenment.
         [?]
Repeat this three times (Page 154).

Next is the special way of going for refuge.





    2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-1A2B     The special going for refuge (Page 154)[?]


This special way of going for refuge is going to refuge in a  Mahayana  way,
thinking,  "From  now  until  I  achieve  enlightenment  for  the  sake   of
protecting all sentient beings, I go for refuge to  the  Buddha,  I  go  for
refuge to the Dharma, and I go for refuge to the Sangha."


    2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-1A3 Stating the trainings of [/that you should abide by]
    having taken refuge (Page 155)


The master should explain the precepts of going for refuge. We  had  studied
these precepts when we covered  the  practices  that  are  shared  with  the
persons of small capacity.


    2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-1B       Accumulation of the collection [of merit] (Page
    155)


Having gone for refuge to the Buddha, Dharma and  Sangha,  one  amasses  the
collection of merit by visualising the root and lineage gurus  and  all  the
buddhas and bodhisattvas, and in relation to them, one accumulates merit.


    2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-1C       Training in the attitude (Page 155)


One purifies one’s attitude by bringing to mind the meditations on love  and
compassion for developing the mind generation and actively  sustaining  them
in thought.

These are all  the  important  points  regarding  the  preparation  for  the
ritual. On the basis of cleaning well the place where  the  ritual  will  be
conducted, you go for Mahayana refuge. You  then  amass  the  collection  of
merit and purify your attitude. On the basis of sustaining  the  meditations
on love and compassion to the point  when  there  is  some  feeling  in  the
heart, then you can say that the preparations for the ritual are complete.


    2B4B-2B3B-2C1C-2   The actual ritual (Page 155)


On the  bases  of  having  done  these  preparatory  practices  and  through
sustaining the meditations on love and compassion, there comes a  time  when
you have a transformative experience  whereby  some  feeling  in  the  heart
arises through thinking of love and compassion. You then become  the  person
who can take part in the ritual. This is the ideal situation and  it  should
be like that. It is insufficient that you simply   repeat  what  the  master
says.

As mentioned in the text,  the  person  who  assumes  this  mind  generation
should be someone who has trained her mind in the manner that was  explained
earlier and who has gained some transformative experience  with  respect  to
mind generation.

In order to be able to participate in and benefit from  the  actual  ritual,
we should do these preparations well. When the preparations are  done  well,
the actual ritual will also go smoothly. When you are  able  to  go  through
the ritual smoothly, you will also have a very good result.

But we are not like that. When our  preparations  are  not  done  well,  the
actual ritual will be imperfect and we will not have much of  a  result.   I
think it is important for us to know this so that, as much as  possible,  we
should try to ensure that our preparations are done well in order for us  to
be able to generate this aspirational mind generation.

         A  The behaviour (Page 155)


For the actual ritual, in  the  presence  of  the  master,  you  kneel  down
respectfully.


         B  The distinction of the mind generation

[The mind generation here] is not the mere mind generation  that  thinks  “I
will attain buddhahood for others’  welfare.”  Rather,  it  is  the  promise
that, observing the mind that has been generated, thinks, “I shall not  give
it up as long as I have not  attained  enlightenment.”  This  is  why  [/and
therefore] that attitude should be  generated  in  dependence  on  a  ritual
(Page 155).

Anyone can generate the  aspirational  mind  generation  that  only  entails
generating the intention, “I will achieve enlightenment for the  benefit  of
all sentient beings.” However,  when  you  generate  the  aspirational  mind
generation that comes with the commitment, that entails making a promise  to
never forsake this intention until  you  have  achieved  enlightenment.  You
then have to train in the precepts that come with the commitment.

Generating the aspirational  mind  generation  through  a  ritual  does  not
necessarily come with the commitment. Anyone can do this. However,  when  it
comes to generating the engaged mind generation, then it  necessarily  comes
with the commitment. It will be helpful if we go through the  verse  of  the
ritual for adopting the mind generation  that  comes  with  the  commitment.
This verse is to be repeated three times after the master.


         F  The ritual for assuming the mind generation [/the mental
         attitude generating enlightenment]

The ritual for assuming the mind generation is:

         All buddhas and bodhisattvas residing in the ten directions, please
         grant  me  your  attention[?].  Master,  please   grant   me   your
         attention[?]. I, whose name is (…), by means of the roots of virtue
         of the nature of generosity, the nature of morality, and the nature
         of meditation that I  have  created,  caused  to  be  created,  and
         rejoiced in the creation of in this life  and  in  previous  lives,
         just as the previous [?/Just as  before  the]  tathagatas,  arhats,
         perfectly  complete  buddhas  and  great  bodhisattvas   thoroughly
         abiding on the great  grounds  [/levels],  generated  the  mind  of
         unsurpassed perfectly complete enlightenment, in the same way  also
         I, whose name is (…),  from  now  until  I  reach  the  essence  of
         enlightenment,  {185}  will  generate  the  mind  of   unsurpassed,
         perfectly complete, great [/grand] enlightenment, I  will  liberate
         the beings that are not liberated, free those  who  are  not  free,
         give breath to those unable to breathe, and cause  those  who  have
         not completely passed  beyond  sorrow  to  completely  pass  beyond
         sorrow (Page 156).


This is the way to assume the mind generation through a ritual when you  are
able to find someone to perform the ritual for you.


         G  The method for taking [the mind generation] by oneself in a
         ritual (Page 156)


However, it does not  mean  that  you  cannot  assume  the  mind  generation
through  a  ritual  if  you  cannot  find  a  master.  You  can  assume  the
aspirational mind generation through a ritual even  if  you  cannot  find  a
master. The preparations are almost the same:
 • Visualise Shakyamuni Buddha and all the buddhas in front of you.
 • Make obeisance and offerings.
 • Accumulate merit by doing the seven-limb practice.
 • Go for refuge and so forth.
 • Think that you are assuming this mind generation by repeating  the  verse
   after Shakyamuni Buddha who is in front of you.

This is assuming the mind  generation  through  a  ritual.  Having  attained
that, the next thing to do is to maintain it  and  not  weakening  what  you
have attained. You have to ensure that it does not  degenerate  by  training
in the precepts.


    2B4B-2B3B-2C2      Guarding that which has been obtained without
    degeneration [/without its degenerating]

         A  Training in the cause that assures the mind generation [?]will
         not degenerate in this life
         B  Training in the cause that assures one will not be separated
         from [/part with][ [the mind generation] again in future [/other]
         lives

The second one has two [points]: Training in the cause that  assures  [?]the
mindthe mind generation will not degenerate in this  life  and  training  in
the cause that assures one will not  be  separated  from  [/part  with][[the
mind generation] again in future [/other] lives.

    2B4B-2B3B-2C2A     Training in the cause that assures[?] the mind
    generation [?]will not degenerate in this life

         1  Training in remembering the advantages, so that the strength of
         one’s delight in the mind generation increases
         2  Training in generating it six times, so that the actual mind
         generation [?] increases
         3  Training in not mentally abandoning [/giving up on/non-
         abandonment of?] any sentient being for whose welfare the mind has
         been generated
         4  Training in accumulating the collections of merit and wisdom

The first one has four [points]: Training in remembering the advantages,  so
that the strength  of  one’s  delight  in  the  mind  generation  increases,
training in generating it six times, so that the actual  mind  generation[?]
increases,  training  in  not   mentally   abandoning[/giving   up   on/non-
abandonment of?] any sentient being for whose  welfare  the  mind  has  been
generated, and  training  in  accumulating  the  collections  of  merit  and
wisdom.

    2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-1   Training in remembering the advantages, so that the
    strength of one’s delight in the mind generation increases (Pages 156 –
    157)


Here, we talk about the two advantages of having  generated  a  stable  mind
generation:





    2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-1A2B     The actual [advantages]

         1  You become a holy field
         2  You thoroughly hold the merit of non-harm (Page 157)


    2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-1A2B-1   You become a holy field (Page 158)


Once the mind generation arises in your mind, immediately  you  will  become
an object of worship for all living  beings,  i.e.,  you  become  an  object
worthy of  their  veneration.  When  you  develop  mind  generation  through
training your mind in the sevenfold cause  and  effect  instructions  and/or
the instructions of exchanging self and  others,  naturally  you  become  an
object of  reverence  and  respect  for  sentient  beings.  You  become  the
unexcelled leader in the minds of sentient beings.

Anyone who develops the real mind generation becomes  a  source  of  benefit
and not harm for sentient beings. When a person is like  that,  people  will
naturally respect that person.


    2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-1A2B-2   You thoroughly hold the merit of non-harm

         A  The way you are guarded by protectors (Page 158)


The second benefit for those who have  generated  mind  generation  is  that
they will always be protected by the guardians of the universal  monarch  or
wheel-turning king. It is said that one will be protected by twice  as  many
guardians as those protecting the wheel-turning kings. The  person  who  has
developed mind generation cannot be harmed by  non-human  entities  such  as
the yaksas and local spirits.


         B  Mantras and the like will succeed more easily

You easily pacify calamities, harm and infectious diseases  with  the  words
of secret mantra and knowledge mantra[?]. If  even  things  that  cannot  be
accomplished in the hands of sentient beings[?], will be  accomplished  when
they come into your hands,  what  need  is  there  to  mention  that  [other
things] will be accomplished? (Page 158)

This section talks about the importance of having a stable mind  generation.
Those very powerful and effective  mantras  do  not  show  their  power  and
effectiveness when practised by people who  do  not  have  mind  generation.
However, these secret mantras and knowledge mantras  become  very  effective
and powerful when practised by people who have mind generation.

         D  One is without anger and patient [/absence of anger and
         patience](Page 158)


Those who have developed this mind generation do not retaliate when  harmed.


         E  It will be difficult for one to be reborn in the bad migrations
         and one will quickly be freed (Page 158)


Even when those who have developed the  mind  generation  are  born  in  the
lower realms, they will be quickly released from those rebirths.  For  those
who have mind generation, whatever sufferings  they  experience  become  the
conditions for their compassion to increase.

In order to increase the strength of  enthusiasm  for  mind  generation,  we
have to constantly remember the advantages and the benefits of  having  mind
generation.


    2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-2   Training in generating it six times so that the
    actual mind generation [?] increases

         A  Training in not giving up the aspiring mind generation
         B  Training in increasing the aspiring mind generation

The second one has[?] two [points]: training in  not  {189}  giving  up  and
increasing the aspiring mind generation (Page 159).

Great faults or disadvantages will arise from  giving  up  the  aspirational
mind  generation.  When  you  generated  this  special  mind,  you  made   a
commitment in the presence of the buddhas, bodhisattvas, and the  gurus.  So
if you were to give up this commitment, the ensuing faults or  disadvantages
would be great.





         2  Not giving it up, due to delight like that of finding a jewel in
         a rubbish heap

Also that same [text] says:

         As a blind man finds a jewel
         In a heap of dust, like that,
         Effortlessly bodhicitta
         Has arisen within me.                                 [31]

You should think “What I found is just as amazing” and “I shall not give  it
up under any circumstances.” Observing this, reinforce the  decision  [?-zhe
dam] not to give it up even for an instant (Page 160).

An example is given of a blind person finding a jewel in a pile of  garbage.
That is almost impossibly rare. Likewise, the fact that anyone has a  chance
to develop  this  aspirational  mind  generation  is  also  extremely  rare.
Therefore, you should remember this and generate the thought over  and  over
again so that you will never ever give it up.





    2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-2B  Training increasing the aspiring mind generation

         1  It is not enough to merely not give it up, it must be reinforced
         (Page 160)


You need to engage in the training to increase  whatever  aspirational  mind
generation has been generated.


         2  How the ritual is performed at the six times (Page 160)


Therefore you should generate this mind three  times  during  the  day,  and
three times at night. You can do so through a  ritual.  As  mentioned  here,
you visualise the field of merit  and  make  offerings.  In  particular,  as
mentioned earlier in the preparatory ritual, you  purify  your  attitude  by
sustaining the meditations on love and compassion. On this basis, you  again
give rise to the mind generation and recite this verse three times:

         I go for refuge until I am enlightened
         to the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Supreme Assembly[?].
         Through the practice of generosity and the other [perfections],
         May I attain buddhahood in order to benefit migrating beings  (Page
         160).

It will be ideal if you can use the words from the longer  ritual  mentioned
earlier for assuming the mind generation. Otherwise you can use  this  short
verse as a means to develop and strengthen your mind generation.





    2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-3   Training in not mentally abandoning [/giving up
    on/non-abandonment of?] any sentient being, for whose welfare the
    mental attitude has been generated (Page 160)


What is the meaning of  “mentally  abandoning  sentient  beings”?  It  means
generating the thought, “Now, I will never  work  for  that  person,”  based
upon some conditions that had arisen.


    2B4B-2B3B-2C2A-4   Training in accumulating the two collections (page
    160)


After  having  generated  the  mind  generation,  you  have  to  strive   to
accumulate  merit  and  to  purify  obscurations  by  doing  the  seven-limb
practice.

These are the four trainings that you have to engage  in  in  order  not  to
weaken your mind generation in this life.


    2B4B-2B3B-2C2B     Training in the cause of not being separated from
    [/part with][ [the aspiring mind] in other [/other] lives

         1  Training in abandoning the four black dharmas that cause it to
         degenerate
         2  Training in adopting[?/adopting] the four white dharmas that do
         not allow it to degenerate

The second one has two [points]:  training  in  abandoning  the  four  black
dharmas that cause it to degenerate  and  training  in  adopting[?/adopting]
the four white dharmas that do not allow it to degenerate (Page 161).

We will talk about these four white dharmas and four black  dharmas  in  the
next class. Please read this on your own.

Question: Two methods have been taught for generating  mind  generation.  Do
we need to practise both to become a bodhisattva or are  these  two  methods
taught because of the different mental inclinations of the practitioner?  Is
the strength of the mind generation achieved through these methods the  same
or different?

Answer: These two systems of  developing  the  mind  generation  came  about
because of the lineages coming from two masters. The  mind  generation  that
is generated through training in either of these systems  is  the  same.  In
the lam-rim text, Liberation in the Palm of Your  Hand,  it  says  that  the
system of exchanging self and others is a more  powerful  technique  because
these instructions contain the essential points of the sevenfold  cause  and
effect instructions.

But when we practise  the  sevenfold  cause  and  effect  instructions,  the
essential points of the instruction of exchanging self and others  need  not
be there. This is mentioned in that text. You have to think about this.

Question: If our precious guru Kyabje Lama Zopa  Rinpoche  who  is  a  great
practitioner and who has developed the realisation of  mind  generation  can
still be harmed, it is hard for me to accept what was said in the text.  Can
Khen Rinpoche please comment on this?

Answer: There isn’t a straightforward answer  to  this  matter.  It  can  be
approached from many angles. In order to be able to  comment  on  this  from
various  angles,  we  need  to  know  many  things,  one  of  which  is  the
presentation of the four Buddhist tenets.

For  example,  according  to  the  Great  Exposition   School   (GES),   the
Vaibhashikas, the Buddha’s body is true suffering and is not a  buddha  body
whereas the Sutra School and the other tenets do  not  accept  this.  If  we
follow the GES, the Buddha’s aggregates are not the aggregates of  a  buddha
because they are true suffering. If they are true suffering,  problems  will
arise.

Khen Rinpoche: Which school do you  follow?  You  are  a  proponent  of  the
highest school, the Middle  Way  School,  but  your  question  is  from  the
Vaibhashikas’ School!

Khen Rinpoche: From the Sutra School upwards, the view is  that  a  buddha’s
aggregates is buddha, not true suffering. Once you accept that,  it  becomes
a contradiction to say that a buddha can be harmed.

People may see a buddha being harmed, such  as  Buddha  Shakyamuni  shedding
blood when harmed by Devadatta, but when we see someone being  harmed,  this
does not necessarily mean that that person is being harmed, as in  the  case
of Buddha Shakyamuni. The Buddha was showing the  aspect  of  being  harmed.
Once you accept that the individual involved is  a  buddha,  then  it  is  a
contradiction to assert that that person is suffering.

The only explanation left is that it is due to the impure perception of  our
impure mind. The Vaibhashika view is probably an easier fit  for  our  level
of mind.

Anyway, whether someone is a buddha or not does depends on the level of  the
mind. To the mind that is completely free of all obscurations,  that  person
is a buddha. It won’t matter what happens to the body.

Question: If I had taken the bodhisattva vows  in  a  previous  life  and  I
don’t remember the precepts until I take the bodhisattva vows again in  this
lifetime,  do  I  accumulate  the  negative  karma  that  is  done  but  not
accumulated?

Khen Rinpoche: When you  fall  asleep  in  this  life,  do  you  create  the
negative karma of not keeping the precepts?

Student: No.

Khen Rinpoche: Why not? When you fall  asleep,  you  are  not  keeping  your
precepts, right?

Student: But it is said that even  when  you  are  asleep,  the  merit  from
having the bodhisattva vows do not stop …

Khen Rinpoche: When you engage in the training that  will  ensure  that  the
mind generation is not weakened in this  life  and  if  you  engage  in  the
training that  will  ensure  you  will  not  be  separated  from  this  mind
generation in your future lives, then it should not degenerate.

When we die, during the entire period of the intermediate  state,  the  mind
generation does not manifest. When it does not manifest, then we say  it  is
in the aspect of not degenerating.

Upon taking rebirth, the coarse consciousness starts  to  operate.  One  may
start to have a good heart and it is possible that the mind generation  will
arise. I think in that life, in order to reactivate it, one has to train  in
order to generate this mind generation by assuming it through a ritual.

I am not sure whether you incur the fault of not  keeping  the  vows  during
the in-between period when the mind generation is not manifest. When we  are
asleep, the mind generation is not manifest. During that time  it  does  not
really matter whether one practises the four white dharmas  or  whether  one
does not abandon the four black dharmas.

If one were to lose one’s mind, probably there is  no  fault  in  not  being
able to abandon the four black dharmas  and  to  cultivate  the  four  white
dharmas.  I  guess  one  would  not  incur  any  faults  because  these  are
exceptional circumstances beyond one’s control.




Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng

Edited by Cecilia Tsong


-----------------------
[1]  The  whole  definition  would  read  as  follows:   Aspirational   mind
generation is the mind that thinks, “I will achieve  enlightenment  for  the
benefit of all sentient  beings,”  and  is  a  mind  that  is  not  directly
conjoined with the activity of engaging in the practice of  the  deeds  that
exists in the continuum of a bodhisattva.

[2] In the Lamrim Chenmo, mind generation is translated as the spirit of
enlightenment.

