Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L44 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.536049
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


   Lesson No: 44                    Date: 22nd March 2012


(Meditation on Manjushri)
Visualize Manjushri in the space in front of  you.  Then  develop  heartfelt
devotion toward Manjushri and perform the seven-branch worship. After  that,
do the visualization of the flow of nectars purifying all your  obscurations
and developing your wisdom. Try to do this with concentrated mind.
As you know that Wwe usually do  a  short  meditation  on  Manjushri  before
class. We  bring  Manjushri  to  our  mind,   and  then  perform  the  seven
-branches of worship, and make a  and then make heartfelt prayer.

It is important to make this such heartfelt prayers  because  they  it  does
make a big difference to our studies. We  make  athis  heartfelt  prayer  in
order to pacify obstacles that may arise in the course of listening  to  the
teachings during class and the session. We also make heartfelt prayer to  be
so thable at to we can understand the Ddharma that when  we  are  learn  and
studying. So,

Iit is very important to make heartfelt prayers  on  the  basis  of  single-
pointed faith in order . We make strong prayers  with  single-pointed  faith
to pacify free obstacles,  and to have success in our studies,   and  to  be
able to  learn the Ddharma. This makes a big  difference  for  to  everyone.
you all.

 So wWhen we make such  prayers, we need to make  sure  they  are  heartfelt
prayer all the times.  As Wwe have talked about karma recently. , Tthose  he
prayers should be strong, heartfelt,  and long-lastingenduring. So,  Iit  is
very important to pray and to study  learn  the  Ddharma  in  a  strong  and
powerful way and to sustain that over a long period of times. When If we  do
this, we will definitely be able to leave many virtuous es imprints  on  our
mind.

You coome here to learn the Ddharma. Even if in the case when  nothing  much
happens for you, but if  you  work  at  it,  definitely  this  will  make  a
difference to for you to knowing the Ddharma in your  future  lives.  We  do
pray but  perhaps,  at  times  at  times,  our  prayers  are   is  not  very
heartfelt. T; the prayers we make de may not be strong and enduring. We  may
not feel any positive effects from such prayers.

So Wwhatever we do, such as studying  and learning the Ddharma, we  need  to
put in effort, do it well, and sustain that over a  long  period  of   time.
Only then will we will see the results. However, Iif from  our  side  we  do
not have this e strong wish to learn, , of course, we will may  not  achieve
much.

When we were looking  at  the  truth  of  suffering,  we  talked  about  the
suffering  aggregates,  .   The  suffering  aggregates  are  primarily   the
contaminated/ appropriated physical and  mental  aggregates  that  we  havde
inherited.  Because of having these contaminated aggregates,  when  we  meet
with the slightest of the conditions,  suffering  is  readily  produced  and
experienced we experience suffering almost immediately.

It is said that our suffering  aggregates  -the  contaminated  physical  and
mental aggregates - are in the nature of suffering. Why do we say thisit  is
in the nature of suffering? Even wAt any particular time when  suffering  is
not not manifesting ,and  we  arewill  not  experiencing  e  any  unpleasant
sensations or feelings, . bBecause these suffering  aggregates  are  in  the
nature of suffering, whenever we meet with the slightest of the  conditions,
suffering is readily produced.

What are the causes that produce  these  suffering  aggregates?  If  you  do
analyze, Vvarious conditions come together into produceing  these  suffering
aggregates. . As Wwe create many different kinds of all  sorts  of  actions,
these contaminated actions that produce  these  suffering  aggregates.  This
was discussed in the truth of the origins of suffering.

These contaminated physical and mental aggregates are  the  results  of  our
contaminated actions. How From where do these  contaminated  actions  arise?
In the first place, why do we engage in such these actions? On the basis  of
the mistakenly apprehending sion of an object those that  which  is  in  the
are by naturenature of  suffering  and  unpleasant  to  be  pleasurable  and
pleasant, we become get emotionally involved  with  the  object  and  a  and
attachment then arises. Due to From attachment, we engage in  all  sorts  of
contaminated actions. Due Beto our cause of attachment to the  happiness  of
this life, we engage in  non-virtues  such  as  killing  and  so  forth  and
because of these actions,   we  are  thrown  into  the  miserable  or  lower
realms.

Also due to On top of that, because of our  attachment  and  the  desire  to
experience enjoyments in the future lives,  we  engage  in  certain  actions
such as generosity that iswhich are motivated  by  the  wish  to  experience
happiness  and  or  enjoyments  in  the  future  lives.  These  karmas   are
meritorious and they which causes us to be get a reborn irth as a human,  or
a desire realm god.

There are people ersons who may  not  be  attracted  to  such  the  external
desirable objects. , but Rrather they are attached to the bliss that  arises
from the meditative concentration. Driven by the  attachment  to  the  bliss
that arises from the meditative concentration,  they  accumulate  the  karma
that will would throw them into the form and formless realms.

As mentioned in the teachings, because  of  attachment,   one  goes  to  the
lower realms. , Bbecause of attachment,  one is reborn in cyclic  existence.
and The rebirths of the six types of beings in cyclic existence  comes  from
attachment.  Attachment arises due to mistakenly apprehending that which  is
in the nature of suffering to be pleasurable.

How does this happen? Upon  further  analysis,  you  find  that  If  you  do
analyze, aattachment arises due to holding  on  to  the  “‘I”’  to  be  very
important and precious.

If yYou do analysze further: it deeper, why do we hold the “I”  or  self  to
be as so important? This relates  boils  down  to  what  we  have  discussed
earlier. It is due to  i.e. the view of the  transitory  collection;,  i.e.,
which is the strong  sense  of  the  “I”  being  self-sufficient  and  being
independent from the physical and mental aggregates,  -the  body  and  mind.
So,

Iin short, true suffering refers to the  contaminated  physical  and  mental
aggregates that arise from the true  origins  of  sufferings,  ;  which  are
primarily actions, karma, and the afflictions.

When If you look at the actions that are  accumulated,  they  are  motivated
primarily by attachment. If we take the position that ignorance is the  same
as  and the view of the  transitory collection are the same,  the  ignorance
refers to is thethe ignorance apprapprehension dingof  a self of  a  person.
and Tthis ignorance is the root from which attachment arises.

How does the  contaminated body and mind arise from ignorance?  It  is  very
important that we This is something that is very important for us  to  think
about this. We  have  to  see  it  for  ourselves  of  how  all  sufferings,
including our e the suffering of the body and mind,   come  from  ignorance.
We need to arrive at the ascertainment At the end of the  thinking  process,
we should haveand   the  understanding  in  at  our  heart  that  all  these
sufferings come from ignorance.
Through thinking, Wwe should see, understand and  experience  for  ourselves
how ignorance is the source  of  all  our  the  problems.  ;  including  the
suffering of the body and mind.

Only  then,  we  can  we   talk  about  ignorance  in  detail,  s  and  then
identifying what exactly is  ignorance is. We then start to  check  look  at
whether there is  any  antidote  to  ignorance  and  then  analysze  whether
ignorance can be weakened by applying this antidote. When  If  we  start  to
think about all this, ese, this is where we then move on start with  to  the
next truths: the true cessation and true path. When If we  proceed  in  this
such a way, we will arrive at  with a perfect understanding.

When If we analysze in  this, such a way and on the  basis  of  seeing  from
our own experience of how ignorance is indeed the root of all our  problems,
we will come to the true true path and true cessation. Then from our  heart,
Wwe will come to recognisze, from the depths of our heart, that  the  actual
refuge is the true path.  and Ttrue cessation is which is called the  Dharma
jJewel. On the basis of  of having identified what  ignorance  is,  we  will
see that ignorance can be removed by cultivating the true path in our  mind.
Then, Wwe will truly really feel, “; “This is my refuge, my actual  refuge,”
and also come to an understanding of what is the Dharma jJewel.
 is.
When If we do uunderstand how the Ddharma - true path and true  cessation  -
is our the actual refuge, then we will understand that the  real  protection
does not come from outside but comescomes  from withininside of us.  If  the
protection can comes from outside, then it will ould aabsurdly  follow  that
we do not n’t have to do anything at all. Of course that  is  not  possible.
So Tthe real protection has to come from the within  inside  of  us,   i.e.,
by generating the true path in our mind. This  at  is  the  reason  why  the
Buddha said, ys; “One is one’s own protector.” That which means that we  are
the one who haves to protect ourselves and  and we arebe  our own saviours.

                                ************

Coming back to “karma that is intention” and “karma  that  is  the  intended
action.”
   • Who is the one that accumulates projecting karma? Everyone else except
     the superior beings or the aryas.
   • Why do the superior beings not accumulate projecting  karma?  This  is
     because they have seen the truth directly.
   • When one sees the truth directly,  does  it  mean  that  ignorance  is
     destroyed completelyright there and then? No, it is not immediate.
   • When one sees the truth directly for the  first  time,  initially,  at
     that time the superior being has not  overcome  ignorance  completely.
     However  but that superior being does not accumulate any  more   fresh
     projecting karma. Why  is  this  so?  This  is  because  when  he  has
     realiszed the truth directly,  the ignorance in his mind  is  weakened
     to the extent that it does not have the power to create an action that
     will project a new rebirth in cyclic existence. In order to accumulate
     an action that is  strong  enough  to  project  a  rebirth  in  cyclic
     existence, the projecting cause,  – ignorance, - must be powerful.

It is mentioned As said in many treatises,  such as Nagarjuna’s  Fundamental
Wisdom and Vasubandhu’s Abidharmakosha,  that once the  truth  is  realiszed
or seen directly, henceforth one will not accumulate projecting karma.

Question from Khen Rinpoche:  After  having  realiszed  emptiness  directly,
does that person take on a rebirth due to karma and afflictions?

The reason why I broought up this  question  is  to  see  whether  you  have
really read the text or not. As stated clearly in Tthe text  clearly  states
that this person  they will do take rebirth due to the power  of  karma  and
afflictions.

Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): It lLooks like only three to  four  people
read the text.

Question from Khen Rinpoche: How is it that the  superior  beings  who  have
realiszed  the  truth  directly  still  take  rebirth  due  to   karma   and
afflictions?

Student 1: Even though they do not accumulate new projecting karma,  because
of having accumulated previous projecting karma previously  that  which  has
not yet been exhausted yet, they will still be reborn  in  cyclic  existence
due to the past karma that they hadve accumulated.

Khen Rinpoche (Spoken in English): Okay, Ggood. You have passed.

Student 2: Can I posit say that it cannot happen i.e.that  they cannot  take
rebirth?  If they hadve realiszed emptiness directly, they no  longer  grasp
at phenomena. According to the twelve links of dependent  origination,  even
though they may have the projecting karma but thatey  is are not  activated.
So, they cannot take rebirth.

Khen Rinpoche: Lama  Tsongkhapa  says:  “Once  you  have  directly  realised
selflessness, you can still be reborn in cyclic existence  under  the  power
of karma and mental afflictions. However, you do not  newly  accumulate  any
throwing karma.” perceived reality  i.e.  selflessness,  you  may  still  be
reborn in cyclic existence by the power of the former karma and  afflictions
but you will not accumulate any new karma that can impel such rebirth”.  Are
you saying that what Lama Tsongkhapa had said is unnot true?
Student:  2: He is only saying that id  wwe  will  not  accumulate  any  new
projecting karma.

Khen Rinpoche: We accept that you will not  accumulate  any  new  projecting
negative karma but you will still be  reborn  in  cyclic  existence  by  the
power of your former karma and afflictions.

Student: 2:  Previously they had ve projecting karma but in order for  thate
projecting karma to work, to propel them to  a new rebirth, at the  time  of
death, they must have grasping and craving, which they  won’t  have  because
they had realised emptiness. right?


Ven Gyurme: Why no grasping?
Student 2: Because you have realized emptiness.
Ven Gyurme: So they don’t have ignorance?
Student 2: I see.
Khen Rinpoche: It is clear that even aryas do take rebirth by the  power  of
their former karma and afflictions. The question is how does this occur.  ,
Question: Explain how.
Although it is not in this text, there is an  but there are  an  explanation
of the different levels for theof  superior beings:
1. The stream- enterer
2. The once- returner
3. The non-returner
4. The foe destroyer
Of these four superior beings, Tthe first two,   -the  stream-  enterer  and
the once- returner-,  will still take rebirth in the cyclic existence  under
the power of their  foformer karma and afflictions. In  the  Abhidharmakosha
it is clearly stated that,  due  to  karma  and  afflictions,  some  stream-
enterers have to take seven rebirths in cyclic existence.

The non-returners does not take rebirth under the power of  past  karma  and
afflictions.

In  the  Abhidharmakosa,  it  is  clearly  stated  that  due  to  karma  and
afflictions, some stream enterers have to take  another  seven  rebirths  in
the cyclic existence.

    2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3        How you die, transmigrate[?], and take rebirth

         A  Conditions for death [?]
         B  The mind of death
         C  From where the heat withdraws
         D  How the intermediate state [/bardo] is accomplished [/achieved]
         after death
         E  How you take rebirth in a birth-existence

The third one has five points: conditions for  death,  the  mind  of  death,
from where the heat  withdraws,  how  the  intermediate  state  [/bardo]  is
accomplished [/achieved] after death, and how you take rebirth in  a  birth-
existence

    2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3A  Conditions for death

         A  Death following the exhaustion of one’s life span

To die due to the exhaustion of one’s life span is to die when the time  has
come in which one’s entire life  span  projected  [/impelled?]  by  previous
karma has been exhausted[/has run out][?].

         B  Death following the exhaustion of one’s merit

To die following the exhaustion of one’s merit is the same as to die from  a
lack of basic requirements[/necessities].

         C  Death due to dangers not being avoided

To die due to dangers not being avoided is the same as the nine  causes  and
conditions of death, such as due  to  overeating,  set  out  in  the  sutras
[/temperance/moderation].

The nine causes and conditions  of  death  are  listed  out  in  the  Lamrim
Chenmo:

      How you die and are reborn
      This is explained in five parts:
   1. Causes of death
   2. The mind at death
   3. Where heat gathers
   4. How you reach the intermediate state after death
   5. How you then take rebirth
      Causes of death
      Various causes are mentioned:
   1. One die due to exhaustion of lifespan
   2. One die due to exhaustion of merit
   3. One die due to not avoiding danger
      [LRCM Vol I page 307] Death from the  exhaustion  of  your  life  span
      means dying after you have used up all  of  the  life  span  that  was
      projected by your previous karma; as the time has come, you die. Death
      from exhaustion of your merit means, for example,  dying  deprived  of
      the necessities of life. There is also death  from  failure  to  avoid
      danger, in regard to which the sutras list nine causes and  conditions
      for premature death: overeating, eating something indigestible, eating
      without having digested the previous meal, failing to expel undigested
      food that has accumulated in the stomach, intestinal obstruction,  not
      relying on specific  medicines  for  specific  illnesses,  failing  to
      understand  the  distinction  between  accustomed   and   unaccustomed
      activities, untimely death [i.e., accidental death], and  engaging  in
      sexual intercourse (Page 307).


    2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3B  The mind of death

         1  The mind of death
         2  Its appearances [?/appearances]
         3  For all three minds of death there is joining due to craving

    2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3B1 The mind of death

         A  [Virtuous]
         B  [Non-virtuous]
         C  [Unspecified]
[?*Second:? - there is 1., 2. and 3. here]  Both  virtuous  minds,  such  as
confidence, and non-virtuous minds, such as attachment, {143} arise  in  the
mind, in dependence on one’s own actions or being made  to  recall  them  by
others – as long as gross compositional factors operate[?]. To die  with  an
unspecified mind implies that one did not recall  virtuous  or  non-virtuous
minds by oneself nor was one reminded of them by others.

    2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3B2 Their appearances [?/appearances]

         A  [The appearance due to a virtuous mind] [?]
         B  [The appearance due to a non-virtuous mind]
         C  [The appearance due to an unspecified mind]



    2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3B2A     [The appearance due to a virtuous mind]

For those who have created virtue it is like going from thick darkness  into
light. At the time of death, various pleasant  dream-like  forms  appear  to
them, they die happily, and even the interruption of life is of  very  minor
severity.

    2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3B2B      [The appearance due to a non-virtuous mind]

         1  The actual [appearance]]

[/(In this regard)]For those  who  have  created  non-virtue,  [/been  doing
something unwholesome] it is like going from light into thick  darkness.  At
the time of death, various dreamlike  repulsive  forms  appear  to  them[?],
intense suffering feeling arises, and  the  interruption  of  life  is  very
severe[/accompanied by enormous agitation].

         2  Clearing up doubts concerning the interruption of life

The interruption of life exists for all birth-places excluding the gods  and
hell beings.


    2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3B2C     [The appearance due to an unspecified mind]

         1  The actual [appearance]

In those who have an unspecified mind, the  two,  happiness  and  suffering,
that were explained above do not arise.

         2  What mind becomes manifest at death [?]

At the time of death, whichever mind,  virtuous  or  non-virtuous,  is  most
familiar becomes manifest, whereas other minds do not subsequently  operate.
If they are equally familiar, that  which  is  recalled  first  will  become
manifest, whereas others do no subsequently operate.

         3  All the subtle minds of death [/minds of death] are unspecified

At the time when the mind moves into its subtle part, [?*] virtuous and non-
virtuous minds come to a stop [?] [?*hören auf und werden?]  and  become  an
unspecified mind (Pages 120 – 121).
The mind at death [LRCM Vol I page 308]
(a) Dying with a virtuous mind
Those who die with virtuous minds, whether through remembering on their  own
or through being reminded by others, turn their minds to  virtues,  such  as
faith,  for  as  long  as   coarse   discrimination   [ordinary   types   of
consciousness] remains. In the case of death for those who  have  cultivated
either virtue or non-virtue unequally, they either remember  on  their  own,
or  are  reminded  by  others,  what  they  have  become  accustomed  to  do
repeatedly in the past, and this becomes  extremely  powerful.  Their  minds
then become absorbed in this and  forget  all  else.  If  they  are  equally
familiar with both virtue and non-virtue, then they cannot stop  remembering
what they remember first, and cannot engage their minds in anything else.
Those who have cultivated virtue seem to pass from darkness into  light;  as
they die various pleasant and  attractive  images  appear  as  though  in  a
dream. They die comfortably, and, at the point of  death,  intense  feelings
of suffering do not arise in their  bodies.  For  those  who  are  currently
doing what is right, the final agony of death is minimal.
(b) Dying with a nonvirtuous mind
Those who die with nonvirtuous minds, whether through remembering  on  their
own or through being  reminded  by  others,  remember  non-virtue,  such  as
attachment, for as long as coarse discrimination remains. At  the  point  of
death, they experience intense physical pain. When those who  are  currently
cultivating non-virtue die, they experience signs  foretelling  the  effects
of the non-virtue  they  have  engaged  in.  As  if  in  a  nightmare,  many
unpleasant images appear to them. They seem to pass from light to  darkness.
When those who have committed  serious  nonvirtuous  actions  observe  these
unpleasant signs, they experience physical pain and  their  hair  stands  on
end. They shake their hands and feet, void urine  and  excrement,  reach  up
toward the sky, roll their eyes back, drool, and more.  If  they  have  been
moderate in their non-virtue, then not  all  of  these  things  will  happen
-some will and some will  not.  Wrongdoers  suffer  terrible  agony  at  the
moment of death; such agony  is  found  everywhere  that  beings  are  born,
except among deities and hell-beings.
At the time of death, whereupon discrimination will become  unclear,  beings
are attached to the self with which they  have  long  been  familiar.  After
that, through the influence of attachment to the self,  they  think,  "I  am
ceasing to exist," and they crave embodiment. This causes  the  intermediate
state. Attachment to the self also occurs among  stream-enterers  and  once-
returners, but as they investigate it with  wisdom  they  reject  it  rather
than assent to it, the way  a  powerful  person  dominates  a  weak  person.
Attachment to self does not occur among non-returners.
(c) Dying with an ethically neutral mind
Those who are currently cultivating neither virtue nor  non-virtue,  or  who
have done neither, do not remember virtue and non-virtue,  either  on  their
own or at the urging  of  others.  At  death  they  have  neither  pain  nor
pleasure.
When you die with a virtuous mind, it lasts  as  long  as  there  is  coarse
discrimination, but once subtle discrimination is  activated,  the  virtuous
mind stops and becomes an ethically neutral mind. At this point  you  cannot
retrieve the virtue with which you  had  become  familiar,  nor  can  others
remind you. As the same holds true  for  nonvirtuous  minds,  all  minds  of
death are ethically  neutral  after  the  onset  of  subtle  discrimination.
Vasubandhu's Treasury of Knowledge Auto-commentary says that  both  virtuous
minds and nonvirtuous minds  are  clear,  and  thus  incompatible  with  the
cessation of coarse consciousness at death

The text talks about the mind of death on the coarse level and the  mind  on
the on the subtlerr level.
At the time of death when the coarse consciousness is still  operating,  the
mind can either be v:
Virtuous,
nNon-virtuous,
or eEthically neutral.

At the time of death,  when the coarse consciousness is  still  manifesting,
if one has been accustomed to a virtuous state of mind when one  was  alive,
then due to that familiarity and under one’s  own  power,  one  is  able  to
bring about a virtuous state of mind. If not, at the time of death,  Iit  is
also  possible to develop a virtuous state of mind by  being  reminded  with
the help of others.

When people are on the verge of dying or when they are about to  pass  away,
we have ways of helping themthe methods to help  them:   such  as  reminding
them of the virtuous thoughts, reciting mantras that they can  for  them  to
hear, encouraging them to think about the  Buddha,  and so forth. These  are
the ways to help the dying person to bring about a virtuous  mind.

At the time when aa  person passes away and the coarse consciousness is  not
manifesting,  i.e.,  the coarse consciousness becomes subtle,  and  if  that
person’s mind is in a  virtuous state, it will make a difference as it  will
hel help that person to get a good rebirth.

It is the same for the non-virtuous mind at the time of death. At  the  time
of death, the non-virtuous mind can arise due to familiarity or  habituation
to those negative thoughts when one was alive. Or  tThere  may  also   arebe
people around the dying person who is causing him/her to  have  think  those
of the negative thoughts at the time  of  death.  For  this  reason,  it  is
better not to cry in the presence of the  dying  person  because  the  dying
person may worry and develop attachment. This is  not  good  for  the  dying
person.

eceased. Therefore we should encourage or advise  friends  or  relatives  of
the dying person not to cry in  the  presence  of  the  dying  person.   but
Rrather they should do things to help the dying person to  generate  develop
positive thoughts.  When If one dies with a non-virtuous mind, one will  not
get a good rebirth.
It is said that when if one does  not  recall  virtueous  or  non-virtueuous
mind  either through one’s  own power or through being reminded  by  others,
then one will die with an ethically neutral mind. then dying with  the  mind
that is neither virtuous nor non-virtuous does happen.


Question from Khen Rinpoche: When If we die with a  virtuous  mind,  we  are
very likely to have a good rebirth. When  If  we  die  with  a  non-virtuous
mind, then we are probably going to get a bad  rebirth.  When  If  one  dies
with a mind that is neither virtuous nor non-virtuous, what kind of  rebirth
will one get?

Student 3: I think the karma that the dying person iis  most  familiar  with
before he diesthey die will ripen first. I think Tthere is  a  sequence  for
this: the heaviest karma, , the most familiar and so forth etc. but I  can’t
remember the details. sequence.


Ven Gyurme: If it is heaviest first, then regardless to the  state  of  mind
at the time of death, it is going to ripen any way.
Khen Rinpoche: I guess it will be all right to say that  when  if  one  dies
with an ethical neutral mind,  then the kind of rebirth that one  will  gets
will is dependent on one’sthe karma that is mostre powerful.  Perhaps  maybe
it is all right to say this.   but  I  am  not  exactly  sure  and  have  to
analysze this further. it.

At the time of death, when there is still  coarse  discrimination  is  still
present  in the mind, then it is possible to have a virtuous  mind,  a  non-
virtuous mind, or an ethical neutral mind. But when the coarse mind  becomes
subtler, then from the perspective of sutra, the subtle mind at the time  of
death is only ethically neutral. ; Tthere is neither a virtuous nor a   non-
virtuous mind because in order for the mind to be either  virtuous  or  non-
virtuous, those e minds haves to be alert in  order  to  engage  with  their
the respective objectss. At the time of death,  when the  mind  is  subtler,
it lacks the alertness to be able bility to be alert to engage  with  itsthe
object. Therefore, from  the  perspective  of  sutra,  the  subtle  mind  is
ethically neutral. However from the perspective of tantra, the  subtle  mind
at the time  death can be transformed into a virtuous mind.


    2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3B3 For all three minds of death there is joining due to
    craving

[/(At the time)] For all, at the time of death, as long as  [the  state  of]
unclear discrimination has not been reached, there arises  attachment  to  a
self which has long been familiarised with.  {144}  After  that,  under  the
influence of attachment to a self thinking  “I  am  becoming  non-existent”,
delight in a body arises.  It  is  the  cause  for  the  intermediate  state
[/bardo] to come about (Page 122).

At the time of death, whereupon discrimination will become  unclear,  beings
are attached to the self with which they  have  long  been  familiar.  After
that, through the influence of attachment to the self,  they  think,  "I  am
ceasing to exist," and they crave embodiment. This causes  the  intermediate
state.
Here This it means that at the time of death, due to our attachment  to  our
own identity,  -our self as a person, -  fear  arises,  thinking,  ;  “I  am
going to disappear and become nothing.” “Delight in a body” or cand  craving
for embodiment arises and . Tthis causes  craving  causes  the  intermediate
state to come about.


    2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3C  From where the heat withdraws

Third: In those who have created non-virtue the heat  first  withdraws  from
the upper part of the corpse and dissipates down to the heart [?]. In  those
who have created virtue the heat first withdraws from the lower part of  the
corpse and dissipates  up  [/up]  to  the  heart[?].  [In  both  cases]  the
consciousness transmigrates  from  the  heart[/changes  place].  That  [/The
place] which the consciousness first entered  into  in  the  middle  of  the
[mixture of] semen and [menstrual] blood transforms [?*Vorzeitigkeit?]  into
the heart, and where it  eventually  transmigrates  [/transmigrates/departs]
from is that very place it first enters into (Page 122).

Where heat gathers
Among those who are currently cultivating non-virtue,  consciousness  leaves
the body coming down from the upper parts, which become cold first. When  it
reaches the heart, it leaves the body. The consciousness of someone  who  is
currently cultivating virtue leaves coming up from the lower parts  and  the
body becomes cold from the lower parts. In both cases  consciousness  leaves
from  the  heart.  The  point  at  which  consciousness  first  enters   the
fertilized ovum becomes the body's heart
How does one enter into the intermediate state? At the time  of  death,  the
consciousness gathers at the heart. Once the consciousness leaves  the  body
from the heart,  the intermediate state is established.
How you reach the intermediate state after death
The intermediate state is established due to attachment.  The  establishment
of the intermediate state is said to be simultaneous with the  exit  of  the
consciousness from the body.


    2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3D How the intermediate state [/bardo] is reached
    [/achieved] after death

         1  From where the bardo [/place of the intermediate state] is
         accomplished

Fourth:   From   the   place   where   the    consciousness    transmigrates
[/transmigrates  from?]  as  explained  above,  death  and  the  bardo   are
accomplished without a break, just like the  swing  on  the  armature  of  a
scale.

         2  The shape of the intermediate state being etc.

The  intermediate  state  being  moreover  has  complete   sense   faculties
[/powers] such as the eyes, and has the  aspect  of  the  body  of  whatever
migrating being it will be born as. As long as it  does  not  take  rebirth,
its eye  is  unobstructed  like  the  divine  eye  and  its  body,  too,  is
unobstructed  as  though  possessed  of  magical  powers.  It  is  seen   by
intermediate state beings of similar type and by  the  flawless  divine  eye
arisen from meditation (Page 122).
As the consciousness leaves from that spot, the heart,  you  die  and  reach
the intermediate state immediately, just as one arm  of  a  balancing  scale
tips up when the  other  arm  tips  down.  Furthermore,  the  being  of  the
intermediate state possesses the complete set of sensory faculties -such  as
eyes- as well as the form of the body it will have in the realm  into  which
it will be reborn. Until it takes rebirth, its  vision  is  unimpeded,  like
divine  vision  [a  type  of  superknowledge],  and  its  body  as  well  is
unimpeded, as though it  had  miraculous  powers.  This  is  stated  in  the
Abidharmakosha.
Here  itThis  is  talking  about  th  talks  about  the  appearance  of  the
intermediate state being definite. If one is to be reborn as a  human  being
in the next life,  and when one is  in  the  intermediate  state,  one  will
havse  the  appearance  of  a  human  being.  You  need  to  know  that  the
intermediate state being hasve the appearance of the kind  of  rebirth  that
it will take.

There are different explanations ofn this. One explanation  states  that  in
the intermediate state, one will haves  the  appearance  of  one’s  previous
life.  But Lama Tsongkhapa said ys that this is incorrect. He  asserts  that
in the intermediate state, one will have the appearance of the rebirth  that
one will take,  i.e.,  if you are going to reborn as a human  being,  ;  you
will have the appearance of a  human being during the intermediate state.

I think the explanation is like this:.  tThe projecting  karma  that  causes
one to take that intermediate state and the rebirth that which  comes  after
that is the same. I guess, Bbecause of this, if one is going to  be   reborn
as a human being, one will have the appearance of a human being when one  is
in the intermediate state.
Anyway, this is something that you can to think about. Lama  Tsongkhapa  did
says y very clearly that,  in the intermediate  state,  one  will  have  the
same appearance as the kind of rebirth that one is going to take.

While it is set out in the Treasury [?*italics]  that once the  intermediate
state of any migrating being has been accomplished, there  is  no  diverting
it into some other rebirth, the Compendium  of  All  [the  Abhidharma]  also
explains reversals (Page 122).

According to Vasubandhu’s Abidharmakosha, the  lower  Abhidharma,  once  one
has entered into the intermediate state of a particular  rebirth,  one  will
definitely have to take that  kind  of  rebirth.  One’s  ;  that  means  the
intermediate state cannot change.

But Arya Asanga’s Compendium of  Knowledge,  the  higher  Abhidharma,  holds
that one’s the intermediate state can be changed.  Lama  Tsongkhapa  follows
this view, e Compendium of Knowledge i.e.,  one’s intermediate state can  be
changed. For example, if the relatives of the deceased  were  to  engage  in
very strong and powerful virtues and then dedicated that  to  the  deceased,
then it is possible that  the  fate  of  the  decfor  the  deceased  in  the
intermediate state will to cchange and the  deceased  will  to  get  a  good
rebirth.

It is said that intermediate state beings can see one another.   and  Tthose
with divine vision can also see the intermediate state beings. When we  talk
about divine vision, there is pure divine vision and impure divine vision:.
   •  The impure divine vision refers to those people who inherit  it  from
     birth,  i.e.,  they are born with this divine vision. It is said  that
     Tthey cannot see the intermediate state beings.
   • Only those who have achieved develop pure the  divine  vision  through
     the power of meditation achieve the pure divine  vision  can  see  the
     intermediate state beings.


         6  Distinction whether there is or is not an intermediate state
         (Page 123)

   • For Tthose who are taking rebirth from the  formless  realm  into  the
     form and the desire realms have to go through the intermediate state.
   • There is no intermediate state for tBut for those who are going to  be
     reborn in the formless realm from the desire and form realms, there is
     no intermediate state..




8     The lifespan (Page 123)
What is the lifespan of the intermediate state beings? The maximum  lifespan
is forty- nine days. This doesn’t mean that one has to remainstay there  for
forty- nine days but one can remain in the  intermediate  state  for  up  to
forty- nine days. The intermediate state beings  have  to  die  after  every
seven days.  Of course, it is possible for the intermediate state  being  to
take rebirth before the seventh day. If the intermediate  state  being  does
not take rebirth on the seventh day, it has to die and be  reborn  into  the
intermediate state again. If it doesn’t take rebirth, it just has to  go  on
to the next first seven days, and the next seven second sevendays,   and  so
on but definitely it will take rebirth within the forty- nine days.

When we talk about the lifespan of an intermediate state  being’s  lifespan,
it is from the perspective of the lifespan of a human  being.  So  from  the
perspective of the human being, Tthe way to count the forty-  nine  days  is
in terms of the days of a human being’s day. In general,  this  is  how  you
you count the unit of time of an the intermediate state being.
However there is also another explanation of n the unit of time for  of  the
intermediate state being that is  ;  which  is  dependent  on  the  kind  of
rebirth that that being one is going to take. Then wSo when  we  will   talk
about the day, the number of days is from the perspective  of  the  kind  of
realm in which one is that one is going to take rebirth in. So Iit  may  not
be a human day. y, Iit can be an animal day or a  hell  being  day,  and  so
forth.

When , insect day, hell day and so forth. If you think about  it,  it  seems
that you have to say that the length of athe day in the  intermediate  state
is dependent on the kind of rebirth that one is going to take. For  example,
if one is going to take rebirth in the hell realms, then one will  have  has
to spend athe maximum of forty-nine hell being  days as an the  intermediate
state being.

Question: Note: Amendment to page 121 of  the  Middle  Length  Lamrim  text:
2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3B2A [The appearance due to a virtuous mind] should read  as:
For those who have created virtue it is like going from thick darkness  into
light. At the time of death, various pleasant  dream-like  forms  appear  to
them, they die happily, and even the interruption of life is of  very  minor
severity.
Student 4:  As mentioned just now that If  the  the  life  span  of  an  the
intermediate state beings is from the perspective of the kind  of  realm  in
which that one is going to take rebirth,  in. aAs athe single day in of  the
hell realms is so long, it seems that there must be many intermediate  state
beings who are destined to take rebirth in the hell realms  beings  who  are
still  wandering  in  the  intermediate   state.   Is   this   understanding
correctwill target as an  intermediate  being  of  the  hell  realm  and  be
suspended there. Do I not understand that correctly?

Answer: Khen Rinpoche: I did not say that this is it is  definite.  certain.
Regarding the duration of the intermediate state, one view  is  that  it  is
the forty-nine days of the human being days. But Perhaps it may also be  the
forty-nine days from the perspective of of the realm in which one  is  going
to take rebirth in. Thisere is an eexplained nation by some masters such  as
, perhaps it is Guntang Rinpoche, who did said y that the way to  you  posit
the forty-nine days is from the perspective  of  the  rebirth  that  one  is
going to take.

Your point is that if the forty-nine days is not  from  the  perspective  of
the human being days but from the perspective of the  rebirth  that  one  is
going to take,  such as a hell being, then the intermediate state  is  going
to be very long.

But you haven’t thought about this it from the other way  round.  the  other
way round. For a hell being who is going to be  reborn  as  a  human  being,
fare you going to count rom  which  intermediate  state  you  are  going  to
count; forty-nine49 hells being’s days  or  forty-nine  49  human  being  ’s
days?

Student 4: (iInaudible)

Khen Rinpoche: Earlier on you said that it is not right to posit the  forty-
nine 49 days from the perspective oof the rebirth that you one are going  to
take.

Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): You are saying the r reason is  the  bardo
period will be being is too long right? . Your answer  is  that,  isn’t  it?
That’s why we should must consider human being  days. Isn’t thThat  is  your
reasoning? , isn’t it? No?


Student 4: No. I am just trying to clarify my understanding of  this  point:
i(Inaudible)
f we posit that the days  will  be  counted  from  the  perspective  of  the
rebirth to be taken, then for beings headed for the hell realms, there  must
be countless numbers of them still remaining in the bardo state right now.

Khen Rinpoche: What is wrong with staying too long  in  the  bardo?  Anyway,
one is heading for the hell realms where one will remain  for  a  very  long
time. you are going to stay in hell for a long time. Actually  it  is  safer
to remain the longer you  stay  in  the  intermediate  state,  it  is  safer
because once you take rebirth in the hell realms, reach hell is it  will  be
hell!. So no  worries. That is why it is called a transit visa.

Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): It is better if you have  a  long  transit
in this case!So, you have long transit, it is better.


Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme;

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng;


Edited by Cecilia Tsong;

