Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L09 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.669176
================================================================================



Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi

Root text: The Middle Length Lam-Rim by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by  Trijiang  Rinpoche  are
in small lettertype, to be distinguished from Lama Tsongkhapa’s own  outline
that is in larger lettertype.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


Lesson No: 9                                       Date: 7th July 2011


Traditionally, before the start of teachings, we recite the prayer of  going
for refuge and generating bodhicitta. What is the purpose of reciting  these
prayers? They help us adjust  our  motivation,  i.e.,  to  set  the  correct
motivation for listening to and explaining the teachings

The first two lines of the prayer refer to going for refuge to  the  Buddha,
Dharma and  Sangha.  In  order  for  the  activities  of  listening  to  and
explaining the instructions to  become  Buddhist  practices,  they  must  be
conjoined with going for refuge to the Buddha, Dharma and  Sangha;    hence,
the first two lines of the prayer.

There are  Hinayana  and  Mahayana  teachings.  You  are  now  studying  the
teachings of the Mahayana, the Great Vehicle. Therefore, in order  for  your
activities here to become Mahayana practices, your motivation must  be  that
of bodhicitta, generating the altruistic intention; hence the third and  the
fourth lines of the prayer.

You may question, “What is the benefit and use of studying and learning  the
Buddhist teachings? In particular, what  is  the  benefit  of  studying  and
learning this classic text extensively?” The answer to  this  question  lies
in this prayer that we recite before class.

You can check what thoughts arise when you  recite  this  prayer.  When  you
have  studied  and  learnt  the  Buddhadharma  extensively,  due   to   your
understanding of and respect for what the Buddha,  Dharma  and  Sangha  are,
then when you recite this refuge  prayer,  there  is  some  feeling  in  the
heart. When your heart is moved, you have real refuge in your heart.

When you have that kind of understanding of and faith in the Buddha,  Dharma
and Sangha, naturally, you will also aspire to  become  the  Buddha,  Dharma
and Sangha. This aspiration naturally arises. Of  course,  respect  for  and
appreciation of the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha will also arise naturally.

What about bodhicitta? In relation  to  refuge,  for  whom  are  you  taking
refuge in the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha? It is for others,  for  all  living
beings and all sentient beings.

In the  beginning  of  this  text,  Lama  Tsongkhapa  took  great  pains  to
eliminate the many misconceptions that you may have in  your  mind.  He  did
this because you are all stuck, due to these misconceptions. The reason  you
are unable to engage in your studies  and  practices  is  because  of  these
misconceptions.  Therefore,  it  is  vital  to  eliminate  them   from   the
beginning.

With respect to learning the Dharma, when you listen  to  the  teachings  or
when you explain the instructions to others, when you do  not  know  how  to
listen and how to teach, then, there will be problems. You need to know  how
to listen to the teachings and how to teach them.

You have to understand the essence of what has been covered  so  far.  Let’s
say, with respect to how you should actually listen to  the  teachings,  you
are advised to listen to the teachings by abandoning  the  three  faults  of
the vessel and relying on the six ideas.

From your own side, you have to check if you possess any of  the  faults  of
the vessel. When you realise that you do possess the faults of  the  vessel,
as mentioned in the teachings, then you have to eliminate those faults.

You should also check whether you possess the six ideas  in  your  mind.  If
any of them are missing, then you should strive  to  develop  them  in  your
mind.

At the very least, the motivation that you should have for listening to  the
teachings is to subdue your mind and develop the  wish  to  benefit  others.
When you learn the Buddhadharma, you are then able to teach  the  Dharma  to
others, pointing out to them what they should discard, and what they  should
cultivate. In this way, you will be able to bring great benefit to others.

You are also supposed to listen to the Dharma with a  mind  of  delight  and
enthusiasm. For that to happen, you first have to contemplate  the  benefits
of listening to the Dharma. Therefore, there is a section in the  text  that
deals with the benefits of listening to the Dharma.

Likewise,  when  teaching  or  explaining  the  Dharma,  you  should  do  so
enthusiastically, with delight. To make that happen, you should  contemplate
the benefits of teaching the Dharma. When you are teaching  the  Dharma,  at
the very least, you should do so with a mind of  sincere  concern  and  love
for the listeners, desiring to help them.

There was a piece of very important advice in the  last  lesson.  You  study
and practise the Dharma so that you can eliminate your  mental  afflictions.
But you have to understand that, when you practise or listen to  the  Dharma
half-heartedly, that will not help you to achieve your goal.

Even when you listen to and study the  Dharma  well,  with  respect  to  the
teachings themselves, they should cover the entire path.  On  top  of  that,
your studies and practice must be continuous, like the constant flow of  the
river.

Although in the beginning,  it  is  difficult  for  you  to  do  a  complete
practice,  i.e.,  practise  everything,  it  is  important  that  you  leave
imprints in your mind that will enable you to practise the complete path  in
its entirety.  This is connected to the two characteristics of karma:
1. when you do not create the cause, you will not meet with the result  and,


2. once you create the cause, the result will  not  disappear,  on  its  own
   accord.

You need to ensure that, from life to life - not just in this  life  but  in
all your future lives to come – you will have a good basis, i.e., the  right
kind of rebirth, so that you can continue your studies and practice.
  • On top of a good rebirth, you need the favourable qualities, such  as  a
    long life and  the  absence  of  sicknesses.  Such  qualities  are  very
    important and are necessary to enable you to continue your  studies  and
    practice.
  • But having these qualities alone are not enough. On  top  of  that,  you
    need devotion (or faith). You also  need  wisdom.  These  are  essential
    qualities for you to become a suitable vessel for learning the Dharma.
  • Yet, having these qualities are still insufficient. On top of them,  you
    need access to a qualified teacher, a virtuous friend who can guide  you
    along the path.
  • That again is not enough. You must ensure that you will be taken care of
    and be guided happily by such a qualified virtuous friend, a guru.
  • On top  of  that,  you  need  to  engage  correctly  in  the  three-fold
    activities  of  listening  to,  reflecting   and   meditating   on,   or
    familiarising yourself with the teachings.

The teachings here are the teachings of  sutra  and  tantra.  What  are  you
studying them for? What you need is to achieve the highest bliss, i.e.,  the
unsurpassed state of enlightenment. What I have mentioned  so  far  are  the
things that you need to achieve this,  but  they  do  not  arise  without  a
cause. You need to create the causes now.

One of the causes that you need to create is that you need to  study,  learn
and read these important instructions that show  the  entire  path,  because
you need to leave imprints of having studied and learnt them. When  you  are
able to study and reflect well on the Lam-Rim, the Stages  of  the  Path  to
Enlightenment, you will be placing all these  imprints  on  your  mind.   By
doing this, you will  be  creating  the  causes  for  all  those  favourable
conditions that were mentioned earlier to come about.

If possible, it will be excellent if you are able to  engage  daily  in  the
practice of guru yoga, such  as  the  guru  yoga  of  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  The
Hundreds of Deities of the Land of Joy. In that practice of  guru  yoga,  it
is very good when you are able to  recite  a  Lam-Rim  prayer  such  as  The
Foundation of All Good Qualities,  a  prayer  that  contains  the  essential
points of the entire Lam-Rim.  Every time when you recite this  prayer  and,
think about and reflect on it, you are leaving  an  imprint  of  the  entire
path in your mind.

If possible, it is good to memorise The Foundation of  All  Good  Qualities.
It is not long and not difficult to memorise. It  does  make  a  difference.
Once you have memorised it, you can reflect on it. When reflecting  on  such
a prayer, you do not need to put aside a special time for it. You can do  so
in the course of your daily activities, because once you have memorised  it,
you can reflect on it anywhere, such as when you are  travelling  on  public
transport. Having memorised the prayer, when you reflect on  it,  that  will
leave a very strong and powerful imprint on your mind.

You need to study and rely on unmistaken instructions, such as the  Lam-Rim,
The Stages of the Path  to  Enlightenment.  This  is  important,  especially
during this time, when you  have  obtained  the  favourable  conditions  and
rebirth for the study and practice of the Dharma.  When  you  have  obtained
this perfect opportunity, even if you are unable to  put  the  entire  path,
everything that is mentioned in the teachings, into practice, at  least  you
can leave imprints of having learnt and studied the entire  path,  the  Lam-
Rim, as much as possible. As and when you are able  to  do  so,  you  should
think about what you have learnt and meditate on it. That  will  leave  very
strong imprints in your mind.

I am often asked, “Is it okay to take initiations? When is a good  time  for
taking initiations?” Generally speaking, the answer is this: of  course,  it
is important to take advantage of  the  opportunity  to  leave  imprints  of
studying the tantric teachings on your mental continuum, but the main  thing
is your motivation.

If your motivation for receiving initiations  and  for  learning  tantra  is
directed towards enlightenment and, to be able  to  meet  with  the  tantric
teachings from life to life, then that is okay. Of course, you also need  to
have unshakeable faith in tantra. You need that kind of faith  towards,  not
only the tantric instructions, but also towards the gurus  who  confer  upon
you the tantric empowerments and teachings. You need all these conditions.

In essence, your wish to learn tantra and  to  receive  initiations  and  so
forth must be directed towards achieving enlightenment. When you  aspire  to
achieve enlightenment  for  the  benefit  of  others,  then  taking  tantric
teachings becomes a condition to achieving this goal. If  you  have  such  a
motivation, then it is all right to engage in tantric practice.


   Explanation of the stages by which a student of the actual instructions
                              should be guided


    2B4    The stages by which a student should be guided through the
    actual instructions

         A  The root of the path: how to rely on a spiritual teacher
         B  The stages of how to train the mind once you have relied

The fourth one has two points: the root of the path  -  how  to  rely  on  a
spiritual teacher - and the stages of how to train the mind  once  you  have
relied.

    2B4A   The root of the path: how to rely on a spiritual teacher

         1  The somewhat elaborate explanation for generating certainty
         2  The condensed presentation of how to sustain it

The first one  has  two  points:  the  somewhat  elaborate  explanation  for
generating certainty and the condensed presentation of how to sustain it.

    2B4A-1 The somewhat elaborate explanation for generating certainty

         A  The need for relying on a spiritual master since all good
         qualities depend on him
         B  The actual way to rely


    2B4A-1A            The need for relying on a spiritual master since all
    good qualities depend on him

First: As all goodness, starting  off  from  the  development  of  a  single
positive quality and the decrease of a single  fault  in  the  mind  of  the
disciple has its root in the sublime friend, the  way  to  rely  on  him  is
important in the beginning (Page 19).

The importance of relying correctly on the teacher is not peculiar  only  to
Buddhism. In general, even in your secular  studies,  in  modern  education,
whatever you want to learn, whatever skill you want to pick up, you have  to
rely on the teacher. Acquiring knowledge through relying on the  teacher  is
very important.

Lama Tsongkhapa is emphasising here  the  need  to  rely  correctly  on  the
teacher. Since it is so important to rely correctly on  the  teacher,  then,
with respect to the kind of teacher  you  should  rely  on,  what  qualities
should that teacher possess?


    2B4A-1B            The actual way to rely

         1  Characteristics of the one to be relied on, the virtuous
         spiritual friend
         2  Characteristics of the one who relies
         3  The way he relies on him
         4  The benefits of reliance
         5  The drawbacks of not relying
         6  Summary of the meaning of these [points]

In this regard there are six  points:  characteristics  of  the  one  to  be
relied on,  the  virtuous  spiritual  friend,  characteristics  of  the  who
relies, the way he relies on him, the benefits of  reliance,  the  drawbacks
of not relying {25} and a summary of the meaning of these [points].

    2B4A-1B1     Characteristics of the one to be relied on, the virtuous
    spiritual friend

         A  Identification of a “guru”
         B  His characteristics

    2B4A-1B1A    Identification of a “guru”

First: Although, generally speaking, in terms of the individual vehicles,  a
lot is said [about this] in the [Buddha’s] excellent words  along  with  the
commentaries, here only a virtuous spiritual friend guiding on the  path  to
Buddhahood, the Mahayana, by gradually guiding on  the  path  of  the  three
[types of] beings, will be presented.

    2B4A-1B1B    His characteristics

         1  Highest characteristics
         2  Middling characteristics
         3  Minimum characteristics

    2B4A-1B1B-1  Highest characteristics

         A  Good qualities he himself needs

In Ornament of the Sutras it says that the  disciple  needs  to  rely  on  a
spiritual teacher possessed of ten properties:

         A spiritual teacher with discipline, calm, complete peace,
         more qualities, effort, rich in scriptural transmissions,
         who has thoroughly realized suchness, is eloquent,
         loving, and no more discouraged - on that one rely (Pages 19 – 20)!

The ten defining qualities are:
   1. “Discipline”: the Mahayana teacher must have discipline,  through  the
      practice of ethics.
   2. “Calm” (or serene): the Mahayana teacher must have  pacified  his  own
      mental distractions through the practice of  concentration,    thereby
      making his mind calm and serene.
   3. “Complete peace” (or thoroughly pacified)  indicates  a  quality  that
      comes from the training  in  wisdom.  Because  of  having  trained  in
      wisdom, the teacher has pacified his own mental afflictions,  such  as
      the three mental poisons.
   4. “More qualities” refers to having good qualities surpassing  those  of
      the students.
   5. “Effort” refers to being energetic. The  Mahayana  teacher  should  be
      energetic and put effort into and be enthusiastic about helping others
      and accomplishing their welfare.
   6. “Rich in scriptural transmissions” means that the teacher should  have
      a wealth of scriptural knowledge, from having learnt  extensively  all
      the different teachings.
7.    “Thoroughly  realised  suchness”  (or  having  thorough  knowledge  of
      reality)  means  having  the  realisation  of  the   selflessness   of
      phenomena. In particular, this refers to  having  the  realisation  of
      emptiness as explained by the highest Buddhist  philosophical  school,
      the Consequence Middle Way School (CMWS) or the Prasangika Madhyamaka.


      What is the difference between this and the  third  quality  of  being
      thoroughly pacified? Perhaps, having the thorough knowledge of reality
      can be taken  to  mean  having  an  understanding  or  realisation  of
      emptiness, in accordance with the CMWS.   On  the  other  hand,  being
      thoroughly pacified is a quality arising from training in  wisdom  and
      can be taken to refer to the realisation of emptiness as presented  by
      the Autonomy Middle Way School (AMWS) and the tenets below it.
      Since both these qualities are related to  wisdom,  there  must  be  a
      difference between them. The difference between these  qualities  lies
      in  their  manner  of  realising  emptiness.  You  can   also   relate
      “thoroughly pacified” to realising  emptiness  inferentially,  whereas
      having “thorough knowledge of  reality”  can  be  understood  to  mean
      having the direct perception of emptiness.
8.     “Eloquent” (or having skill in instructing the disciples) means  that
      the teacher is skilled in  putting  across  the  instructions  to  the
      students and in guiding them, according to their abilities.
9.    “Loving”  (or  possessing  loving  concern)  means  that  the  teacher
      possesses sincere love and concern for the disciples he is guiding.
10.    “No more discouraged” refers to the fact that  the  Mahayana  teacher
      should have abandoned dispiritedness and is not discouraged by  having
      to explain the teachings over and over again due to the  students  not
      understanding them.

Of  course,  there  are  differences  in  the  level  of  qualification  and
competency  of  the  Mahayana  teacher.   Ideally,  the   Mahayana   teacher
possesses all these ten defining characteristics.

When you study the Lam-Rim,  it  is  wonderful.  Lama  Tsongkhapa  explained
clearly what kind of teacher you should rely on. You have to  know  what  to
look for in a teacher. In the case of a Mahayana teacher, you need  to  know
these ten qualities and, on the basis of knowing them, you then  search  for
a teacher who possesses these qualities.

Furthermore it says that someone who has not disciplined himself,  for  that
reason is not in a position to discipline someone else. A  spiritual  master
disciplining others has to be someone who  has  first  disciplined  his  own
mind (Page 20).

When you have not subdued your own mind, how is it  possible  to  discipline
or subdue the mind of others? This is very important. Therefore, anyone  who
is aspiring to be a Mahayana teacher must first subdue his own mind.

You may wonder: “Well then, in what way does it need to be disciplined?”  To
accomplish anything  at  all  that  occurs  to  you  and  then  label  it  a
realizational quality because it exists in the mind, is of no benefit.  This
is why a system of mental discipline compatible with the  general  teachings
of the Jinas is necessary. That has been ascertained as the  three  precious
trainings, and therefore, ethical discipline and the  other  two  have  been
set forth (Page 20).

It is quite common for some people, who supposedly have done some  practices
or retreats, to profess to be teachers.  Having  done  some  practice,  they
then advertise, proclaiming, “I have done such and such a practice.  I  have
achieved realisations. I have clairvoyance. I can see this Buddha  and  that
deity.” They claim to  have  all  these  abilities.  If,  in  reality,  they
actually possess these qualities, that is well and good.  But what  if  they
do not possess these qualities?

These days, people run after such so-called teachers, when they  hear  about
their qualities. They believe in them  and  pursue  them.  People  may  also
choose their teachers because they are famous and well-known,  or  are  said
to have such and such realisations. Looking for a teacher in these  ways  is
wrong. When you rely on such teachers, who  proclaim  to  have  realisations
but actually do not possess any realisations, then there is  little  benefit
for you.

What kind of teacher should you rely on?  The text says  very  clearly  that
you should rely on a teacher who has disciplined his  mind  in  a  way  that
accords with the general teachings of the Buddha.  What  is  this  way?  The
three higher trainings are definitely  such  a  way.  Therefore,  there  are
these three  qualities,  disciplined,  calm  and  thoroughly  pacified.  The
teacher must be ethical, pure and living in ethics. He must be  someone  who
does not have many mental distractions and who has trained in wisdom.

Question: At the bottom of page  20,  for  the  quality  of  realisation  of
suchness, it says, “However, even if  this  is  not  present,  that  is  the
direct realization of emptiness it is said that  this  [criterion]  is  also
fulfilled by a realization through scriptures and reasonings.”

This sounds like an inferential realisation of emptiness.  It  seems  to  be
saying that under the realisation of suchness,  either  the  realisation  of
the selflessness of phenomena or an inferential realisation is acceptable.

Answer: “Realisation of suchness” can also be  translated  as  knowledge  of
reality. Therefore, knowledge of reality and  the  realisation  of  suchness
mean the same thing.

The text reads, “'Realisation  of  suchness’”  refers  to  the  training  in
wisdom - realization of the selflessness of phenomena.” The  realisation  of
suchness should be referred to as the special training in wisdom, i.e.,  the
realisation of the selflessness of phenomena. As I have  explained  earlier,
we take this realisation to mean the  realisation  of  the  selflessness  of
phenomena as explained by the CMWS.

“Alternatively, it is mainly held to be manifest suchness.” This means  that
it is best if the teacher has  a  perception  of  reality.  Perception  here
means the direct realisation of emptiness. The text does say  however  that,
even if this is not present, it  is  acceptable  for  the  teacher  to  know
reality through scriptures and reasonings.

If the text says that this is acceptable,  then  you  have  to  be  able  to
differentiate between this acceptable option and the third quality of  being
thoroughly pacified. How are you going to explain that?
We are trying to  see  the  difference  between  these  two  qualities,  the
quality of being thoroughly pacified and the quality of the  realisation  of
suchness (or emptiness). As both qualities are related to  wisdom,  what  is
the difference between them?

There are different ways to interpret the difference. The quality  of  being
thoroughly pacified refers to having an understanding of emptiness from  the
perspective of the AMWS, the second  highest  school  and  all  the  schools
below it. The realisation of suchness refers  to  the  special  training  in
wisdom,  “special”  here  referring  to  the  realisation  of  emptiness  as
presented by the highest school, the CMWS.

For those who have not studied some of  these  things,  you  may  find  this
difficult. This is not a problem, but those of you  who  have  studied  this
before, should not have any difficulties. For those of  you  who  have  done
the previous Basic Program, when I say, “The quality of thoroughly  pacified
is related to having the view of emptiness from  the  AMWS  and  the  tenets
below it and the  realisation  of  suchness  is  about  the  realisation  of
emptiness, according to  the  CMWS,”  you  should  have  some  idea  of  the
distinction of the presentation of selflessness and so forth.

For those of you who have not studied this before, don’t worry. You have  to
understand that the Lam-Rim,  the  Stages  of  the  Path  to  Enlightenment,
condenses  the  essential  points  of  the  subject  matter  of  the   three
scriptural collections into one text. Therefore, without  having  done  some
of these studies, you will not be able  to  understand  every  single  thing
that is mentioned here. It will come, so don’t worry. The point  is  not  to
lose heart as those topics will come later.








Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Angie Xiao
Edited by Cecilia Tsong
Checked by Shirley Soh




