Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L15 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.363136
================================================================================



Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi

Root text: The Middle Length Lam-Rim by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by  Trijiang  Rinpoche  are
in small lettertype, to be distinguished from Lama Tsongkhapa’s own  outline
that is in larger lettertype.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


Lesson No: 15                        Date: 4th August 2011


All sentient beings, including all of us here, possess  the  buddha  lineage
(or buddhanature) in our mental continua. This buddha lineage refers to  our
potential to become a buddha, the seed to achieve enlightenment.

In order for a sprout to arise, there must  first  be  a  seed.  All  of  us
possess the seed to achieve full enlightenment in our minds. This  potential
has always been there since time without  beginning.  However,  just  having
that potential alone  doesn’t  mean  that  you  will  automatically  achieve
enlightenment. Although the potential is there, you need  to  increase  that
potential. How do you do that?

As explained in the  previous  class,  you  need  to  gather  the  different
conditions by accumulating the collections of merit and wisdom  as  well  as
purify your mind of all obscurations. In particular, you need to  engage  in
the three-fold activities of listening to,  reflecting,  and  meditating  on
the teachings.

When you want a sprout to  come  about,  many  conditions,  such  as  water,
fertiliser, and  so  forth,  must  first  come  together  for  the  seed  to
transform into the sprout.  Having the seed  alone  doesn’t  mean  that  you
will get a sprout. Likewise in order for this buddha potential in your  mind
to fully ripen, you need  to  develop  it  by  gathering  together  all  the
different conditions. You need to bring together all the  different  factors
to activate the potential, and to strengthen and increase it  in  order  for
the potential to manifest and arise.

To give an illustration, the cause of butter is milk. You  get  butter  from
milk but if you were to just leave a  pot  of  milk  sitting  there  without
doing anything to it, although it has the potential  to  become  butter,  it
will not become butter on its own unless you churn the milk. It is the  same
with achieving enlightenment. Just having  buddhanature,  the  potential  to
achieve enlightenment alone is not sufficient. You need to  work  on  it  so
that that potential is activated and ripens.

Khen Rinpoche: I guess most, if not all  of  you,  may  not  have  seen  how
butter is produced. Have you seen that? When I was young,  around  eight  or
nine years old, one of my relatives was a nomad who lived in  a  jungle  and
had many yaks. One day, I went there with my grandmother.  We  walked  there
from my house. They milked  the  yaks  twice  a  day,  in  the  morning  and
evening. Every morning, after they got the yak  milk,  they  would  let  the
yaks go into the jungle. At nighttime, when the yaks came back,  they  would
milk them again.

As they had about a hundred yaks, they collected plenty of milk.  They  will
boil the milk and then pour it into a chest-high wooden  tub  after  it  had
cooled down. They will then churn the milk by plunging  this  wooden  paddle
up and down, repeatedly, into the wooden tub. They had to do  this  for  one
to two hours. After a while, small pieces of butter will be  produced.  That
is the only time I saw how they made butter. As  my  home  had  only  a  few
yaks, we did not make any butter.

                            *********************
We had looked at the first limb of the  seven-limb  practice,  the  limb  of
prostration. As I said before, even  with  regard  to  making  prostrations,
when you study and learn what  is  involved  in  making  prostrations,  that
knowledge  makes  a  difference  to  your  mind  when  you  actually  do   a
prostration. That is my experience as well. Learning and  studying  makes  a
difference to your motivation and your interest.

During my studies in the monastery, we  had  to  memorise  whatever  we  had
studied. At that time, we recited  what  we  were  memorising  in  order  to
refresh the memory but  we  did  not  know  the  meaning  of  what  we  were
reciting.

But then I always had the interest to find out exactly what I was  reciting.
Whenever you learn something new, it makes a difference when you  learn  the
meaning of the words, even if it is just one or  two  sentences.   It  makes
you want to find out more. In that sense, it helped me to  have  the  strong
aspiration and interest to find out more.

When you have already memorised the text beforehand and, at the  same  time,
you have some understanding, then whatever recitation  you  engage  in,  you
will know what you are  reciting  and  you  will  be  able  to  reflect  and
meditate on it at the same time. When you see the point of  doing  this,  it
further strengthens your interest to want to find  out  more  and  to  learn
more.

You have so many things to recite, prayers and so forth. The whole point  of
doing these recitations is that these words serve as the  reminder  for  you
to think about certain subjects or  topics.  The  purpose  of  reciting  the
different prayers is to remind you of the meaning of the  Dharma,  what  you
need to reflect on and what you need to practise.  You  need  to  engage  in
recitations because they are the conditions  for  you  to  think  about  the
meaning of the words.



But in order to understand the meaning of the words,  the  only  way  is  to
find out through studying or learning.  Therefore  you  definitely  have  to
study and learn. This is a very important point that I always  bring  up  in
class. It is very important to study. You have to  understand  this  message
for yourself. You have to see for yourself why it is so important  to  study
and to check whether studying helps you and your practice or not.

After you have done some studying, does  it  make  any  difference  to  your
practice? Does it make any difference to your ability to  reflect  when  you
recite the prayers? Are you able to reflect more deeply  on  their  meaning?
This is something that you have to see for yourself, because once  you  have
seen for yourself and realise how helpful it is  for  you,  your  faith  and
interest will increase.

I always bring this up. Please continue to study hard. Please  remember  the
point of doing this and then generate the  determination  to  continue  your
studies. If all of you were to do this, then we would have accomplished  the
main purpose of having this centre. The whole point of having  a  centre  is
to offer Dharma education, i.e., to help people to learn and  then  practise
the Dharma.

It will also fulfil the purpose of my being here,  as  my  main  purpose  of
being here is to impart teachings. As you know, His Holiness the Dalai  Lama
always emphasises the need to study. He always says  you  must  study.  Lama
Zopa Rinpoche has been saying the same thing as well. So when  you  continue
your education and studies, you are fulfilling their  deepest  wishes.   One
of their deepest wishes for having centres is to  offer  education  so  that
people can really learn and then practise. This is what  really  makes  your
gurus happy.

When you talk about what pleases the gurus, what pleases  His  Holiness  and
what pleases Rinpoche, it is  fulfilling  their  deepest  aspirations.  When
they are pleased, definitely they will live longer. Pleasing  the  gurus  in
the  form  of  learning  and  practising  the  Dharma  are  definitely   the
conditions for them to live long. Of all the different kinds  of  pujas  and
prayers that you can do for your gurus, there is no better puja than  to  do
what is pleasing to the guru. Please keep this in mind and continue  to  pay
attention to your studies.

                          ************************


    2B4A-2A1A-5B1B     [Respectful pleasing offerings]

         1  [Surpassable offerings]
         2  [Unsurpassable offerings]

    2B4A-2A1A-5B1B-1   [Surpassable offerings]

Surpassable  offerings  [are  set  out  in]  the  two  stanzas   “the   best
flowers...” The best flowers {38} are marvellous  specimens  of  divine  and
human flowers. Garlands are  many  different  kinds  of  flowers  mixed  and
strung together. Both together [refer to] all actual and imaginary  flowers.
“Cymbals” are the sounds of traditional instruments and the  like.  “Scented
unguent” is a mixture of  fragrant  perfumes.  “Sublime  parasols”  are  the
finest of parasols. “Butter lamps” are fragrant, radiant lights from  things
like incense or butter as well as radiant jewel lights. “Incense” refers  to
combinations of fragrant substances and to a single one. “Sublime  garments”
are the finest of clothes. A “supreme scent” is water and the like  pervaded
by a  scent  that  fills  the  billion  world-systems  with  fragrance.  The
“vessels of powder” are packaged powders of fragrant  incense  suitable  for
scattering and burning or the coloured sand powder of a mandala in  multiple
layers wide and high like Mount Meru. “Arrangement”, joined at  the  end  to
all the above, [means] a lot, decorated and variegated (Page 30).

With respect to the second limb of offering, there are both surpassable  and
unsurpassable offerings.  Surpassable offerings are expressed in two  verses
of the King of Prayers[1]:

      Verse 5
      Beautiful flowers and regal garlands,
      Sweet music, scented oils, and parasols,
      Sparkling lights and sublime incense,
      I offer to you victorious ones.


      Verse 6
      Fine dress and fragrant perfumes,
      Sandalwood powder heaped high as Mount Meru,
      All wondrous offerings in spectacular array,
      I offer to you victorious ones.

The  different  offerings  that  are  mentioned  in  these  two  verses  are
surpassable offerings made by worldly beings like us. With  regard  to  whom
you make these offerings, you offer them to the  buddhas  and  bodhisattvas.
You should think that you are making offerings  to  the  numberless  buddhas
and bodhisattvas who are equal in number to all the atoms in the world.

With regard to the offering substances, even when you are offering a  single
flower, you should visualise  mentally  that  you  are  offering  numberless
flowers, and that each of the numberless buddhas and  bodhisattvas  receives
what you have visualised. There are flowers in the human world  as  well  as
flowers in the god realms. There are flowers of different  colours,  shapes,
and fragrances. Bringing all these different varieties of flowers  to  mind,
you emanate numberless flowers and offer them.



The prayer says, “All wondrous offerings in spectacular array.” So when  you
offer the flowers, visualise that  you  offer  them  in  all  the  different
colours, shapes,  and  fragrances  from  both  the  human  and  god  realms,
arranging them in the form of thrones, celestial mansions, and so forth.

When you make offerings, you should  remember  that  you  are  doing  so  to
numberless objects of refuge. With regard to the  offering  substances,  for
example flowers, you should emanate  numberless  flowers  of  the  different
varieties and so forth and offer them with the  virtuous  motivation  I  had
explained in earlier lessons. You should do this with a  mind  of  faith  in
the objects of refuge, the faith that arises from seeing  the  qualities  of
the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha. When you are  able  to  do  these  practices
with the different visualisations and correct attitude, even though you  are
physically offering only  one  flower,  you  can  accumulate  very  powerful
merit.

You have to see the reason for doing these  visualisations.   The  point  is
that even though you are physically offering just one flower, when  you  can
think in the different ways that I mentioned, because of that  wider  mental
perspective, you will  accumulate  more  merit.  The  amount  of  merit  you
accumulate is commensurate with the objects  of  refuge,  such  as  all  the
buddhas, bodhisattvas and the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha, that you bring  to
mind. When you think that you are making offering to numberless  objects  of
refuge, then the merit that you accumulate will be commensurate  with  that.



    2B4A-2A1A-5B1B-2   [Unsurpassable offerings]

         A  The actual [offerings]

Unsurpassable offerings  [are  set  out  in]  the  single  stanza  “whatever
offering ...” - the  surpassable  ones  are  offerings  of  worldly  beings,
therefore this here is [about] everything good that is emanated by  powerful
beings such as bodhisattvas (Pages 30 – 31).

      Verse 7
      With transcendent offerings peerless and vast,
      With profound admiration for all the buddhas,
      With strength of conviction in the bodhisattva way,
      I offer and bow down to all victorious ones.

The unsurpassable offerings are offerings created by those with  power  such
as the bodhisattvas, e.g., the bodhisattva Samantabhadra.  Wish-  fulfilling
jewels, the wish-granting tree, and the great treasure vase are examples  of
the unsurpassable offerings created through the power of  the  bodhisattvas.
Generating bodhicitta, the altruistic  intention  to  achieve  enlightenment
for the benefit of sentient beings,  generating  great  compassion  in  your
mind, and transforming your roots of virtue  into  the  aspect  of  offering
substances are also unsurpassable offerings. I spoke about  the  meaning  of
upholding the Dharma in an earlier class.   The  Dharma  can  be  classified
into (1) the  scriptural  teaching  and  (2)  the  realisational  teachings.
Upholding these two teachings also becomes an unsurpassable offering.


         B  The motivation for prostrations and offerings

The last two lines are to be joined to all the previous  [sets  of]  two  in
order to complete them. They indicate the  motivation  of  prostrations  and
offerings as well as the object (Page 31).

      Verse 7
      With the strength of conviction in the bodhisattva way,
      I offer and bow down to all victorious ones.
The last two lines of the  verse  show  the  motivation  that  you  need  to
generate.  The  motivation  becomes  very  important.  Whenever   you   make
prostrations and offerings, you should do so with a  very  strong  faith  in
the objects of refuge, the faith that arises from  seeing  their  qualities.
You should also have the strong intention to achieve that  state,  i.e.,  to
become like them.

    2B4A-2A1A-5B1C     [Confession of negative actions]]

Confession of negative actions [is set out in] the one stanza  “desire  ...”
In dependence on the cause, the three poisons, and by  means  of  the  three
bases, the body etc., their nature is that I have done them (that  is,  that
I have actually created them), that I have  made  others  create  them,  and
that I {39} rejoiced in those created by others, all of which are  generally
subsumed under  “whatever  I  have  done”.  If  through  recollecting  their
faults, you regret those done previously and sincerely confess them  with  a
mind of restraining from them in the future,  the  increase  of  deeds  done
earlier and the continuity of future occurrences will be severed (Page  31).
 .
      Verse 8
      Every harmful action I have done
      With my body, speech, and mind
      Overwhelmed by attachment, anger, and confusion,
      All these I openly lay bare before you.

The negativities that you had accumulated were primarily  motivated  by  the
afflictions, such as the three  mental  poisons  of  ignorance,  anger,  and
attachment. You accumulate negativities through your three doors, the  body,
speech, and mind. You also accumulate negativities when  you  cause  someone
else to engage in negative actions. That is  no  different  from  committing
the negativities yourself. Then when  you  rejoice  in  others  engaging  in
negativities, such rejoicing is also said to be negative.

In order to engage in  confession,  you  have  to  see  the  faults  of  the
negativities.  You  will  have  to  experience  the  results   of   whatever
negativities that  you  had  accumulated.  Even  one  negative  action  will
manifest in the form of different results and you will  have  to  experience
all those results. The details of these  results  will  come  later  in  the
section on karma.

By  understanding  the  disadvantages  of  the  negativities,  you  have  to
generate regret for the negativities that you  had  already  accumulated  in
the past. By reflecting on their faults and the damage that they will do  to
you, you will then be able to develop sincere  regret.  When  you  sincerely
regret these past negativities, then automatically  you  will  refrain  from
engaging in them again. Therefore generating regret becomes very important.

The ability to develop  sincere  regret  depends  on  having  the  faith  of
conviction in the law of cause and effect, karma. Such  faith  in  karma  is
very  important  before  you  can  develop  this  sincere  regret  for   the
negativities that were accumulated in the past. As it says  in  the  outline
of the Lam-Rim, “The faith of  conviction  in  karma  is  the  root  of  all
temporary happiness and certain goodness.”

When you have the real faith of conviction in  karma,  then  you  will  have
sincere regret. When you have  sincere  regret,  then  restraining  yourself
from those actions again, in the future, will be almost automatic.

When you engage  in  confession,  you  primarily  need  to  have  these  two
attitudes:
(1) regret for the negativities accumulated in the past and,
(2) restraint towards future wrongdoings.
What is the difference when your confession  is  conjoined  with  these  two
attitudes?
   • When you regret your past negativities, the negativities that you  had
     already accumulated in the past will not increase.
   • When you have an attitude of restraint towards future wrongdoings, you
     will put a stop to creating new negative actions.

In order  to  completely  purify  all  negative  actions,  the  practice  of
confession has to be conjoined with the four  opponent  powers.  These  four
opponent powers – the  power  of  regret,  the  power  of  the  support  (or
refuge), the power of the remedy, and the  power  of  restraint  -  will  be
covered later on.


    2B4A-2A1A-5B1D     [Rejoicing]

Rejoicing [is  set  out  in]  the  single  stanza  “the  Jinas  of  the  ten
directions ...”
As you recall the benefits of the five  persons’  virtue,  you  develop  joy
(Page 31).

      Verse 9
      I left up my heart and rejoice in all positive potential
      Of the buddhas and bodhisattvas in ten directions,
      Of solitary realizers, hearers still training, and those beyond,
      And of all ordinary beings.

Rejoicing means to rejoice in the merit and virtues of  the  five  types  of
persons. They are:


   1. the conquerors of the ten directions, the buddhas,
   2. the conqueror’s children, the bodhisattvas,
   3. the pratyekabuddhas, the solitary realisers,
   4. those with no more to learn, the hearers, and
   5. ordinary beings

In order for you to be  able  to  feel  really  happy  and  rejoice  in  the
buddhas’ merit and qualities, you must first understand what qualities  they
possess. Similarly in order to be able to feel really happy and  rejoice  in
the  bodhisattvas’  merit,  you  need  a  complete  understanding   of   the
bodhisattvas’ paths, the practices they had  done  and  the  qualities  they
gained through the entire path. In the same way, in  order  to  be  able  to
feel really happy and  rejoice  in  the  qualities  and  the  merit  of  the
solitary realisers and hearers, you also need to understand  what  they  did
while travelling on the path.

So even just to be able to rejoice well, you need to be  able  to  know  all
their qualities. That comes from studying. From this, you can see  that  you
have no choice but you really need to study and learn. To be able to do  the
practice of the seven-limbs well, you first need to study.

Here we are just talking about the preliminaries. The practice of the seven-
limbs is just part of the preparatory practices. If that  is  the  case,  it
goes without saying that when you come to the actual body of  the  practice,
sustaining the meditations of the path,  definitely  that  can  only  happen
with studying.

When you rejoice, you feel happy and take delight in virtue. You can  either
rejoice in your own virtue or the virtue of others. Rejoicing  in  your  own
virtue increases the virtue that you had already accumulated and it  induces
you to engage in more virtue in the future. Therefore you accumulate  a  lot
of merit. Why should you rejoice in your own merit? What do you get  out  of
doing this? Because when you rejoice in your  merit,  when  you  feel  happy
about having done something positive, then you are more likely to engage  in
such positive actions again in the future.

It is also said that you accumulate merit when you rejoice in the virtue  of
others. As mentioned in the teachings, when you rejoice in the merit of:
1. someone with less qualities than you,  you  accumulate  more  merit  than
   that person,
2. someone who is equal to you in qualities, you accumulate the same  amount
   of merit, and
3. someone who has more qualities than you,  you  accumulate  an  amount  of
   merit that is commensurate with the level of your mind.

Actually you accumulate merit so easily when you rejoice  in  the  merit  of
others. Although that is the case, you usually divide the world  into  three
groups of people:

1. those who are on your side, friends;
2. those who are not on your side, enemies; and
3. those who are neutral, strangers.

When you rejoice in the merit of others, it is an  easy  way  to  accumulate
merit. But when you see people you don’t like engaging  in  virtue,  instead
of rejoicing in their virtuous actions, you feel jealous and upset. You  may
even develop a negative sense of competition, of  wanting  to  compete  with
that person. This happens in the absence of  rejoicing.  But  when  you  are
able to rejoice in the virtuous actions of that  person,  all  the  negative
thoughts are stopped. So now do you see the point of rejoicing? You need  to
see the reason why you need to engage in rejoicing.

Naturally it is difficult for you to feel  happy  when  people  you  dislike
experience good things or are engaging in virtue. You find it  difficult  to
rejoice in that. In fact, that is the most difficult thing to do.  Rejoicing
in the merit of others is relatively easier, but to rejoice and really  feel
happy about the good things that people  you  dislike  are  doing,  that  is
really difficult. Nevertheless this is something  that  you  have  to  train
yourself to do.

Why should you train in this? You have to see  the  point.  When  you  don’t
rejoice, it means the absence of rejoicing.  Instead,  you  get  upset,  you
feel jealous and you have this negative sense of competition.  In  the  end,
who suffers? You suffer. You feel unhappy inside. Your  mind  is  disturbed.
There is no peace. Therefore you are  the  one  who  suffer  the  loss,  not
anyone else. By seeing this point,  you  will  purposively  engage  in  this
practice.  Yes,  this  is  difficult.  But  although  it  is  difficult,  by
understanding the reasons for doing so, you should as much as possible try.


    2B4A-2A1A-5B1E     [Requesting[2] for the wheel of Dharma to be turned]

Requesting for the wheel of Dharma to be turned [is set out in]  the  single
stanza “in the ten directions ...” You  exhort  those  who  have  awoken  to
complete buddhahood in fields of the ten directions, are detached  and  have
found unobstructed exalted knowledge, to teach  the  Dharma,  emanating  the
same number of bodies for a long time (Page 31)
.
      Verse 10
      You who are the bright lights of worlds in ten directions,
      Who have  attained  a  buddha’s  omniscience  through  the  stages  of
         awakening,
      All you who are my guides,
      Please turn the supreme wheel of Dharma.

You implore the buddhas of all the ten  directions  to  turn  the  Wheel  of
Dharma. There is a historical precedent  for  this.  After  the  Buddha  had
achieved enlightenment, he showed the aspect of  not  teaching  immediately.
Then the worldly god, Brahma, offered a thousand-spoked golden Dharma  wheel
and implored the Buddha to  teach.  After  that  request,  the  Buddha  then
turned the first  Wheel  of  Dharma  by  teaching  the  Four  Noble  Truths.
Likewise you can visualise yourself as Brahma, not just  one  but  countless
replicas of yourself, each holding a thousand-spoked  golden  Dharma  wheel,
and implore the buddhas to turn the Wheel of Dharma.

You make the request with  this  visualisation  thinking  that  the  buddhas
accept your request. By doing this practice, you create the  cause  to  have
the good fortune to be able to  hear  and  practise  the  teachings  of  the
Buddha from life to life. Doing this practice make a difference.  From  life
to life, wherever you are born in the three realms, you will be  born  in  a
situation where you will hear the teachings of the Buddha.


    2B4A-2A1A-5B1F     [Supplication]

Supplication [is set out in] the single stanza  “Showing  the  passage  into
nirvana ...” You supplicate those who show how  to  pass  beyond  sorrow  in
fields of the ten directions to stay, not passing into nirvana for  as  many
eons as there are particles of dust in the universe in order to bring  about
the benefit and happiness of migrating beings (Page 31).

      Verse 11
      With palms together I earnestly request:
      You who may actualize parinirvana,
      Please stay with us for eons numberless as atoms of the world,
      For the happiness and well-being of all wanderers in samsara.

The longer the buddhas abide in the world, the  more  sentient  beings  will
benefit from their presence. Therefore you supplicate  sincerely  from  your
heart that the buddhas will remain for numberless eons.

You should do this practice regularly. What do you get out  of  supplicating
the buddhas not to pass into parinirvana? When you do this  constantly,  you
will receive the benefit of having your life obstacles pacified and be  able
to live a  life  without  sicknesses.  When  you  sincerely  supplicate  the
buddhas not to pass into parinirvana, your supplication becomes a  condition
for them to remain in the world. The longer  they  remain,  sentient  beings
will be able to receive more benefit. Then your  supplication  becomes  your
contribution to the welfare and happiness of all sentient beings.

    2B4A-2A1A-5B1G     [Dedication]

The limb of dedication [is set out in] the single stanza  “Prostrations  and
...” All the roots of virtue represented by the previous six limbs are  made
common [property] of all sentient beings and never  come  to  an  end  since
they have been dedicated with strong determination to perfect  enlightenment
(Page 31).






      Verse 12
      Whatever slight positive potential I may have created,
      By paying homage, offering, and acknowledging my faults,
      Rejoicing, and requesting that the buddhas stay and teach,
      I now dedicate all this for full awakening.

How should you dedicate the merit that you accumulate  from  paying  homage,
making offerings, confession, rejoicing, imploring,  and  supplication?  You
should dedicate it as the cause for yourself  and  all  sentient  beings  to
achieve full enlightenment. By dedicating in this way, it brings  about  the
fulfilment of all your wishes. Why is this so? Because, you  are  dedicating
all the merit that you have gathered as the cause for you and  all  sentient
beings to achieve enlightenment.  When  you  really  think  about  it,  this
dedication covers everything, i.e., every  single  dedication  is  contained
within this dedication.

    2B4A-2A1A-5B2      The need to take the meaning of the words to heart

If you thus develop an understanding of  the  meaning  of  those  words  and
gently do as was taught without allowing your mind to wander, you will  hold
immeasurable heaps of merit.

    2B4A-2A1A-5C       Categorization of the individual [elements]

Accordingly  the  five  limbs  prostrating,   offering,   requesting,   {40}
supplicating and  rejoicing  constitute  the  collection  of  accumulations.
Confessing purifies obscurations, one aspect of rejoicing,  the  cultivation
of joy at one’s own virtue, multiplies the virtue. By  means  of  dedicating
the virtues of collecting, purifying and  multiplying,  however  small,  are
multiplied manifold, and what would  come  to  and  end  after  producing  a
temporary effect is made inexhaustible. In brief, there are the  three:  (1)
accumulation, (2) purification, as well as  (3)  multiplication  and  making
inexhaustible (Pages 31 – 32).

You accumulate the collections of merit and sublime wisdom,  the  favourable
conditions,  by  performing  the  five  branches  of  obeisance,   offering,
rejoicing, imploring, and supplication.

What  does  confession  do?  Through  confession,   you   clear   away   the
obscurations that are the unfavourable conditions.  Cultivating  delight  in
the virtue that you do that is part of rejoicing  will  also  increase  your
virtue. You  may  have  some  virtue  as  a  result  of  such  accumulation,
purification, and increase, but you  will  expand  them  enormously  through
dedication.  Although  virtuous  effects  may  arise  temporarily  and  then
dissipate, through dedication, they will never dissipate.

To summarise, the  seven-limbs  (or  the  seven  branches  of  worship)  are
included in the following three: (1)  accumulation,  (2)  purification,  and
(3) expansion and a lack of dissipation.

So whenever you engage  in  virtue,  you  should  dedicate  the  merits  you
accumulate. Through dedication, it ensures that your virtue will not  go  to
waste and makes the virtue  inexhaustible.  When  you  dedicate  your  merit
sincerely from your heart towards enlightenment, these are  the  differences
it will make.

Question from Khen Rinpoche: There are two lines in the Golden  Light  Sutra
that the buddhas never ever pass away into  parinirvana  and  the  teachings
never ever decline. Do you have any comments about this?

Answer from student: My interpretation is that there is  always  a  buddha’s
form that never passes away, and  the  Dharma  never  declines  because  the
realised Dharma that is in the Buddha’s mind is always there. The Dharma  in
this world may decline but there is the  realised  Dharma  in  the  Buddha’s
mind that never declines.

Khen Rinpoche: Very good.

Question: Do we also ask the bodhisattvas not to  pass  away  into  nirvana?
Why are we requesting the buddhas not to pass away into parinirvana when  we
can’t see them in the first place?

Answer: It does not mean that you can’t ask someone to live  long  when  you
don’t see them. You can ask someone  who  lives  in  America  to  live  long
although you don’t see that person. You can make that request.

It is all right also to request the bodhisattvas not to  pass  away  because
they are here to benefit sentient beings. I have mentioned before that  even
if the person is an ordinary being but whose  existence  is  beneficial  for
others, it is all right to request that that person live for  a  long  time.
That is not a problem. You can make that request  because  the  longer  they
remain in the world, the more benefit they bring to the world. So  there  is
no problem in requesting them to live for a long time.

You should read the text, especially the new students.  When  you  have  any
doubts, you should bring them up in class. The more questions,  the  better.
The next section of the text will deal with the topic of meditation.



Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Angie Xiao
Edited by Cecilia Tsong
Checked by Shirley Soh

-----------------------
[1] The King of Prayers appears in pages 249 – 258, The  Essential  Buddhist
Prayers, An FPMT  Prayer  Book,  Volume  1,  Basic  Prayers  and  Practices,
Copyright: FPMT Inc., 2008. The verses quoted in this section on the  seven-
limb practice are all from the King of Prayers.

[2] “Requesting” has also been translated as “imploring.”

