Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L46 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.200821
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


   Lesson No: 46                    Date: 29th March 2012


(Meditation on Manjushri)

Today I will give you a brief introduction to the twelve links of  dependent
origination (or dependent-arising) using the drawing of the  wheel  of  life
(or the wheel of cyclic existence).

This is the historical background to the wheel of life: during the  time  of
the Buddha, King Udayana gave a present to King  Bimbisara.  King  Bimbisara
thought that he should in return give a present  to  King  Udayana,  but  he
didn’t know what to give him so he sought the Buddha’s  advice.  The  Buddha
advised King Bimbisara to commission the drawing of the  wheel  of  life  in
accordance with his explanation. The King then offered it to  King  Udayana.
It was said that upon  seeing  the  drawing  of  the  wheel  of  life,  many
subjects of King Udayana were able to liberate themselves from samsara.

The wheel of life shows three things:
   1. The causes of circling in cyclic existence
   2. The environments in cyclic existence where one can end up
   3. The manner in which one circles in cyclic existence

|                   |                          |                        |
|The wheel of  life |Their meaning             |Symbols used            |
|                   |Causes of circling in     |                        |
|First innermost    |cyclic existence          |Three animals           |
|circle             |                          |symbolising the three   |
|                   |                          |afflictions             |
|                   |                          |                        |
|Second circle      |                          |White and black karma   |
|                   |                          |                        |
|Third circle       |Environments that one can |Six types of            |
|                   |take rebirth in           |transmigratory beings   |
|                   |                          |                        |
|Fourth circle      |Manner in which one       |Twelve links of         |
|                   |circles in cyclic         |dependent origination   |
|                   |existence                 |                        |

1. The causes of circling in cyclic existence
As discussed recently, the true origins of cyclic  existence  is  karma  and
the afflictions. In the wheel of life:
  • the first circle in the centre shows three animals  that  symbolise  the
    afflictions.
  • the second circle is divided  into  two  halves:  the  white  background
    signifying white karma and the black background signifying black karma.
These two circles collectively show the causes of our circling in samsara.

What are the causes of circling in cyclic existence?  It  is  primarily  the
afflictions.  In  the  innermost  circle,  the  three  mental  poisons   are
symbolised by the three animals:
   1. the pig symbolises ignorance
   2. the snake symbolises anger
   3. the rooster symbolises attachment

In the drawing, the snake and the rooster are  shown  to  be  issuing  forth
from the mouth of the pig. This symbolises that ignorance  is  the  root  of
the other two afflictions. However in some other drawings of  the  wheel  of
life, you may see the rooster issuing forth from the pig’s  mouth  and  from
the rooster’s  mouth  comes  the  snake.  They  are  interconnected  to  one
another. This shows  that  ignorance  gives  rise  to  attachment  and  that
attachment gives rise to anger.

Karma  is  motivated  by  the  three  mental  poisons.  Due  to  them,   one
accumulates either white karma or black karma. This is shown in  the  second
circle of the drawing. When you look at the figures in  the  second  circle,
on the left, three figures are shown to be  moving  upwards.  I  think  this
represents the intermediate state beings. The Lamrim Chenmo  clearly  states
that intermediate state beings who are going to a good rebirth  move  in  an
upward direction and those intermediate state beings heading for  the  lower
realms move in a downward direction.

We saw how the intermediate state beings will actually  have  the  shape  of
the body in which they will take rebirth. If one is to be reborn as a  human
being, one enters the intermediate state of a  human  being  and  will  look
like a human being. However when one is going to  the  lower  realms,  e.g.,
one is to be reborn as an animal, one will have the shape of  an  animal  in
the intermediate state. This is symbolised by the second circle.

2. The environments in cyclic existence where one can end up
The next circle shows the six types of transmigratory beings.

One moves on to the next rebirth from  the  intermediate  state.  One  takes
rebirth as one of the six types of transmigratory beings shown in the  third
circle. For the six types of transmigratory beings, there are:
   • three good realms
   • three lower realms
These are represented by  the  six  quadrants.  Sometimes,  instead  of  six
quandrants, only five are drawn. When  divided  into  five  quadrants,  that
means the demigods are subsumed under the gods. When you separate  the  gods
and the demigods, you will have six quadrants.

The god realms can be subdivided into:
1. the realm of the desire realm gods
2. the realm of the gods of the form realm
3. the realm of the gods of the formless realm
In terms of their different levels or environments, there are:
   • six levels in the realm of the desire realm gods
   • seventeen levels in the realm of the gods of the form realm
   • four levels in the realm of the gods of the formless realm

The third circle shows the environments into which  one  can  be  reborn  in
cyclic existence. It includes all the environments in  cyclic  existence  up
to the peak of cyclic existence. That is the highest state of existence  one
can achieve in samsara.

3. The manner in which one circles in cyclic existence
The outermost circle  shows  the  twelve  links  of  dependent  origination,
starting from ignorance and ending with aging and death.

(1) Ignorance
Symbolised by a blind old man
In the drawing, the  first  link  of  dependent  origination  is  ignorance,
symbolised by a blind old man. As this man is both old and  blind,  he  will
never get to where he wants to go. He cannot find  any  sustenance  such  as
food or drink or any enjoyments. He is unable to avoid dangerous places.  He
may fall over a cliff  and  then  experience  suffering.  This  old  man  is
analogous of ignorance. Due to ignorance, we end up experiencing  all  kinds
of suffering.

Ignorance mainly refers to not knowing the ultimate  nature  of  reality  or
not knowing the suchness of phenomena. Because of not knowing  the  ultimate
nature of phenomena, one accumulates all kinds of karma.

(2) Compositional activity (or karma)
Symbolised by a potter making earthenware
Motivated by ignorance, one accumulates  karma.  In  the  drawing,  this  is
symbolised by a potter. When the potter makes  earthenware,  he  can  create
anything he wants. This is analogous of the link of  compositional  activity
and refers to the accumulation of projecting karma.

Compositional  activity,  compositional  action,   projecting   action,   or
projecting karma: they all mean the same  thing.  Just  as  a  potter  makes
different things, likewise due  to  the  different  karma  accumulated,  one
takes on different bodies, both good and bad. One also  has  different  life
experiences and different enjoyments, both small and great.
(3) Consciousness
Symbolised by a monkey swinging from tree to tree
The next link is the link of  consciousness.  The  imprints  of  accumulated
karma are left on this contaminated mental consciousness that is  the  basis
of infusion of accumulated karma.

When karma is accumulated, an imprint of that action is left on  the  mental
consciousness. The mental  consciousness  upon  which  the  imprint  of  the
action is left is this link of consciousness. This link does  not  refer  to
all consciousnesses.

You should be able at least to explain to others the meaning  of  this  link
of consciousness. This may sound easy to those of you who  have  heard  this
presentation before but it is not so straightforward. If I were to  ask  you
a few questions, you will realise clearly the complexity of this topic.  For
those of you hearing this for the first time, at the very  least,  you  have
to know what is being referred to by the link of consciousness.

Consciousness is symbolised by a monkey. As you  know,  monkeys  are  active
animals that leap around and never stay still in one  place.  This  is  like
the ordinary mind. Even when one wants to stay  focused  on  something,  the
mind is unable to  remain  on  the  chosen  object.  Instead  it  is  easily
distracted by other things. Just as a monkey swings from tree to  tree,  the
consciousness moves from one life to another.

The projecting factors (or projecting causes)
These three,  ignorance,  compositional  activity,  and  consciousness,  are
collectively called projecting factors or projecting causes.

Now we will look at the results of  these  projecting  causes.  This  starts
with the fourth link, the link of name and form.

(4) Name and form
Symbolised by people sitting in a boat
Name and form refers to the five aggregates that  are  the  results  of  the
projecting factors.  They  are  the  projected  results.  Amongst  the  five
aggregates, “form” refers to the form aggregate and  “name”  refers  to  the
four remaining aggregates other than form.

The remaining four aggregates  are  feeling,  discrimination,  compositional
factors, and consciousness. These four aggregates  are  not  form  and  they
cannot be the objects of the sense powers. Rather they are  objects  of  the
mental sense power. They  can  only  appear  to  the  mind  via  a  name  or
terminology.

From the time the five aggregates first come into  existence  up  to  before
the six sources, the fifth link, are developed,  the  five  aggregates  that
exist during this time fall within the link of name and form. Name and  form
does not refer to  the  five  aggregates  alone.  They  refer  to  the  five
aggregates from the time they are established up to before the  six  sources
are developed.

The fourth link,  name  and  form,  is  symbolised  by  a  group  of  people
travelling on a boat. The five aggregates that an individual  has  while  in
the intermediate state prior  to  his  rebirth  will  probably  have  to  be
subsumed under this link. Just as one needs to travel on a boat to get  from
one side of the shore to the other, similarly, in order to  enter  into  the
birth state, one has to pass through the intermediate state.  On  the  basis
of having the five aggregates during  the  intermediate  state,  one  enters
into the birth state.

5. Six sources
Symbolised by an empty house with six windows
There comes a time when the six sources come into  existence.  That  is  the
start of the link of the six sources. The link  of  the  six  sources  start
from the time they are established (or come into existence) up to  the  time
before the arising of  the  six  consciousnesses  that  depend  on  the  six
sources.

The six sources or the six sense powers are the  empowering  conditions  for
the arising of the six consciousnesses. In the drawing, the six sources  are
symbolised by an empty house with six windows.  This  is  analogous  to  the
time when  the  six  sense  powers  are  already  established  but  the  six
consciousnesses have yet to manifest.

6. Contact
Symbolised by a couple embracing
When the sensory object, the sense power, and  the  body  come  together,  a
consciousness arises. This refers to the link of contact.  The  sixth  link,
contact, is symbolised by a couple embracing. By embracing, feeling  arises.
This is analogous to how  from  the  link  of  contact  comes  the  link  of
feeling.

The mental factor of contact distinguishes whether the object  is  pleasant,
unpleasant, or neutral.

7. Feeling
Symbolised by a person whose eye is pierced by an arrow
Corresponding  to  how   contact   distinguishes   the   object,   pleasant,
unpleasant, or neutral feelings will arise. The  time  when  feelings  arise
upon contact’s discrimination of the three kinds of objects is the  link  of
feeling.

The link of feeling refers to the time when the mental factor of feeling  is
manifesting in a strong way; be it pleasant, unpleasant or  neutral.  It  is
symbolised by a person whose eye is pierced by an  arrow.  When  a  person’s
eye is pierced by an arrow, there is the very intense and strong feeling  of
pain that makes it difficult for the person to think of some  other  object.
It is as if the mind is completely absorbed in the feeling.  Likewise,  when
a strong feeling of either pleasure  or  suffering  arises,  our  minds  are
completely absorbed in the feeling such that  we  are  unable  to  think  of
anything else.

The projected results
The four links, name and form, six sources, contact, and  feeling,  are  the
results of projection or the projected results.

The  three  projecting  causes,  ignorance,  compositional   activity,   and
consciousness, and their four results, name and form, six sources,  contact,
and feeling, make up one set of a cause and effect  relationship.  From  the
three projecting causes, you have the four projected results.

8. Craving
Symbolised by an alcoholic
Next is the eighth link of craving. Craving is  essentially  attachment.  It
refers to the feeling that nourishes the potential  of  the  karmic  imprint
left on the consciousness. In the  drawing,  craving  is  symbolised  by  an
alcoholic, someone who drinks without  control.  Just  as  an  alcoholic  is
never satiated, our attachment never brings any satisfaction.  The  more  we
drink, i.e., the more we  give  in  to  our  attachment,  the  stronger  our
desire. Craving is like that. It nourishes the imprints of  the  karma  that
have been left on the mental continuum, making them stronger.

9. Grasping
Symbolised by a monkey plucking fruit
The ninth link is grasping. Grasping is a derivative of  attachment  and  is
stronger than craving. It is a stronger form of attachment, of yearning  for
and wanting something.

The link of grasping is symbolised by  a  monkey  plucking  fruit.  Normally
when a monkey plucks a fruit, it starts to eat it but before it  can  finish
the fruit it has, its hand is already plucking another fruit.

The latent propensity of a karmic imprint  that  is  left  on  the  mind  is
nurtured by craving and grasping. This karmic imprint  is  nurtured  to  the
point where it is almost ready to bring forth its result. This time  is  the
link of potential existence.

10. Potential existence
Symbolised by a pregnant woman
The tenth link of potential existence is symbolised by a pregnant woman  who
is about to deliver her baby.

Actualising factors (or actualising causes)
The links of craving, grasping, and potential existence are  the  causes  of
actualisation.

Next are the last two links, the link of birth and the  link  of  aging  and
death.

11. Birth
Symbolised by a newborn baby
The eleventh link of birth refers to the  consciousness  initially  entering
the next rebirth. In the drawing, this is symbolized by a new born baby  who
has just emerged from the mother’s womb.

12. Aging and death
Symbolised by a person carrying a corpse on his back
The link of aging and  death  is  symbolised  by  a  person  walking  whilst
carrying a corpse on his back.

Actualised results
The links of birth and aging and death are the results of  actualisation  or
the actualised results.

Of the twelve links of dependent origination:
  • the first three are the projecting causes and  the  next  four  are  the
    projected results. This is one set of cause and effect relationship.
  • there are three links that are the causes of actualisation and two links
    that are the results of actualisation. This is another set of cause  and
    effect relationship.

|                 |              |                 |                  |
|Projecting Causes|Projected     |Actualising      |Actualised        |
|                 |Results       |Causes           |Results           |
|                 |              |                 |                  |
|1.Ignorance      |4.Name and    |8.Craving        |11.Birth          |
|2. Compositional |Form          |9. Grasping      |12. Aging and     |
|activity         |5. Six sources|10. Potential    |death             |
|3. Consciousness |6. Contact    |existence        |                  |
|                 |7. Feeling    |                 |                  |

When you look at the twelve links of dependent origination, in order  for  a
particular result to manifest, how many causes must precede it?

   • You need to start with ignorance. The farmer needs a piece of land  to
     plant the seeds. The farmer is analogous to ignorance.
   • The seeds that he plants are the compositional activities.
   •  The  field  in  which  he  plants  the  seeds  is  analogous  to  the
     consciousness, the basis of infusion.
However, this does not mean that the crops will necessarily  grow.  It  just
means that it is possible for the crops to grow. Likewise,  the  combination
of ignorance, compositional activity, and consciousness alone  do  not  mean
that they will necessarily yield results.

Craving and grasping now come into the picture:
   • Craving and grasping nurture the karmic imprint that was left  on  the
     mental continuum.
   • When the latency of that karma is nourished to the extent that  it  is
     powerful enough to bring forth its result,  that  state  is  known  as
     potential existence.
This is analogous to the farmer working in the field who adds fertiliser  to
nurture the seeds and ensures that there is enough water so that  the  seeds
are certain to grow, ripen and be harvested.

Three projecting causes and three actualising causes
   • Ignorance, compositional activity, and  consciousness  are  the  three
     projecting causes.
   • Craving and grasping, nourish the seed of the karma that was  left  on
     the mind to the point where it is certain to bring forth  its  result.
     That time is known as  potential  existence.  Craving,  grasping,  and
     potential existence are the three actualising causes.


Four projected results and two actualised results
The projecting causes together with the actualising  causes  have  nourished
the seed of  the  karma  to  the  point  that,  at  the  time  of  potential
existence, it is certain to give rise to its result. This  is  analogous  to
the seed of the crop being nurtured to the point that it is certain to  give
rise to its result, the sprout. This sprout can be likened to  the  link  of
name and form.

   • The sprout grows into a  seedling.  Over  time,  it  develops  shoots.
     Likewise, after the five aggregates are established, i.e., the link of
     name and form, there comes a time when the six sources develop.
   • The seedling becomes a fully grown plant and starts to flower. That is
     likened to the link of contact.
   • When the plant yields fruits, this is likened to moving from the  link
     of contact to the link of feeling.
   • The fruits left on the plant will start to rot. This is likened to the
     link of aging and death.

The question was raised as to where the link  of  birth  fits  in?  In  this
context, the link of birth and the link of name and form are about the  same
thing.

Question: Is there  a  specific  term  used  for  this  particular  link  of
consciousness  that  is  the  basis  of  infusion  for  the  dormant  karmic
tendencies in the teachings of highest yoga tantra?

Answer: When we talk about the link of consciousness, you  should  be  aware
that there are different assertions of what is  the  consciousness  that  is
the basis of infusion for the karmic latent propensity.

The link of consciousness discussed here is the consciousness  that  is  the
basis of infusion. When you engage in  an  action,  that  action  leaves  an
imprint on the mind. What is the mind that receives this imprint?
Different Buddhist tenets have their own different views.  There  are  those
who assert that it  is  the  mental  consciousness  that  is  the  basis  of
infusion, while others assert that it is the mind-basis-of-all that  is  the
basis of infusion.

When you bring tantra into the picture, in tantra, we talk about  a  subtler
consciousness that is the basis of  infusion  as  the  coarse  consciousness
does not go on to the next life. Only the extremely subtle mind  does  that,
i.e., go on to the next life.

Student: So the answer will be the most subtle mind?

Answer: Yes.

Question: I refer to the two qualms brought  up  in  the  Lamrim  Chenmo  on
pages 319-320. In both cases, the reasons for the qualms  arising  were  not
given. Can Khen Rinpoche please explain the reasons for these qualms?

Answer: Not now. I will do so in the next class.

Think about these twelve links dependent origination based on  what  I  have
said today. If there is anything you do not understand, bring it up  in  the
next class.

Question: I read that there were two ways of presenting the twelve links  of
dependent arising: the scriptural presentation, i.e., from the first to  the
twelfth link and the  experiential  presentation.  For  beginners  like  us,
won’t an experiential presentation be easier for us to understand?

Ven Gyurme: The analogy of the farmer and  his  crops  is  the  experiential
presentation that you mentioned. In general, that is how  the  twelve  links
are experienced.

Question from Khen Rinpoche: It is not so straightforward. In this wheel  of
life, the twelve  links  are  presented  in  a  certain  order.  Why  is  it
presented in that order?

Khen Rinpoche: I will offer lunch to any one  of  the  senior  students  who
have a good answer for this. Only the senior students. The new  students  do
not have to think about this.

Student: It has to do with reflecting on the twelve  links  in  the  forward
process and the reverse process: in the forward process  to  understand  how
the links work to fuel the progress of cyclic existence and in  the  reverse
process to understand how to stop the projected factors.

The actual sequence of dependent-arising is as presented in the  analogy  of
the farmer. But like the four noble truths, the twelve links are  taught  in
this sequence for the purpose of meditation.
Khen Rinpoche: What is the sequence then from the perspective of practice?

Student: For a more detailed example, I will go back and  research.  I  know
it is the forward process and the reverse process. When you meditate on  the
forward process, you understand how one is the cause for the other.

Khen Rinpoche:  The  forward  process  starts  from  ignorance.  Because  of
ignorance, compositional activity arises. From  there  comes  consciousness.
From consciousness, name and form. Is this the forward process?

Student: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: Is it exactly like this in the forward process?

Student: In terms of the cause and effect relationship, no.  Just  like  the
four noble truths, true suffering is taught first but,  in  actuality,  true
origins occur first. When you meditate on the forward  process,  that  shows
how uncontrolled rebirths occur while the meditation on the reverse  process
can stop these links from issuing forth.

Khen Rinpoche: Isn’t meditating on the forward process for  stopping  cyclic
existence also?

Student: Both of them. But I can’t remember the details.

Khen Rinpoche: Go home, sleep, and check your dream!





Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme;

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng;

Edited by Cecilia Tsong

