Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L08 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.704058
================================================================================



Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi

Root text: The Middle Length Lam-Rim by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by  Trijiang  Rinpoche  are
in small lettertype, to be distinguished from Lama Tsongkhapa’s own  outline
that is in larger lettertype.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


Lesson No: 8                                       Date: 5th July 2011


We had started the section on  how  to  listen  to  the  teachings.  In  the
beginning, you are advised to think about the benefits of listening  to  the
teachings. You need to reflect on this.

What do you gain from listening to the teachings? As mentioned in the  text,
you will come to understand what needs to be abandoned and what needs to  be
cultivated. On that basis, you will then engage correctly  in  the  practice
of abandoning what should  be  abandoned  and  cultivating  what  should  be
cultivated. As a result, your mind will abide and remain in virtue  and,  as
a result of that, it will bring you to the state of full enlightenment.

What you need and what you want is ultimate happiness. In order  to  achieve
that, you need perfect wisdom. Perfect wisdom  arises  from  having  perfect
concentration and, in order to achieve that,  you  need  to  engage  in  the
three-fold activity of  listening  to,  reflecting  and  meditating  on  the
teachings.

Before you can meditate on the teachings, you  must  first  reflect  on  the
teachings to gain an ascertainment of them. But before such  reflection  can
happen, you must first listen to the teachings. Therefore, listening to  the
teachings is very important.

It is mentioned in the teachings that, when you  listen  to  the  teachings,
you should listen with an attitude of respect for the teachings and for  the
teacher. The main reason for having such a respectful attitude is  that  you
will stand to benefit more.

As to how you should listen to the teachings, the  text  mentions  that  you
should listen to the teachings by abandoning the three faults of the  vessel
and relying on the six discriminations (or ideas).

As I mentioned before, since you are already here, you should try your  best
to listen to the teachings with a focused mind. You should  also  listen  to
the teachings with a positive motivation. At  the  very  least,  you  should
think, “I am here to listen to the teaching so that I can subdue my mind.”
You should try not to forget what you have heard during  class.  That  means
you have to refresh your memory every now and then. In order not  to  forget
the teachings, when something important or significant is  being  discussed,
you can write down notes and try to refresh your memory from the  notes  you
have taken.

Geshe-la: When we started the first Basic Program, I read  the  Lam-Rim  and
made a short note in my book. This year, when I read it, I don’t  understand
what I wrote because it was too brief and  I  don’t  know  why  I  wrote  it
there. Sometimes, when you come across an important point, you write a  very
short note but,  after  some  time,  when  you  read  the  note,  you  don’t
understand what you wrote.

I heard a story of a meeting in Tibet. During  this  meeting,  there  was  a
person who knew how to write so he was asked to write down  the  minutes  of
the meeting. This person wrote the minutes. The following year, there was  a
similar meeting. When he was asked to  read  the  previous  year’s  minutes,
this person said, “The notes that I wrote last year, how  can  I  read  them
this year?” This is just a joke but it is very important not to write  notes
that you end up being unable to read yourself.

You are also advised to listen to the teachings by relying on the six  ideas
that are the favourable and beneficial conditions for you. You should  think
that:
   1. you are a sick person,
   2. the instructor or teacher is a doctor,
   3. the instructor’s explanations are medicine,
   4. earnest practice is the way to cure your sickness,
   5. the Tathagatas are excellent beings and,
   6. the teachings will endure for a long time.


    2B3A-3A2C    Generating the discrimination of what has been taught as
    medicine

Third: Just as a patient greatly appreciates the medicine  put  together  by
the doctor, one regards the instructions  and  teachings  given  by  someone
expounding the Dharma as the most important thing, making an effort to  hold
them in respect and not wasting them through forgetfulness and the like.

    2B3A-3A2D    Generating the discrimination of persistent practice as
    the cure

         1  The contempt of striving for words without practicing them

Fourth: An ill person sees that his illness  cannot  be  alleviated,  if  he
does not take the medicine the doctor put together, and takes it.  Likewise,
once you see that attachment etc. cannot be  eliminated  without  practicing
the  instructions  the  Dharma  teacher  has  taught,  you  should  practice
diligently  and  not  make  a  great  effort  at  vain  words  of   numerous
classifications  without putting them into practice. As a  matter  of  fact,
what good would it be to a leper whose hands and  legs  are  coming  off  to
resort to a dose of medicine once or twice (Page 14).


The analogy is of someone with a very serious illness seeing a doctor.  When
you are seriously ill, you will listen very carefully  to  what  the  doctor
has to say.  The doctor then prescribes some medicine.  As  a  patient,  you
take the medicine prescribed by the doctor. But  when  you  are  very  sick,
taking the medicine once or twice, without completing  the  dose,  will  not
help you.

Next comes the meaning.

{19} Likewise, for us who have been stricken  since  beginningless  time  by
the wicked basis of illness that  is  the  mental  afflictions,  it  is  not
sufficient to practice the meaning of the  instructions  only  a  couple  of
times. This is why we should examine all the  complete  parts  of  the  path
with discriminating wisdom and be as diligent as a flowing river  (Pages  14
– 15).

It is mentioned, under the first idea, that you should think of yourself  as
someone who is very sick. Why? This is because you have been  stricken  with
the chronic disease of the three mental poisons  since  beginningless  time.
That being the case, you have to engage in constant  practice  in  order  to
heal yourself.

Although constant practice  is  required  to  overcome  this  sickness,  the
practice, as mentioned here, has to be one that contains  the  complete  and
unmistaken path, i.e., not only must it be  unmistaken,  it  must  be  fully
complete in all its elements.

In order for you to be able to  practise  in  this  way,  you  must  have  a
thorough ascertainment, without any confusion or mistake, of  the  path,  In
order to have such an ascertainment of the complete,  unmistaken  path,  you
must analyse it with discriminating wisdom. Once you  have  ascertained  the
entire unmistaken path, you are supposed to sustain  that  ascertainment  in
practice, in a constant manner, like the constant flow of a river.

It is like it says in the Praise of Confessing:

      ... That is to say our minds are always obscured,
      for long we have served the causes of our ills
      how can a leper whose hands and feet fall off
      and who takes his medicine but rarely derive benefit (Page 15)?

Amongst the six ideas, the idea of thinking of yourself to be a sick  person
is said to be very important.


         2  The importance of the discrimination of oneself as someone ill

That being  so  the  discrimination  of  oneself  as  someone  ill  is  very
important. If it is present, the other ones also  arise.  However,  if  this
remains  merely  words  without  the  meaning  of  the  instructions   being
accomplished for the sake of eliminating the mental  afflictions,  you  will
only be a listener. You will resemble an ill person who is not  rid  of  his
illness if, having sought a  doctor,  he  only  cares  about  the  medicinal
composition and does not take the medicine - says the King of  Concentration
[Sutra]. It also says:

         If, after I have explained the excellent Dharma,
         you don’t apply it well, although you heard it,
         it is like with patients whose pouches are full of medicine,
         but who still cannot cure their own diseases.


And in the Guide:

         These should be put into practice physically,
         what would be gained by uttering just the words?
         Would it be beneficial to the patients,
         if they just read how the medicine is meant to be used (Page  15)?

You, as an individual, need to know why you need the  Dharma.  In  order  to
answer this question, you have to understand what  the  Dharma  can  do  for
you. You have to recognise the kind of difficulties  and  problems  you  are
facing and then check and see if the teachings  are  able  to  help  you  to
overcome your suffering and problems.


         3  The instruction to act [accordingly], having identified [the
         meaning of] “persistence”

Therefore the discrimination that persistence eliminates the disease  should
be  developed.  “Persistence”  in  this  statement  signifies  putting  into
practice the topics of adopting and abandoning [of modes  of  conduct]  from
the spiritual teacher’s instructions. {20} Now, to put  them  into  practice
you need to know them and for that you need  to  listen  and  study.  Again,
after studying and knowing you need to practice and therefore it is  crucial
to engage in the meaning of what has been  studied  to  the  best  of  one’s
abilities (Page 15).

Lama Tsongkhapa very clearly states, that in order to practise  the  Dharma,
you must first study it. Without studying the Dharma, there  is  no  way  to
practise it. You must  always  remember  this  important  advice  from  Lama
Tsongkhapa - that you must study before you can  practise.  The  purpose  of
studying and learning is to  be  able  to  put  whatever  you  learned  into
practice.

Lama Tsongkhapa says that, if you leave it at the level of  studying  alone,
you will not achieve much benefit:

Otherwise, at the time of death, you will have regrets with regard  to  what
you have not accomplished. You will resemble an actor  imitating  others  or
someone interested in sugar eating only sugar cane[1] (Page 15).
When you leave your studies at the level of words,  without  trying  to  put
them into practice, then you are like an actor imitating others. If  someone
were to ask you, “Can you do this particular dance?” you will  not  be  able
to do so.

In Exhortation to the Supreme Intention it says:

      “I failed in my attainments[2] – now, what should I do?”
      that is how the childish wail while dying.
      They have not delved deep and the suffering is greatnote
      that these are the faults of delighting in words.

And:

      Like someone amidst the crowd observing a play,
      discussing the virtues of another hero,
      and failing with regard to his own persistence -
      note that these are the faults of delighting in words.


And:

      In the bark of sugar-cane there is no essence,
      the delightful flavour is inside,
      someone eating the bark is unable to find
      the delicious flavour of molasses.
      Similarly, words are like the bark,
      the taste is like the meaning of those words.
      Consequently abandon delighting in words,
      always be conscientious reflecting their meaning (Pages 15 -16)!

Listening to the teachings is very important and it  is  also  important  to
study and learn. But when you leave your studies  at  the  level  of  words,
then it is not going to be beneficial. You have to reflect  on  and  analyse
what  you  have  heard  in  order  to  gain  a  thorough  understanding  and
ascertainment of what you have heard. On the basis of such reflection,  when
you are able to ascertain what you have heard, then  this  is  like  tasting
the essence of the sugarcane which is far more delicious than its husk.

    2B3A-3A2E    Contemplating the discrimination of the Tathagata as an
    exalted being

The fifth one consists in developing respect, having  brought  to  mind  the
teacher of the Dharma, the Bhagavan (Page 16).

You should recollect the Buddha’s kindness, and then develop faith  in,  and
respect and devotion towards him. This  is  because,  for  our  benefit,  in
order to receive the teachings, the Buddha had:
   • at times, sacrificed his own life for the Dharma,
   • at other times, sacrificed his own processions for the Dharma and,
   • at yet other times, he sacrificed his entourage and loved ones for the
     Dharma.

So, when you listen to the teachings, you should remember  the  kindness  of
the  Buddha  who  endured  countless  hardships  for  sentient  beings.  The
teachings that you listen to are his teachings. He was the  one  who  taught
these teachings. You should remember this  fact,  when  you  listen  to  the
teachings as it will help you to put the teachings into practice.


    2B3A-3A2F    Generating the wish for the Dharma tradition to last long

The sixth one consists in the thought: how nice it would  be,  if  based  on
listening to such a Dharma, the Jina’s teachings remained in the  world  for
long (Page 16).

These are the six ideas that you rely on when listening to the teachings.

The text then states how important  it  is  that  you  relate  whatever  you
learned to your own mind.


    2B3A-3B            The way in which one needs to listen, having related
    this to one’s mind

Apart from that, if you  keep  your  own  mind  aside  while  explaining  or
listening to the Dharma, the Dharma remaining separate from  it,  then  this
will result in whatever is being explained to miss the point (Page 16).

The point is that whenever you listen to the teachings,  you  should  do  so
with the idea that you are listening to the teachings  in  order  to  subdue
your own mind. To illustrate this, an analogy is used.

Therefore, it is necessary to listen in order to reach certainty  concerning
one’s own continuum. To illustrate this:  if you want to examine whether  or
not there is dirt or some other impurity on your face, you look at  yourself
in a mirror and, understanding that there is, remove it. Likewise, when  you
hear the Dharma, your faulty behaviour appears in the mirror of the  Dharma,
whereupon you feel anguish thinking: ‘that is what my  mind  has  come  to’.
Then, as you engage in  eliminating  faults  and  attaining  qualities,  you
necessarily train in accordance with the Dharma (Page 16).

When listening to the teachings and studying the Dharma, you should use  the
Dharma as a mirror to check if your own behaviour and  actions  accord  with
the Dharma. When they do not accord  with  the  Dharma,  then  you  have  to
change them.

It is like in the Jataka stories [where]  the  son  of  Sutasa  asks  Prince
Chandra for Dharma teachings in these terms:

         Beholding the forms of my bad behaviour,
         in the dazzling mirror of Dharma,
         anguish arises forceful in me,
         and I turn towards the Dharma.


Knowing this to be the thinking of  a  [suitable]  vessel  for  hearing  the
Dharma, the Bodhisattva gave him teachings (Page 16).


    2B3A-3C            How to keep in mind the purpose of attainments

In short, thinking: ‘I shall attain Buddhahood for the sake of all  sentient
beings, to attain that, I need to train in its  causes.  Apparently,  it  is
necessary to listen to the Dharma for that, therefore I shall listen to  the
Dharma’, you  should  generate  the  mind  of  enlightenment,  consider  the
benefits of study and listen with joy, abandoning the  faults  of  a  vessel
(Page 16).

As it says here, you should listen to the teachings with joy, a  happy  mind
and great delight. One of the  ways  to  produce  such  an  attitude  is  to
remember the benefits of listening to the teachings.

We have  now  completed  the  section  on  how  you  should  listen  to  the
teachings. This is an important section. You should  understand  how  to  go
about listening to the teachings. These couple of pages, dealing  with  this
topic, are quite straightforward.


    2B3B   How to explain

         1  Considering the benefits of explaining the Dharma
         2  Generating respect for the teacher and the teachings
         3  What kind of attitude and activities to explain with
         4  Distinction between who the explanations should and should not
         be given to

The second one has four points: Considering the benefits of  explaining  the
Dharma,. generating respect for the teacher and the teachings, what kind  of
attitude and  activities  to  explain  with,  distinction  between  who  the
explanations should and should not be given to.

    2B3B-1 Considering the benefits of explaining the Dharma

First: In the Treasury  it says:

         Giving Dharma, free of mental afflictions,
         teach according to sutra and other true texts.


In its auto-commentary it says: “Therefore, those  who  explain  the  Dharma
incorrectly and with an afflicted mind craving for  material  gain,  respect
and fame, {22} corrupt their own great merits. Therefore, a pure  motivation
to teach the Dharma is extremely important and just like Ngargompa said,  it
is crucial to review it beforehand:  “I  have  never  explained  the  Dharma
without meditating upon impermanence before the session.”
      In Exhortation to the Supreme Intention two groups  of  20  advantages
of giving the gift of Dharma in the  absence  of  material  things  and  the
concern for gain, respect and the like are set forth.  Also,  in  Drag  Shul
Chan it says that the merit of a householder  giving  immeasurable  material
things is exceeded by an ordained person giving a  single  verse  of  Dharma
(Page 17).

It was mentioned earlier that the listener must adopt a virtuous  motivation
when listening to the teachings. With respect to  the  instructor,  when  he
delivers the teachings, he must also do so with a virtuous motivation.  When
you teach the Dharma, motivated by desire for money, material gain,  respect
or fame, then the entire teaching  becomes  the  cause  for  your  merit  to
greatly decrease. On the other hand, when you teach with a pure  motivation,
you will gain many benefits.


    2B3B-2 Generating respect for the teacher and the teachings

Second: When uttering the Mother of the Buddha the Teacher himself  arranged
the seat and so on. Accordingly, the Dharma is a field  of  veneration  even
for Buddhas, so  one  should  bring  to  mind  the  positive  qualities  and
kindness of the Dharma and its teacher, generating respect (Page 17).

Traditionally,  when  teachings  are  delivered,  the  teacher  sits  on  an
elevated throne. This was practised by the Buddha himself. The  main  reason
for this is to show that the teachings that are  being  delivered  are  very
holy and precious.


    2B3B-3 What kind of attitude and activities to explain with

         A  Attitude
         B  Activities

The third one has two points: attitude and activities.

    2B3B-3A      Attitude

First,   [the   Sutra]   Requested   by   Sagaramati   puts   forward   five
discriminations: generating the discrimination of oneself as  a  doctor,  of
the Dharma as medicine, of the one listening to the Dharma as a patient,  of
the Tathagata as a holy being and of the mode of the Dharma as  abiding  for
a long time as well as  the  development  of  loving  kindness  towards  the
people around.
      The envy [born from] anxiety that others are  superior,  the  laziness
of putting things off, the  discouragement  of  fatigue  due  to  explaining
things over and over again, praising oneself and chit-chatting  about  other
people’s faults, the reluctance to lend texts[3]  as  well  as  concern  for
material things such as food and clothing  should  be  abandoned,  thinking:
those merits from teaching for the sake of my own and others’  enlightenment
are the provisions of my happiness (Pages 17 – 18).

When teaching others, one of the most important things to keep  in  mind  is
that you should do so out of concern, and love for and  with  the  intention
to help the listeners. Also, during the teachings, you should  not  directly
or indirectly talk about and praise yourself,  hinting  that  the  listeners
are lower than you. You should also not have  this  fear,  thinking,  “If  I
were to teach them, they will know more  than  I  do.”   You  should  teach,
thinking “May this action of  teaching  become  the  cause  for  myself  and
everyone else to achieve enlightenment.”

If someone were to sincerely ask a Dharma question and you are reluctant  to
answer it, because you are afraid  that  by  answering  the  question,  that
person will know what you know and may even know more  than  you,  that  is,
“stinginess with regard to explaining the teachings.” So, you should  answer
when a person asks a Dharma question sincerely.


    2B3B-3B      Activities

{23} Second: Having washed and dressed in immaculately  clean  clothes,  you
sit down in a clean and pleasant place on a cushion on a Dharma  throne.  If
you then chant a mantra subjugating demons, demons and gods of  the  demonic
category will not get closer to you at all than a perimeter of  100  yojanas
and even if they do, they will not be able to create any  obstacles,  as  it
says in [the Sutra] Requested by  Sagaramati.  Therefore  you  should  chant
that mantra and - with an extremely radiant facial complexion  -  give  your
explanations conjoined with the conditions for ascertaining their meaning  -
examples, proofs and quotations (Page 18).

It is said that, when teaching the Dharma,  your  teachings  should  not  be
like a nest of a crow. When you look at how crows build  their  nests,  they
do so according to whatever twigs they can find and they  are  not  properly
constructed. Your explanations should not be like that.

Also, the manner of teaching  and  the  material  that  you  are  delivering
should not be like the way old people eat food. This means  that,  when  you
teach, you talk about the easy things, but when you come  to  the  difficult
points, you skip them. This is likened to old people who  do  not  have  any
teeth. They can only chew on soft foods. When it comes to  hard  food,  they
will swallow it whole due to their difficulty in chewing it.

Also, the way you teach should not be like an old person who has to rely  on
a walking stick. You rely on a walking stick because you are not  steady  on
your feet. So, your teachings should not be like that. They should  be  very
steady. This means that you deliver your teachings with adequate  analogies,
reasons and scriptural quotations.


    2B3B-4 Distinction between who the explanations should and should not
    be given to

Fourth: In the Sutra on Discipline it says: “do not act without being  asked
to”. Accordingly, you do not teach without having been asked and  even  when
someone asks, you should examine the vessel. However, knowing someone to  be
a vessel, it is acceptable to teach even without having been  asked,  as  it
says in the King of Concentration [Sutra]. Further modes of conduct are  set
forth in the Sutra on Discipline (Page 18).
The text then explains how a session should  be  concluded  in  relation  to
both listening to and explaining the teachings.


    2B3C   Generally, how to proceed at the end

         1  What to do at the end - the actual things to do:

The roots of virtue of teaching and listening in this way should  be  sealed
by means of pure aspirational prayers such as the Prayer of Good Conduct.

         2  The benefits of this

There is no doubt that, if the Dharma is explained and listened to  in  this
manner, in just one session the advantages stated above will arise.  Due  to
the act of listening and explaining the Dharma hitting home, all the  karmic
obscurations accumulated previously by not respecting the  Dharma  or  those
expounding it etc. are purified and all the  ones  being  newly  accumulated
are nipped in the bud.

         3  The general mode of behaviour of saints

Due to the manner of listening hitting  home,  the  instructions  set  forth
bring about benefit in the mind. Seeing this, all the earlier  saints[4]  in
general {24} were diligent about this and especially  the  former  gurus  of
this instruction persevered at it with utmost diligence.

         4  The advice to cherish them, as it is a great fault to turn away
         from them

These are evidently great instructions - if one  does  not  reach  certainty
about this and one’s attitude does not change - as is often the case  -  the
Dharma, so profound and vast, no matter how much it is  explained,  will  be
like a god fallen to [the rank of] a demon and that very Dharma will  become
an aid to the afflictions. Therefore, “if  you  err  on  the  first  of  the
month, [you will do so] until the fifteenth “ as they say and  since  it  is
like that, the wise strive at this method  of  transforming  what  has  been
heard and explained into the path and make every opportunity to explain  and
listen into something worthwhile. For  this  is  the  best  preparation  for
teaching the instructions.

When listening to or explaining the teachings, it is very  important  to  do
so with a pure motivation. When you listen or explain the teachings  with  a
pure motivation, there are many benefits, such as the benefit of being  able
to subdue  your  own  mind  and,  of  course,  being  able  to  benefit  the
listeners.

But when you listen to or teach the Dharma with an  impure  motivation,  you
can forget about subduing  your  own  mind.  These  activities  will  become
causes  and  conditions  for  your  mental  afflictions  (or  delusions)  to
increase.

“These are evidently great instructions.” When you listen to or explain  the
teachings with  a  proper  motivation,  that  in  itself  becomes  the  best
preparation  and  the  most  important  prerequisite  for   teaching   these
instructions.
Right from the beginning, when you study and learn the Dharma and  when  you
listen to the teachings, you must set the motivation every  time.  When  you
do not do that in the beginning, then it is likely that you will not  do  it
the second time. Then you may end up listening to  the  Dharma  your  entire
life, without setting a proper motivation for doing so. When you  live  your
life in this way, i.e., you may be listening to the  teachings  but  you  do
not put in the effort into changing your motivation, what will  happen?   As
it says here, all those acts of listening will not benefit your mind.

Next is the fourth great  outline  of  the  Lam-Rim  that  starts  with  the
instructions explaining how disciples should be guided  on  the  path.  That
starts with the practice of guru devotion.











Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng
Edited by Cecilia Tsong
Checked by Shirley Soh

-----------------------
[1] “Sugar cane” should be understood to refer to the husk of a sugarcane
stalk.
[2] “Attainments” refer to practice.
[3] “Reluctance to lend texts”: This should be translated as “stinginess
with regard to explaining the teachings.”
[4] “Earlier saints” can be understood to refer to the excellent beings of
the past.

