Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L07 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.317854
================================================================================



Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi

Root text: The Middle Length Lam-Rim by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by  Trijiang  Rinpoche  are
in small lettertype, to be distinguished from Lama Tsongkhapa’s own  outline
that is in larger lettertype.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


Lesson No: 7                                   Date: 30th June 2011


Remember  what  Lama  Tsongkhapa  said  in  his  “In  Praise  of   Dependent
Origination?”  He said he felt very fortunate that he was  able  to  develop
faith in the Buddha.  This  faith  arose  from  understanding  the  Buddha’s
teachings and he was able to develop such faith before the end of his  life.
The faith that Lama  Tsongkhapa  developed  in  the  Buddha  came  from  his
understanding of the Buddha’s teachings. It  is  very  important  that,  one
day, this happens for you too, i.e., you develop the  faith  in  the  Buddha
that comes through understanding his teachings.

What do you have to do to develop this kind of  faith?  You  need  to  study
the teachings of the Buddha. When the day comes that you can  see  how  true
the Buddha’s teaching are, naturally, faith in the Buddha  will  arise  from
the depths of your heart.

Developing deep faith in the Buddha is not an easy thing. Why? In  order  to
develop such faith, you need to first understand what the Buddha taught.  In
order to understand what the Buddha taught, you  need  to  examine  what  he
taught.  You  have  to  study  and  learn  the  teachings.  Then,  you  will
understand the meaning of his teachings and see how true they  are  and  how
they fit into your own experience. Only then will you be able to  have  real
devotion towards the Buddha.

“In Praise of Dependent Origination,” Lama  Tsongkhapa  uses  the  following
analogy:

      42
      Seeing the qualities of this teaching
      Pulls [hard] from your heart,
      Just like what a hook does to a fish;
      Sad it is not to have heard it from you.

When you want to catch a fish, you have to use a hook  with  bait  that  the
fish likes. When the fish sees the bait, uncontrollably, the fish will  swim
towards the bait. That is how the fish is caught.  Likewise,  in  order  for
you to develop this kind of captivated faith towards the  Buddha,  you  must
first see the qualities of his teachings. When you  see  how  wonderful  his
teachings are, uncontrollably, you will be drawn to developing that kind  of
faith towards the Buddha.

All of us would like to develop that kind of faith. You need  this  kind  of
devotion but how does such deep devotion arise in the first place? When  you
think about this, regardless of the angle from which you  look  at  it,  the
conclusion will be that the only  way  to  be  able  to  develop  such  deep
devotion and faith towards the Buddha is to understand his teachings.

In order to do that, you have to study his  teachings.  There  is  no  other
choice. That is the only way. I don’t think that there  is  any  other  way.
This is one  of  the  reasons  why  you  are  here  to  learn  the  Buddha’s
teachings. The more you study the teachings,  the  more  you  realise  their
depth and profundity and the more  you  will  believe  that  the  Buddha  is
really special.
                            *********************

We have completed the four greatnesses of the Lam-Rim.  One of  the  reasons
for understanding the four greatnesses is that you  will  then  be  able  to
develop respect for and faith in the Lam-Rim. You are studying  the  Lam-Rim
so that you can put it into practice. Therefore, the object of your  studies
and the object of your practice is the same. It is the Lam-Rim.

If, at the end of studying the Lam-Rim, you still think that there  is  some
practice other than practising the Lam-Rim, such  as  taking  empower-ments,
deity practice, mantra recitations and so forth, that is a  mistake  and  is
wrong. Please remember to keep this in mind all the time.

This applies to everyone. Most people are  like  that.  They  have  received
many Lam-Rim teachings but despite this, they think that there is  something
else to be  practised.  That  is  the  reason  why  many  people  run  after
empowerments. After receiving the empowerment, they put  their  effort  into
doing the sadhana and  deity  practice,  thinking  that  that  is  the  real
practice. Then, they start to think of doing deity retreat, forgetting  that
what they had heard in the Lam-Rim  teachings  are  the  main  thing  to  be
practised.

The  Lam-Rim  shows  the  paths  of  the  persons  of  the  three  different
capacities. The practice of the Lam-Rim is the fundamental practice.  It  is
indispensable because, without practising the Lam-Rim, there is  no  way  to
practice tantra.

    Explanation of how Dharma possessed of the two greatnesses should be
                          listened to and explained


    2B3    How Dharma possessed of the two greatnesses should be listened
    to and explained

         A  How to listen
         B  How to explain
         C  Generally, how to proceed at the end

The third one has three points: how to listen, how to explain and generally
how to proceed at the end (Page 11).

The two greatnesses are (1) the greatness of the author  of  the  teachings,
Lama Atisha and (2) the greatness of the instructions.

The Lam-Rim gives  very  good  and  wonderful  instructions.  It  starts  by
eliminating the major misconceptions and wrong views that most people  have.
After  eliminating  these,  it  then  explains  how  you  should  study  the
teachings: how you should listen to them and how you should explain them  to
others.

It talks about how to listen and the benefits of listening to the  teachings
in a particular way with a particular mind-set. What you have heard  so  far
and what you are going to look at  now  –  everything  is  to  be  put  into
practice. Many people have the idea that the real essence of  the  teachings
is coming soon. These are just the preliminaries and you do not need to  pay
so much attention to them. But,  actually,  everything  covered  so  far  is
meant to be practised immediately.


    2B3A   How to listen

         1  Considering the advantages of listening to the Dharma
         2  Developing respect towards the Dharma and those who teach it
         3  The actual way to listen

The first one has three points: considering the advantages of listening,
developing respect towards the Dharma and who teaches it and the actual way
to listen.

    2B3A-1 Considering the advantages of listening

First: from the Verses on Listening:

         Through listening you come to know the dharmas,
         through listening misdeeds are turned away,
         through listening all trivia are abandoned,
         through listening nirvana is achieved


“Through listening, you come  to  know  the  dharmas,”  means  that  through
listening to the teachings, you understand what  is  to  be  cultivated  and
what is to be abandoned. Through that understanding, you  will  be  able  to
turn away from wrongdoings and misdeeds. In particular, you will be able  to
engage in the training in ethics.

Then, through contemplating correctly what you have to abandon and what  you
have to cultivate, you will also eliminate what is  meaningless,  i.e.,  you
will be able to engage in the training of concentration.

Remember the three  scriptural  collections,  the  vinaya  teachings,  sutra
collections and the Abhidharma teachings?
   • The second line, “Through listening, misdeeds are turned away,” relate
     to listening to the collection of the vinaya teachings that pertain to
     the code of ethical conduct. By listening to these teachings, you will
     understand how you  should train in ethics.
   • “Through listening, all trivia are abandoned”:  by  listening  to  the
     teachings from the sutra collections, you will understand how to  give
     up meaningless distractions and, through that, you  will  be  able  to
     train in concentration.
   •  “Through  listening,  nirvana  is  achieved”:  by  listening  to  the
     teachings on knowledge, the Abhidharma, you develop wisdom.  Also,  on
     the basis of a sound training in concentration, you will  be  able  to
     train well in wisdom.  With  wisdom,  you  will  be  able  to  achieve
     nirvana.

Question: Does the layperson have access to the vinaya teachings?

Answer: The pratimoksha vows, the vows  of  individual  liberation,  can  be
divided into eight categories.  The eight types of pratimoksha vows  can  be
subsumed into two: (1) the vows of the householder and (2) the vows  of  the
ordained.

Although the emphasis of the vinaya is on the conduct of and  the  vows  for
the ordained, since householders like you need  to  engage  in  training  in
ethics, the training for the householder is also explained  in  the  vinaya.
You can study the section in the vinaya that relates to the householder.

These four [lines] say that in dependence on listening an  understanding  of
the points that should be adopted and  abandoned  gradually  develops.  From
this knowledge - ethical discipline that counteracts wrongdoing. Then,  once
you have turned away from  meaningless  pursuits,  concentration  where  the
mind can stay on a wholesome object  as  long  as  you  wish  arises.  Then,
through training in wisdom realizing the suchness that is selflessness,  the
root of samsara’s fetters is cut and you attain liberation.
      In the Jataka stories, too, it says:

         He who through listening fills his mind with faith,
         {16} grows firm rejoicing in that which is excellent.
         Wisdom is born and bewilderment vanishes-
         this is well worth paying for with one’s own flesh.


         Listening is the lamp against mental darkness,
         the greatest wealth no robber can carry away,
         the weapon destroying the enemy - ignorance


         best of friends giving guidance in skilful means;
         near and dear, if you are poor or not;
         inoffensive cure against ills of sorrow,
         the foremost army destroying an army of faults,
         it is the best fame, and treasure and splendour as well.
         If you meet noble beings - the best of gifts,
         and in assemblies it is the delight of the wise (Page 12).

Let us take the example of listening to teachings on:
   • the qualities of the Three Jewels,
   • the presentation on karma, the law of cause and effect and,
   • the Four Noble Truths.
By listening to these teachings, you will come to  understand  these  topics
and what they mean, and you will be able to develop the faith of  conviction
in them.

For example, by listening to the teaching on  the  qualities  of  the  Three
Jewels, once you understand what you have heard and then develop  the  faith
of conviction in the Three Jewels, you will, from your  own  side,  worship,
pay homage and make offerings to the Three Jewels.

When you hear the teachings on karma, the law of cause and effect, when  you
develop the faith of conviction in karma, you will know what to abandon  and
what to cultivate. You will then be able to live  your  life  in  accordance
with the law of karma and live an ethical way of life.

Similarly, when you hear the teachings on the Four Noble  Truths,  you  will
develop the faith of conviction in these teachings, especially  with  regard
to how you should practise the teachings and what you have  to  abandon  and
give up. This will greatly benefit your practice.

By developing such faith of conviction, you  become  very  stable.  This  is
what the teachings are saying. These are the benefits of  listening  to  the
teachings. You have to see whether this is the case for you.

This is the goal. The aim is to experience these benefits. You have  to  try
it out for yourself. Once you experience the benefits of  listening  to  the
teachings, then the interest to  continue  to  learn  and  study  them  will
naturally arise. Listening has an impact on your mind, especially  when  you
hear something over and over again.

Let us say you keep on hearing, “Killing  is  really  bad,”  over  and  over
again. Somehow, this impacts your mind such that,  when  you  are  about  to
engage in the act of killing, because of having heard this many  times,  you
remember that this act is a misdeed.

Here, we are talking about merely  hearing  the  teachings.  When  you  hear
something, it definitely leaves an imprint on your mind. Let us say  someone
tells you, “No, you cannot eat this food because it will harm your  health.”
Even though you hear this only once, many years later, when  someone  offers
this particular food to you, you will remember what  you  have  heard,  that
this particular food will harm your health. This is the  potential  of  just
hearing something.

as well as:


      Having listened make the attainment the essence of practice,
      and you will be released from the stronghold of births with ease.

Keep thinking again and again about these and other advantages of  listening
and generate resolute faith from the bottom of your heart (page 12).

“Having listened make the attainment the  essence  of  practice”  and  “Keep
thinking again and again about these and other advantages of  listening  and
generate resolute faith from the bottom of  your  heart”:  this  shows  that
although it is beneficial to listen to the teachings, that  is  not  enough.
The point is that, after listening to the teachings,  you  should  put  them
into practice as much as you can. Why? Because when  you  put  the  teaching
into practice, “You will be released from  the  stronghold  of  births  with
ease.”

Birth is the cause of all the problems because, when  you  have  birth,  you
will have aging, sickness and death. Once you are able to stop  birth,  then
you will not have to experience all these sufferings. This line,  “You  will
be released from the stronghold of births with ease” refers  to  a  specific
kind of rebirth and not rebirth in general. The rebirth  that  you  need  to
stop refers to the rebirth that occurs due  to  karma  and  afflictions.  It
does not mean stopping all kinds of rebirths.


    2B3A-2 Developing respect towards the Dharma and those who teach it

Second: from the Ksitigarbha Sutra:

         Listen filled with one-sided faith and respect,
         without any mockery nor disrespect towards them,
         worship the exponents of the Dharma,
         producing the notion of them as resembling Buddhas.

In accordance with this quotation you  should  view  them  as  resembling  a
Buddha, offer them service with things like lion thrones, worship them  with
gifts and give up disrespect (Pages 12-13).

As I have mentioned before, the purpose of listening to the teachings is  to
subdue the mind.  When  you  listen  to  the  teachings  with  the  attitude
described here in this sutra, you will only  benefit.  As  it  says  in  the
sutra, you must respect the  Dharma,  the  instructions,  that  are  taught.
Since the instructor is the one who is explaining the  teachings,  likewise,
you need to respect the instructor. When you listen to  the  teachings  with
these ideas, it makes a  difference  to  and  will  benefit  the  mind.  The
teachings can then move your heart and mind.

The Buddha, seeing the purpose, then taught that you should  adopt  such  an
attitude when listening to the teachings as it will only  benefit  you,  the
listener.

In the Bodhisattva Levels it says that you should  be  free  from  arrogance
and, towards the teachings and those who expound them,  from  disregard  and
you should respect those two. And in the Jataka stories it says:

         Sit on a seat that is very low,
         develop the glory of discipline,
         see with eyes imbued with joy,
         while drinking the nectar of the words.


         Bow down in respect and concentration,
         with mind that is pure and free of stains
         like one who is ill {17} heeds the doctor’s words,
         respectfully listen to the Dharma (Page 13).

When you listen to the teachings, you should listen to  the  teachings  with
an attitude of faith and  respect.  You  should  listen  to  the  teachings,
thinking that you are sick, like a patient visiting a doctor. This  will  be
explained in greater detail soon. When you are sick and you visit a  doctor,
you pay attention and listen carefully to what the  doctor  says.  Likewise,
when you attend teachings, you should do likewise.


    2B3A-3 The actual way to listen

         A  Indication of how to listen in general
         B  The need to listen, having related this to one’s mind
         C  How to keep in mind the purpose of attainments

    2B3A-3A            Indication of how to listen in general

         1  Giving up the three faults of a vessel
         2  Relying on the discriminations

This section pertains to how you should listen to the teachings by:
   • abandoning the three faults of a vessel and
   • relying on the six ideas or attitudes

Lama Tsongkhapa uses the analogy of a vessel with faults.

The third one has three [points]: Giving up the three  faults  of  a  vessel
and relying on the six discriminations.

    2B3A-3A1     Giving up the three faults of a vessel

First: If a vessel is turned upside down or held the  right  way  round  but
unclean or clean but with the bottom leaking, then even if rain is  made  to
fall on it by the gods, it cannot go in, or even if it goes in, it  will  be
polluted by the dirt and therefore will not  fulfil  the  purpose  of  being
drunk and the like or even if it is not spoiled by dirt, it  will  not  stay
but leak out (Page 13).

Next is applying the analogies to the meaning.

In the same way it is to no great purpose to hear the Dharma, if you sit  in
a place where it is being explained, but do not listen well, or listen,  but
take it wrong - with a faulty motivation and the like - or if, even in  case
these faults are not present, the words and the meaning you grasped  at  the
time of hearing are not consolidated  and  get  lost  through  forgetfulness
etc. Therefore, one should be free from these [faults] (Page 13).

This describes our situation and points out  the  faults  that  most  people
here may have:
   • First, you may come to class but your mind is somewhere else. You  may
     be sitting here physically but you may not be paying attention to what
     is being said.
   • Even when you are listening to the teachings, you  may  not  have  the
     proper motivation for listening to the teachings. For example, you may
     have no intention of putting the instructions into practice.  You  are
     only curious or you may have some other bad intentions.
   • Even when you do listen attentively with a  positive  motivation,  you
     may not pay much attention to what was said after  the  teachings  and
     you forget what was said in class.

When you listen to the teachings with these faults, then  listening  to  the
Dharma serves little purpose. This is what Lama Tsongkhapa  says.  How  then
should you overcome such faults?

The antidotes to these three are set forth in three phrases in  the  sutras:
“Listen well - intensely - and keep in mind (Page 13)!”

“Listen well” is the antidote to the fault  of  being  a  dirty  vessel  and
means listening to the teachings with a proper motivation.  You  can  listen
to the teachings by thinking, “I am here to listen to the teachings to:
   • subdue my mind or
 • so that I can benefit others or
   • so that I can put them into practice.”

Listening “intensely” is the antidote to the  fault  of  being  an  upturned
vessel. Since you have come to class to listen to the  teachings,  you  must
pay full attention to what is being said.

“Keep in mind” is the antidote to the fault of being  a  leaky  vessel.  You
should listen intensely by paying attention to  whatever  is  said  and  you
should try different means to ensure that you do not forget  what  was  said
during the teachings.

The advice of listening  to  the  teachings  through  abandoning  the  three
faults of a vessel can generally also be applied  to  other  areas  of  your
studies. Whatever you are studying and learning, if it is  a  teaching,  you
should pay attention during the teaching  and  listen  attentively,  with  a
virtuous motivation such as, “I  am  doing  these  studies  so  that  I  can
benefit others in the future.” You should  also  listen  without  forgetting
what was said during the teaching and remember it afterwards.

And in the Bodhisattva Levels we are told to listen with the desire to  know
everything, single-pointedness, attention, a humble mind,  and  the  thought
of all sentient beings[1] (Page 13) .


    2B3A-3A2     Relying on the six discriminations

         A  Contemplating the discrimination of oneself as a patient
         B  Contemplating the discrimination of the one expounding the
         Dharma as a doctor
         C  Generating the discrimination of what has been taught as
         medicine
         D  Generating the discrimination of persistent practice as the cure


         E  Contemplating the discrimination of the Tathagata as an exalted
         being
         F  Generating the wish for the Dharma tradition to last long

The second one has six points: contemplating the discrimination  of  oneself
as a patient, of the one expounding the Dharma  as  a  doctor,  subsequently
generating the discrimination of what  has  been  taught  as  medicine,  the
discrimination  of  persistent  practice  as  the  cure,  contemplating  the
discrimination of the Tathagatas as exalted beings and generating  the  wish
for the Dharma tradition to last long.

    2B3A-3A2A    Contemplating the discrimination of oneself as a patient

First: In Engaging[i] it says:

         Even when stricken with ordinary illness
         {18} one has to follow the words of the doctor
         how much more so, if a hundred
         ills like lust strike you down all the time (Pages 13-14)!

As is mentioned here, owing to mental afflictions like  attachment  etc.  we
always suffer from diseases causing long-lasting and severe  suffering  that
is difficult to cure. Therefore we first need  to  diagnose  them  as  such.
Kamawa said: “If it  is  not  in  accord  with  the  actual  situation,  our
meditation goes off in the wrong direction. We have  been  stricken  with  a
serious illness due to the three poisons, the illness is very grave, but  we
do not know we are ill at all (Page 14).”

The first idea that you need to cultivate when you listen to  the  teachings
is to think of yourself as a sick person. Here, Lama Tsongkhapa  says,  very
clearly, that you have been stricken with:
   • an illness for a very long time,
   • it is very difficult to cure and
   • it brings about great suffering.
The illness that Lama  Tsongkhapa  is  referring  to  is  the  three  mental
poisons of attachment, anger and ignorance (or bewilderment).

You have had this illness since beginningless rebirths. It has  always  been
there and no matter what you do, it is still there, bringing about  all  the
undesirable experiences of this life. It  will  also  bring  about  all  the
undesirable experiences in future lives. Therefore,  it  is  very  important
that you recognise that you are in such a situation.

    2B3A-3A2B    Contemplating the discrimination of the one expounding the
    Dharma as a doctor

Second: If we are stricken with a serious illness like for  example  a  wind
or gall disease, we look for a specialist in medicine  and  meeting  one  we
are extremely happy, listen to what he says,  treat  him  with  respect  and
acknowledge him. In the same way one looks for a  spiritual  guide  teaching
the Dharma and, having found one, accomplishes what he says, taking  it  not
as a burden but as an ornament, acting with respect  and  reverence  towards
him (Page 14).

This is what you need to think from your own side.


    2B3A-3A2C    Generating the discrimination of what has been taught as
    medicine

Third: Just as a patient greatly appreciates the medicine  put  together  by
the doctor, one regards the instructions  and  teachings  given  by  someone
expounding the Dharma as the most important thing, making an effort to  hold
them in respect and not wasting them  through  forgetfulness  and  the  like
(Page 14).

Summary:
   • You should listen to the teachings:
         o by abandoning the three faults of a vessel. What are these three
           faults?
         o by cultivating the  six  discriminations  (or  ideas)  that  are
           favourable, helpful conditions  for  you.  What  are  these  six
           ideas?
   • What are the antidotes to the three faults? “Listen well,  thoroughly,
     and hold it in mind!” These three phrases spoken by the Buddha are the
     antidotes to the three faults.
You should think about this for yourself. When you listen to  the  teachings
with the ideas that I have mentioned so far, do they benefit you or not?

The teachings say that, whenever you listen to the Dharma, you  have  to  do
so by abandoning the three faults and cultivating the six  ideas.  You  have
to try them out for yourself and see whether  it  makes  any  difference  to
your  mind.  Once  you  see  the  difference  through  your   own   personal
experience, you will understand the truth of what Lama Tsongkhapa  said  and
you will appreciate Lama Tsongkhapa’s Lam-Rim teachings. There  is  no  real
benefit to simply being able to list  out  the  three  faults  and  the  six
ideas. The benefit  comes  from  trying  them  out  and  putting  them  into
practice.

When you are listening to the teachings, cultivate the  idea  of  abandoning
the three faults. Then, check whether it makes any difference to your  mind.
Once it makes a difference to your mind, you will realise how  true  it  is,
based on your own experience. But, in order for that  experience  to  occur,
you must try it out for yourself.

When you leave it at the level of something to be enumerated, then you  will
not be able to experience the benefits.
The teachings are saying that, whenever you  listen  to  the  Dharma  –  any
Dharma teachings - this is the kind of attitude that you need  to  cultivate
and the faults that you need  to  abandon.  You  have  to  verify  this  for
yourself.

Question: On page 13, what are the  Bodhisattva  Levels  and  what  are  the
three mental poisons?

Answer: Bodhisattva Levels is a treatise composed  by  Arya  Asanga  on  the
practice of the various stages of the bodhisattva  path.  The  three  mental
poisons are attachment, anger and ignorance.






Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng
Edited by Cecilia Tsong
Checked by Shirley Soh






















-----------------------
[1] Ven. Gyurme: “The thought of all sentient beings” may not be correct
and should be understood as “reflecting with complete composure.”

-----------------------
[i] Engaging in Bodhisattva Behaviour

