Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L38 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.660242
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


   Lesson No: 38                Date: 25th February 2012


We had started looking at the mind that is intent on liberation. Earlier  on
we discussed how it is insufficient just to get a good rebirth either  as  a
human being or a god. In this section on  the  person  of  medium  capacity,
there is an explanation as to why we need to aim for liberation.

Before we can generate the mind that is intent on  liberation,  we  have  to
identify correctly what liberation is. Liberation is when  the  suchness  of
our mind is completely separated from the afflictions.

After having identified what liberation is, the text goes on to discuss  the
four noble truths. It is essential to understand the four  noble  truths  in
order to be able to develop the mind that is intent on liberation.

The first noble  truth  is  the  truth  of  suffering  that  recognises  and
identifies what suffering is. Then we go on to look  at  the  truth  of  the
origins of suffering. Next is the  truth  of  cessation.  On  the  basis  of
understanding what true suffering is and the  cause  of  our  suffering,  we
come to see that liberation  is  an  existent  phenomenon  and  how,  as  an
individual, there is the possibility of achieving such a  state.  With  this
understanding  and  conviction,  one  then  puts   effort   into   achieving
liberation.

The order of the four noble truths can be presented in  different  ways.  In
the text, from the perspective of practice, the order is:
1. True suffering
2. True origins
3. True cessation
4. True path

In  some  other  texts,  the  four  noble  truths  are  arranged  from   the
perspective of a cause and effect relationship:
1. True origins
2. True suffering
3. True path
4. True cessation
By coming to class, if you know why the four noble truths  are  arranged  in
these different orders, then I think we have achieved our purpose here.


         C  Establishing by means of logic that such an order is necessary

The four truths are  taught  many  times  in  this  manner,  throughout  the
Mahayana and Hinayana. Since the Sugata  condensed  [in  them]  the  crucial
points of entry  into  cyclic  existence  and  its  reversal  [?]  they  are
extremely important for achieving complete liberation. Since it is  a  major
switch for their practical application, disciples need to be guided in  this
order.  If your attachment to cyclic existence is not reversed  and  put  to
rest [?*missing in German] at all by way  of  reflection  on  the  truth  of
suffering, the wish to achieve liberation will become  mere  words,  because
whatever you do will become an [/the?] origin [of new suffering]. If you  do
not come to a good understanding of the root of  cyclic  existence  -  karma
and the afflictions - by reflecting [/by means of  reflection]  on  origins,
you will be like someone who does not see the  target,  shooting  an  arrow,
for you will be missing [/lacking] the crucial points of  the  path.  You[/,
you] will hold what is not the path to freedom from existence  to  be  that,
whereupon your hardships will be fruitless. And, if you  do  not  know  what
should be abandoned, suffering [along with its] origin, you  will  not  even
identify the[/realize the essential meaning of]  liberation  that  is  their
thorough pacification, whereby your striving for liberation {128} will  also
end up as [?] nothing but an [arrogant] presumption (Pages 106 – 107).

Lama Tsongkhapa says it so well here. This presentation of  the  four  noble
truths is very important and you must understand it. In  the  beginning,  it
is very important to understand what  suffering  and  cyclic  existence  is.
Until we feel disenchanted with cyclic existence, our  wish  for  liberation
is just mere talk.

The reason that we are unable to develop a real  desire  for  liberation  is
because we are so attached to cyclic existence. We  want  to  be  in  cyclic
existence, we like it, and we think that it is  good.  Since  we  feel  this
way, then obviously we do not have a mind that  seeks  liberation.  Although
we may think about liberation and we may want it, this is not a real wish.

We first need to be revolted by cyclic existence. Only then will we  have  a
real desire to achieve liberation. After that  we  have  to  understand  the
root of cyclic existence. We need to understand and see correctly  what  are
true origins, the root of all our suffering.

When we do not identify  correctly  the  true  origins  of  suffering,  even
though we may be  trying  very  hard  and  doing  many  different  kinds  of
practices, it will be a waste of  time  because  we  will  not  achieve  any
results. When we do not identify correctly the root  of  the  problem,  then
whatever we do will not harm or destroy it. So it is  important  for  us  to
fully understand and realise the first two truths, true suffering  and  true
origins, without which nothing will happen.









    2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2        The actual meditation on suffering

         A  Considering the suffering of cyclic existence in general
         B  Considering the suffering of individual [realm]s [/specific
         sufferings]

The  second  one  has  two  points:  considering  the  suffering  of  cyclic
existence in general and considering the suffering  of  individual  [realm]s
[/specific sufferings].

    2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2   A    Considering the suffering of cyclic existence
    in general

         1  Considering the eight [types of] suffering
         2  Considering the six [types of] suffering (Page 107)

Here is the way to sustain the meditation session for the person  of  medium
capacity.

    2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1A     How to meditate by the level of the faculty

First: With regard to sustaining the entire round of meditations  common  to
intermediate beings, here you should also take up  common  points  explained
in the context of lesser beings. With regard to sustaining those  [?*]  that
are not common [to both], if  you  have  the  mental  strength,  you  should
sustain them [in meditation] as explained [here], if  your  mental  strength
is small, you should discard the scriptural citations and sustain  only  the
essential [/core] meaning of whatever falls in this context (Page 107)

Whatever meditation one is doing that meditation should be  free  from  both
laxity and excitement.

    2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1B     How it is necessary to be [/meditate] free from
    laxity and excitement

Although these are analytical meditations, you should cease  all  excitement
and so forth, focusing  the  mind  on  the  objects  of  meditation  without
allowing it to go to virtuous, non-virtuous, or  unspecified  objects  other
than them. Not allowing [the mind] to fall under  the  influence  of  sleepy
drowsiness or laxity, you should meditate continuously  [/engrossed  in  the
continuity of it?] from a state of extreme clarity and lucidity, for it  was
taught that the results of all spiritual [/wholesome] practice in which  the
mind is distracted to other things are small.  In Engaging in  [Bodhisattva]
Conduct it says:

         Reciting, austerities and things,
         Even though engaged in long,
         If done with one’s mind distracted elsewhere
         Are meaningless, the seer taught (Pages 107- 108)


The person of medium capacity begins by meditating  on  true  suffering  and
the true origins of suffering. The meditation is essentially  an  analytical
meditation that should be free from the faults  of  laxity  and  excitement.
The mind that is performing this analytical  meditation  on  true  suffering
and true origins has to be clear and alert. In  fact  this  applies  to  all
reflections and meditations, i.e., the  practices  should  be  done  with  a
clear and alert mind.

Whatever practice one is  doing,  it  should  be  done  without  any  mental
distraction. Be  it  meditation,  or  reciting  of  texts  or  mantras,  the
benefits mentioned in the texts from doing these practices will only  reveal
themselves when these practices are done with an undistracted mind, i.e.,  a
mind that is free from laxity and excitement.

The text then goes on to explain how calm-abiding (or  meditative  serenity)
and special insight are extremely  important  for  developing  any  virtuous
qualities.

    2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1C     How all the [/(positive)] positive qualities of
    the three vehicles are accomplished through such meditation

This being so it was taught that for all [/whatever] accomplishment  of  the
positive qualities of the three vehicles two [things] are necessary:  actual
calm abiding – a single-pointed mind  that  stays  on  a  virtuous  observed
object without being distracted –  or  a  facsimile  of  that[/something  in
conformity with it], and actual special insight which individually  analyses
a virtuous object and differentiates modes and varieties, or a facsimile  of
that. In accordance with that it also says in the  [Sutra]  Unravelling  the
Intention:


         Maitreya,  you  should  understand  that  all  virtuous  qualities,
         whether mundane  or  supramundane,  of  hearers,  bodhisattvas,  or
         tathagatas are the result of calm abiding and special insight.

If calm abiding and special insight were  not  divided  in  the  two  -  the
actual a facsimile to it - there would be no certainty  [/it  could  not  be
determined/there would be no  (certainty  in)  telling]  that  all  positive
qualities of the three vehicles come  [forth]  as  effects  of  actual  calm
abiding and special insight (Page 108).

Next is identifying the eight types of suffering. I don’t think  I  need  to
go through them with you as they are quite straightforward. You should  read
these on your own.

    2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1D     The eight types of suffering

         1  The suffering of birth
         2  The suffering of aging
         3  The suffering of illness
         4  The suffering of death
         5  The suffering of meeting with the unpleasant
         6  The suffering of separation from what is pleasant
         7  The suffering of seeking what you desire and not getting it
         8  “In brief: the five appropriated [?] aggregates are suffering”


    2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1D-1   The suffering of birth

Here the considerations on the suffering of birth, the first of eight  types
of suffering, have five points:

         A  [Suffering]

Birth is suffering, because it is associated with suffering. When  the  four
- hell sentient beings, perpetually  suffering  hungry  ghost,  beings  born
from wombs, and beings born (from an egg), they  are  born  with  a  lot  of
violent sensations of pain (Pages 108 – 109).

It says here that hungry ghosts invariably suffer.  There are hungry  ghosts
who experience the suffering of birth but not all hungry ghosts  necessarily
undergo  the  suffering  of  birth.  This  is  explained  in  one   of   the
commentaries on this section.

         B  [Connection with taking on bad states]

Birth  is  associated  with  taking  on  [/adopting]  bad  states.  Due   to
connecting    with    the     seed     for     the     arising,     abidance
[/subsistence/abiding]and increase of mental afflictions, {130} [a  rebirth]
is unsuited to either being used for actions employing virtue  or  to  being
controlled at will (Page 109).

With regard to the seeds of the dysfunctional tendencies, there is:
 • the dysfunctional tendency of the body, where the  body  has  this  heavy
   sluggish feeling  so that one finds it difficult to employ  the  body  in
   virtue
 • the dysfunctional tendency of the mind, where the mind is  influenced  by
   laxity and excitement. This does not allow  the  mind  to  focus  on  the
   chosen object.

We are born with these dysfunctional tendencies of both body and  mind.  The
moment we are born, the seeds of these dysfunctional tendencies  are  there.
This is one reason why birth is suffering.

         C  [Basis of suffering]

Birth is  the  basis[/environment/abode]  of  suffering.  In  dependence  on
having taken birth in the three realms, the  suffering  of  aging,  illness,
death etc. increases (Page 109).

Being born is the condition for us to age, to get sick and then to die.

         D  [Basis of mental afflictions]

Birth is the basis [/environment/abode]  of  mental  afflictions.  Once  you
have been born in cyclic existence the three poisons of attachment,  hatred,
and ignorance arise with regard to objects. Again, due  to  that,  body  and
mind being thoroughly unpacified, they suffer and consequently do not  abide
in happiness. Thus, body and mind are  tormented  in  various  ways  by  the
mental afflictions.

         E  [Involuntary separation]

Birth is  suffering  because  it  is  in  the  very  nature  of  involuntary
separation. Death  which  is  the  end  of  everything  born  has  not  been
[?*cannot be?] transcended and is  undesirable.   It  also  only  makes  you
experience suffering (Page 109).

     2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1D-8  “In brief, the five appropriated
    [/perpetuating?*] aggregates are suffering”

         A  Brief presentation
         B  Extensive explanation

         A  Brief presentation

Eighth: Thinking [/The considerations] about the meaning of  the  statement:
“In  brief,  the  five   appropriated   [/perpetuating?*]   aggregates   are
suffering” has five points:
      - they are a vessel of suffering that will become manifest,
      - they are a vessel of suffering based on what  has  [already]  become
manifest,
      - they are a vessel for the suffering of suffering
      - they are a vessel for the suffering of change, and
      - they are in  the  nature  of  compounding[/in  the  nature  of  the]
suffering (Page 111). [/conditioned existence]

         B  Extensive explanation

{133} Here the  first  [point]  is  that,  in  dependence  on  taking  these
appropriated aggregates, the sufferings  of  the  next  rebirth  onward  are
induced (Page 112).

It is the nature of the five contaminated aggregates appropriated  by  karma
and the afflictions to be vessels  for  future  suffering.  What  does  this
mean? We induce suffering in future lives by taking up these aggregates.

These explanations here are trying to point out the suffering nature of  our
body and mind.

Why are the five aggregates in the nature of  suffering?  Because  they  are
the vessels for future suffering. The moment we take  on  this  contaminated
body and mind, we still have the afflictions. Due to these  afflictions,  we
accumulate the projecting karma that causes us to take  on  another  set  of
contaminated body and mind. When  that  happens,  we  will  experience  more
suffering. That is why this contaminated body and mind are the  vessels  for
future suffering.

      The second one: the aggregates that have  [already]  been  established
become the basis  for  illness,  aging,  etc.  that  depend  on  them  (Page
112)[/it/the former].

These appropriated aggregates, the contaminated body and mind,  the  results
of karma and afflictions, are vessels for suffering based on what  presently
exists. Our appropriated aggregates form the basis for  the  suffering  that
we will experience such as illness and old age. These are  grounded  in  the
current aggregates. If we did not have these contaminated body and  mind  in
the very first place, there is  no  way  we  will  experience  old  age  and
illness. Therefore this contaminated body and mind  are  in  the  nature  of
suffering.

      The third and fourth ones: [the aggregates] give  rise  to  these  two
types of suffering due to their connection with the negative  tendencies  of
the two (Page 112).

These  contaminated  appropriated  aggregates  are  also   the   bases   for
experiencing the suffering of pain and the suffering of  change.  These  two
sufferings come about “because the appropriated aggregates are  linked  with
the dysfunctional tendencies towards these two  types  of  sufferings.”  [1]
Once  we  get  this  contaminated  body  and  mind,  it   comes   with   the
dysfunctional tendencies, the seeds for us to experience  the  suffering  of
pain and the suffering of change.  The  seeds  for  experiencing  these  two
sufferings come  along  the  moment  this  contaminated  body  and  mind  is
established.

      The fifth one: due to  the  mere  establishment  of  the  appropriated
aggregates they arise in the nature  of  compounding  suffering[/conditioned
existence], for all compounded phenomena are under to the control  of  other
- previous karma and mental afflictions - are  compounding  suffering  (Page
112)[/conditioned existence].

Our contaminated appropriated aggregates are the vessels for  the  suffering
of conditionality. As it says in the Lamrim Chenmo, “The very  existence  of
the appropriated aggregates constitutes  the  nature  of  the  suffering  of
conditionality because all of the  compositional  factors  which  depend  on
previous karma and afflictions are the  suffering  of  conditionality  (Page
279).”

The essence that we should  get  from  reflecting  on  this  section  is  to
understand and realise  how  the  contaminated  body  and  mind,  i.e.,  the
contaminated appropriated aggregates, are in the nature of suffering.

Dharmakirti said, “Because it  is  impermanent,  it  is  in  the  nature  of
suffering. Because of that, therefore it is selfless.”

“Because  it  is  impermanent,  it  is  in   the   nature   of   suffering”:
impermanence here  is  applied  to  the  appropriated  physical  and  mental
aggregates.  Our  contaminated  body  and  mind  are  in   the   nature   of
impermanence and are changing in each and every moment.

Why are they in the nature of impermanence? The cause of their  changing  in
each and every single moment is none  other  than  the  cause  that  brought
about the aggregates. That root cause is ignorance.  Because  of  ignorance,
they are in the  nature  of  suffering.  This  is  how  the  aggregates  are
established  to  be  in  the  nature  of  suffering  with  the   reason   of
impermanence.

This is something that you have to think about because not  everything  that
is impermanent is necessarily in the nature of suffering. When  we  look  at
our appropriated aggregates, our contaminated body and  mind,  they  are  in
the nature of impermanence. They change in each and every single moment:
   • What is the cause of our appropriated aggregates changing in each  and
     every single moment? The cause is  none  other  than  the  cause  that
     brought about this contaminated body and mind.
   • What is the cause that brought about this contaminated body and  mind?
     It is ignorance.
   • Therefore it is in the nature of suffering.
   • Because it is impermanent, therefore it is suffering.
   • Because it is in the nature of suffering therefore it is selfless.

There are different ways of interpreting this. When you look at  this  in  a
simple way, since the aggregates are in the  nature  of  suffering,  because
they are impermanent, then there is no need to hold on to  them  as  “I”  or
“mine.” If they are in the nature of suffering, why do you want to  hold  on
to them as yours?
With regard to the first noble truth, the nature of suffering  is  selfless,
right? Selfless here can be taken to mean not holding on to  the  aggregates
as “I,” as self.

You have to understand that our contaminated appropriated aggregates,  which
are the results of karma and afflictions, are in the  nature  of  suffering,
the  reason  being  that  their  root  cause  is  ignorance.   Because   our
contaminated body and mind came from  ignorance,  therefore  the  result  is
that they are in the nature of suffering.

It is extremely important to understand how our body and  mind  are  in  the
nature of suffering. When  we  don‘t  understand  this,  then  we  will  not
understand true suffering well. In  order  to  understand  the  first  noble
truth, true suffering, we have to understand  that  this  contaminated  body
and mind are in the nature of suffering.

Referring back to the quotation, “Because it is impermanent, it  is  in  the
nature of suffering.  Because  of  that,  therefore  it  is  selfless.”  The
earlier explanation was this: because the aggregates are in  the  nature  of
suffering, therefore there is no need to hold onto them  as  the  “self”  or
“I.” Therefore they are selfless.

Another way of looking at it is this: the aggregates are in  the  nature  of
suffering because their cause is ignorance. What is ignorance? Ignorance  is
the active misapprehension of reality. The  object  conceived  by  ignorance
does not exist in reality. Things do not exist in  the  way  apprehended  by
ignorance. Therefore  when  it  comes  to  the  aggregates,  we  should  not
apprehend them as the “self” or the “‘I.”

The contaminated  body  and  mind  came  from  ignorance.  Ignorance  is  an
erroneous mind, a mind that misconstrues reality. Therefore that  makes  the
aggregates selfless. You don‘t have to apprehend the aggregates as having  a
self.

Do you see the connection between impermanent, the nature of suffering,  and
selflessness?

This section concludes with Lama Tsongkhapa saying:


    2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A1E     Advice to cherish [/hold dear] [this] manner of
    meditating on the essence

If no genuine disenchantment develops towards cyclic existence, which is  of
the nature of the appropriated [?] aggregates, there is  no  way  a  genuine
awareness striving for liberation will develop  and  great  compassion  with
the sentient  beings  roaming  about  in  cyclic  existence  cannot  develop
either. Therefore these considerations  are  extremely  important  whichever
vehicle you enter, the Mahayana or Hinayana (Page 112).


The above is  saying  that  it  is  important  to  recognise  that  our  own
contaminated body and mind are (1) the results of our karma and  afflictions
and (2) that they are in  the  nature  of  suffering.  When  we  talk  about
samsara, we are basically talking about  our  contaminated  body  and  mind.
When we are not able to see how our contaminated body and mind  are  in  the
nature of suffering and therefore develop renunciation  towards  them,  then
there is no way we can achieve liberation. We cannot even achieve  the  mind
intent on liberation.

When we are unable to see how our own aggregates that are in the  nature  of
suffering to be samsara, then we will not be able to  understand  how  other
sentient beings circle in samsara. Then there is no way for  us  to  develop
genuine great compassion towards them. Therefore there is so  much  emphasis
in this section on developing an understanding of how our aggregates are  in
the nature of suffering.

In order  for  us  to  understand  true  suffering,  we  must  come  to  the
understanding that our  contaminated  appropriated  aggregates  are  in  the
nature of suffering. What can we do to arrive at  this  understanding?  What
are some of the reasons that can help us with this  understanding?  This  is
something that we have to think about for ourselves.

When  we  do  think  about  this,  it  is  quite  clear  that  our   current
contaminated body and  mind  are  the  bases  or  platforms  upon  which  we
experience every single problem and suffering such  as  old  age,  sickness,
and death. All these will not happen when there is no basis to  begin  with.
Is it not the very fact that we have this contaminated body  and  mind  that
causes us to experience all these sufferings?

This contaminated body and mind that  we  have  now  causes  us  to  develop
afflictions over and over again because the seeds of  the  afflictions  come
along with the contaminated body and mind.  Without this  contaminated  body
and mind there is no  way  for  the  seeds  of  afflictions  to  be  carried
forward. We carry those seeds  into  this  life  and  when  the  afflictions
manifest, we accumulate the projecting karma that causes us to take  another
rebirth. If we did not have this contaminated body and mind,  none  of  this
will happen.

This is how we can  come  to  understand  and  see  for  ourselves  how  our
contaminated body and mind are in the nature of suffering. On the  basis  of
this understanding, next we have to understand and realise the  causes  that
bring about this contaminated body and mind.  This  leads  us  to  the  true
origins of suffering.

In the Middle-Length Lam-Rim the six types of  suffering  are  presented  in
three groups:
1. How in cyclic existence there is no secure basis that you can count on.
2. However much we indulge in its pleasures, they bring no  satisfaction  in
   the end.
3. You have been caught up in cyclic existence since beginningless time.

    2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A2 Considering the six [types of] suffering

         A  Summarised presentation of the six [types of] suffering
         B  Presentation of them condensed in three groups [?]
         C  How there is nothing in contaminated feelings that is of the
         essence of happiness

    2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A2A     Summarised presentation of the six [types of]
    suffering

Second – Considering the six [types of] suffering -: The Letter to a  Friend
sets out the faults [of cyclic existence]:
      - lack of certainty,
      - insatiability,
      - discarding [/casting away] one’s body again and again,
      - being reborn [/transmigrating] again and again,
      - changing from high to low [states] again and again, and
      - lacking companions.

    2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A2B     Presentation of them in three groups [?]

         1  There is nothing reliable
         2  No satisfaction
         3  Beginninglessness

 Summing them up in three [groups]:
      - in cyclic existence there is nothing reliable,
      - no matter how much of its happiness one enjoys, there  is  no  final
point of satisfaction, and
      - one has been in it since beginningless times (Page 112).


    2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2A2C     How there is nothing in contaminated feelings
    that is of the essence of happiness

At present most of the happy  feelings  that  increase  our  attachment  are
minds of happiness that arise with respect to a remedy  of  suffering.  Yet,
there is no happiness by way of an essence that is unrelated  to  suffering.
For instance, if you suffer because you have  walked  a  lot,  the  mind  of
happiness that arises due to sitting  down  appears  to  be  happiness  that
arises gradually  while  the  previous  great  suffering  gradually  ceases.
However, it is not happiness by way of its essence[/happiness by  virtue  of
its essence], for if you sit too much, again, that  will  produce  suffering
as before. If they were  causes  of  happiness  by  way  of  their  essence,
walking, sitting, lying, eating and drinking, as well as sun and shade  etc.
should result in happiness growing to the same  extent  as  you  have  spent
time indulging in them – just like suffering growing to the same  extent  as
you are subject to the causes of suffering. However, it appears  that  after
too long only [more] suffering is produced (Page 113).

For us, we apprehend that which is in the nature of  suffering  to  be  real
pleasure. Here is a discussion on the suffering of change, our  contaminated
pleasant feeling. Although it is in the nature of suffering, we do  not  see
it to be in the nature of suffering. We apprehend it to be  real  happiness.
Because of that belief, we get attached to it. Because of  that  attachment,
we engage in the different kinds of actions and accumulate  the  karma  that
results in problems in the future. The way to  stop  this  is  to  see  that
which is in the nature of suffering to be in the nature of suffering.

Here we are talking about the suffering of change. We have to  do  something
about our attachment to this kind of  suffering.  The  way  to  reverse  our
attraction for this kind of suffering is  to  realise  that  it  is  in  the
nature of suffering.

Let‘s say you come down with a serious illness. Usually that is  accompanied
by intense feelings of pain that  are  very  unpleasant.  Because  of  these
unpleasant feelings, you get upset and angry.

We  usually  get  upset  when  we  are  unwell  and   experiencing   painful
sensations. We have to do something about that unhappy mind, that anger.  In
this situation, the way to reduce anger is to  accept  that  this  is  life.
This is because  we  have  the  basis  for  it.  As  long  as  we  have  the
contaminated body and mind, all of this is bound to happen. It  can  happen.
By accepting that this is the nature of life, then we can deal  better  with
our anger. Because we have this contaminated body  and  mind,  therefore  we
are subject to all these kinds of suffering. By acknowledging that  this  is
just the nature of life and accepting it, then we can work  with  our  anger
that arises due to the feeling of pain.

Another way to think about this: whatever  experiences  we  have,  including
our bad and suffering experiences, we have to accept that we  ourselves  are
at fault because we have created the cause, the  action,  in  the  past  and
accumulated the karma. We are experiencing  the  result  now.  By  accepting
that, then we can work with our anger.

On top of this, if you have a courageous mind, you can think and  pray  that
your sickness be the substitute for the sicknesses for  all  other  sentient
beings. When you are able to think like this, then of course, you  can  deal
with the anger that arises from experiencing those  painful  sensations.  In
fact it may even be possible for you to actually feel  happy  when  you  can
think in this very expansive way.

This is mentioned in the teachings.  Whatever  the  situation  might  be  or
whenever it  comes  to  problems,  the  extent  of  the  suffering  that  we
experience in that situation depends on our mental perspective.  Our  mental
perspective makes  a  big  difference  in  determining  the  extent  of  the
suffering that we experience in that situation. If it is anger, we  have  to
deal with it. If it is desire or attachment, we also have to deal with it.

    2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-2B  Considering the suffering of the individual [realms]
    [/specific sufferings]

         1  The suffering of the three bad migrations
         2  The suffering of humans
         3  The suffering of demigods
         4  The suffering of gods (Page 113)

Next is the reflection on the specific sufferings, i.e., the  sufferings  of
the three lower realms that have been explained before and the  explanations
of the sufferings of humans, demi-gods, and gods. You can read this on  your
own.  We will start true origins on Thursday.

Question: How would we categorise all the sections we have  covered  so  far
with respect to the four aspects of true suffering:  conceiving  impermanent
phenomena to be permanent,  miserable  things  to  be  pleasurable,  unclean
things to be clean, and selfless things to have a self?

Answer: Those are the four erroneous conceptions. What do you think are  the
four characteristics of true suffering?

Student: Impermanence, miserable, unclean, and selfless.

Khen  Rinpoche:  The  “unclean”  should  be  “empty”   (i.e.,   impermanent,
miserable, empty, and selfless).

Student: I am wondering if these four characteristics are implicitly  taught
in the  sections  we  have  covered  so  far,  e.g.,  which  section  covers
impermanence, which section covers empty and selfless and so forth.

Answer:  In  order  to  establish  true  suffering,   then   there   is   an
understanding of impermanence. Because it  is  impermanent,  it  is  in  the
nature of suffering. Because it  is  in  the  nature  of  suffering,  it  is
selfless. This establishes true suffering.

When you want to elaborate further on the two kinds of self, then  you  have
empty and  selfless  with  one  meaning  the  emptiness  of  the  permanent,
unitary, and independent self, and the other meaning the  emptiness  of  the
self-sufficient,  substantially  existent  person  respectively.  When   not
elaborating on the two kinds of  self,  you  can  then  condense  them  into
three: impermanent, miserable, and selfless.

Question: Just now you said that suffering is in the nature of  impermanence
because the cause of change is the cause that brought about the  aggregates,
i.e., ignorance. Why is  the  impermanence  of  suffering  and  selflessness
related? You said ignorance is in the nature of suffering, therefore  it  is
selfless. I don’t get it.

Answer: What does the Buddha mean when he said, “All composed phenomena  are
impermanent?”

Impermanence  means  that   all   composed   phenomena   undergo   momentary
disintegration, i.e., they undergo change in each and every  single  moment.
What causes that to happen? The cause of a  composed  phenomenon  undergoing
momentary disintegration is none other than the  cause  that  produced  that
phenomenon. The moment composed phenomena came into being,  they  came  into
being by having the nature of momentary disintegration.

When we apply that to the aggregates, the  aggregates  are  impermanent  and
are   also   composed   phenomena,   therefore   they   undergo    momentary
disintegration as well. What is the cause  for  them  to  undergo  momentary
disintegration? The cause for them  to  change  in  each  and  every  single
moment is none other than the cause that brought them about. That  cause  is
ignorance.

What is the reason for the body and mind that we have to change in each  and
every single moment? There must be a cause. The cause is  the  same  as  the
cause that  brought  about  their  existence.  What  is  the  cause  of  the
contaminated body and mind? The cause of the contaminated body and  mind  is
ignorance.

Ignorance is an erroneous mind and is a wrong conception. While there is  no
self,  ignorance  apprehends  a  self.  Things  do  not  exist  in  the  way
apprehended  by  ignorance.  Although  there  is  no  self   but   ignorance
apprehends a self. In reality it is selfless.
   • It is in the nature of suffering because it is impermanent.
   • It is selfless because it is in the nature of suffering.
   • Because it is impermanent, it is in the nature of suffering.
   • Because it is in the nature of suffering, it is selfless.

Question: We can meditate on the  nine-point  death  meditation  to  realise
gross impermanence. Can we say  that  to  realise  subtle  impermanence  and
momentary disintegration we should meditate on the twelve  links?  In  order
to realise emptiness, we need to realise subtle impermanence, am I right  to
say that?

Answer: It boils down to the use of reasoning. The  only  way  to  establish
subtle impermanence is first through  reasoning  and  the  reasoning  to  be
applied is none other than what was brought up earlier.

Having said that the nine-point meditation on death and impermanence is  not
just  a  meditation  on  coarse  impermanence.  It  is   a   meditation   on
impermanence. When you understand  subtle  impermanence,  it  is  applicable
there as well. For example, we can apply it especially to how  the  time  of
death is uncertain.

Subtle  impermanence  means  momentary  disintegration.  That  is  the  real
meaning of impermanence. The understanding of  subtle  impermanence  has  to
come from reasoning. For  example,  aging,  in  the  conventional  sense  of
someone becoming old, is very apparent. We then  say  that  that  person  is
aging. But aging itself does not happen overnight. Aging is  a  process.  In
the twelve links of dependent-arising, aging starts right  from  the  second
moment of birth.

Question: Why is it the  cause  that  brings  about  the  existence  of  the
phenomena is the very cause for it disintegrating moment by moment?

Answer: We are trying to understand how the  cause  that  brings  about  the
existence of a phenomenon is the very same cause for that phenomenon  to  be
in the  nature  of  changing  each  and  every  single  moment.  Impermanent
phenomena undergo change in each and every single moment. That  change  must
have a cause. The cause must be able to produce a phenomenon that is in  the
nature of disintegrating moment by moment.

Let me ask you a question: in order for something to come about, there  must
be a cause. The phenomenon comes about.  But  for  it  to  disintegrate,  is
there another cause for that?  Does the cause for it  to  change  moment  by
moment come after it is produced? What is the problem if you  say  that  the
cause for its disintegration comes after it comes into existence?

We have difficulties because whenever we think of disintegration  we  always
think about the gross disintegration that we can  see.  Here  when  we  talk
about subtle impermanence, we  are  talking  about  something  that  is  not
obvious but subtle: how every impermanent  phenomenon  undergoes  change  in
each and every single moment.

A building undergoes change but it may not be obvious. But  after  fifty  or
sixty years, then you can  see  the  changes  that  have  taken  place.  The
process of a building changing does not happen overnight but the process  of
change happens over a long period of time in each and every  single  moment.
There is change in each and every single moment.

Over a long period of time due to the accumulation  of  these  changes,  the
change becomes obvious. The atoms and molecules that make  up  the  building
are changing in each and every single moment. Over a period  of  time,  when
these small changes at the micro level accumulate, then there comes  a  time
when the changes become obvious. You can then see gross disintegration  from
the outside.

As long as the phenomenon in question is produced from  causes,  the  moment
it is produced and comes into existence, it is produced  in  the  nature  of
disintegrating momentarily. The moment it is produced,  it  is  produced  in
the nature of that which will  undergo  change  in  each  and  every  single
moment. That nature has to come from a cause.

What other cause is there  other  than  the  cause  that  brings  about  the
production of the phenomenon? So for all impermanent phenomena,  the  moment
they are produced, they also disintegrate.

This is something we have to think about as it is not obvious. Usually  when
we think about impermanence, we always look  at  the  obvious  impermanence,
the gross or coarse impermanence. But  here  we  are  talking  about  subtle
impermanence.

Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; Transcribed by Phuah Soon  Ek  and  Vivien
Ng; Edited by Cecilia Tsong; Checked by Shirley Soh
-----------------------
[1] Page 279, LRCM

