Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L42 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.463064
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


   Lesson No: 42                    Date: 15th March 2012


Question from Khen Rinpoche: How is the karma that projects a rebirth  as  a
god or demigod accumulated?

Student: An active intention of voluntarily refraining from killing,  as  in
one of the five refuge precepts. As long as the intention is there,  strong,
long-lasting, and undertaken voluntarily, one may accumulate the  projecting
karma for rebirth as a god or as a demigod.

Khen Rinpoche: I want a specific cause.

Student: It is mentioned in the text that contaminated virtuous karma  leads
to rebirth as desire realm god but I am not sure what this is exactly.

Khen Rinpoche: In general, the cause of a good rebirth  is  virtue  and  the
cause of rebirth in the lower realms is non-virtue.  Do  you  remember  what
was mentioned in the text? The text said that:
         • a strong virtue leads to rebirth as a god,
         • a middling virtue leads to rebirth as a demigod
         • a small virtue leads to a human rebirth

When we talk about getting rebirth as a god, we are talking about  a  desire
realm god. In general, it is virtuous karma that leads to rebirth as a  god,
a demigod, and a human being, but what kind  of  virtuous  projecting  karma
projects a god rebirth, a demigod rebirth, and a  human  rebirth?  When  you
think about this, you will find that the answer is not  so  straightforward.


There are people who practise generosity and live an  ethical  way  of  life
with the main motivation of achieving some happiness in this  lifetime.  Are
their actions  of  observing  ethics  and  practising  generosity  with  the
intention of achieving happiness in this lifetime virtue or not?

Khen Rinpoche: You must be able to answer this now. Yes or no?

With  the  intention  of  achieving  happiness  in  this  life,  the  person
practises ethics. Would he experience any positive  results  in  his  future
life? Are the person’s actions of practising giving or observing ethics  for
the happiness of this life alone Dharma or not?

Khen Rinpoche: Why not? It is easy to say no. You must be  able  to  explain
why. It is not Dharma? It is not virtuous? It doesn’t give  results  in  the
future? Think about this.

                              *****************
We have been looking at the afflictions and we have finished with:
1. The view of the transitory collection
2. The view holding to an extreme
3. The view holding to a bad view as best


         I  [The view] holding to [a bad] ethical discipline and ascetic
         practice as best

[The view] holding to [a bad] ethical discipline  and  ascetic  practice  as
best is an afflicted intelligence that observes  an  ethical  discipline  of
giving up immorality, an ascetic practice that sets  a  dress  code[/way  of
dress], manners, and bodily and verbal behaviour as definite and  the  {139}
aggregates in dependence on which they arise. It  views  them  as  something
purifying negativity, as liberating from mental afflictions, and  definitely
releasing from cyclic existence (Page 117).

Regarding this belief in the supremacy of ethics and  religious  discipline,
there are certain ideas about (1) how certain forms of ethics are  the  best
(or supreme) and (2) how  certain  modes  of  conduct  (translated  here  as
“ascetic practice”) are supreme.

There are certain practices of ethics that will not lead to  liberation  but
there is a belief that such practices are good. This is  called  bad  ethics
and there is a belief that such bad ethics are good.

There is also the belief that certain modes of conduct are good, e.g.,  with
relation to one’s dressing. There is a belief that wearing  human  skins  or
adorning oneself with bones and skeletons is good. The  text  mentions,  “an
ascetic practice that sets a dress code.” This  refers  to  people  adorning
themselves with skeletons or human skins.

In the commentary:
   • an example of a bad “manner” is thinking that standing on one leg  and
     observing the sun moving across the sky is a fantastic thing to do.
   • an example of a bad mode of  conduct  involving  verbal  and  physical
     behaviour will be being naked and keeping silent.

There are people who engage in such behaviour thinking  that  it  will  lead
them to liberation. The person who has this view with regard to  bad  ethics
and modes of conduct also regards his own body and mind to  be  supreme.  By
engaging in such behaviour he thinks that his aggregates will be purified.

It is stated in the teachings that there are people who remember their  past
lives as a dog or pig. They believe that  such  an  animal  rebirth  is  the
cause of being born human in this life. Having arrived at  that  conclusion,
they engage in the conduct of a pig or dog such as sleeping like  a  pig  or
behaving like a dog. A mind that believes in the supremacy of  those  ethics
and wrong modes of conduct that  will  never  lead  them  to  liberation  is
called the view holding to a bad ethical discipline and ascetic practice  as
best.

         J  Wrong view

A wrong view is an afflicted intelligence that deprecates saying  that  past
and future lives, actions and their results and the like do  not  exist,  or
superimposes the concept of Ishvara, a primal substance, etc. as  the  cause
of migrating beings (Page 117).

Wrong view can be divided into:
   • the wrong view that deprecates reality
   • the wrong view that superimposes qualities and characteristics that do
     not exist in reality.

An example of the wrong view  that  deprecates  or  denies  reality  is  the
thought thinking that there is no karma. This is a wrong  view  that  denies
something that exists.

The text says, “or superimposes the concept of Ishvara, a primal  substance,
etc. as the cause of migrating beings.” People who believe  that  the  world
is created by a being such as Ishvara is an example of  a  wrong  view  that
superimposes or exaggerates.

This  is  how  the  mental  afflictions  are  identified  [/These  were  the
identifications of the mental afflictions] from the  common  perspective  of
the higher and lower tenet systems. The Prasangika  Madhyamika  system  will
be explained [below].

    2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-1        The stages by which [the mental afflictions]
    [/they]arise

         A  The system of the Treatise on the Levels asserting that the view
         of the transitory collection and ignorance are in opposition to
         each other

Second: If the view of the transitory collection and ignorance are  held  to
be distinct [the  stages  of  how  the  mental  afflictions  arise  must  be
understood in the following manner]. For instance with regard  to  a  coiled
[?*] rope, once  darkness  has  fallen  to  some  extent,  if  the  mode  of
subsistence of the rope is not clear, a mind apprehending  a  snake  arises.
Likewise, through the darkness of ignorance  obscuring  the  clear  [/vivid]
mode  of  subsistence  of  the  aggregates,  the  deception  regarding   the
aggregates as a self arises and  from  that  the  other  mental  afflictions
arise (Pages 117 – 118).

From the perspective of considering ignorance to be different from the  view
of the transitory collection as asserted by Arya Asanga and Vasubandhu,  the
order in which they arise is as follows: ignorance that  refers  to  a  mere
misapprehension or lack of knowledge arises first followed  by  the  arising
of the view of the transitory collection.

What is the opposite  of  being  ignorant?  It  is  knowing  something.  The
opposite of knowledge is ignorance, i.e., you are  unaware  or  you  do  not
understand something. In this context, when we take ignorance to  mean  “not
knowing,” ignorance arises first followed by the arising of the view of  the
transitory collection. This is the position of Arya Asanga and Vasubandhu.

On the other hand, there is the assertion that ignorance is not just a  mere
lack of knowledge  but  it  is  an  active  fundamental  misapprehension  of
things. This  is  the  view  of  Dharmakirti  and  the  Middle  Way  School.
According to this view, ignorance is the view of the transitory collection.


         B  The system of Madhyamika and Dharmakirti asserting that the view
         of the transitory collection itself is ignorance

If those two are asserted to  be  the  same,  the  view  of  the  transitory
collection itself is the root of mental afflictions (Page 118).

According to the great masters of the past, there are two different ways  of
identifying ignorance.
   • One school thinks that ignorance is the mere lack of knowledge or lack
     of understanding of something.
   •  Another  school  feels  that  ignorance  is  not  merely  a  lack  of
     understanding  of  something  but  it  is   a   mind   that   actively
     misapprehends  something.  From   that   ignorance   comes   all   the
     afflictions.


         C  How the remaining root mental afflictions arise according to the
         two systems

Furthermore, whenever the view of the  transitory  collection  apprehends  a
self, an arbitrary distinction is made between self and other. Once that  is
made, attachment towards one’s own side and hatred towards  the  other  side
arise (Page 118).

From our earlier discussion of the view of the transitory collection,  there
is an “I” or self who believes it is the owner of the  aggregates  that  are
completely different and separate from the body and mind.  We  believe  that
we exist in this way. When you have such  a  belief,  naturally  the  strong
concept of self and others  arises  with  a  strong  discrimination  between
oneself and others. Based on this discrimination,  one  develops  attachment
to people and things that are associated to be on “my” side.  On  the  other
hand, one develops hostility towards things and people that  are  associated
with “others.”

Also conceit arises upon observing that self; that very self is held  to  be
permanent or annihilated and is  viewed  as  the  self  etc.,  and  the  bad
[/unwholesome/evil/bad] activities connected with it  are  held  to  be  the
best. Likewise wrong views that think “The teacher who taught  selflessness,
the actions and results he taught, the four truths, the three  jewels,  etc.
do not exist” are generated{140} or, alternatively, the  doubt  that  thinks
“Do they exist or not? Are they … or are they not…?” is  generated.  In  the
Commentary [on Valid Cognition] it says:

         If there is self there’s awareness of other
         Dividing between them brings grasping and anger.
         Closely connected with those [two] -
         All the faults will come about (Page 118).

It is important that we understand the order in which the afflictions  arise
and how all  these  afflictions  arise  from  the  view  of  the  transitory
collection. It would be helpful if you can produce  a  chart  for  or  write
down this order.

You have to think about how the view of the  transitory  collection  is  the
basis for all the other afflictions to arise and the  order  in  which  they
arise. In order to do this successfully you must  first  identify  correctly
what the afflictions are. Ten afflictions are given here. You must  identify
them individually and correctly. On that basis, you see how the view of  the
transitory collection acts as the basis for all  the  other  afflictions  to
arise.

Question:  In  terms  of  our  actual  practice,  is  there  any  particular
significance to these two different  systems  of  regarding  ignorance?  The
first system is saying that ignorance is the  basis  for  the  view  of  the
transitory collection and the second system is saying that ignorance is  the
view of the transitory collection. It seems that  both  systems  agree  that
the view of the transitory collection is the root of all the afflictions.

Answer: We are looking here at the meaning of ignorance:
   • one school views ignorance to be the  direct  opposite  of  knowledge,
     i.e., not knowing
   • another school says that this understanding of ignorance as merely not
     knowing is insufficient. Ignorance is not just the  mere  opposite  of
     knowing. Ignorance has to be a mind that engages erroneously with  its
     object. There is a misapprehension of the object.
Therefore we have to understand that  there  are  two  ways  of  looking  at
ignorance.

In terms  of  practice,  you  need  to  know  that  the  order  of  how  the
afflictions arise is different. There are these two explanations as  to  how
the afflictions arise:
1. based on ignorance, the view of the transitory collection arises
2. ignorance and the view of the transitory collection are the same

Question: I refer to the three mental non-virtues: wrong view,  covetousness
and malice. Wrong view  is  clearly  listed  here  to  be  one  of  the  ten
afflictions. How about covetousness and malice?
Answer: Covetousness is included within desire  and  attachment.  Malice  is
included within anger.

Question: You asked us to  think  about  how  the  view  of  the  transitory
collection is the cause of the other afflictions. I assume then that out  of
these ten afflictions, the view of the transitory collection will  be  cause
and the remaining nine afflictions will be the results of the  view  of  the
transitory collection. But ignorance is  one  of  the  ten  afflictions  yet
ignorance is the base from which  the  view  of  the  transitory  collection
arises. I am confused.

Answer: If you take ignorance and the view of the transitory  collection  to
be the same thing, you will not have this qualm. But when  you  assert  that
ignorance and the view of the transitory collection to  be  different,  then
ignorance comes first followed by the view  of  the  transitory  collection,
which comes next.

Student: What if you  believe  the  ten  virtues  alone  will  lead  you  to
enlightenment without the need for the wisdom  understanding  emptiness  and
bodhicitta – will that be considered bad ethics?

Khen Rinpoche (spoke in English): I don’t think so.

Let’s say, when we practise the ten virtues with the intention of  achieving
liberation, won’t that become a cause for liberation?

Student: What happens if we didn’t have that intention?

Khen Rinpoche: That is the same question I asked earlier.

When we practise ethics with the goal of achieving a good rebirth either  as
a human being or as a god, that practice of ethics becomes the cause for  us
to be reborn as a human being or  as  a  god.  Depending  on  our  goal  and
intention, the same practice of ethics can lead to  different  results.  The
practice of ethics can lead to enlightenment. It can lead to  liberation  or
it can lead to a good rebirth depending on your motivation.

Back to the question that I  gave  you  earlier:  when  we  practise  ethics
seeking only some kind of reward or  happiness  in  this  life,  it  doesn’t
become  a  cause  for  a  good  rebirth.  It  doesn’t  become  a  cause  for
liberation. It doesn’t become a cause for enlightenment. What do you think?

Student: My personal opinion is that the two schools of  thought  pertaining
to ignorance are the same:
   • The first school of thought is saying that ignorance is  not  knowing,
     i.e., it is the opposite of wisdom  and  you  have  understood  things
     wrongly.
   • The second school is saying that it is more than that.  Sometimes  you
     may think you have the  right  understanding  of  something  but  your
     knowledge can be wrong. Because of not having the correct knowledge of
     the nature of things, the view of  the  transitory  collection  arises
     which leads to the ten afflictions such as attachment,  anger  and  so
     forth.

Khen Rinpoche: You said  the  ignorance  posited  by  the  first  school  of
thought is “knowing something wrongly.” If that is the  case,  there  is  no
difference between  the  positions  of  the  first  and  second  schools  of
thought.

You also said the first school  posits  ignorance  to  be  the  opposite  of
wisdom but ignorance is not necessarily the opposite  of  wisdom.  To  posit
that, you first have to posit what wisdom is. In  this  context,  wisdom  is
posited to be the wisdom that realises the emptiness of the  self-sufficient
substantially existent person, i.e., the mind that realises that  the  self-
sufficient substantially existent person does not exist whatsoever.

If that is wisdom and you say ignorance is  the  opposite  of  wisdom,  then
ignorance cannot merely be “not understanding something.”  The  opposite  of
wisdom  has  to  be  a  fundamental  misapprehension  of  the  self,   i.e.,
apprehending the self to be self-sufficient substantially existent.

You say that this is the position of the  first  school  of  thought,  i.e.,
ignorance being the opposite of wisdom, but this is not  so.  The  ignorance
asserted  by  the  first  school  of   thought   refers   to   “merely   not
understanding”. When you take ignorance to mean  “merely  not  understanding
or not knowing,” ignorance cannot be the opposite of wisdom.

For the second school of thought, ignorance and the view of  the  transitory
collection are the same. Ignorance here is  a  fundamental  misapprehension.
Then you can say that it is the opposite of wisdom.

Question:  For  those  who  assert  that  ignorance  and  the  view  of  the
transitory collection are not the same, how  then  would  they  assert  that
this ignorance that  is  merely  not  knowing  to  be  the  root  of  cyclic
existence and how removing this root would lead to liberation from  samsara?


Removing the view of the transitory collection is necessary  for  liberation
to be achieved but since ignorance is posited to be separate from  the  view
of the transitory collection, it seems that you would have  to  remove  that
as well.

Answer: Both systems assert that ignorance is the root of  cyclic  existence
and that ignorance needs to be overcome. The thing that overcomes  ignorance
is wisdom. Both  schools  of  thought  assert  this.  Whether  ignorance  is
asserted to be different from the view of the transitory collection or  not,
they both assert  that  it  is  the  view  of  selflessness  that  overcomes
ignorance.

Student: According to  the  assertions  of  the  Sutra  and  the  Mind  Only
schools,  the  obstructions  to  liberation  would  be  the  self-sufficient
substantially existent person, i.e., the view of the transitory  collection.


Therefore the path to liberation would be realising  the  emptiness  of  the
self-sufficient substantially existent person for the  proponents  of  these
tenets. Therefore realising the emptiness of  the  view  of  the  transitory
collection will be enough without  having  to  realising  the  emptiness  of
ignorance if these two are asserted to be separate distinct entities.

Question: With regard to the view holding to a bad  ethical  discipline  and
ascetic practice as best, may I clarify that the people  holding  this  view
are those who are interested to be liberated from cyclic  existence  and  it
is not referring to non-Buddhist practitioners or practices?  The  reason  I
ask this is because although the afflictions are said to  disturb  the  mind
when they arise and I know the secondary afflictions will be covered  later,
it seems to  me  that  the  afflictions  in  this  classification  primarily
obstruct the achievement of liberation.   Is  this  where  they  are  coming
from?

Answer:  The  five  afflicted  views,  i.e.,  the  view  of  the  transitory
collection, the view holding to the extreme, and so  forth,  come  about  as
the result of a certain kind of thinking; that is why it is referred  to  as
afflicted wisdom or afflicted intelligence. As a result  of  such  thinking,
the mind believes or concludes that, “It must be this. It must be that.”  In
order to overcome this view, we have to  engage  in  thinking  correctly  to
oppose such afflicted intelligence. We need discriminating wisdom.

With regard to the five non-views -  attachment,  anger,  pride,  ignorance,
doubt - we need to think  about  whether  these  afflictions  arise  as  the
results of afflicted intelligence. Do they arise from thinking  or  not?  In
order to overcome these five non-views, do their antidotes have  to  involve
a strong element of wisdom or not?

We need to think about this. In the text, the afflictions are classified  as
the five  afflicted  views  and  the  five  non-views.  Why  is  there  this
different way of classifying the afflictions - the afflictions that are non-
views and the afflicted views?

Question: I refer to the view  holding  to  a  bad  ethical  discipline  and
ascetic  practice  as  best.   Regarding  the  dress  code,  Khen   Rinpoche
mentioned the wearing of skulls, skeletons, and so forth. I keep on  hearing
the wearing of human skins as well. I  don’t  understand  where  this  comes
from.

Khen Rinpoche : The text mentions that.

Khen Rinpoche (referring to the  question  he  posed  at  the  beginning  of
class): There are people who practise generosity or give up  killing  aiming
for some reward in this life such as reputation. The  motivation  for  these
actions are only associated with this life alone. The motivation is  looking
for some reward in this life. Then one practises  generosity  or  giving  up
killing.

Are these actions Dharma or not? Are they virtue or not? Aren’t  there  many
people in this world who are like that? To get  some  reward  in  this  life
they practise charity or they stop doing certain things.  Are  such  actions
Dharma?  Are they are virtue?

Won’t the results of these actions ripen in the future? The result of  these
actions would lead to good rebirth, doesn’t it? If it doesn’t ripen in  this
life, won’t it definitely ripen in a future life? When it  ripens,  will  it
ripen as suffering or as happiness?

Student: The actions we do without  the  motivation  for  the  happiness  of
future lives are still considered virtues and they will still result in  the
happiness of future  lives.  However,  such  actions  are  not  Dharma.  For
actions to be Dharma, they must be conjoined  with  renunciation.  As  such,
these virtuous actions are considered to  be  contaminated  virtuous  karma.


Khen Rinpoche: It seems that you have not  understood  the  concept  of  the
three types of persons. It is not necessarily so that you  must  be  seeking
liberation. When you are practising Dharma, for that action  to  be  Dharma,
you are not necessarily looking for liberation and enlightenment.

Student: Isn’t Dharma true paths and true cessations? If this  is  so,  then
Dharma must be conjoined with renunciation.

Khen Rinpoche: What is the definition of a true path?

Student: The mind that is conjoined with renunciation.

Khen Rinpoche: That means you don’t understand the Three Jewels.

What is the boundary of the Three  Jewels?  What  is  the  boundary  of  the
Dharma Jewel? Are  the  true  paths  and  true  cessations  present  in  the
continuum of an ordinary person?

Student: No.

Khen Rinpoche:  Only  superior  beings  possess  the  true  paths  and  true
cessations?

Student: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: All the paths in the continuum of a person  on  the  path  of
accumulation are not Dharma? Bodhicitta is not Dharma? Renunciation  is  not
Dharma? The refuge in your mind is not Dharma?

In  the  context  of  the  Buddha,  Dharma,  and  Sangha,  this  should   be
differentiated from the Dharma that we are talking about  here  in  general;
that which is Dharma and that which is non-Dharma.

The question is this: you have no motivation  beyond  this  life.  You  only
care about this life. In order  to  achieve  something  in  this  life,  you
practise generosity and ethics. Will your actions have any  results  in  the
life beyond this one? Yes or no?

Most  of  you  say  “yes.”  Therefore  it  follows  that  intention  is  not
important.  There is no need to practise with the  intention  to  achieve  a
good rebirth. There is no point in dedicating your merit as  it  will  ripen
in the future anyway. There will be no need to  generate  a  motivation  and
there will be no need to dedicate your merit.

When you practise ethics and  you  are  motivated  by  the  desire  for  and
dedicate that practice towards a good rebirth, will  it  result  in  a  good
rebirth or not? Similarly for liberation, when you practise ethics in  order
to achieve liberation and you dedicate towards  achieving  liberation,  will
that result in liberation or not?

There are three people who practice ethics  but  they  experience  different
results. One experiences a good rebirth.  One  experiences  liberation.  One
experiences enlightenment. They practised the same  thing  but  what  is  it
that causes them to have different results?

Students: The motivation.

Khen Rinpoche: Ah… Therefore practising ethics for this life and  practising
giving in this life will have no result in the future. You  accept  that  or
not?  Because  the  motivation  is  seeking  the  happiness  of  this  life,
therefore it will become a cause for the happiness of this life.

To say however that there will be  no  effect  in  the  future,  that  is  a
difficult thing to accept on an emotional level.


Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng

Edited by Cecilia Tsong



