Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M1 L02 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.141432
================================================================================



Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi

Root text:The Middle Length Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by  Trijiang  Rinpoche  are
in small lettertype, to be distinguished from Lama Tsongkhapa’s own  outline
that is in larger lettertype.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


Lesson No: 2                                    Date: 14th June 2011


Praise to Shakyamuni Buddha
We will start with the recitation of the Praise to Shakyamuni  Buddha.  When
you recite this Praise, visualise Shakyamuni Buddha in the  space  in  front
of you. Try to remember the kindness  of  the  Buddha.  It  is  because  the
Buddha descended into our world  that  you  now  have  this  opportunity  to
practise the Dharma. You can also reflect on the qualities  of  his  exalted
body, speech, and mind. In that way, you try to develop some  faith  towards
the Buddha. It is said that, just by  turning  your  attention  towards  the
Buddha, that alone purifies a lot of obscurations and accumulate  a  lot  of
merit. So, please try to put in some effort into this  reflection  when  you
recite this prayer.

Praise to Manjushri
Whenever you study the Buddha’s teachings, it is very useful and,  in  fact,
it is important  for  you  to  have  wisdom  or  intelligence.  It  makes  a
difference when you make a request to Manjushri, who is a special  deity  of
wisdom. When we recite the Praise to Manjushri, it will be good if  you  can
visualise Manjushri in the space in front of you.

Before you recite this prayer, it is very good to go  through  mentally  the
practices of the seven limbs.  They are the limbs of:
   • prostrations
   • making offerings
   • confessing negativities
   • rejoicing in virtues
   • requesting the buddhas to turn the Wheel of Dharma
   • beseeching them not to pass away into nirvana
 • dedication of merits
We will spend a minute, in silence, to go through the  seven  limbs  quickly
in our minds. Those of you who are not  yet  familiar  with  the  seven-limb
practice,  then  you  can  make  a  heartfelt  single-pointed   request   to
Manjushri, “May all of us quickly be like you.”

Visualise Manjushri in the space in front of  you. He wields a sword in  his
right hand and holds a volume of text in his left hand, at  his  heart.  The
sword  symbolises  the  eradication  of  the  afflictions,  in   particular,
ignorance that is in our minds. The text symbolises  the  subjects  that  we
are trying to  learn,  especially,  the  actual  reality  of  life  and  the
phenomena around us.

 • Visualise that, at the heart of Manjushri, there is a moon disc that is a
   flat disc of light.
 • Visualise the syllables of Manjushri’s mantra, OM AH RA PA CHA NA DHI, on
   that moon disc.
 • Next, visualise masses of light rays and nectar emanating from  the  moon
   disc and the mantra garland in the heart of the Manjushri,  flowing  into
   you, purifying you of all your  ignorance and  ego-grasping.  Also  think
   that all the obscurations that hinder your Dharma  studies  and  practice
   are all purified.
 • After that, again visualise all the light rays and  nectar  flowing  from
   the heart of Manjushri into you. Think that  you  have  achieved  a  very
   special wisdom that is akin to Manjushri’s wisdom.
So, we will recite the Praise to Manjushri and the mantra of  Manjushri  for
one or two minutes. At that time, you can visualise in the way that  I  have
explained.

Mandala offering
You then offer a mandala to Manjushri, who is  inseparable  from  your  root
guru. You visualise your roots of virtue  or  merits  transformed  into  the
aspect of the mandala and present it to  Guru  Manjushri.  If  you  do  this
visualisation, it will accumulate an immeasurable amount of merit.

Before every class,  we  will  recite  the  same  prayers.  In  the  future,
whenever we recite these prayers, please remember the  points  that  I  have
brought up today. I cannot be repeating them in every session. You  have  to
familiarise yourself with what you have to visualise.  Please keep  that  in
mind. When we recite these prayers, please  do  them  without  a  distracted
mind.

Whenever you recite prayers, the prayers should move the heart and mind,  at
least a little bit. You should make that happen  from  your  side.  This  is
what you have to do.  Of  course,  it  is  not  something  that  can  happen
overnight. It is a matter of getting used to them and  being  familiar  with
the prayers and recitations. From  your  side,  you  have  to  try.  Besides
familiarity, it is  possible  that  whenever  you  recite  such  prayers,  a
special kind of feeling or faith may arise. This is what you  have  to  work
towards.

As I mentioned in the last class, it is  very  difficult,  in  general,  for
people to have the desire and an interest to study the  Buddha’s  teachings.
It is very rare. The fact that all of you have expressed  your  interest  in
wanting to learn and the fact that you have made your way here, that  itself
is amazing! It is as if something that is near impossible has happened.

When you think about it, it is amazing because all of  you  have  very  busy
lives with all sorts of commitments. You come from work. The very fact  that
you are here is something really amazing.  So what  you  have  done  is  not
something that others can do, generally speaking. It is rare for  people  to
have this interest and to actually act on their interest.

Now, how do you sustain this interest from day to day, week to  week,  month
to month and then, from year to year? We hope to complete  this  Program  in
five to six years. If you are  able  to  sustain  your  interest  over  this
period, that is even more amazing than amazing! If  you  manage  to  sustain
your interest and complete the course, then that will  be  the  greatest  of
all amazements!

It is one thing to have the interest to learn but you have to  sustain  this
interest. This is important because, during the course of your studies,  you
will meet with all sorts of difficulties, problems and  obstacles.  Usually,
once you meet with problems or obstacles, somehow,  your  interest  in  your
studies will degenerate and weaken. Then, you will find  it  more  difficult
to come to class and find it difficult to continue with  your  studies.  But
the point is not to lose the courage  and  determination  because  once  you
lose that courage and determination, then it is very difficult to  get  back
that interest to continue with your studies.

All of you obviously must have the interest to study, but this is  only  the
second class. The thing to do is to try your best to sustain  this  interest
and move forward. During the course of your  studies,  you  will  definitely
learn about the teachings of the Buddha but  there  will  always  be  things
that you will not be able to understand immediately. If you use  that  as  a
reason to give up, or to become discouraged, then that is a mistake.

As I mentioned before,  you  will  meet  with  all  sorts  of  difficulties,
problems and both outer and inner obstacles. That is  why  it  becomes  very
important to continuously make  prayers  and  requests  to  Manjushri  or  a
special deity. By bringing that deity to mind, you should  accumulate  merit
and purify your obscurations by doing the  seven-limb  practice  and  making
heartfelt, single-pointed requests. You need to do this constantly.  If  you
do this, it will make a huge difference to your being able  to  successfully
complete your studies.

There is another reason why people become discouraged along the  way.  There
will always  be  people  who  are  bright  and  intelligent.  They  seem  to
understand everything. If you happen to be someone  who  doesn’t  understand
everything, then naturally, you will get discouraged  and  start  to  think,
“Other people are so bright and intelligent. I am kind of  dumb.”  Then  you
will start to become discouraged.

When discouragement sets in, you will then stop studying and stop coming  to
class. When that happens, when you start to think like that, you  must  know
how to deal with it. There is  no  point  succumbing  to  discouragement.  I
guess everyone here is a Buddhist and we all accept  karma.  Due  to  karma,
there is no way that all of us will be the same. All of  us  are  different.
Some people are more intelligent and some people  are  not  so  intelligent.
Isn’t this the result of karma? So,  those  who  are  more  intelligent  are
experiencing the results of their own good karma from the past.

The point is that you have to take rebirth. So, if you just  sit  there  and
feel discouraged, that is not going to help your future lives. In fact,  you
should put in more effort because what you do now in this life  will  affect
your future lives. If you feel that you are not so intelligent in this  life
and you want to be more intelligent in your future lives, you should put  in
more effort to learn and to study. This is how you have to think.

Geshe-la: When I was studying in Sera,  I  had  many  classmates.  I  had  a
friend who was more intelligent than me. I could only memorise one  page  of
text but he could memorise ten pages within one to two hours.

When I saw this, sometimes, I  felt  discouraged,  “How  come  he  has  this
intelligence and I don’t have it?” So, sometimes I felt discouraged  when  I
compared in this way. That happened to me. This is why  I  am  sharing  this
experience with you.  Maybe some of you are also like that.

I had another classmate who was also very intelligent. During  debate,  when
someone taught him, he could understand very quickly  but  for  me,  I  took
time to get it. I was not that  intelligent,  compared  to  this  classmate.
However,  although  he  was  more  intelligent,  he  was  not  hard-working.
Although I was not as intelligent as he was, I was more hard-working.

In our studies, in the long run, it is  not  the  intelligent  one  but  the
hardworking one who wins.  I  am  not  saying  here  that  I  am  good.  But
sometimes the intelligent ones think that their minds  are  so  quick,  they
stop their studies and do other  things,  and  then  resume  their  studies.
Sometimes, they study very hard in one month,  becoming  like  scholars  and
then they relax in the following month. So one month  is  good  and  another
month is not good. In the end, they could not achieve their goal.

What I am saying  here  is  that  hard  work  is  more  important,  not  the
intelligence.  If  you  work  hard,  you  will   achieve   something.   Your
achievement will be commensurate with the hard work you put it.

Of course, it is  entirely  different  with  wisdom.  When  you  don’t  have
wisdom, even if you work hard, you will not be  able  to  achieve  so  much.
But you will still achieve something, according to your level of wisdom.

My message then is to work hard. When you work hard, at the end of the  day,
you will achieve something. It is just like when you work hard, at  the  end
of the day, you will make some money. Studying is the  same  thing.  If  you
study, read your text and work hard, come to class, put  in  the  effort  to
try to listen, at the end of the five years, you will get something.

You should be happy with whatever you can achieve. You should  not  compare,
“Oh, he gets more and I get less,” and become discouraged and then  give  up
your studies. That is not correct. You must work hard and be strong and  you
will achieve something.

Therefore, it is very important to sustain your  interest  in  learning.  As
much as possible, try not  to  miss  any  classes  because  once  you  start
missing classes, from one class, it then becomes two classes.  Somehow,  you
will end up not coming to classes anymore.

I always tell my students that it is very important to read the  text,  even
a couple of pages, before coming  to  class.  That  is  very  important.  It
doesn’t matter whether you understand what you have  read  but  it  is  very
important to read the text before coming to class.

                            ********************

                                  CHAPTER I
                                INTRODUCTION

Respectfully I prostrate at the feet of the venerable saints  who  are  full
of compassion.

    This here is the middling of three Lamrim texts - a great, a middle
    length and a small one - which the gentle protector, Dharmaraja[i]
    Tsongkhapa composed. It is also widely known as the “small Lamrim”. Its
    source text has three sections:


    1 The introductory elements of the explanations
    2 Composition of the explanations themselves
    3 Their completion


    1 The introductory elements of the explanations


             Expression of veneration and the vow of composition


    1A           Expression of veneration

Bhagavan[ii], Lord of this world system of forbearance,
Jina’s[iii] regent, Jamgon, Lord of the Dharma,
Manjughosha, single father of all the sugatas[iv],
Nagarjuna and Asanga, foretold by the Jina,
bowing to you with respect (Page 1).

This is an expression of worship or veneration. Usually, when a treatise  or
an important text such as this one is composed,  at  the  beginning  of  the
text,  it  is  important  that  the  author  pays  homage  to  express   his
veneration. In this text, Lama Tsongkhapa pays homage to  the  holy  beings,
particularly to  his  root  guru.  He  pays  homage  to  Shakyamuni  Buddha,
Maitreya Buddha, Manjushri, Nagarjuna and Asanga.

What is the reason for paying  homage  to  these  different  beings  at  the
beginning of the text?  Usually, whenever an important text, such  as  this,
is being composed, many obstacles  may  arise.  In  order  to  pacify  these
obstacles that may occur in the course of composing  the  text,  the  author
usually pays homage in the beginning.

After paying homage to these different beings,  what  does  Lama  Tsongkhapa
do?  He says:


    1B           Vow of composition

                                              I shall once more
give explanations here in a summary fashion
of the gradual path of the most profound view
and of vast conduct – making it easy to access (Page 1).

“I shall once more give  explanations…”:  prior  to  composing  this  Middle
Length Lam-Rim, Lama Tsongkhapa  had  already  finished  writing  the  Great
Treatise on the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment.  Here,  in  this  text,
Lama Tsongkhapa is trying once more to give the same explanation  but  in  a
condensed manner.

   General introductory explanation of the instructions being taught here


    1C           Identification of the Dharma to be explained in the
    context of what the title means

{2} The Dharma to be explained here consists in how the fortunate are lead
to the level of buddhahood through the stages of the path to enlightenment.
It summarises all the points of the Jina’s excellent speech, [following]
the tradition of the two great trail-blazers Nagarjuna and Asanga,
constitutes the Dharma system of supreme beings progressing to the state of
omniscience, and contains all the stages without omission that the three
[types of] beings need to practice (Page 1).

Shakyamuni Buddha taught the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra that:
   • explicitly teaches the stages of the path of the profound view.
     The stages of the path of the profound view were passed  to  Manjushri
     by Buddha. In turn, Manjushri passed those teachings to the  protector
     Nagarjuna.
   • implicitly teaches the stages of the vast conduct.
     The stages of the vast conduct (or the path of  the  extensive  deeds)
     were clarified by the saviour of love, Maitreya. From Maitreya,  those
     teachings pertaining to the stages of the vast  conduct  were   passed
     down to Asanga.

The teaching we are looking at here is the Lam-rim, the graduated stages  of
the path to  enlightenment  that  is  the  system  for  the  supreme  beings
progressing to the state of omniscience. The Lam-rim  also  fully  comprises
all the stages practised by the three types  of  persons  –  the  person  of
small, middling and great capacities. As to whom they  are,  we  will  cover
that as we go along.

      2     Composition of the explanations themselves

           A Correspondence with the manner of explanation proposed by the
           scholars
           B The actual explanations in accordance with that

      2A    Correspondence with the manner of explanation  proposed  by  the
      scholars

The scholars of glorious Vikramashila [monastery]  considered  it  vital  to
start off with three preliminaries, i.e. the greatness of the author of  the
teachings, the greatness of the teachings and the way to explain and  listen
to them (Pages 1-2).
As we move on with the text, you should know:
   • who is the author of these teachings,
   • what qualities are possessed by the author,
   • the special distinguishing features of this Dharma system, and
   • how these teachings should be listened  to  and  how  they  should  be
     taught.

     2B     The actual explanations in accordance with that


           1  Showing the greatness of the author in order to show that the
           teachings are venerable
           2 Showing the greatness of the teachings in  order  to  generate
             respect towards the       instructions
           3   How the teachings which are great  in  two  ways  should  be
           listened to and explained
           4   The stages by which a disciple should be guided through  the
           actual instructions

In accordance with that, the guide to the stages of the path to
enlightenment has four [parts]: Showing the greatness of the author in
order to show that the teachings are venerable, showing the greatness of
the teachings in order to generate respect towards the instructions, how
the teachings which are great in two ways should be listened to and
explained, and the stages by which a disciple should be guided through the
actual instructions (Page 2).

Who is the author of these teachings? As I mentioned earlier, the stages  of
the vast conduct, the implicit meaning of the Perfection  of  Wisdom  Sutra,
were handed down to Maitreya Buddha, who passed them to  Asanga.  They  were
then  successively  passed  down  to  various  spiritual   masters.    Those
teachings were received by Lama Atisha who then composed the text, the  Lamp
on the Path to Enlightenment. In  that  text,  Lama  Atisha  arranged  these
teachings of the stages of vast conduct in an easy manner for practice.

     Showing the greatness of the author in order to make the teachings
                                  venerable

      2B1   Showing the greatness of the author in order to show that the
      teachings are venerable


           A The root and actual author
           B His greatness

      2B1A  The root and actual author

First: the author: Generally speaking,  the  present  instructions  are  the
ones that the venerable protector Maitreya gives in his  Ornament  of  Clear
Realization.  In  particular,  they  are  based  on  Lamp  on  the  Path  to
Enlightenment, so that its author is also the author of  the  present  text.
Other than under the name of Great Master Dipamkara Shri-jñana  he  is  also
widely known as the glorious Atisha.

      2B1B   Atisha’s greatness


           1 How Atisha took birth in an excellent family
           2 How Atisha achieved his good qualities on that basis
           3 Having achieved them, how Atisha performed deeds for the  sake
           of the teachings

His greatness is threefold: How he took birth in an  excellent  family,  how
he achieved his good qualities on that basis, and having achieved them,  how
he performed deeds for the sake of the teachings.

      2B1B-1       How Atisha took birth in an excellent family

{3} According to the translator’s praise:

      Due east in the excellent country of Sahor
      lies a city of great size,
      namely Vikramanipura.
      In its midst: the royal court,
      an extremely spacious palace
      called “the one with golden banners”.
      Its pleasures, might and wealth resemble
      those of king Tongkhun of China.
      King of that land is Kalyanasri
      and his queen is called Shriprabha.


      The royal couple have three sons:
      Padmagarbha, Candragarbha,
      and Shrigarbha they are called.
      Again, Prince Padmagarbha has
      five royal consorts and nine sonsthe
      oldest one, named Shriguna,
      is a Mahapandita
      widely known as Dhanashri.
      His youngest brother, called Shrigarbha,
      is the Bhikshu Viryacandra.
      The middle one is Candragarbha
      he is our exalted guru.

      2B1B-2           How Atisha achieved his good qualities on that basis

           A How Atisha attained the positive  qualities  of  comprehensive
           scriptural knowledge
           B How Atisha attained the realizational qualities of its correct
           accomplishment


How he attained his positive qualities has two [parts]: how he attained  the
positive  qualities  of  comprehensive  scriptural  knowledge  and  how   he
attained the realizational qualities of its correct accomplishment.

      2B1B-2A      How   Atisha   attained   the   positive   qualities   of
      comprehensive scriptural knowledge

      1      How Atisha learnt the areas of general knowledge

First: By the age of 21, having studied the four areas of  knowledge  common
to Buddhists and non-Buddhist - language, logic, crafts and  medicine  -  he
had become an excellent scholar. In particular, the great Drolungpa  relates
how, at the age of 15, having heard the Lines of  Reasoning  just  once,  he
debated with a non-Buddhist intellectual  renowned  for  his  erudition  and
beat him - which spread his fame far and wide.

      2     How Atisha learnt Mantra

Then he requested complete empowerment from the  master  yogi  of  the  main
temple on Black Mountain, the glorious Rahulagupta who had  received  direct
visions of Hevajra and  a  prophecy  from  Vajradakini,  {4}  receiving  the
secret name Jñana-guhya-vajra. Up to the age of 29 he studied the  Vajrayana
under numerous highly realized gurus and  thereby  became  knowledgeable  in
all texts and instructions. When the thought “only  I  am  knowledgeable  in
the secret mantra” occurred to him,  dakinis  pointed  out,  in  his  dream,
several volumes of mantra he had not seen before.  That  lowered  his  pride
(Page 2-3).

Lama Atisha studied many teachings on Secret Mantra. There was a  time  when
he thought he had learnt everything about Tantra and developed  some  pride.
However, in his  dream,  dakinis  pointed  out  that,  “there  were  several
volumes of mantra he had not seen before.”

It is not impossible that you will develop pride during the course  of  your
studies. Once you start to learn more  and  gain  an  understanding  of  the
teachings, it is possible for pride to arise. Therefore, it is important  to
ensure that, whatever you learn along the way does not become the cause  for
you to become proud.  It will be an obstacle when you develop pride  due  to
your studies. When pride arises due to your knowledge of  some  of  Buddha’s
teachings, it causes you to look down on others. It serves no  purpose  when
that happens. Therefore, it is important to ensure that whatever  you  learn
does not become the cause of generating pride.

      3      How Atisha was ordained and learnt the collections of inner
      knowledge

Both in his dreams and directly the gurus and protectors then made known  to
him that vast benefit would accrue for the teachings and many beings, if  he
took monastic vows as appropriate. Upon their encouragement he  had  himself
ordained. The great  upholder  of  monastic  discipline,  Shilarakshita,  an
elder of the Mahasamghika tradition who had attained  the  concentration  in
which  you  single-pointedly  enter  [ultimate]  reality  on  the  path   of
preparation, officiated  as  abbot.  Candragarbha  received  the  name  Shri
Dipamkara-jñana.
       Afterwards, up to the age of 31,  he  studied  the  lower  and  upper
divisions of inner philosophical knowledge, in  particular,  for  12  years,
the Great Detailed Explanation under Guru Dharmarakshita in  Odantapuri.  As
he was very well versed in the scriptures of the four  original  traditions,
he had an infallible grasp of the tiniest  details  in  modes  of  behaviour
that  should  be  cultivated  and  rejected   according   to   the   various
philosophical schools, like [for instance  the  monastic  rules  concerning]
accepting gifts (Pages 3 -4).

Lama Atisha received the teachings on the Great Detailed Explanation,  which
is a  text  on  knowledge  or  Abhidharma,  for  12  years  from  his  Guru,
Dharmarakshita. Sometimes, it is helpful to read accounts of  the  lives  of
these great masters. From these accounts, you can see very clearly  that  no
one is born a scholar. There is  no  exception,  not  even  for  these  holy
beings. No matter how wealthy, powerful or intelligent  they  were,  all  of
them studied at the feet of their gurus. They also studied  extensively  for
a long time before they became learned.

      2B1B-2B      How Atisha attained the realizational qualities of its
      correct accomplishment


           1 How all realizational qualities are contained in the three
           trainings
           [2 How Atisha was accomplished in the three trainings]

      2B1B-2B1     How all realizational qualities are contained in the
      three trainings

Second: As, generally speaking, all the scriptural  teachings  by  the  Jina
are  contained  in  the  three  precious  collections,   the   realizational
teachings are also contained in the three precious trainings (Page 4).

All of Buddha’s  teachings  can  be  condensed  into  the  three  scriptural
collections (or the three baskets): (1) the vinaya (2)  sutra  and  (3)  the
Abhidharma.

The three precious (or higher) trainings are:
   1. the higher training in ethics
   2. the higher training in concentration
   3. the higher training in wisdom
These  three  higher  trainings  form  the  subject  matter  of  the   three
scriptural collections.

How  are  these  three  scriptural  collections  differentiated?  They   are
differentiated by their subject matter:
   • The vinaya collection, the code of  ethics  for  the  ordained,  deals
     mainly with the higher training in ethics.
   • The  sutra  collection  deals  mainly  with  the  higher  training  in
     concentration.
   • The Abhidharma collection deals mainly with  the  higher  training  in
     wisdom.

When you pick up a text of the Buddha’s teachings, how  do  you  know  which
scriptural collection it belongs to? In  order  to  make  it  easy  for  the
reader, a Dharma king in Tibet ordered the translators to  come  up  with  a
system. So now, when you open a text and, in the beginning, it reads:
   • “I prostrate to the buddhas and bodhisattvas,” that indicates the text
     belongs to the sutra collection.
   • “I prostrate to the youthful Manjughosha,”  that  indicates  the  text
     belongs to the Abhidharma collection.
   • “I prostrate to the Omniscient One,” that indicates the  text  belongs
     to the vinaya collection.

KEY POINTS
By coming to class today, you must know:
   • What are the three scriptural collections?
   • How are they differentiated? They are differentiated by their  subject
     matter.
   •  What  constitutes  the  subject  matter  of  the   three   scriptural
     collections?  The subject matter is the three higher trainings.
   • How do you identify to which scriptural collection a text belongs?

In the next class, you should be able to tell me the answers  to  these  key
points.

Geshe-la: In 2005, I went to America for two months to learn English.  There
was a teacher there who doesn’t speak Tibetan  but  he  knows  how  to  read
Tibetan. He said that, in order to know the topic  well,  he  must  memorise
the definitions of certain topics. He said, for each sentence,  he   repeats
it for 100 times (counting  the  beads  on  his  mala).  By  then,  he  will
remember the definition. This is how he did it.

You have to adopt a very different approach to your studies  here.  I  don’t
think there is much benefit with me talking from my  side  and  you  sitting
there and listening. Nothing much is going to happen from that.

On the basis of listening to the teachings, you have to read  the  text  and
you also have to think and analyse. In  particular,  you  should  engage  in
discussions with one another. This is very important.

You have to adopt this approach in your studies. On the basis  of  listening
to the teachings, reading the text  and  critically  analysing  the  subject
matter, that is how you can reach a decisive ascertainment or  understanding
of any topic you are studying. You must do this.

When you adopt this approach, it will make a huge difference as to how  much
you can learn. Whatever you learn will definitely stay in your  mind  for  a
long time and you won’t forget  it.  It  makes  a  huge  difference  to  the
development of your own intelligence and wisdom.

The more you think and analyse, in order to reach a  decisive  ascertainment
of the subject matter, your brain  becomes  more  alert,   intelligent,  and
quicker. Even the scientists say that we use a very  small  portion  of  our
brain. Most of it is unused.

Geshe-la: The only problem is that, each time you think, a white  hair  will
appear. I am joking…

Question: If it is a Mahayana sutra,  does  it  necessarily  belong  to  the
sutra collection?

Answer: Not necessarily so.  The word,  ‘sutra,’  means  the  words  of  the
Buddha. As mentioned, there are different divisions within the teachings  of
the Buddha.

(A Basic Program graduate shares his experience).

Geshe-la: Lama Zopa Rinpoche knows that we started this Basic  Program  with
230 students. He is extremely happy. He said this is a  record  amongst  all
the FPMT centres. This really pleased his mind. I think  this  is  the  best
offering we can make to Rinpoche. Even if you do  many  prayers,  I  am  not
sure whether it is the best offering. The best offering is  to  please  your
guru and he is extremely happy with this. I think that is the best  way  and
we are doing it.

He also said that having a centre is to help you  to  study.  He  said  that
this is the main purpose of having a centre.  He  also  sent  a  message  to
everyone. He wishes to come here to wish everyone but he  cannot  come.   So
he said, “Tashi Delek  to  everyone.”  I  think,  in  English,  it  is  “Hi,
everyone!”


Rinpoche always mentions that the purpose of having a centre is  for  Dharma
studies. So remember that. The guru wants you to study. That  is  his  wish.
When you study, then you are following the guru’s advice.  Then  there  will
be success in your life. And that  really  makes  the  guru  live  long.  So
remember that and put effort into your studies.




Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng
Edited by Cecilia Tsong
Checked by Shirley Soh


-----------------------
[i] Dharma king
[ii] bcom ldan ‘das, a title of the Buddha combining the concepts of
“conquering” and “transcending” is rendered here by its Sanskrit contextual
equivalent “Bhagavan” (“possessing fortune, prosperious, happy, glorious,
adorable, venerable”)
[iii] rgyal ba, “conqueror, victorious one” is a close equivalent of
Sanskrit jina, which will be used consistently here for rgyal ba
[iv] bde gshegs “gone to bliss” is the equivalent of Sanskrit “sugata”
(“going well, one who has fared well”) which will be used consistently here
for bde gshegs

