Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L22 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.298854
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


   Lesson No: 22                Date: 1st September 2011


We discussed how someone is to be led on the path by  using  the  Stages  of
the Path of the Three Types of Persons. You have to understand  the  purpose
of following this method.

A person of small capacity needs to overcome the current preoccupation  with
the happiness and affairs of this  life  alone.  Literally  in  Tibetan,  it
means to reverse the attraction to the happiness of this life. You  have  to
reflect well on the suffering of the three lower realms, i.e., how will  you
bear the suffering of the lower realms if you end  up  there  in  your  next
life. Through this reflection, when you realise that  you  definitely  would
not be able to bear the suffering  in  the  lower  realms,  you  develop  an
interest in your future rebirth with the desire to get a good  rebirth.  You
have to train to create the causes for a  good  rebirth  by  practising  the
Buddhadharma. Practising the Buddhadharma will prevent  you  from  going  to
the lower realms. This is the minimum that you should do.

Let’s say that you get a good rebirth.  Is  that  sufficient?  Do  you  stop
there? No. The next step is to reverse the attraction even to the  happiness
of future lives, i.e., to overcome the idea that having a  good  rebirth  is
enough. You do  that  by  bringing  to  mind  all  the  problems  of  cyclic
existence, reflecting on how you would have to suffer in  cyclic  existence.
Through this reflection, you overcome the attraction even to  the  happiness
of future lives.

    2B4B-2A2B-1E       How the lesser and intermediate [branches of the
    path] are necessary when training in the actual mind (Page 46)

 • You can see that in the first stage you  reflect  on  all  the  different
   kinds of sufferings that you would have to endure if you  are  reborn  in
   the lower realms in the next life.
 • In the second stage, you reflect that even if you have  a  good  rebirth,
   you are not free from suffering. You are tormented with problems while in
   samsara. So, in the first and second stages,  you  reflect  on  your  own
   suffering.
 • After having thought through that and reflected well, then  you  move  to
   the third stage by switching your attention to the suffering  of  others.
   Instead of focusing on your own suffering, you look at the  suffering  of
   others. You begin to understand how others are also experiencing the same
   kind of suffering that you had reflected on. From  that  reflection,  you
   are then in a good  position  to  be  able  to  generate  real  love  and
   compassion for others.

If you think, from the beginning, “I am a person of great capacity. I  am  a
Mahayanist and am practising the Mahayana  teachings.  Therefore  reflection
on the suffering of the lower realms and samsara are not necessary  for  me.
I will just practise the Mahayana teachings right from the start,”  what  do
the teachings say about this?  You  would  not  be  able  to  even  practice
bodhicitta and you can forget about generating it.

Therefore without training the mind in the first and  second  stages,  there
is no way you can practise the Mahayana path. Now you can see why it  is  so
important to train in the stages of the path of the three types of  persons.
By doing the reflections of the three stages, you come  to  the  point  when
you can develop real love and compassion. With that as the  basis,  you  are
able to practise and generate bodhicitta. Once bodhicitta is developed,  you
are set on the path to accomplish omniscience or full enlightenment.

    2B4B-2A2B-2A       The actual purpose

         1  Question


         2  Answer (Page 48)

Remember the question that was brought up in the last class? The qualm  that
when you think that you are a person of  great  capacity  or  a  Mahayanist,
then right from the beginning, you can do away with  all  the  practices  of
the persons of small and medium capacities? What happens to this person?
 • This person will never be able to do a  good  practice  of  the  Mahayana
   Path.
 • This person will not be able to even generate  the  realisations  of  the
   lower paths.
 • This person will be left with nothing.

Therefore there is a need to train gradually:
(1)  First there is a need to train in the path  that  is  shared  with  the
persons of small capacity.
(2)   Then you train in the path that is shared with the persons  of  medium
capacity.
(3)   Only then do you train in the path of the persons of great capacity.
When you train your mind and conduct your practice in such a way, then  your
practice will become perfect.

Therefore one of the outlines in the text says, “Giving reasons for  gradual
guidance from the point of view of the three [types of] beings  (Page  44).”

When you possess a human life that is characterised by  the  eight  freedoms
and ten endowments, how then do you take full advantage of it?

    2B4B-2B            The actual way of taking its essence

         1  Training the mind in the stages of the path common to lesser
         beings
         2  Training the mind in the stages of the path common to
         intermediate being
         3  Training the mind in the stages of the path of great beings
         (Page 50)

These three major outlines are telling us how you can  take  full  advantage
of this perfect situation. You start  by  training  the  mind  in  the  path
common to the person of small capacity. Then you  train  your  mind  in  the
stage of the path of common to the person of medium capacity. Only  then  do
you train your mind in the stages  of  the  path  of  the  person  of  great
capacity. You undertake this training only you have gained  an  overview  or
general presentation of the entire path.

                                 CHAPTER II
                                 SMALL SCOPE


        Explanation of the stages of the path common to lesser beings


    2B4B-2B1     The stages of the path common to lesser beings

         A  The actual training in the contemplations of lesser beings
         B  The gauge of those contemplations having arisen
         C  Clearing up misconceptions about them


    2B4B-2B1A    The actual training in the contemplations of lesser beings



         1  Developing a mental attitude of interest in future worlds[1]
         2  Relying on the methods for the happiness of future worlds


    2B4B-2B1A-1  Developing a mental attitude of interest in future worlds

         A  Being mindful of death: the thought that one is not going to
         stay in this world for long
         B  What things will be like in future worlds: thinking of the
         happiness and suffering of the two kinds of migrating beings


                 Explanation of how to be mindful of death -
                that one will not stay in this world for long


    2B4B-2B1A-1A Being mindful of death - the thought that one is not going
    to stay in this world for long

         1  The disadvantages of not cultivating mindfulness of death
         2  Advantages of cultivating it
         3  What kind of mind that is mindful of death is being generated
         4  How to cultivate mindfulness of death


    2B4B-2B1A-1A1      The disadvantages of not cultivating mindfulness of
    death

         A  Demonstration that the mind’s holding on to the idea that one is
         not going to die is the gateway of harm (Pages 49 – 50)

When you do not cultivate the mindfulness of your own  impending  death  and
instead have the feeling, “I will live for a very long time,” then you  will
only be interested in achieving the happiness  of  and  in  eliminating  the
sufferings of this life  alone.  This  is  what  happens  when  you  do  not
cultivate the mindfulness of your death.

         B  How this prevents us from even taking an interest in future
         lives (Page 50)

When you are thinking of this life alone,  how  can  you  think  about  your
future lives? Where is there mental space for that? You will not even  think
about what you will become in your next life, i.e.,  the  interest  in  your
future lives will not arise. When that is the case then you  will  not  even
think about liberation and  enlightenment.  Therefore  it  is  difficult  to
practise the Dharma. These are the faults  of  not  contemplating  your  own
death.

There are also other consequences when  you  do  not  contemplate  your  own
death.

         C  How this results in meaningful endeavours also having little
         power (Page 51)

Although you may engage in  studying,  reflecting,  and  meditating  on  the
Dharma, these activities are done mainly for the sake  of  this  life  alone
when you are not mindful of your death. Without this strong  mindfulness  of
death, even when you engage in retreat or other practices, you will not  get
any results from them and whatever virtue you may have accumulated  will  be
very weak.  Moreover  your  practice  will  be  involved  with  wrongdoings,
infractions and negativities that are the causes for you to go to the  lower
realms. It is as if you are accumulating causes to go to the lower realms.

         D  How this results in long-term goals, too, being postponed (Page
         51)

Even when you try to develop some interest in the happiness of  your  future
lives and create causes for a good rebirth, due to the lack  of  mindfulness
of your own death, you tend to procrastinate. When you procrastinate,  again
you go back to your old self focusing on the happiness of this life alone.

         E  How holding to permanence induces attachment, aversion, and so
         forth and how they induce faulty behaviour (Page 51)

When you are not mindful of your own death, you will get  completely  caught
up in the affairs of this life alone.  With  this  kind  of  attitude,  your
whole life will be mixed with wrongdoings, coming  under  the  influence  of
the afflictions, and your actions will throw  you  into  the  lower  realms.
Your life will be completely opposite to the Dharma. These  are  the  faults
of not cultivating the mindfulness of death.

    2B4B-2B1A-1A2      The advantages of cultivating it

         A        The great value (Page 51)

The benefits of cultivating mindfulness of death are that:
   • you will develop a sincere interest in your future lives.
   • you will be interested in virtue and your virtues will be strong.
   • you will accumulate less wrongdoing.
In the Parinirvana [Sutra] it says:
         Among all ploughing of fields, that in autumn is  best.  Among  all
         footprints,   that   of   the   elephant   is   best.   Among   all
         discriminations, those of impermanence and  death  are  best:  they
         eliminate all the desire, pride and ignorance of the  three  realms
         (Pages 51 – 52).

The footprints of the elephant are an analogy. The elephant  does  the  work
for us.  Wherever it walks, it is easy to follow  its  tracks  because  they
are very clear. Similarly meditating on death and impermanence  will  ensure
that your Dharma practice and the path you are traveling on will be smooth.

Similarly, it is praised, among other things, as  a  hammer  destroying  all
mental afflictions and all faulty behaviours instantly as well as a gate  to
the simultaneous accomplishment of all that is virtuous and excellent  (Page
52).

         B  It is the gate to all excellence (Page 52)

It is said that the thought, “I will not  die  yet,”  is  the  door  through
which all the problems come, whereas the  thought,  “I  will  die,”  is  the
source of all goodness.

         C  How it is necessary to give up misunderstandings and meditate
         from the bottom of one’s heart (Page 52)

Many  people  have  the  wrong  idea  that  the  meditation  on  death   and
impermanence is only the instruction for beginners or those who do not  know
much Dharma. They also think that it is not something  that  everyone  needs
to do. Lama Tsongkhapa says that it is not like that at all:

Therefore, you should not think: “This is a practice for those  who  do  not
have profound Dharma, other objects of meditation to meditate on “ and  “You
should meditate on this, but only a bit in the beginning, it  is  unsuitable
to practice it continually”. You should not take it like  that,  but  rather
you should meditate upon it, until you gain certainty  from  the  bottom  of
your heart that it is necessary in the beginning, in the middle, and at  the
end (Page 52).

It is said here that the reflection on death and impermanence  is  important
in the beginning, in the middle, and in the end:
 • In relation to a person of small  capacity,  in  order  to  overcome  the
   preoccupation with the affairs and happiness of this life alone,  he  has
   to think about death and impermanence without which there is  no  way  to
   overcome that preoccupation.
 • For the person of medium capacity, he must  develop  renunciation,  i.e.,
   develop the thought, “I must definitely get out of cyclic existence.”  In
   order to produce that intention, he must reflect on impermanence  without
   which there is no way to produce that thought.
 • Similarly  the  person  of  great  capacity  also  needs  to  reflect  on
   impermanence.
You can see then  how  the  meditation  on  death  and  impermanence  is  so
important at the beginning in all these different contexts.

Looking at it from another perspective:
 • The reflection on death and impermanence is important in  the  beginning.
   Why? Because it is only after having reflected on death and  impermanence
   well that you will sincerely want to practise the Dharma and  enter  into
   the path.
 • Then in the middle when you are going about  your  practice,  it  is  the
   meditation on death and impermanence  that  sustains  your  practice  and
   makes you want to continue.
 • In the end, the reflection on death and impermanence is that which  makes
   you complete your practice and brings everything to fruition.

You have to think about whether what the text says so far is  true  or  not.
The text says that you have to reflect on the fact that: (1) by  nature  you
are impermanent and (2) that you are definitely going to die

It also points out  that  when  you  are  mindful  of  your  own  death  and
impermanence, you will have all these benefits. When you do not  reflect  on
death and impermanence and are not mindful of them all the  time,  you  will
experience all these faults.

Meditating on death and impermanence is an internal exercise.  You  have  to
look at yourself and your own life. You have to see  whether  what  is  said
here is true or not, especially about the faults. If it is  true,  then  you
have to practise.

    2B4B-2B1A-1A3      What kind of mind that is mindful of death is
    generated (Page 52)

I think it is a common experience that when  something  frightening  happens
in our life, we turn to the Dharma and motivated by our  fear  of  impending
death, then we really look towards the Dharma.  Although  it  is  said  that
you should be mindful of your own death, what exactly does this mean?

As Lama Tsongkhapa says:

The fear [born] from worries about separation from  relatives  etc.  is  the
kind of fear of death of those who are not trained in the path (Page 52).

Is this the kind of mindfulness of death that you need to develop? No.   The
mindfulness of death is not about generating the fear that  everything  will
be lost. Why is this not considered to be the mindfulness of death?  Because
without practising it, you already experience it. Therefore that is not  the
mindfulness to be developed here. What mindfulness then should you  develop?

All bodies taken under the power of karma  and  mental  afflictions  do  not
pass beyond death, which is why – even though this may give rise to  fear  –
it cannot be prevented for the time being. However, without  having  blocked
the causes for bad migrations and accomplished the causes  for  high  status
and certain goodness, you will fear death (Page 52).
In this context, what kind of  fear  of  death  should  you  cultivate?  You
should fear having to die without having done anything positive. You  should
fear having to die after having accumulated so many  causes  for  the  lower
realms. These are the kinds of fear of death that you need to cultivate.

Can such fear of death be stopped?  They can be stopped. Why?  Because  when
you practise the Dharma, you do not need to fear these kinds of  death,  but
you should be afraid of having to die  (1)  if  you  have  not  created  the
causes for a good rebirth and (2) if you have led your  life  creating  only
causes for the lower realms.

These are the kinds of fear that you need to produce in yourself.  Based  on
having these fears, what should you do? As much as possible, you should  try
your best to live a life accumulating the causes for a good rebirth.  Having
done your best, at the time of death, you will not  be  afraid  because  you
know that you have  done  what  you  can.  You  will  have  the  confidence,
thinking, “I will definitely not go to the lower  realms.”   When  you  have
such confidence, then there is no fear.

A great Kadampa master of the past said, “Now we need to  be  frightened  by
death. At the time of death, we should be fearless.”

When you live your life accumulating the  causes  for  future  happiness,  a
good rebirth and, at the same time, you confess  whatever  negativities  you
had already accumulated with the application of the  four  opponent  powers,
then this is the best preparation you can do for your death. At the time  of
death,  this  preparation  is  the   best   phowa,   the   transference   of
consciousness. You don’t need people to perform prayers for  you.  When  you
lead your whole life just creating non-virtue, at the time of your death,  I
think it is quite difficult to have a good result simply  by  having  people
perform prayers for you.

By developing these kinds of fear of death,  you  will  want  to  engage  in
Dharma practice. Although you need to stop taking rebirth once and  for  all
under the influence of karma and the afflictions, for the time  being,  this
is beyond you and is not going to happen soon. Definitely, you will have  to
die.

    2B4B-2B1A-1A4      How to cultivate mindfulness of death

         A  It is certain that we will die
         B  It is uncertain when we will die
         C  At the time of death nothing except for the Dharma will be of
         benefit (Page 52)

Cultivate  this  by  way  of  the  three  roots,  nine  reasons,  and  three
decisions. The three roots are:
1. Death is certain.
2. The time of death is uncertain.
3. At the time of death, nothing helps except the Dharma.
These are the three roots.  Each  of  them  has  three  reasons,  altogether
making up the nine reasons. At the end of each root, there is  a  resolution
or decision. Therefore there are three decisions.

    2B4B-2B1A-1A4A     It is certain that we will die

         1  Actual reasons
         2  Resolution

    2B4B-2B1A-1A4A-1   Actual reasons

         A  The Lord of Death will certainly come and there are no
         conditions for warding him off
         B  One’s life span cannot be increased and diminishes incessantly
         C  You die without having had time to practice Dharma while alive


       2B4B-2B1A-1A4A-1A     The Lord of Death will certainly come and there
       are no conditions for warding him off (Pages 52 – 53)

The meditation on the certainty of death is to  bring  to  mind  that  death
cannot be avoided:
 • It doesn’t matter what kind of body you have, whether it is a body  of  a
   human being, a worldly god or a naga. There will come  a  time  when  you
   have to die. No matter what kind of body you can assume, you  still  have
   to die.
 • It doesn’t matter where you are born, whether it is in the north,  south,
   east or west, up in space or underground, death is certain.
 • It doesn’t matter what is your time of birth or whether you are  born  in
   summer, winter, spring or autumn, you still have to die.
 • As death is certain, you cannot escape by fleeing from death. It  doesn’t
   matter where you go; you still have to die.
 • Even if you have a lot of power and authority in  the  world,  you  still
   have to die.
 • All your money and possessions cannot turn away death.
 • No mantra can turn death away.
 • There isn’t any magical potion that can stop death.

Do you have the idea now that you are definitely  going  to  die?  You  know
that you are going to die but do you actually need to meditate on it? Is  it
necessary to reflect on the certainty of death since you know  already  that
you are going to die?

(Student’s reply is inaudible)

When someone asks you, “Will you definitely die?” you will  definitely  say,
“Yes.” So that is the first reason.

    2B4B-2B1A-1A4A-1B  One’s life span cannot be increased and diminishes
    incessantly (Page 53)

Next is the contemplation that your  lifespan  cannot  be  extended  and  is
constantly diminishing. Your lifespan is predetermined by one of  your  past
actions. Let’s say in the past you had accumulated the  cause  that  results
in you living for a hundred years. Your maximum lifespan  is  no  more  than
that.


It doesn’t mean that when you have the karma to live  for  a  hundred  years
that you will necessarily live  for  a  hundred  years.  You  may  have  the
predetermined lifespan of a hundred years but when you meet  with  obstacles
along the way, you may die earlier. When your merit runs low and  the  merit
to sustain your life is not there, you may  die  before  your  predetermined
lifespan.  Even when you do live out your full lifespan of a hundred  years,
that is it. There is nothing you can do to add on to that. That  is  why  it
says your lifespan cannot be extended.

Let’s say you are a person who can live for a hundred years.  But  from  the
time of your birth, with each and every single passing  day,  your  lifespan
is decreasing every  moment.  It  is  constantly  diminishing  and  becoming
shorter.

Therefore, since we entered the womb we have been going straight  towards  a
future life without  remaining  still  even  for  a  mere  instant.  In  the
meantime life also wastes away  without  a  moment  of  respite,  as  we  go
towards death lead by its messengers, disease and aging. Therefore,  do  not
rejoice in the view that you abide  during  your  life  without  approaching
future worlds. It is like the analogy that when falling off a high  mountain
peak the time of falling through the sky before crashing to  the  ground  is
not worthy of joy. In the Commentary on the Four  Hundred  Verses  there  is
the quotation:

         Hero of men, in that night in the very beginning,
         Where someone comes to dwell in a womb in the world -
         Starting from that point he moves with each day
         Without the pause of a step towards the Lord of Death (Page 54).

Student: Even if you do not create any virtue at  the  time  of  death,  you
just think of Amitabha. Then everything will be taken care of. So  there  is
no need to worry.

Khen Rinpoche: If you remember the section on the  human  life  of  freedoms
and endowments, in the end, you are advised to reflect on the  four  points.
The second point is that you have the ability to practise the  Dharma.  Why?
Because you are endowed with both  the  external  condition,  the  spiritual
friend or the teacher,  and  the  internal  condition,  the  human  life  of
freedoms and endowments. That section doesn’t just talk  about  the  teacher
alone but you also need to have the condition of a human  life  of  freedoms
and endowments to practise.

When you do not have the freedoms and endowments, for example, if you are  a
dog, a pig or any other kind of animal, or if you are in the  lower  realms,
you can’t practise the Dharma even if the Buddha is present. Nothing can  be
done.

Therefore, it gives two reasons: (1) the  external  condition,  the  teacher
and (2) the internal condition, the human life of freedom and endowments.

In the case of going to Amitabha Pure Land, of course, it is possible to  go
there but it is not so straightforward. It is not as if you can  do  nothing
and wait for Amitabha Buddha to come to deliver you. It is  not  like  that.
It is not so straightforward:
 • You need to be familiar with the Pure Land.
 • You need to have a very strong aspiration for wanting to go there.
 • Based on that, you create the causes and accumulate the merit.
 • You also need single-pointed faith in Amitabha Buddha.
These are all the internal conditions that come from  your  side.  When  you
have these conditions, then it is possible  that  Amitabha  Buddha  will  be
standing there, welcoming you.

Question: You mentioned untimely deaths such as dying at  a  young  age  and
through accidents. Are there any cases when there is  timely  death  or  are
all deaths untimely?

Answer: Not all deaths are untimely deaths. There are some deaths  that  are
timely.

Khen Rinpoche:  Some deaths by accident happen  at  the  right  time.   Some
deaths by accidents are not at the right time.

It is hard for us to say this person died due to his  lifespan  running  out
or it is due to an untimely death. It is possible  to  determine  the  cause
through astrology but as to whether that astrology is accurate in the  first
place, that is another question.




Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng
Edited by Cecilia Tsong
Checked by Shirley Soh



-----------------------
[1] “Future worlds” can be understood to refer to “future lives.”

