Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M1 L19 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.424499
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


   Lesson No: 19                   Date: 23rd August 2011



    2B4B   The stages of how to train the mind once you have relied

         1  The basis of leisure - exhortation to take its essence
         2  How to take the essence

The second one has two points:  with  regard  to  the  basis  of  leisure  -
exhortation to take its essence and how to take the essence.

    2B4B-1 The basis of leisure - exhortation to take its essence

         A  Identification of leisure and endowments
         B  Considering their great value
         C  Considering the difficulty in finding them (Page 38)

We have completed the outline, “The root of the  path:  how  to  rely  on  a
spiritual teacher (Page 19).” Next is the outline, “The  stages  of  how  to
train the mind once you have relied (Page 38)” that has two parts:
1. An  exhortation  to  take  full  advantage  of  a  life  of  leisure  and
   opportunity
2. How to take full advantage of a life of leisure and opportunity

     2B4B-1A     Identification of leisure and endowments

         1  Leisure
         2  Endowments.


    2B4B-1A1     Leisure

         A  Identification of leisure (Page 38)

Leisure[1] in Tibetan is dal ba. That means having the freedom  to  practise
Dharma.

         B  The eight unfree states (Page 38):

Leisure means freedom from the eight inopportune states that can be  divided
into two sets of four:
 • the four inopportune states in the human realm, and
 • the four inopportune states not related to the human realm.

Four inopportune states in the human realm
 • When you are born as a human being but if you exist at a  time  when  the
   Buddha has not descended, then that becomes one of the inopportune  human
   conditions.
 • But even if you are born as a human being in a world where the Buddha has
   descended, but you are born in a place where the teachings of the  Buddha
   has not spread, that is another inopportune state.
The first inopportune human  state  refers  to  a  combination  of  the  two
factors: Either (1) you are born  in  a  place  where  the  Buddha  has  not
descended, or (2) even if the Buddha has descended,  you  do  not  find  the
Buddha’s teachings in that particular place.

The second inopportune human state is being born in a  border  region  where
there are no teachings of the Buddha.

The third inopportune human state is when even if you are born  in  a  place
where the Buddha has descended and where you have access  to  his  teachings
but you are born with incomplete sensory faculties  or  you  are  physically
challenged by having incomplete limbs, being deaf and so forth.

The fourth inopportune human state  is  when  you  are  born  with  complete
sensory faculties but you are someone who holds wrong views or you deny  the
existence of the Three Jewels and the workings of karma.

Summary
If you are born as a human being, then the  four  inopportune  human  states
refer to:
1. being in a world where the Buddha has not descended or being in  a  world
   where the Buddha has descended but you have no  access  to  the  Buddha’s
   teachings.
2. being born in a border  region  where  there  are  no  teachings  of  the
   Buddha.
3.  being born with incomplete sensory faculties.
4.  being someone who holds wrong views.

You should think about this. If someone is born as a human  being  but  with
these four inopportune conditions, I think this  person  will  have  neither
any mental space nor time to practise the Buddha’s teachings. If any of  you
were to possess any of these conditions, is  it  possible  to  practise  the
teachings?

Next are the four non-human inopportune states  such  as  being  born  as  a
celestial long-life god or being born in any of the three lower realms.

That the three lower realms are non-human inopportune conditions  is  pretty
obvious. While you may not directly perceive the hell beings or  the  pretas
(hungry ghosts), you can see animals. You should analyse that  if  you  were
born as an animal, is it possible to practise  the  Dharma?  It  is  obvious
that you cannot practise the Dharma as  an  animal.  It  then  goes  without
saying that if you are born as a hungry ghost or as a hell being,  there  is
no way to practise the teachings.
The fourth non-human inopportune condition is  being  born  as  a  celestial
long-life god.

Samsara is divided  into  three  realms,  the  desire,  form,  and  formless
realms. The form realm is again divided  into  four  levels.  The  long-life
gods here refer to the celestial beings who are born in the fourth level  of
the  form  realm.  For  these  beings,  their  consciousness  only  manifest
actively during the time of their birth and when they die. Other than  that,
between birth and death, they basically  space  out.  These  celestial  gods
have very long lives, but if you were to take this  kind  of  rebirth,  then
you would possess one of the non-human inopportune states.

There are also ordinary and superior beings in  the  formless  realm.  Being
born as an ordinary being in  the  formless  realm  is  also  considered  an
inopportune state because you will lack the fortune to  actualise  the  path
to liberation. Analysing this further, you will probably have  to  say  that
the ordinary being in the form realm does possess the  fortune  to  practise
the path to liberation.

With regard to the celestial beings (or worldly gods),  there  are  gods  of
the desire realm and there are gods  of  the  higher  realms.  Here  we  are
referring to the gods of the form and formless realms. Most of the  gods  of
the desire realm are also said to be in an inopportune  state  because  they
are distracted constantly by sensual pleasures. They also have a  very  long
life.

Depending on the commentaries used, some  commentaries  explain  that   this
non-human inopportune state of being a worldly god with long life to  refers
to a specific  god  of  the  fourth  level  of  the  form  realm  who  lacks
discrimination, while some commentaries takes this to mean the worldly  gods
of the desire realm.

In the Lamrim Chenmo, it is clearly stated that the beings in the  form  and
formless realms do not have the fortune to newly attain the path of  seeing.
It is stated that the ordinary beings of the formless realms do not  possess
the fortune to achieve the path to liberation whereas  the  ordinary  beings
of the form realm do possess the fortune to achieve the path to  liberation.
If you say this, you should have a reason to back this up. I  am  not  sure.
Do you have any suggestion?

(Inaudible responses from students)

It is clearly mentioned in the text that ordinary  beings  in  the  formless
realms are in a condition who lack freedom,  i.e.,  they  do  not  have  the
opportunity to achieve the path to liberation. Having said  that,  you  have
to think about the reason why this is so.

The way to think about these eight inopportune states or the lack  of  these
eight inopportune conditions is to relate them to  your  own  existence.  By
recognising the mere fact that you are now born as a human  being  and  free
from these eight inopportune conditions, just having this freedom alone,  is
helpful in your practice of the Buddha’s teachings.

    2B4B-1A2     Endowments (Page 38)

Next are the endowments.  There  are  ten  endowments,  five  pertaining  to
oneself and five that pertain to others.



         A  The five personal endowments (Page 38)

The five endowments pertaining to oneself are:
1. being born as a human.
2. being born in a place where the Buddha’s teachings exist.
3. having complete sensory faculties.
4. having reversible karma, i.e., you have not engaged in the five deeds  of
   immediate retribution and so forth.
5. having faith in the source, i.e., you have faith in the three  scriptural
   collections of the Buddha’s teachings.
These are the  five  endowments  or  favourable  conditions  that  you  must
possess personally in order to engage in Dharma practice.

         B  The five endowments conditioned by others (Page 39)

The five endowments that pertain to others are:
1. A Buddha has descended in this world.
2. The teachings are taught by either the Buddha himself  or  his  followers
   such as the hearers and so forth.
3. “The Dharma teachings are abiding” refers to the existence of people  who
   have  put  the  Buddha’s  teachings  into  practice  and  have  generated
   realisations, i.e., they are upholding the realisational Dharma.
4. “The abiding Dharma  teachings  being  followed”  means  that  there  are
   people who are following the teachings.
5. “Hearts of loving concern for others” means that  there  are  benefactors
   and donors who support the Dharma.
These are the five endowments  pertaining  to  others.  They  are  necessary
conditions for you to practise  the  Dharma  but  they  have  to  come  from
someone else. Therefore they are endowments that pertain to others.

These endowments are  all  the  favourable  conditions  for  practising  the
Dharma and  have  been  divided  into  personal  endowments  and  endowments
pertaining to others. What does this mean?  It  means  that  both  kinds  of
endowments are necessary. There are some people who may think that  as  long
as the Buddha is around, then everything is fine as  everything  is  in  his
hands and they don’t have to do anything. From these teachings, you can  see
clearly that you need to possess the endowments from your own side  as  well
before you can practise the Dharma.

The whole point of identifying these freedoms and endowments is for  you  to
reflect on them. In terms of the freedoms, you have to ask yourself:
 • Do I possess all these eight freedoms?
 • Having these eight freedoms, do they  really  make  a  difference  to  my
   practice?
 • Possessing them, what do they do for my spiritual development?
Similarly in terms of the ten endowments, you should ask yourself:
 • As an individual, do I possess all these endowments?
 • Possessing these endowments, are they important to me?
 • Am I fortunate to have them?
 • Do they make any difference to my spiritual practice?

On the basis of having identified these eight freedoms  and  ten  endowments
in relation to yourself, you move  on  to  the  next  outline,  “Considering
their great value (Page  39),”  where  you  reflect  on  how  important  and
valuable it is to have this kind of rebirth.

    2B4B-1B      Considering their great value

         1  Considering the inappropriateness of someone with this special
         base acting like an animal

Second: If no practice of  the  completely  pure  Dharma  for  the  sake  of
lasting happiness comes about at all, you are like an  animal  despite  your
birth in a higher realm, since animals also have  the  endeavour  merely  to
attain happiness and eliminate suffering until they die (Page 39).

Having attained such a human life with all its freedoms and  endowments,  if
you do not use it  to  achieve  everlasting  happiness  by  practising  pure
Dharma, it is said that you are no different from an  animal.  You  have  to
ask yourself whether this is true or not. Is there any difference if you  do
not use this human life with  its  freedoms  and  endowments  for  something
better?  If you lead just a normal life, are  you  any  different  from  the
animals?

         2  How a body of leisure and endowments is best (Page 39)

Someone who has obtained a human life of freedoms and endowments is said  to
have obtained a special human rebirth. For example, on the basis  of  having
this kind of rebirth,  you  can  meditate  on  and  develop  the  altruistic
intention, bodhicitta. This kind of human life is considered to be the  best
basis for practising and developing bodhicitta. Even  while  those  who  are
born as gods or nagas have their own  powers  and  are  more  powerful  than
human beings in many ways, when  it  comes  to  developing  bodhicitta,  the
human rebirth is said to be the best basis for doing so.  The  text  advises
that since you have already attained  such  a  human  rebirth,  rather  than
letting it go to waste, you should extract its essence to make this  rebirth
meaningful.

         3  How to train in the wish to take the essence, having brought to
         mind those [two] objectives (Page 40)

There is a quotation from Shantideva’s Engaging in the Bodhisattva’s  Deeds:

         Having found this kind of leisure,
         not to cultivate what is virtuous -
         no betrayal could be a greater,
         nothing more deluded than that.
And:
         Having found this place so rare,
         hard to find and beneficial,
         if I, well aware of it,
         were taken to that hell again
         as if deluded by magic spells-
         has my mind here wasted away? -
         through what delusion I do not know either -
         what has become of my mind - my feelings (Page 40)?

         4  The inappropriateness of returning empty-handed, given that not
         only ultimate but also temporary objectives are easily accomplished
         (Page 40)

On the basis of having obtained this human life of freedoms and  endowments,
you can achieve both the temporary and ultimate goals.  The  temporary  goal
refers to getting a higher rebirth as a human or god. That is something  you
can achieve.  The  ultimate  goal  is  the  achievement  of  liberation  and
enlightenment. You can also achieve this. Here you are advised to make  full
use of this human life of freedoms and endowments, day and night,  in  order
to achieve these two goals.

This topic of the human life of freedoms  and  endowments  comes  under  the
outline, “The basis of leisure –  exhortation  to  take  its  essence  (Page
38).”  This section is persuading and convincing you to do something  useful
with this human life of freedoms and endowments. The only  way  to  persuade
yourself of this is to think over and over again what we have just  covered.
You have to think about it. Otherwise, there is  no  way  you  can  persuade
yourself that this is so. The way to  persuade  yourself  is  to  understand
that you have received this human life of freedoms  and  endowments  and  to
think of all the wonderful things that you can achieve, both  the  temporary
and ultimate goals, with this human rebirth. It is difficult  to  find  such
an opportunity again. Therefore for  these  various  reasons,  you  persuade
yourself to start doing something right now. You better not  let  it  go  to
waste.

The essence of this section is the advice exhorting you to  be  better  than
animals. To be better than animals means thinking beyond your  preoccupation
with the happiness and affairs of this life. When you do not do  this,  then
you are no different from an animal. You have the  ability  to  think  about
why you should be better than animals and how you  can  be  better  than  an
animal. You have the ability to do this. If you  tell  an  animal  the  same
thing, “You need to be better,” I think there is nothing the animal can  do.


Is it easy to get this human life of freedoms and endowments? The answer  is
no.

    2B4B-1C      Considering the difficulty in finding it

         1  Illustration of the difficulty of finding it
         2  Reasons why it is difficult to find
         3  The rarity of those obtaining the causes of leisure and
         endowments
         4  The result of sustaining those objectives
         5  The method of meditation with four special features
         6  Differentiated, sustained mode [of practice]

    2B4B-1C1     Illustration of the difficulty in finding it

Third: In the Basis of Scriptural Transmission it says that beings  who  die
and migrate from the bad and happy realms to the bad  realms  are  like  the
dust of the great earth and that the beings who are  born  from  there  into
the happy realms are like the dust taken up by the tip  of  a  finger  nail.
{52} Therefore, [a precious human rebirth] is difficult to  find  from  both
the happy and the bad realms (Pages 40 – 41).

    2B4B-1C2     Reasons why it is difficult to find (Page 41)

This is the  difficulty  of  obtaining  this  human  life  of  freedoms  and
endowments. Why is it so difficult and rare to obtain? Because the  majority
of sentient beings are constantly engaged in the ten  non-virtuous  actions.
When you look at your own mental continuum, you can also see how you are  so
naturally predisposed towards non-virtue. If you constantly engage  in  non-
virtue, the end result will be the lower  realms,  as  non-virtuous  actions
will only project or throw you into a lower realm rebirth,  never  a  higher
realm rebirth.

    2B4B-1C3     The rarity of those obtaining the causes of leisure and
    endowments (Page 41)

As most sentient beings are naturally predisposed to non-virtue, that  means
it is very difficult to get a human life of freedoms  and  endowments  again
in the future. On top of that, you have to deal with  all  the  non-virtuous
actions you had already accumulated since beginningless time. Of course,  if
you purify those negativities through practising confession by applying  the
four opponent powers, perhaps you can reduce  some  of  those  negativities.
But again that is something you don’t do.  It is very rare  to  find  people
who engage in heartfelt confession practices  immediately  after  they  have
committed non-virtue. So, in general, it is  very  difficult  to  achieve  a
good rebirth.

Once you find yourself back again in the lower realms, it is very  difficult
to get out from that rebirth and go to the higher realms. Why  is  this  so?
Once you are in the lower realms as a hell being, hungry  ghost  or  animal,
you will always be accumulating negative karma in  those  rebirths.  If  you
are  accumulating negative karma in a human body, then you  will  accumulate
even more negative karma when you are in the lower realms.   That  makes  it
very difficult to get out from the lower realms. When you think about  this,
then you will realise how difficult it is  to  obtain  this  human  life  of
freedoms and endowments again.

    2B4B-1C5     The method of meditation with four special features (Page
    41)

In order to  take  full  advantage  of  this  human  life  of  freedoms  and
endowments that you have already obtained, you  must  reflect  on  its  four
elements, as follows:
1. the need to practise the teachings, because all living beings  only  want
   happiness and do not want suffering, and because achieving happiness  and
   alleviating suffering depend only on practising the teachings.
2. the ability to practise,  because  you  are  endowed  with  the  external
   condition, a teacher, and the internal conditions,
   the freedoms and endowments. You possess all the  favourable  conditions,
   both external  and  internal.  Therefore  you  are  definitely   able  to
   practise the teachings.
3. the need to practise in this lifetime, because if you  do  not  practise,
   it will be very difficult to obtain the freedoms and endowments again for
   many lifetimes to come.
4. the need to practise right now, because there is no  certainty  when  you
   will die.

These four elements are  really  important.  The  first  question  that  you
should always ask yourself is this, “Why  should  I  practise  the  Dharma?”
The answer is because you do  not  want  suffering  and  what  you  want  is
happiness. In order to obtain that, then you have to practise. You are in  a
position to practice the Dharma because you have all the conditions.

     2B4B-1C6B   How to contemplate in particular

         1  The difficulty in finding [leisure and endowments] from the
         point of view of their cause

First: The difficulty in finding [leisure and endowments] from the point  of
view of their cause. Generally speaking, {54} even for the attainment  of  a
mere happy migration, it is necessary to perform one  of  the  pure  virtues
such as discipline. In particular, for the attainment  of  complete  leisure
and endowments, you need a lot of roots of virtue such as getting hold of  a
base through pure ethical conduct, reinforcing it  through  giving  and  the
like and making connections by means of stainless prayers. In that case,  it
becomes apparent that those who accomplish such causes are very  few,  which
is why one should think that, proportionately, the result, the  general  and
specific base of happy realms is difficult to find (Page 42).

This section is saying that, in general, just  to  get  a  good  rebirth  is
really difficult. On top of that, if you want to  obtain  a  human  life  of
freedoms and endowments, this is even more difficult. What  is  the  reason?
Because it is very difficult to gather  the  causes  for  achieving  such  a
rebirth.  They are very rare. When you do not  create  the  causes  and  you
find it difficult to gather the causes together  then  of  course  you  will
have difficulty in finding the result.

Essentially, you should reflect and remind yourself that you should not  let
this opportunity go to waste. You should strive to  use  this  rebirth  that
you have in order to achieve  the  temporary  and  ultimate  goals.  On  the
individual level, you need to think about  this  over  and  over  again  and
encourage and persuade yourself to use this opportunity now to achieve  both
the temporary and the ultimate goals.

Questions for discussion on Sunday, 28th August 2011
1. What is faith and why is it so important?
2. What is meditation and what is the purpose of meditation?
3. What is the  most  important  thing  to  do  in  between  the  meditation
   sessions?
4. What is the difference between analytical  and  stabilisation  meditation
   and is it correct for a single individual to engage in both?

Question:  What is the difference between the desire and  the  form  realms?
As an ordinary being, which realm am I living in now?

Answer: We are all abiding in the desire realm. In order to be born  in  the
form realm, first you must have achieved calm-abiding. Someone who  is  born
in the form realm have no interest  whatsoever  in  the  enjoyments  of  the
desire realm. They regard them as unpleasant. They don’t have attachment  to
the enjoyments of the desire realm because they have something better!

Question: Is rebirth as an ordinary being of the form  realm  considered  to
be an opportune rebirth?

Answer:  With regard to the long-life gods, we  are  specifically  referring
to the gods of the fourth level of the form realm. We are not  referring  to
every single god of the fourth level of the form realm  but  only  to  those
who lack discrimination.

You seem to be implying that the gods of the first, second and third  levels
of the form realm possess the  opportune  state  whereas  the  gods  of  the
fourth level of the form realm do not possess that opportune condition.

The form realm is divided into four levels. There  are  ordinary  beings  in
the form realm who have entered the path but it seems that is not  the  case
for the formless realm. Indeed there is this difference. The point  is  that
in the formless realm, it seems that there is  no  ordinary  being  who  has
entered the path while in the formless realm. So there  is  this  difference
between form realm and formless realm. Why is there this difference?   There
must be reasons for this. This is something to think about.

There are ordinary beings who have entered the path while in the form  realm
but they cannot newly attain the path of seeing. In order  to  newly  attain
the path of seeing they have to take rebirth in the desire  realm.  This  is
stated in the Abhidharma and it is also stated in the  Lamrim  Chenmo:  “You
cannot initially attain the path of a noble  being  during  a  life  in  the
higher [deities’] realms (Page 121).”  It is stated very clearly that it  is
not possible to newly achieve the path  of  seeing  in  the  higher  realms,
i.e., the form and formless realms, but you can newly achieve  the  path  of
seeing on the basis of being a desire realm god. This is because  of  having
very strong habitual tendencies from past rebirth as a human being.




Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng
Edited by Cecilia Tsong
Checked by Shirley Soh

-----------------------
[1] Leisure and endowment are also translated  as  freedom  and  opportunity
respectively.

