Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L11 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.545275
================================================================================


Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi
Root text: The Middle Length Lam-Rim by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by  Trijiang  Rinpoche  are
in small lettertype, to be distinguished from Lama Tsongkhapa’s own  outline
that is in larger lettertype.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


Lesson No: 11                          Date: 21st July 2011


All of you have met with the teachings of the Buddha. On top  of  that,  you
now have the interest and determination to study these teachings.  When  you
think about it, what is the main cause for this good situation? I think  you
have to attribute it to having created the cause in your past lives.  It  is
the ripening of some virtuous seeds or imprints. That  is  the  main  thing.
The fact that you met the Buddha’s teachings and have the interest to  study
them means you are experiencing the result of some virtuous karma  that  you
accumulated in the past.

But you should not leave it at that. You should work to increase  the  power
of those imprints that were left in your mental continuum. While  you  still
have the interest to study, you should try as much as possible  to  increase
the power of those imprints through the activities of listening,  reflection
and meditation.

All of you are studying together as a group. This  is  also  the  result  of
some karmic  connection  from  the  past.  Therefore,  it  is  important  to
cultivate a sense of closeness with one another in  the  class.  You  should
think that you are going to do  this  together  for  the  next  five  years,
cultivate this sense of closeness and regard everyone as family.

In the great monasteries in India where the monks study, the  monks  of  the
same class are always very united and close to one  another.  They  consider
their friendship and relationship with their fellow classmates  to  be  very
important, perhaps even more important than with  their  own  parents.  They
understand that they are  in  this  together  and  they  have  to  help  one
another. When someone met with problems, everyone in the  class  would  come
together and help. For example, if someone were to fall  sick,  everyone  in
the class would help that person. Also students of the  same  teacher  would
help their fellow students when they were in trouble. Perhaps, this is  what
you can emulate and try  to  achieve  here,  to  cultivate  this  bond  with
everyone in the class.

Generally speaking, on the normal class days, you may not have  enough  time
to get to know one another due to the  limitation  of  time  and  so  forth.
Therefore, we created an opportunity  for  you  to  be  able  to  do  so  by
organising the Sunday discussion session. This is one of the reasons why  we
have the discussion session  so  that,  during  those  sessions,  there  are
opportunities to get to know one another. It is important  to  get  to  know
one another and to introduce yourself.

There are suggested guidelines on  behaviour  and  the  attitudes  that  are
helpful for the discussion sessions. We will send them out to you  tomorrow.
Please take some time to look at them.  When  you  follow  these  guidelines
when participating in a discussion session, it will help everyone.

During the discussions, it is important  to  ask  questions  but  to  do  so
respectfully. For example, you do  not  ask  questions  out  of  anger.  The
intention for engaging in discussion is not to win  or  to  defeat  someone.
Rather, the  point  of  discussion  or  debate  is  to  eliminate  your  own
misconceptions and any qualms or doubts  you  may  have  pertaining  to  the
subject.

When you listen to another person’s presentation and you think  that  it  is
incorrect, that there are some faults with it, you  can  respectfully  point
out that the line of argument is wrong, with the  intention  of  eliminating
the misconception underlying the wrong line of reasoning. It  is  not  about
winning and it is not about defeating the person.

Let us say, during the discussion or debate,  when  someone  says  something
that you feel is incorrect, from your side, simply saying, “That  is  wrong.
I don’t agree” is insufficient. That doesn’t  help.  You  must  be  able  to
explain your position. You may say, “I don’t agree with  this.  This  should
not be the case.” Then, you should be able to back up your objection with  a
valid reason. You should be able  to  point  out,  “This  is  not  the  case
because of such and such…”

Just saying, “No” or, “You are wrong,” or, “I object,” is not  helpful.  You
have to be able to point out why  you  think  the  other  person’s  line  of
reasoning is wrong. Of course, when you counter that person’s  presentation,
he may or may not accept your line of argument. That  person  also  has  the
right to reject what you say by rebutting with some  other  arguments.  This
is how the discussion  or  debate  works.  It  is  a  to-  and-fro  process.
Sometimes, in the end, you may arrive at a conclusion.  At  other  times,  a
conclusion may not necessarily be reached about a particular issue.

Most people, when they raise an objection during discussion, they  stop  at,
“No, I don’t agree,” and have nothing to back up their objection. When  that
happens, the discussion is over as there is no basis to continue.  When  you
just say no, have nothing else to say and do not come up  with  any  reason,
then both sides will just sit there and get upset with one another.


So when you do object to a particular line of reasoning or  to  whatever  is
being said, besides saying no, you have to come up with the reason why.  But
whatever reason you come up with may not necessarily  be  correct.  So  your
opponent, or the person you are debating or discussing with, has  the  right
to rebut your statement.  Of course, that person’s counter argument may  not
be correct as well. So, basically, it is  a  to-and-fro  process.  It  is  a
competition of logic to see whose logic and reasoning is superior.

                             ******************
With respect to  the  defining  characteristics  of  the  Mahayana  teacher,
ideally, he should possess the ten qualities mentioned  in  the  text.  When
that is not possible and you cannot find  such  a  teacher,  at  least,  you
should look for a teacher who possesses the five qualities mentioned in  the
middling characteristics.  At  the  very  minimum,  you  should  rely  on  a
Mahayana teacher whose qualities exceed his faults. You should not  rely  on
a Mahayana teacher whose qualities and faults are equal.


    2B4A-1B2     Characteristics of the one who relies, the disciple

         A  Faults of someone who does not have and benefits of someone who
         does have the five characteristics

Second: From the Four Hundred:

         Impartial, intelligent, full of endeavour -
         thus is explained a vessel for teachings.
         Otherwise qualities of the teacher,
         have no effect – there’s no change in the listener.


As  it  says  in  the  commentaries:  someone   endowed   with   the   three
characteristics is a  suitable  vessel  for  listening.  If  all  three  are
complete, the positive qualities of the one expounding the Dharma appear  as
positive qualities and do not appear as faults. Not only that: the  positive
qualities of the listeners also appear as such to that  person  and  do  not
appear as faults. If the characteristics of a vessel are not  complete,  the
listener, under the power of his faults, will classify even  an  extremely,,
perfectly pure spiritual teacher who expounds the Dharma,  among  those  who
have faults, and perceive an exponent’s faults as qualities (Page 22).

When the Mahayana teacher possesses the qualities stated  above,  then  what
about the student or disciple who relies upon such a teacher? What  are  the
defining characteristics that such a disciple should have?

The three characteristics of a disciple are:
1. “Impartial” (or non-partisan)
2. “Intelligent”
3. “Full of endeavour” (or diligent and hardworking)
When the disciple who relies on the teacher possesses these  three  defining
characteristics, this disciple will be able to  see  the  qualities  of  the
teacher as qualities and not see them as faults.

When the disciple possesses these three defining characteristics,  then  the
good qualities of his fellow listeners will also appear as such and  not  as
faults.

When  the  disciple  does  not  possess  these  three  characteristics,  the
influence of his own faults will cause him to see  an  even  extremely  pure
teacher to have faults.

Next is the explanation of the three characteristics themselves.


         B  Explaining the specifics of the [various] characteristics in
         detail

{29} In this regard “impartiality” (“unbiased”) means  being  without  bias.
If you have a bias, it will make you obscured  and  you  will  not  perceive
positive qualities, due to which the meaning of  excellent  explanations  is
not found. It is just as it says in Essence of the Middle Way:

         With a biased - thus anguished - mind
         peace can never be realised.


To be biased means to be attached to one’s own approach and  to  hate  other
people’s  approach.  Having  examined  something  like  this  in  your   own
continuum, you should give it up (Page 22).

The first characteristic is impartiality or to be unbiased (also  translated
as non-partisan). Non-partisan means not to take  sides  i.e.  not  to  like
those who you consider to be on your side and to  have  aversion  for  those
who are on the other side.

What happens when you are not non-partisan? When you are  not  non-partisan,
you will  take  sides.  When  you  are  biased  or  partisan,  you  will  be
obstructed or hindered by your bias from seeing good qualities.  Because  of
this, you will not discover the good meaning of the excellent teachings.

For example, in relation to your teacher, you may have this  idea  that  you
are you and the teacher is someone else. This is the concept:  yourself  and
others. When you hold on strongly to that concept, then under the  influence
of your own attachment, you  hold  on  to  your  own  truth,  thinking  that
whatever you think is correct. Based  on  that,  you  may  not  be  able  to
realise the good intention or the good explanation that  are  given  by  the
teacher. This is because you are holding on to  your  own  truth/  your  own
view; you think that what you believe in  is  right,  although  it  may  not
accord with reality.

You should check if you are partisan or biased. When you find that  you  are
taking sides, then you should stop doing so, if you want  to  be  a  student
who possesses the defining characteristics.


If you wonder whether that by itself is sufficient: even  though  impartial,
someone to whom good ways of explaining appear as faulty ones,  due  to  not
having the intelligence to distinguish  them,  is  not  a  suitable  vessel.
Therefore one needs to have the  intelligence  that  understands  those  two
(Page 22).

On top of being impartial, you need to be intelligent. That means  you  need
to be able to distinguish between good and  faulty  explanations.  When  you
don’t have intelligence, you are not able to distinguish between them.  Then
you will not be able to take up or adopt the good explanations and there  is
a danger that you may hold on to faulty explanations  as  being  correct  or
good. In other words, there is a  danger  that  you  may  discard  the  good
explanations and adopt the bad or faulty ones instead. Therefore,  you  also
need intelligence.

Are those two sufficient?  Even  if  one  has  the  two,  [impartiality  and
intelligence], someone who is just like the listener  to  the  Dharma  in  a
[lifeless] picture[1] is not a suitable vessel. Therefore one  [also]  needs
to have great endeavour (Page 22).

The third defining characteristic of being diligent is very important.  That
means you should work hard and have joyous perseverance. Otherwise, you  may
end up like a drawing of  a  person,  because  a  drawing  of  a  person  is
lifeless. It doesn’t do anything.

The commentary states that adding the two, respect for the  Dharma  and  the
expounder of Dharma as well as an  attentive  mind,  five  [characteristics]
are set forth (Pages 22 – 23).

When you add these two, being  focused  and  being  respectful  towards  the
teaching and the teacher, you have a total of five qualities.


         C  Specifics of achieving the conducive conditions and eliminating
         the adverse conditions for having the four characteristics

That being so there are  four:  (1)  great  endeavour  with  regard  to  the
Dharma, (2)  an  excellently  attentive  mind  while  listening,  (3)  great
respect in the Dharma and the expounder of Dharma and (4)  holding  to  good
explanations having  rejected  faulty  ones.  Intelligence  is  a  conducive
circumstance for those four and the impartiality is what eliminates  adverse
circumstances (Page 23).

There were five qualities. However, there are four qualities here. The  four
are the favourable conditions. The quality  of  being  impartial  eliminates
the  unfavourable  conditions.  It  says  here  that  intelligence  is   the
favourable condition that gives rise to the  four  qualities.  “Those  four”
refers to the four characteristics  but,  in  some  commentaries,  they  say
intelligence is the favourable  condition  for  the  fourth  characteristic,
i.e., you are able to discard bad explanations and retain the good ones.


         D  The need to strive for those characteristics

You should examine whether or not all the attributes  that  would  make  you
suitable for being guided by a spiritual teacher are complete and  cultivate
joy, if they are. If they are not complete,  you  should  strive  henceforth
including future lives[2] at the causes for making them complete (Page 23).

Earlier in the section on the defining characteristics of the guru,  it  was
mentioned, “Those wishing to have disciples rely on them should also  strive
to acquire these characteristics.”  Likewise, from the  perspective  of  the
student, if you want to rely on  the  teacher,  then,  “You  should  examine
whether or not all the attributes that would make  you  suitable  for  being
guided by a spiritual teacher are complete.”  So  effort  is  required  from
both sides.

This is very good advice. If you  want  to  have  students,  then  you  must
strive to possess the defining characteristics that will enable you to  have
students. If you want to be a fully qualified student, then you should  also
strive to possess those qualities that make you a suitable student.

After the explanation of   the defining characteristics of the guru and  the
student, how should a student who  possesses  the  defining  characteristics
rely on a teacher who also possesses  the  defining  characteristics?   This
text states very clearly,  without  ambiguity,  what  kind  of  teacher  you
should look for and what are his defining characteristics as  well  as  what
kind of student you should be and the qualities  you  should  possess.  Only
then comes the explanation on how you should rely on the teacher.

    2B4A-1B3     The way he relies on him

         A  Explanation of the need to rely on someone with the
         characteristics
         B  The actual manner of relying on someone who has the
         characteristics

    2B4A-1B3A    Explanation of the need to rely on someone with the
    characteristics

{30} Third: Thus someone possessed of  [the  characteristics  of]  a  vessel
should examine - the way explained above - whether or not a teacher has  the
characteristics and if so, obtain the kindness of the Dharma from him  (Page
23).

With regard to relying on the teacher,  everyone  is  different.  There  are
some who will take everyone as their teacher, whereas there are  others  who
prefer to follow a small number of teachers. Everyone is  different  because
of his or her different views.

People often ask, “Is it better for me to have  many  or  a  few  teachers?”
With regard to this issue, two examples were given in the Great Treatise  of
the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment, the Lam-Rim Chen Mo.

There was  the  example  of  Sung-pu-wa  who  had  many  gurus.  Once,  when
travelling from  Kham,  he  even  listened  to  teachings  given  by  a  lay
practitioner along the roadside. When his disciples pointed out that it  was
inappropriate for him to do so,  he  replied,  “Do  not  say  that.  I  have
received two benefits.” I guess  you  would  have  to  ask  him  what  these
benefits were as they are not mentioned in the text.

Geshe Drom-don-ba, on the other hand, only had a few gurus,  not  more  than
five: three from Tibet and two from  India.  Bo-do-wa  and  Gom-ba-rin-chen,
who were gurus themselves, agreed that Geshe  Drom-don-ba's  way  is  better
during these times, when students with untrained minds tend  to  see  faults
in their teachers and lose faith.

When your mind is still untrained, you  will  tend  to  see  faults  in  the
teachers. So, the more teachers you have, the  more  faults  you  will  see.
There is then the danger that you will lose faith. That being the  case,  if
your mind is still untrained, then it is better to stick to a  small  number
of gurus. When your mind is pure, i.e., you see everything  as  perfect  and
pure and you don’t see faults, then the number of  teachers  you  have  will
not be a concern. You can rely on anyone as your teacher. But when  that  is
not the case, when your mind is still untrained and you  still  see  faults,
then it is better to stick to a few gurus.

This issue is not mentioned in the  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  but  I  thought
discussing this will be beneficial for you because this  question  comes  up
quite often, “Should I have many or a few teachers?” You  can  see  that  it
all depends on the individual. There is no one definite or correct answer.





    2B4A-1B3B    The actual manner of relying on someone who has the
    characteristics

         1  The manner of relying in thought
         2  The manner of relying through actions

With regard to the manner of relying on a spiritual teacher  from  whom  you
generally obtain the kindness of the  Dharma  and  who,  especially,  guides
your mind well by means of perfectly complete instructions,  there  are  two
points: the manner of relying in thought and the manner of  relying  through
actions.

    2B4A-1B3B-1  The manner of relying in thought

         A  The root, training in confidence[3]
         B  Through remembering his kindness, developing respect

The first one has two points: the root, training in confidence  and  through
remembering his kindness, developing respect (Page 23).

How many ways are there of relying on the teacher? Two. And what  are  these
two? Relying in thought and relying in action.

What is the meaning of relying in thought  or  relying  on  the  teacher  in
general? Relying on or  devoting  to  a  teacher  does  not  mean  that  you
necessarily have to be with him, i.e., it only occurs in his presence.  That
is not the meaning of devoting to or relying on the guru. Does it mean  then
that you have to act as a servant or attendant to  the  teacher?  Does  that
necessarily mean that you are devoting to or relying on the teacher? No.

With regard to the first, what does it mean to devote  to  or  rely  on  the
guru in thought? The root is training in faith and then, by remembering  his
kindness, you develop respect.


    2B4A-1B3B-1A The root, training in confidence

         1  Explanation of confidence as the basis of all qualities

First: In the Jewel Tala Dharani it says:

         The preparatory practice of confidence bears- like a mother-
         all positive qualities, guards them and makes them increase.


This says that confidence gives birth to positive qualities  that  have  not
yet arisen and,  once  they  have  come  into  existence,  it  sustains  and
increases them. In the Ten Dharmas it also says:

         That which guides to liberation,
         the foremost yana is confidence.
         Therefore, the intelligent,
         rely on pursuing confidence.
         In those who are without confidence
         wholesome qualities do not arise,
         Likewise, in seeds that were burnt by fire,
         no green sprout can germinate.

In these terms confidence is said to  be  the  foundation  of  all  positive
qualities through forward and reverse pervasion.


         2  Identification of confidence

Generally speaking, there are many types of confidence: in  the  Jewels,  in
actions and effects, and in the Four  Noble  Truths,  however,  here  it  is
confidence in the spiritual master (Pages 23 – 24).

Faith, in this context, is the faith in the guru that is cultivated  through
seeing his good qualities. Through that, your mind becomes clear and  filled
with joy.

Here is an example. You have  a  body  of  water  that  is  contaminated  by
pollutants. By adding some chemicals into it, the pollutants will  dissolve.
When the pollutants are removed from the water, it becomes  very  clean  and
clear. Likewise, your mind is contaminated  with  the  pollutant  of  seeing
faults in the teacher. By remembering  his  qualities  instead,  the  mental
pollutant of seeing faults  in  the  teacher  is  removed.  Your  mind  then
becomes clean and clear and becomes the foundation for  the  development  of
all positive qualities.

In order to have success in anything that you do,  including  your  studies,
it boils down to effort or joyous perseverance.  You need to put  in  effort
in your studies. But for that effort  to  arise,  you  must  first  want  to
study. Your interest and desire to study must precede the effort.

That interest can only arise when you have  the  faith  of  conviction  that
these studies are beneficial for  you.  In  order  to  have  that  faith  of
conviction, you must see the benefits for yourself. When you  are  convinced
of the benefits, you will be inspired to pursue  and  actualise  your  goal.
Then the interest that leads to effort will arise. From this,  you  can  see
how faith is the root of all good qualities.

In this context, we are referring to the faith in  the  teacher.  The  faith
that you have  to  develop,  in  relation  to  the  teacher,  is  clear  (or
clarifying) faith.

In general, there are three kinds of faith:
 1. clear faith: in the context of correctly  relying  on  the  teacher  in
    thought, the faith referred to here is  clarifying  faith.  That  means
    that through seeing the qualities of  the  teacher,  the  mind  becomes
    clean, clear and filled with joy.
 2. the faith of conviction: for example, when, by thinking about dependent
    origination or the law of cause and effect,  you  are  convinced  about
    them and you develop faith, that is the faith of conviction
 3. wishing (or aspiring) faith: for example, by analysing the  Four  Noble
    Truths correctly, you  understand  that  the  first  two  truths,  True
    Sufferings and True Origins, are the objects to be abandoned. You  also
    realise that True Cessations and True Paths are to be  cultivated.  You
    then develop this wishing faith, aspiring to actualise True  Paths  and
    True Cessations.

It is essential that you understand that faith is the  very  basis  for  all
good qualities. Whatever may be the object or person in question,  when  you
reflect on the qualities of that object/person, you become convinced of  the
worth  of  that  object/person.  That  conviction  will  give  rise  to  the
interest,   from your side, to want to obtain  that  object  or  to  achieve
that goal. This aspiration then gives rise to effort. By putting in  effort,
you will also achieve those qualities. That is why it is said that faith  is
the basis of all good qualities.

With regard to cultivating faith in the teacher, you must stop its  opposing
force, i.e., the conditions that obstruct the  development  of  such  faith.
In order to generate faith in the teacher, you must first stop the  mind  of
non-faith, i.e., the lack of or no faith in the teacher.

How do you stop that lack of faith in the  teacher?  Why  do  you  not  have
faith in the teacher? Why do you lose faith in the teacher?
Primarily, this is due to the conception of  faults,  i.e.,  the  mind  that
looks for and believes in faults in the teacher. That is what causes you  to
lose faith or to not have  faith.  Logically  speaking,  when  you  want  to
develop faith, you have to do something to this mind that sees faults.  This
is what you have to think about.

When you don’t see any faults, then there is no  problem  because  you  will
have faith all the time. The reason  why  there  is  a  lack  of  faith  is,
basically, through seeing faults. The whole issue rests on what can be  done
with this mind seeing faults. There are many  quotations  and  reasons  that
are employed in the text to help you overcome the conception  of  faults  in
the guru. But when you look at those quotations and reasons, you find  fault
with them too. You find fault with the very methods  that  are  supposed  to
help you overcome the conception of faults! We will talk about this  in  the
next lesson. Anyway, I guess, this is our situation. That is  where  we  get
stuck.

Question: On page 24 of the text: “In these terms confidence is said  to  be
the foundation  of  all  positive  qualities  through  forward  and  reverse
pervasion.”  Can  you  please  explain  the  term   “forward   and   reverse
pervasion”?

Answer:  It means that, when there is faith, all those qualities  that  were
mentioned in the quotation will arise. When faith is not present,  then  you
will not experience those benefits.

Question: When you mentioned that the untrained mind will see  faults,  does
that mean that a trained mind will not see faults because of the way  faults
are conceptualised? Is the implication that the mind that  is  trained  will
never see any faults?

Answer: It is not quite like that. When you have  faith,  the  stronger  the
faith, the less likely you will see the faults. For example, when you  think
highly of yourself, then you do not see any of your faults.  Likewise,  when
you have faith, then even when there is a fault, it  does  not  affect  your
faith and it is even possible to use your seeing a fault to further  develop
your faith.

It is not about not seeing faults. When you have faith,  you  will  not  see
many faults. And even when you do see a fault, that fault  will  not  affect
your faith. When you train your mind to have faith, then even when  you  see
a fault, it doesn’t affect your faith and perhaps, with  training,  you  can
even increase your faith.

Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Angie Xiao
Edited by Cecilia Tsong
Checked by Shirley Soh
-----------------------
[1] “Just like the listener to the Dharma in a [lifeless] picture” is also
translated as, “like a drawing of a person who is listening to the
teachings.”
[2] Ven. Gyurme: “Including future lives”  may  be  incorrectly  translated.
This sentence should read as, “If they are not complete, you  should  strive
henceforth at the causes for making them complete before your next life.”
[3] “Confidence” here is more commonly translated as “faith,” so faith  will
be used throughout the commentary on this outline, “The  root,  training  in
confidence.”

