Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M1 L01 (final upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.572000
================================================================================



Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi

Root text:The Middle Length Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by  Trijiang  Rinpoche  are
in small lettertype, to be distinguished from Lama Tsongkhapa’s own  outline
that is in larger lettertype.


Lesson No: 1                                      Date: 9th June 2011


Geshe-la: I don’t know where to  start…This  is  the  first  class  so  does
everyone here seriously want to study for five years? Today is  the  opening
ceremony.

I will talk a little in my broken English. I hope you can  understand.  Some
of you have committed that you want to study seriously for  five  years.  So
that is a contract. You cannot quit. If you quit halfway, you will  have  to
pay the penalty!

Then there is another group who only wants to come when they have the  time.
You have the choice of coming as and when you want.

But for those who have signed up for the five-year Program,  make  sure  you
come to class. You must also sit for the exam that is conducted at  the  end
of every module, that is, if you want to learn.

If you do not want to sit for the  exams,  then  do  not  sign  up  for  the
five–year contract. When you sign up, that means you want to study for  five
years. The requirement then is that you must sit for the exam at the end  of
each module. Then, at the end of five years, you  need  to  take  the  Final
Exam that covers everything you have studied. After that,  you  need  to  do
retreat and then you will be conferred the Completion Certificate.

We have announced all this in the brochure.  You  should  be  aware  of  all
this. I am just reminding you.

So when we say, ‘Basic Program,’ it sounds simple. But, actually, it is  not
really basic. We call it ‘Basic Program,’ because we want you to  come.  You
know how advertising works. “You use this  and  your  hair  can  grow!”  But
actually it doesn’t work that way. I am just joking…

You have to understand why we call it a ‘Basic Program.’  Many  people  come
to study, thinking it  is  really  basic  and  then  they  find  it  is  too
difficult. They say it is not basic at all.

In Buddhism, there  are  many  texts  such  as  the  Madhyamika  texts,  the
Perfection of Wisdom sutras, the vinaya, the Abhidharma  and  the  texts  on
valid cognition and logic, the Pramanavarttika. The  Basic  Program  is  the
basis for studying those texts and it is the basics you need if you want  to
pursue further studies, such as the Master’s Program. Also,  this  cycle  of
the Basic Program started because many of you attended  Venerable  Palzang’s
and Ven. Gyurme’s classes and you are already familiar with the entire  Lam-
Rim. Now, we are studying the Lam-Rim again and it should be  easy  for  you
because you have heard such teachings two or three times before.

But there are topics that will be difficult. You will be  hearing  them  for
the first time. You need to learn all the English terms. Every word will  be
new to you. You don’t get to study these terms in the university.  You  need
to know them and understand what they mean. That is not  easy.  It  will  be
difficult for you.

Here, what I want to say is that whether it is difficult or  not,  the  main
thing is how much interest you have in your heart.  When  you  do  not  have
much interest to study, then everything is difficult. Nothing is  easy.  But
when you have the interest, if you  really  want  to  learn  about  Buddha’s
teachings from the depths of your heart, then no matter  how  difficult  the
subject, you will be able to complete your five-year journey.

About six months ago, we completed one round of the Basic  Program.  In  the
beginning, the students thought it  would  be  too  long.  How  will  it  be
possible to study and complete this in five years?  But  they  did.  Not  in
five years. We took six years. But they did complete the Program.

Along the way, many students had a difficult time.   It  wasn’t  easy.  Some
quit half-way but many of them put in the effort  and  managed  to  complete
their studies. So, at the end of the day, they saw  the  point  of  studying
this five-year Basic Program.

In the very beginning, you may not  see  this.  “Why  am  I  here?  I  don’t
understand  what  he  is  talking  about.”  Then  you  lose  your  interest.
Something comes up. You have to go here  and  there.  You  miss  one  class.
Then you miss the next class. After a while, you miss five, six classes.  At
that time, there will be no interest to come back. Then,  slowly,  you  will
disappear from class. You do not want to come back  anymore.  This  happened
to many people.

What I want to say is that if you have the interest, then you sign  up  now.
It is very important not to lose that interest. “I want to study. I want  to
study.” You should keep reminding yourself. This is  very,  very  important.
Once you miss one or two classes, then it is difficult for you  to  continue
with your five-year studies. This is my experience. I see many  students  to
whom this has happened.

So it is very important to make sure you sustain  your  interest.  When  the
interest is there, then no matter how busy you are, you will make  the  time
to come here. Once you lose that interest,  then  many  excuses  will  come.
“Oh, I have to go there.” “My parents are  sick.”  “My  children  need  me.”
When you lose interest in your studies,  the  moment  something  else  comes
along, you will think that  that  is  more  important  and  attend  to  that
matter. But these things will come all  the  time  in  your  life.  You  may
think, “I will miss class today  but  I  will  attend  the  next  class  and
continue from there.” But these problems will come continually. I  see  this
as the biggest problem so I am telling those of you who want  to  study,  do
not miss class. Keep your interest continually.

When the thought comes, one day, that you do not want  to  come  for  class,
you must stop that thought. “Today, I am tired.  I  don’t  want  to  go  for
class.”  You must stop that thought and push  yourself  and  make  sure  you
come to class. This is very, very important. It is difficult but important.

You have to check how you can sustain your interest every  day.  Of  course,
there is the interest to learn the teachings of the Buddha. But  you  should
know what is in it  for  you  when  you  study  Buddhism,  why  studying  is
important to you and what you stand to lose when you do  not  study.  It  is
very, very important that you remind yourself and be  mindful  of  this  all
the time.

Another way to sustain your interest is to listen well. Every time when  you
come to class, you should ensure that you learn something new.  This  is  an
important way of keeping up your level of interest. If  you  come  here  and
you do not learn a single thing, I think your interest will disappear.

How much you learn during this five-year period is not entirely  up  to  me.
From your side, you need to work hard. You shouldn’t think that  I  will  do
everything for you. No one can do that for you. It is  mentioned  that  even
in your worldly studies, in university and so forth, the  teacher  can  only
teach you 30%. 70% you have to learn yourself through tuition,  reading  and
so forth. Only then will you get 100% of the knowledge. It  is  exactly  the
same with Buddhist studies. I can only help you with 30% but  the  remaining
70% has to come from your side. You have to put in the effort  in  attending
classes,  reading  the  text  and   notes,   listening,   participating   in
discussions, even getting tuition, if necessary.

We have to work together. I cannot feed all the  knowledge  into  your  mind
and then you become enlightened. That  is  not  possible.  Even  the  Buddha
can’t do that, so how can I?

Today, I thought I will also talk a little bit about  myself.  Many  of  you
know me. Many  of  you  do  not  know  me.  So  I  will  give  you  a  short
introduction of myself.

At the age of 12, I became a monk.  Many  people  asked  me,  “Why  did  you
become a monk? Did you choose this or was it  your  parents’  decision?”  It
was 50:50, 50% I chose, 50% my parents chose. In  our  tradition,  when  you
have four or five children and there are  boys,  then  one  can  go  to  the
monastery. Not everyone goes to  the  monastery  but  one  son  can  go.  My
parents had plenty of sons so they didn’t need me there.  They wanted me  to
go to the monastery and I was happy to go.
In our hometown, my parents will invite monks and nuns to come and do  house
blessings. I was young then, around six or seven years old. When I  saw  the
monks and nuns doing blessings, I thought that that was a wonderful job.  It
looked very easy. People serve you.  You  chant.  You  get  some  money  and
offerings. It looked easy. I was a kid then and  had  the  thought  that  it
would be good to be like that. No other reason.

Then the opportunity came for me to become a monk at the age of 12.

When I was at the age of nine or ten, I already looked like an adult, a  big
boy. I say this because, at that age, I was able to look after six or  seven
cows. Not only that. I was able to  cook.  Many  Singaporeans  still  cannot
cook.

When I was eleven, my parents went to Bodhgaya  to  receive  the  Kalachakra
initiation. I had an older brother but he was not at home. He  was  studying
elsewhere. So I had to look after two younger brothers.  One  was  four  and
the other was six. And I had to look after six or seven cows as well. I  was
like a mother in the home for about two months. I needed to cook.  I  needed
to feed the two kids. I needed to feed the cattle. So that was my life.

Then, one day, there was very heavy snowing. There was  about  two  feet  of
snow in my hometown. So the water, the pipes were all frozen. There  was  no
water so I collected the ice, put it in the pot and it melted. That was  how
it was. After a few days, things got better.

I became a monk at 12 and stayed in Kopan for six years  to  study.  In  the
beginning, at the monastery, I didn’t speak Tibetan. I spoke Nepali  and  my
own dialect. In the monastery, everyone spoke Tibetan so in  the  beginning,
it was not easy to survive there. To be thrown into  the  monastery  at  the
age of 12, you miss your parents…After a while, it was ok.

I was there for six years, from age 12 to 18. When I was studying  there,  I
didn’t feel I was studying. I felt I  didn’t  know  anything.  We  memorised
texts, we went to debate class, we debated, we  did  prayers  but  I  didn’t
understand a single word – what we were reciting, what I was talking  about.
When I am debating, I memorised all the definitions. But, at the end of  the
day, I didn’t know what they meant. But I could repeat them, like a  parrot.
When you teach the alphabet to a parrot, the parrot can  repeat  after  you,
right? But I didn’t know what I was reciting, what it was all about.

When the exams came, I took the exams. I got good marks.  They  all  said  I
was good but I felt I wasn’t good enough. I didn’t know anything.  I  always
felt that way.  I am just letting you  know  a  monk’s  life  is  not  easy.
People think otherwise but I am telling you that is not true.

In the early days, Kopan was not like what you see now.  It  was  a  totally
different environment. At that time, we didn’t have rooms.  We  all  had  to
share and sleep together under a big tent. The food  was  not  good.  Things
were difficult in those days.
At the age of 18, Lama Yeshe asked me whether I wanted to study in  Sera.  I
said yes. Four of us were sent to Sera. It is like a university.  It  was  a
long journey. I went with Khenrinpoche Lama Lhundrup.  There  were  five  or
six of us in the train. I think it took us  about  forty-six  hours  to  get
there. But, on the train, there was no place to sit. It was so crowded.  You
also could not sleep. It was hard to go to the  toilet.  There  were  people
there as well. It was extremely crowded. You couldn’t  even  come  out  from
the door. You needed to come out from the window!

That was  in  the  1980’s.  That  was  how  we  travelled  to  South  India.
Sometimes, you got a seat on the train  when  someone  got  up  but  another
group of Indians would come in and pull us out of  our  seats  because  they
wanted to sit down. There were six of us but what could we  do?  You  cannot
fight. That would have been difficult and only lead to more problems.   This
happened the whole way.

At the age of 18, I reached Sera. I changed to  another  environment  so  it
was not easy again. I knew no one so I had to find new  friends  there.  The
friends I made over the last six years were left behind in Kopan  so  I  had
to go to a new place and find new people there. It takes time.

I had a difficult time there for about three to six months. When you  go  to
class, you listen to the teacher but you don’t understand a single  word  of
what he was saying. Then, you have to go to debate. You cannot debate.  They
are very good. You have just arrived so you cannot debate with  them.  Then,
you feel discouraged again. In the beginning, it was like  that.  Even  when
you read, you do not understand. You go to class,  you  do  not  understand.
You go to debate, you do not understand. So it was quite discouraging.

It was like that for a month. At that time, Khenrinpoche was there.  I  told
him I want to go back. He said, “You cannot go back.  You  try  for  another
six months. After six months, if you cannot make it, then you come back.”  I
thought, “That sounds ok. I will try.” At that  time,  I  couldn’t  go  back
anyway. I didn’t even have 20 rupees in my pocket. If I had a lot of  money,
I would have probably gone back!

Somehow, after three months, I began to understand a little bit of what  the
teacher  was  saying.  He  speaks  Tibetan  but  his  dialect  was  slightly
different, so it was difficult to understand. After six months, I  began  to
understand a little bit more. Not fully but I could understand  some  parts.
Then I would go to debate. I was able to open  my  mouth  a  little.  People
asked me questions. I was able to answer a little. Slowly,  I  built  up  my
confidence and interest.

After one year and six months, I was more stable at the monastery.  I  could
see some point to my studying. I was quite happy with what I was doing  with
myself. I had some interest to study.

In the beginning, I didn’t have any goal. I just wanted to study.  That  was
it. I didn’t have any goal  –  coming  to  Singapore  or  going  to  another
country to teach, to become a teacher. I had no goal at  all.  My  wish  was
just to study, to complete my studies and know the topic. That  was  it.  In
the beginning, I had some wish to go into retreat. But  I  didn’t  have  any
thought to become a teacher, to teach. What I am saying here is that it  was
mainly my own wish and some interest to study.

When you study and when you debate, your mind gets  sharper,  you  get  more
intelligent, you know more. Then when you  think  about  the  subject,  each
time you think, you will find some answer. There is some kind  of  joy  that
comes from studying Buddhist philosophy. When you think  carefully  and  you
get some answer that suits your mind, that becomes a great encouragement  to
yourself. It is so wonderful to discover  what  the  Buddha  and  all  those
great masters taught. How can they know all these things? There are so  many
texts but there is no contradiction among them in the  logic  applied.  What
is said in the beginning does not contradict what is said at the  end.  From
whatever angle you look, the reasoning is always correct.  When  you  think,
when you debate, in some way,  very,  very  good  understanding  comes  that
really fits your mind. That is a very joyful experience.

This is the only thing that urged me on in my studies. When  you  understand
a little bit, you have the interest, then you go deeper and deeper and  your
interest will grow. Then you see the point of  the  Buddhadharma.  You  will
see the Buddha differently: who is Buddha, how he teach  so  many  different
levels of people and so forth.

It really opens up your mind when you study everything, especially  Buddhist
philosophy. You know every angle. Then you realise who the  Buddha  is,  how
intelligent he is, how wise he is. His teachings are far beyond  the  limits
of our intelligence. So you are able to see that  when  you  study  Buddhist
philosophy. When you  have  this  realisation  that  the  Buddha  is  really
something, then your faith and devotion will be much, much stronger.  Nobody
can destroy your faith. It is a  very  strong  devotion  and  faith  to  the
Buddhadharma because you have really studied, you know  what  the  topic  is
about. It will not simply be  belief  but  it  is  supported  by  logic  and
reasoning. You see the point with your own mind. That it is really true.  It
is like that. You become a very stable Buddhist.

Here, you must get that. Because only doing some prayers, some  chanting  is
not good enough. If you want to  continue  as  a  Buddhist  long-term,  just
praying and making offerings cannot last long. Now you need to  change.  You
must study and really learn about Buddhism. This is  very,  very  important.
Not only the Lam-Rim we are covering in this module. Actually,  the  Lam-Rim
is a big subject. In five years, we will cover many other topics.  But  when
you combine them together, they all come under the Lam-Rim.

I had studied in Sera for almost 18 years. During that time, I almost  never
missed my classes. I only missed class for one  month  because  I  was  very
sick with TB. So they said if you go to class, you will spread it  to  other
people. You cannot go. So, for one month, I didn’t go. I wanted  to  go  but
they said you cannot come. But when you  miss  one  month  of  classes,  you
totally miss those lessons. Even if you study on your own,  it  is  not  the
same.

You must study with the rest of the class. You learn better with  the  group
energy. You just read your book and think, you may think you know  a  little
but you don’t know anything. There is a huge difference:  coming  to  class,
listening yourself, going to discussion compared to reading on your  own  at
home. It is not the same. This is what I feel.

Also, in Sera, we have to go at 5.30 every morning for prayers.   5  o’clock
you have to wake up, then at 5.30, we start the puja. I  also  never  missed
the puja the 17, 18 years I was there. You don’t go, it is ok.  But  somehow
I never missed puja. One thing is I need to have  my  breakfast!  You  don’t
go, you don’t get breakfast and you have no money to buy  breakfast  so  you
have to go. So one  of the reasons could be that.  You have to go.

So, our day starts at 5.30 in the morning and we end the day at one  or  two
o’clock, past midnight. The debate starts at  6.30  in  the  evening.  After
dinner, you go for debate.  Most  of  the  time,  we  will  recite  prayers,
different praises to different deities for about  one  to  two  hours.  Then
after that, we have debate class. When the debate goes  well,  it  can  last
till one or two o’clock.

Everyone is there. There will be over a hundred monks, watching you,  loudly
debating. You get very excited. It is like you are at  war.  You  don’t  see
anything else. Sometimes it is like that. Sometimes, in debate,  it  is  not
easy. Anger and unhappiness arise. Not fighting. But  everyone  is  studying
hard, everyone have their own emotions,  thinking,  “I  am  right,  you  are
wrong.” But one very  good  thing  is  that  it  doesn’t  last  long.  While
debating, sometimes anger arises. Once the debate is over, immediately,  you
are good friends again. This is important to know.

We had some discussions in the past and I see the problem  here.  Sometimes,
your ego is too strong and you insist you are right.  When  others  disagree
with you, then unhappiness arises. Sometimes, that unhappiness lasts  for  a
long time. Sometimes, they do not want to talk to one another. That  is  not
good. This is something you have to learn.

Debate is extremely important. When someone points out  the  flaws  in  your
argument, you should accept it. When someone uses logic and points out  your
mistakes, you should accept it. That is the way you learn. That is the  best
way to learn. I encourage everyone who  wants  to  study  in  the  five-year
Basic Program to attend the discussion sessions we hold on one Sunday  every
month. Please come for that.

Here, learning is different. I always encourage you to ask questions  rather
than me talking so much. That means in order to come up with questions,  you
have to read your text, you have to think. You read,  you  think,  you  have
this question, “Oh, I don’t  understand  this.”  Then  when  I  answer  your
question with a single sentence, when your doubt is cleared away, that  kind
of learning remains in your mind forever. That  is  the  difference.  Rather
than me explaining this and that. You may understand what I  say.  You  look
like you understand. But after a week’s holiday, it is not there anymore.

So I want to encourage this different way  of  learning.  The  best  way  to
learn is asking questions and debate. When I give my answer and you are  not
satisfied with it, you should be able to point out why it is  incorrect  and
give your reasons. You  should  be  able  to  do  that.  It  is  very,  very
important to learn this way.

After you have completed the Basic Program and know the  subjects  well,  we
hope to produce some teachers. Not only monks  can  teach.  Lay  people  can
also teach. One idea is that. When you know the topic  well  after  studying
for five years, you can teach and guide other people.  That is  one  of  the
goals of the five-year Program – to produce  some  teachers  who  have  some
basic understanding of Buddhism and who  can  then  introduce  it  to  other
people. Then more people will have interest in Buddhism. That is  the  whole
point. Therefore, it is important  you  put  in  the  effort  to  learn  the
Buddhadharma.

One thing I learnt, from my own experience, is that the best  time  for  you
to learn is when you teach. Because you have a big responsibility  when  you
teach other people. So, at that time, you learn  the  most.  You  think  the
most. This happens. So if you really want to learn, after you complete  your
five-year studies, you know something, you must teach if you want  to  study
more.

I don’t feel I am a teacher. I feel I am a student because when I  read  the
topic, there are many things I don’t know. There may be  many  things  I  do
know but there are also many things I do not know.

When you study the Lam-Rim, I don’t think you  will  understand  everything.
Even for myself, although I have studied for a long time, I  still  have  so
many questions of my own regarding the different topics.  But  my  point  is
that there is no need to be discouraged. I always say, as long  as  you  are
not enlightened, there will always be something you do not  know.  So  there
are no grounds for discouragement.

Whenever I don’t know the topic, it also does not discourage me.  Sometimes,
it is a little irritating. I may have read the text over ten  times,  but  I
still don’t get it.  Then I try  to  read  different  commentaries  but  the
scholars also do not explain. I try to read another text. There is still  no
explanation there. Sometimes, I read five, six books. They all say the  same
things but they do not make  things  any  clearer.  That  is  difficult.  It
bothers me but I don’t feel discouraged.

Sometimes, when the mind gets tight like this, that is the  time  to  relax.
Have a cup of tea, some cookies, sit back and relax.

It is very important when you study these difficult topics.  You  must  have
interest and enthusiasm but, at the same time, you should not let your  mind
get so tight that you do not want to  study  anymore.  If  you  become  like
that, that becomes an obstacle to your studies. That is not good.

There should be some balance. Sometimes, you  need  to  push  yourself.  You
don’t push, you will always be lazy. You push too  hard.  Then  you  have  a
breakdown. You have to strike a balance for yourself. I don’t  think  anyone
here will have a breakdown…If anyone is having a breakdown, let me know  and
I will serve you coffee and tea!

Everybody understands what I am saying? Once,  someone  taught  me  a  Malay
word, “Don’t pon-teng (i.e. skip class).” I think that is a very, very  good
word. Everyone knows it. Whenever you want to quit, remember Geshe-la  says,
“Don’t pon-teng.” You remember that.

                           ***********************

Geshe-la is mainly stating the various reasons why you  need  to  study  the
Buddhist treatises. Some of you may question the  need  to  engage  in  such
studies. The reasons why you need to study them is summarised in this  verse
from the prayer, Praise to Shakyamuni Buddha:

      Do not commit any non-virtuous actions,
      Perform only perfect virtuous actions,
      Subdue your mind thoroughly –
      This is the teaching of the Buddha.

“Do not commit any non-virtuous actions”
You need to understand the very nature of what makes an action  non-virtuous
and why there is a need for you to restrain yourself from engaging  in  non-
virtuous actions.

This line that is telling you  to  refrain  from  engaging  in  non-virtuous
actions can be understood in the context of the  Lam-Rim  or  the  Graduated
Stages of the Path to Enlightenment. There is a system in there  that  talks
about the three types of capable beings. This  line  can  be  understood  in
relation to the beings of lower capacity. In the section  on  the  practices
of these beings, the Lam-rim talks about the  different  aspects  of  karma,
how negative karma is accumulated by engaging in  non-virtuous  actions  and
the corresponding ripening effects that  will  result  from  those  negative
actions. This section  covers  karma  and  its  ripening  results  in  great
detail.

What difference does it make to know about karma in such great  detail  when
you read the Lam-Rim? Understanding and knowing karma in such  great  detail
will make a huge difference to you. For  example,  when  you  are  about  to
engage in negativity but if you already have  such  an  understanding,  that
will aid you in restraining yourself from engaging in such acts.  With  this
deep understanding and awareness of karma,  especially  negative  karma  and
non-virtuous actions, it helps you to develop this conscientiousness.

You will naturally be able to refrain from engaging in  negative  karma  and
avoid  those  very  heavy  negative  karmas   because   of   your   in-depth
understanding  and  knowledge  of  this  subject.  Otherwise,  without  that
understanding of what karma is and what constitutes  negative  actions,  the
majority of you will have absolutely no idea when you are actually  engaging
in negative karma.

“Perform only perfect virtuous actions”
This line refers to the  Lam-Rim  teachings  pertaining  to  the  beings  of
middling capacity.  For example, when  you  engage  in  either  physical  or
verbal virtuous actions, this is apparent to yourself and the people  around
you. You can see those actions directly.

However, without a thorough understanding of the nature  of  virtue,  it  is
extremely doubtful as to whether that virtue will  become  an  actual  cause
for attaining liberation or freedom from  cyclic  existence  (samsara).  You
need to equip yourself with a good understanding of the nature of virtue  so
that you are able to steer yourself towards the goal of liberation.

Here, the emphasis on the word, “perfect,” is a reference to  that  goal  of
liberation, attaining  that freedom from samsara.

“Subdue your mind thoroughly”
Within the context of the Lam-Rim, this is referring to the beings of  great
capacity or the beings of the highest scope. It  is  not  enough  to  merely
attain your own personal liberation or to free  only  yourself  from  cyclic
existence.

By merely achieving that, you have not thoroughly subdued  your  mind.  When
you attain your personal nirvana, you have only removed the obscurations  to
liberation.  You  have  yet  to  remove  the  obscurations  to  omniscience.
Therefore, in order to thoroughly subdue your mind, you have  to  completely
eliminate  both  obscurations,  the   obscurations  to  liberation  and  the
obscurations to omniscience.

Then  you  need  to  cultivate  and  generate  bodhicitta,   the   mind   of
enlightenment. To achieve this, you need to thoroughly eliminate  the  self-
cherishing thought. By thoroughly eliminating the  self-cherishing  thought,
you generate pure bodhicitta. Through that  process,  you  can  achieve  the
complete, perfect enlightenment of buddhahood.

This then is the first lesson in  this  Basic  Program.  These  three  lines
constitute the basis for and the reasons why you need to study the  Buddhist
classics:

      Do not commit any non-virtuous actions,
      Perform only perfect virtuous actions,
      Subdue your mind thoroughly –

You should not engage in this Program in order to pursue it as  an  academic
subject or to become a fine  scholar.  Rather,  you  should  engage  in  the
studies of the entire Basic Program in order to be  able  to  achieve  these
three things:
   •  to  be  able  to  perfectly  restrain  yourself  from   engaging   in
     negativities,
   • to be able to engage in perfect virtuous actions and
   • to subdue your own mind.

Throughout the  entire  Basic  Program,  you  should  remember  these  three
reasons for engaging in these  studies.  You  should  remember  these  three
reasons throughout the Program.

Here, the emphasis is on studying the  great  treatises  of  Buddhism.  What
difference does  it  make  whether  you  study  them  by  listening  to  and
contemplating them or not?

When you study  the  great  treatises  of  Buddhism  through  listening  and
contemplation,  it  makes  a  huge  difference.  For   example,   when   you
experience any difficulties or hardships, you  are  able  to  fall  back  on
these   extensive  resources.  You  can  rely  on  the  greater  expanse  of
understanding, logic and reasoning, and scriptural authority to help you  in
analysing and solving your problems.

On the other hand, when you do  not  study  the  great  Buddhist  treatises,
you will not be equipped with all  the  wisdom  that  these  texts  provide.
Without the knowledge and wisdom offered by these great Buddhist  treatises,
you will not have the necessary skills in applying logic  and  reasoning  to
enable you to  have  a  more  well-grounded  approach  towards  solving  and
overcoming your problems and  hardships. Therefore,  you  should  understand
that it makes a huge  difference  to  yourself  when  you  study  the  great
treatises of Buddhism. Your mind becomes  more  expansive  and  you  have  a
greater store of wisdom to fall back on.

You can see this for yourself in  your  daily  life.  Different  people  may
encounter the same problems or hardships. But those  whose  minds  are  more
expansive, with more reserves  of  wisdom  to  call  upon,  have  a  greater
ability to analyse and solve their problems, applying  different  approaches
by using different kinds of logic. Hardships or problems  do  not  overwhelm
them  as  much  as  those  people  who  have  absolutely  no  knowledge,  no
understanding of logic and reasoning. They  are  unable  to  overcome  their
problems by tackling them from different angles.

Of course, we are not denying here the  factor  of  religious  devotion  and
faith. There are  people  who  have  extremely  strong  devotion  or  faith.
Through their intercessory prayers to their gurus as  well  as  the  tantric
deities, performed with single-pointed devotion, they are able  to  overcome
their problems. There are certainly some people who are  blessed  with  such
gifts. But it is  extremely  rare  to  have  this  natural  gift  of  strong
devotion that can help to overcome problems with  intercessory  prayers.  So
the majority of us do not have this option.

A lot of people become Buddhists with a lot of religious zeal  in  the  very
beginning. They may have overwhelming faith in their   guru  and  the  Three
Jewels. However, later in life, they may  encounter hardships  and  problems
to which there is no immediate solution. They then have the tendency to  let
their faith weaken or even entirely slip  away.  Such  things  do  occur  to
Buddhists in general, when their faith is not strong enough.

So when you do not equip yourself with an  extensive  understanding  of  the
scriptural teachings and the wisdom of the Buddhadharma that  are  available
to you, then once you encounter even the slightest  setback  in  life,  your
faith will easily falter.

But when  you  do  engage  in  listening  to  and  contemplating  the  great
treatises of the Buddhadharma,  such  as  the  Lam-Rim,  then  you  will  be
equipped with this great wisdom that is provided by the Buddhadharma.   When
you meet small setbacks in your life, or encounter even great hardships,  or
even during the darkest moments  in  your  life,  your  faith  will  not  be
affected.

In fact, quite the  reverse  may  happen.  You  will  have  the  ability  to
transform those obstacles or those darkest moments  of  your  life  to  fuel
your practice of the Buddhadharma. Your  faith  will  increase  due  to  the
wisdom that you have  acquired  from  listening  to  and  contemplating  the
Buddhist treatises.

As you progress in the Basic Program, the  topics  will  tend  to  get  more
profound and more complex.  So, from the outset, I want to present to  you:
   • the difference it will make to actually engage in  the  study  of  the
     great treatises;
   • the benefits and the qualities that you stand to acquire  and  achieve
     by doing so, and
   • the disadvantages and what you stand to lose when you do not study the
     great treatises.
So here we are doing a comparison of the benefits and the losses.

From the outset, when you are studying the Buddhist treatises, if your  mind
is unstable, you will encounter situations  where  you  may  find  that  the
treatises you are studying are not beneficial to  you.  You  may   start  to
doubt whether these teachings are actually helpful  or  not.  There  is  the
possibility of experiencing such doubt.

From the outset, you should not randomly study any scriptures or texts  that
you can get your hands  on.  Rather,  you  should  have  a  very  systematic
approach towards building up a very strong foundation that  can  become  the
basis to be supported by all the other  different  Buddhist  scriptures  and
philosophies. That will support your own personal growth  of  knowledge  and
wisdom. Right from the very beginning, you need to  establish  an  extremely
firm foundation by studying a text that is very  comprehensive.  That  forms
the foundation for the entire path. Then, along the way, as you go into  the
deeper subjects and the more detailed  complex  classics,  those  texts  can
serve as the support that  reinforces  and  further  strengthens  your  core
understanding of the Buddhadharma.

You also need to be aware that  there  are  all  sorts  of  different  books
available, books by different authors, teachers from different lineages  and
of different backgrounds. As a beginner, when you have not yet  grasped  the
core essence of the  Buddhadharma,  sometimes  reading  different  kinds  of
books, instead of helping you to develop your  wisdom,  may  only  serve  to
confuse you.

You may read books with contents that seem to contradict each other and  you
start to ask yourself why the Buddha’s teachings are contradictory  in  this
way. This is because you have yet to firmly grasp the core understanding  of
what is the Buddhadharma.  These books, instead of serving to  enhance  your
core understanding of the Buddha’s teachings, will  only  confuse  you  even
more.

Also, when you come  to  such  a  profound  teaching  as  the  Buddhadharma,
whether  it  is  teaching  or  learning  about  the  Buddhadharma,  you  may
experience different kinds of obstacles in your  life  that  will  sometimes
hinder you from progressing in your studying and learning the  Buddhadharma.
Therefore,  right  from  the  outset,  you  need  to  have  a  very   strong
determination  to  continue  with  your  studies  regardless   of   whatever
obstacles may happen in your life.

What is most important for us, to support that determination,  is  not  only
to study, but to make strong prayers to your guru, your  tantric  deity  and
the Three Jewels, to grant you the  blessings  in  your  life  to  ward  off
obstacles and provide all the conducive circumstances that will aid  you  in
completing your studies.

For example, a particular module such as the Stages of  the  Path  based  on
the Middle Length Lam-Rim may take four months to complete.  From  the  very
start, when you begin that module, you need to  make  extremely  strong  and
intense prayers to the guru, the lineage gurus, all the tantric  deities  as
well as the Three Jewels to grant you blessings so that you will be able  to
complete studying that module without any kind of  obstacles  and  with  all
the conducive circumstances  to  be  able  to  experience  the  fruition  of
studying that module.

When we are talk seriously about studying, listening  to  and  contemplating
the Buddha’s teachings or the Buddhist treatises from the viewpoint  of  the
Buddha, with reference to scriptural authority, it is  said  that  actually,
there is no better time to study the Buddha’s teachings  than  the  present.
Right now, you are equipped with all the conducive conditions to  study  and
to engage in listening to and contemplating the Buddha’s teachings.  Nothing
is missing or lacking from your life right now that makes it  necessary  for
you to postpone engaging in listening to such teachings.

You need to generate a strong  resolution,  right  from  the  beginning,  to
continue with these studies to the very  end  of  the  Program.  You  should
generate a great  determination  through  understanding  that  there  is  no
better time than now to study the Buddha’s  teachings.  Now  is  the  golden
time and it is the best opportunity. Everything is  perfect  for  you  right
now to study the Buddha’s teachings.

Sometimes, along  the  way,  you  may  feel  discouraged  due  to  your  own
intellectual limitations. You may feel that you do not think fast enough  or
you do  not  have  enough  intelligence  to  comprehend  the  content  of  a
particular module that you are studying.

When this happens, you need to remember this  saying,  ‘One  should  not  be
afraid of limited intelligence but, rather, one  should  be  afraid  of  the
lack of determination.’ You should not let your  lesser  intelligence  be  a
setback for yourself but, rather, you should protect yourself from the  lack
of determination.

Hence, you  should  understand  that  it  is  extremely  important  to  have
determination. You should not feel that it is a  setback  just  because  you
are unable to  immediately  understand  what  is  being  taught.  What  will
ultimately bring you to the end of the path  of  studying  and  practice  is
your determination.

Even  if  someone  is  extremely  intelligent  and  is  able  to  understand
everything the moment it is explained, sometimes, this  person may not  have
determination. After some time, you see such people  slipping  away  because
the determination is not there,  even  though  they  have  the  intellectual
ability to quickly and thoroughly understand what is  being  said.  However,
because they do not have determination, they are unable  to  complete  their
studies and practices. Therefore, determination is extremely  important  and
is of even greater importance than intellectual ability.

You should always take heart in your studies even  though  you  may  not  be
able to understand what is being said here now. Eventually,  you  will  come
to understand the knowledge or wisdom of the content that is being taught.

Geshe-la: Sometimes, I will question you  directly.  You  must  be  able  to
answer. I mean you don’t need to worry if  you  can’t  answer  my  question.
That doesn’t matter but you must prepare for  class.  That  is  the  way  to
learn.

(A Basic Program graduate shares his experience).

Geshe-la: Many of you know the reason why Kyabje Lama Zopa Rinpoche  has  so
many centres all over the world. His main idea is to teach  Buddhadharma  to
people. He always mentions that.

Building a centre is not like building a temple to just let people come  and
pray. This is not his main goal. His main goal is  to  educate  people  with
the Buddhadharma. In this way, you can benefit numberless people.
When you just come and pray, how  much  can  you  benefit  others?  It  only
benefits yourself. Maybe it will give you some peace of mind. But  when  you
come here to study and gain the knowledge  of  the  Buddhadharma,  how  much
benefit can you offer  to  others?  Far,  far  more.  So  there  is  a  huge
difference with just having a temple as a place of prayer, with no  classes.
Maybe we can benefit some people but we can’t reach many people.

When we have 230 people studying here and, at the end of the day, maybe  ten
people are good in their studies. These people can help another 200  to  300
people. They can benefit other people by guiding  them  and   teaching  them
what is right and what is wrong. This is the benefit that you will get  from
studying. The main purpose of having Amitabha  Buddhist  Centre,  therefore,
is to educate people about the Buddhadharma. That  is  the  whole  point  of
having the temple here.

So far, we have been doing very well. When we first  started  the  five-year
Basic Program, about 100 people signed up. It then dropped down to 60 to  70
people. But it was still very good as these people  were  able  to  come  to
classes for five to six  years. From what I see, I don’t think they came  to
the classes because they were devoted to me. They see the point of  studying
and see that the Buddhadharma is interesting. That is the  main  reason  why
they come to Amitabha Buddhist Centre. It is not because  I  am  great  that
they come here. I don’t think it was like that.

This time, we have more people, about 230 to 240. Definitely, I don’t  think
everyone will continue with these classes. Maybe, many of you will  continue
but not everyone. Those of you who want to study and sign up for  the  five-
year Program, I will set up some groups to help you. I  will  appoint  those
who have completed the Basic Program and had taken the final  exam  to  look
after you.

These leaders will look after you  by  answering  your  questions.  You  can
send your questions to your leader through email or whenever you  come  here
for class. I will form some groups and I will appoint leaders. These  people
will have the responsibility to answer your questions. In  this  way,  those
who had completed the Basic Program can  also  learn  more.  They  have  the
responsibility to answer your questions. So don’t ask me  for  the  answers!
They must be able to answer your questions. If they  are  unable  to  answer
your questions, you can tell me.

We all have the good karma  to  gather  together  to  be  here.  As  I  have
mentioned before, you have to remember that I can’t give you everything    I
know. I can only share with you 30% and the remaining  70%,  you  must  work
for it. When you do that and if you don’t achieve  anything  over  the  next
five years, you can come and complain to me! Only then.  Otherwise,    don’t
tell me that you don’t understand.



Translated by Ven. Yeshe Gyatso
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Cecilia Tsong
Edited by Cecilia Tsong
Checked by Shirley Soh

