Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L18 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.095380
================================================================================



Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


Lesson No: 18                      Date: 18th August 2011


The points we covered in the previous  lesson,  i.e.,  what  to  do  between
meditation sessions, are important. You should not think that  they  are  of
little significance. Those are important points that you  need  to  keep  in
mind.

In order to be able to engage  in  a  good  meditation  practice,  you  must
restrain your sensory faculties. When  you  do  not  restrain  your  sensory
faculties, then afflictions, such as attachment and anger, may  arise.  When
they arise, they will interfere with your meditation.

If you really wish to do a good meditation practice, it is  advised  in  the
teachings that you should abandon the hustle and bustle  of  your  life  and
stay in isolation. But even when you are in physical  isolation,  you  still
need to remain vigilant. It doesn’t mean  that  when  you  are  in  physical
isolation that you will necessarily develop a virtuous state of  mind.  That
is not necessarily so. Why? Because  the  afflictions,  such  as  anger  and
attachment, arise from within  the  mind.  Therefore,  it  is  important  to
always remain vigilant with regard  to  whatever  you  do  with  your  body,
speech, and mind.

You need to have an alert mind in order for your meditation practice  to  go
well. One of the conditions  for  having  an  alert  mind  is  to  adopt  an
appropriate diet in terms of the amount of food  that  you  consume  and  so
forth. Since you have to eat  daily,  it  is  important  that  you  remember
these different teachings that advise you on the kind of attitude  you  need
to have while you are eating:
 • You should regard the food you eat as medicine and that you eat in  order
   to sustain your body.
 • Since the food that you eat  comes  in  dependence  on  and  through  the
   kindness of other sentient beings, therefore when you  pray,  you  should
   pray for and dedicate your prayers to them.
 • It is important that when  you  eat,  you  should  not  be  motivated  by
   afflictions such as hostility or attachment.
These are very important instructions.
Next is the advice with regard to sleep. As you should engage in virtue  all
the time, you should not sleep at the wrong  times.  You  should  strive  in
virtue. When it is time for you to sleep, you need to know  how  you  should
sleep and in what kind of posture. The point is that  you  should  transform
your sleep into virtue. You need to sleep in order to rest  your  body.  But
when you think about it, the time you spend  on  sleeping  takes  up  almost
half of your life. This is a huge portion of your  lifespan.  Therefore  you
should make it meaningful.

As mentioned in the teachings, you should fall asleep with a virtuous  state
of mind. Therefore, you should generate a virtuous state of mind before  you
fall asleep and then try to fall asleep with that virtuous  state  of  mind.
When you are able to do this, then the entire sleep becomes  virtuous.  When
you are able to do this your whole life, you will profit greatly from  this.


You need to understand these various points and put them  into  practice  as
much as possible. You need to  familiarise  yourself  with  these  different
attitudes and thoughts so as to move your mind in that direction.

                              *****************

    2B4A-2B      The reason why [meditation] needs to be sustained by means
    of two modes of sustaining

         1  [The two modes of sustaining]
         2  Refutation of the misconception asserting that although there
         are both analytical and placement meditations, one single person
         does not practice them
         3  Refutation of the misconception asserting that all conceptions
         apprehend signs
         4  Refutation of the misconception asserting that if you do a lot
         of analytical meditation prior to the arising of concentration, it
         becomes an obstacle

    2B4A-2B1     [The two modes of sustaining]

         A  The reason why both analysis and placement are necessary for
         meditation[1] (Page 35)

On page 35, this section deals with the reason why meditation  needs  to  be
sustained in two ways, i.e., (1) analytical meditation and  (2)  stabilising
meditation

The quotation from Maitreya’s Ornament of the Sutras highlights  the  stages
of entering the Buddha’s teachings. He says that, first  you  need  to  hear
the teachings. From hearing the teachings, you develop  the  wisdom  arising
from hearing. Based on that, you need to reflect on  what  you  have  heard.
From reflection comes the wisdom arising from reflection. You then  need  to
familiarise your mind by meditating on what you  have  ascertained.  Through
meditation comes the wisdom arising from meditation. These  are  the  stages
by which you enter into the Buddha’s teachings.

There is a saying that whatever you are going  to  put  into  practice,  you
have to hear the teachings first from someone else. You hear  the  teachings
so that you can delineate them clearly in your own  mind.  But  hearing  the
teachings alone is not sufficient.

After you have heard the teachings, you need to analyse and reflect on  what
you have heard by using scriptural authorities and  reasoning  in  order  to
arrive at a definite ascertainment of the  particular  topic  for  yourself.
Such definite ascertainment arises from reflection.

The object of meditation, whatever it may be,  is  arrived  at  through  the
processes of hearing and reflection. Through  hearing  and  reflection,  you
remove the doubts or qualms that you may have pertaining to your  object  of
meditation. Once you have removed your doubts and qualms pertaining to  your
object of meditation, i.e.,  after  you  have  ascertained  your  object  of
meditation, you then meditate on that ascertainment. That is meditation.

There  are  two  ways  of  familiarising  yourself  with   what   you   have
ascertained:
1. using the wisdom of discernment to analyse  what  you  have  ascertained,
   i.e., analytical meditation and,
2. stabilising meditation  whereby  you  do  not  engage  in  analysis  with
   respect to the object of meditation.

From this, you can see that the more you hear  the  teachings,  the  greater
will be your wisdom arising from hearing. The more you reflect on  what  you
have heard, the greater will be your wisdom arising  from  reflection.  Then
the more you meditate on what you have  ascertained,  the  greater  will  be
your wisdom arising from meditation.

What is the benefit the greater your wisdom arising  from  meditation?   The
greater your wisdom arising from meditation, the benefits are:
  • when it comes to stopping the faults that arise your mind, you have more
    methods to stop them.
  • when it comes to developing good qualities, you also have  more  methods
    and more wisdom to develop such good qualities.

When you think along these lines, are you able to see how important  hearing
and reflection is  to  the  practice  of  meditation  and  the  relationship
between these three activities?

Summary:
  • From hearing, the wisdom arising from hearing is developed.
  • From reflection, the wisdom arising from reflection is developed.
  • Whatever ascertainment you arrive at  through  hearing  and  reflection,
    that is your object of meditation.
  • With regard to the ways to meditate on that object of meditation,  there
    are two ways: (1) analytical meditation and (2) stabilising meditation.

On page 36, there is a quotation from Shantideva’s Compendium  of  Training.
Lama Tsongkhapa then says:
With regard to  the  meditations  that  should  be  done  according  to  the
statement, for all four activities - giving away,  guarding,  purifying  and
increasing - with respect to each of  the  three  -  body,  possessions  and
roots of virtue, there are both  analytical  meditations  sustained  through
analysis by means of discriminating  wisdom  and  placement  meditations[2],
which are to place [the mind] single-pointedly without analysis (Page 36).

With respect to the body:
  • There is the practice of giving away your body and in  that  meditation,
    you regard your body as a boat, giving it away to benefit other sentient
    beings.
  • You also need to guard (or protect)  your  body.  This  means  that  you
    should not give away your body for insignificant reasons.
  • In order to guard against attachment, you purify the body by  meditating
    on its ugliness.
  • Increasing or enhancing your body  refers  to  the  practice  of  ethics
    through which you will be able to obtain good rebirths in the future.

With respect to possessions:
 • There is the practice of giving away your possessions.
 • There is the practice of protecting your possessions so that they do  not
   go to waste.
 • Purifying your possessions means abstaining from wrong livelihood.
 • Increasing your possessions means dedicating all the roots of virtue that
   you have acquired from your acts of generosity. It can also refer to  the
   practice of giving away your possessions.

With respect to merit:
 • The practice of giving away your merit means  dedicating  your  roots  of
   virtue to others.
 • Guarding your merit means protecting your merit against anger.
 • Purifying the merit  means  that  with  the  bodhicitta  motivation,  you
   dedicate  the  roots  of  virtue   to   become   causes   for   achieving
   enlightenment.
 • Increasing the merit means rejoicing in the roots of virtue.

These are the four practices of  giving  away,  protecting,  purifying,  and
increasing in relation to the three – your  body,  possessions  and  merits.
The purpose of citing this quotation is to establish that meditation is  not
restricted to stabilising meditation alone. As meditation involves  analysis
as well, there is analytical  meditation.  In  order  to  substantiate  this
point, quotations from the great Indian masters such as Arya Asanga and  the
great bodhisattva Shantideva are used.

         B  Identification of analysis and placement (Page 36)

If indeed there are two  forms  of  meditation,  analytical  meditation  and
stabilising meditation, what practices  involve  analytical  meditation  and
what practices involve stabilising meditation?

Analytical meditation is done for the following topics: “the cultivation  of
confidence in the spiritual teacher, the preciousness of  the  freedoms  and
endowments and how difficult it is to find  them,  death  and  impermanence,
karma and its effect, the faults of cyclic existence and the cultivation  of
bodhicitta.” These practices are cultivated through analytical meditation.

Let us take the cultivation of faith as an illustration. In order for  faith
to arise in your heart, you must engage in  analytical  meditation.  Without
analytical meditation, just bringing up the object of faith and  staring  at
it will not bring about any feeling of faith. Rather, faith  arises  through
analysis, i.e., when you think about the teachings and apply logic  and  the
relevant reasons.

The kind of faith that you need to produce is a very strong  one  that  will
move your heart. In order for such a strong faith to arise, you must  engage
in analytical meditation without which such forceful faith will  not  arise.
What happens when you are able to produce such a powerful faith?  When  such
faith arises in your heart, its counterpart, disrespect, will be stopped.

To summarise, in order to generate strong faith  in  your  heart,  you  must
think of those reasons that promote the cultivation of this kind of faith.

The text gives an example to illustrate this point:  when  your  mind  turns
towards a pleasant object, an object of attachment, and you think  about  it
over and over again, very strong attachment will arise. Likewise,  when  you
think about something or  someone  that  you  do  not  like,  an  object  of
aversion, a forceful hostility or anger will arise when you think about  the
object over and over again. Therefore by thinking about the object over  and
over again, forceful states of awareness will be developed.

What  kind  of  practice  involves  stabilising  meditation?  When  you  are
practising to achieve calm-abiding (or meditative serenity), then  you  need
to engage in stabilising meditation. If you engage in analytical  meditation
when you are practising calm-abiding, that will hinder  the  development  of
calm-abiding.

You have to understand that, in general, analytical meditation helps in  the
development of calm-abiding. This will be covered soon. But at that time  in
your spiritual development, when you are  trying  to  achieve  calm-abiding,
you do not engage in analytical meditation. Rather,  you  should  engage  in
stabilising meditation if you are practising calm-abiding.

You are supposed to read the text beforehand so that when I talk  about  the
important points in class, you can check  whether  your  conclusion  matches
what I have said. Sometimes I will read from the text but  if  we  read  the
text in class, it will take  forever.  My  current  approach  will  only  be
useful if you do your part. You have to read the text and  think  about  it.
Then, when I give you the  summary  in  class,  you  can  check  whether  it
matches your own understanding. If you don’t  prepare  beforehand  and  when
you hear my presentation, which  is  a  summary,  and  if  you  want  me  to
summarise my summary, then it is going to be a bit tricky.

Summary
• There are two forms of meditation:
1. Analytical meditation
2. Stabilising meditation
• What practices involve analytical meditation and what  practices  involve
  stabilising meditation? The practices that require analytical  meditation
  have been listed out. Stabilising meditation is done primarily to achieve
  calm-abiding.
You need to memorise these points as they are the  bases  of  something  for
you to think about and analyse further. Why do I need to perform  analytical
meditation for a particular topic? Why is  analytical  mediation  a  problem
when I want to engage in calm-abiding?

    2B4A-2B2     Refutation of the misconception asserting that although
    there are both analytical and placement meditations, one single person
    does not practice them (Page 36)

There is a misconception that an individual does not need to  practise  both
kinds of  meditation,  analytical  meditation  and  stabilising  meditation.
There is this  misconception  that  scholars  only  need  to  do  analytical
meditation  whereas   those   meditators   who   have   abandoned   external
distractions and live in isolation only need  stabilising  meditation.  Lama
Tsongkhapa says that this is wrong and is  a  misconception.  He  says  that
both  scholars  and  meditators  need  to  engage  in  both  analytical  and
stabilising meditations. Why?  When  the  scholars  need  to  achieve  calm-
abiding, they will need to  engage  in  stabilising  meditation.  For  those
meditators who live in isolation, in  order  for  them  to  develop  a  very
strong  faith  in  their  teachers,  they  have  to  engage  in   analytical
meditation.

    2B4A-2B3     Refutation of the misconception asserting that all
    conceptions apprehend signs (Page 36)

There are some people who claim that all  conceptual  thoughts  are  harmful
because they prevent you from achieving enlightenment or  omniscience.  This
is a misconception that should be abandoned.

Why is it a misconception?  There are many  different  kinds  of  conceptual
thoughts. There are conceptual thoughts that are incorrect mental  attention
such as apprehending the self  and  phenomena  to  be  truly  or  inherently
existent. But there are also conceptual thoughts  that  are  correct  mental
attention such as apprehending reality exactly in  accordance  with  how  it
exists. Such conceptual thoughts are valid cognitions.

Because of not knowing how to differentiate between  correct  and  incorrect
mental attention, this misconception arises  thinking  that  all  conceptual
thoughts are  harmful.   The  way  to  overcome  this  misconception  is  to
understand that there are different kinds of conceptual thoughts.  Some  are
positive  while  others  are  negative.  You  should   stop   the   negative
conceptions that are incorrect mental attention.  Such  conceptual  thoughts
are called wrong consciousnesses. The positive conceptual thoughts  are  the
conceptual thoughts that apprehend the object in accordance  with  how  they
actually exist in reality.

We will be looking at the presentation of the mind in more detail in one  of
the future Basic Program modules.

    2B4A-2B4     Refutation of the misconception asserting that if you do a
    lot of analytical meditation prior to the arising of concentration, it
    becomes an obstacle (Page 37)

Here is another misconception that says that if you do a lot  of  analytical
meditation, it will obstruct your attainment of calm-abiding.  In  order  to
achieve calm-abiding, the mind must be made serviceable.  The  way  to  make
the mind serviceable  is  to  engage  in  analytical  meditation.  Therefore
analytical meditation makes the mind serviceable.

What should you reflect on then?  It  is  mentioned  here  that  you  should
reflect and analyse over and over again the faults of your  afflictions  and
the faults of samsara, cyclic  existence.  You  need  to  reflect  on  these
points repeatedly until you are disenchanted with cyclic existence and  your
afflictions. When your mind is disenchanted with cyclic existence, it  helps
to control your negative emotions, lessening  your  mental  excitement,  and
the different kinds of distractions.

Likewise, when you apply logic and  reasoning  to  your  reflection  on  the
topics of guru devotion, cultivating  faith  in  the  virtuous  friend,  and
thinking about how wonderful it is to  have  achieved  this  human  life  of
freedoms and endowments, all the positive effects of your virtuous  actions,
the benefits of bodhicitta, and so forth,  you  will  be  able  to  generate
faith and a happy mind. When your mind is happy and uplifted,  it  helps  to
counteract laxity.

You can see now  that  analytical  meditation  makes  the  mind  serviceable
because by applying analytical meditation to these various topics,  you  are
able to stop, to a large extent, excitement and laxity.  When  the  mind  is
made serviceable in such a way that it is not so  influenced  by  excitement
and laxity, that person is in a very good position to achieve  calm-abiding.


From what has been discussed so far, I  hope  now  that  you  can  see  that
analytical meditation is very helpful to the  development  of  calm-abiding.
Analytical meditation done prior to achieving calm-abiding is very  helpful.
Therefore, when people say that analytical meditation is not  necessary  and
is harmful  to  your  practice  of  calm-abiding,  you  can  see  that  that
statement is wrong and has no basis whatsoever.

As it says in the text, “When it has been transformed in that way,  whatever
you wish to achieve, calm-abiding or special insight, if you  fix  upon  it,
you will achieve it without difficulty.  That  is  why  such  an  analytical
meditation  is  the  best  means  of  achieving  non-conceptual   meditative
stabilisation (Page 37).” The details are in the text. You  should  read  it
over and over again.

You should understand that this is not a creation of Lama  Tsongkhapa.  What
he said so far has its source in the teachings of the great Indian  masters.
You  can  see  the  quotations  from  their  teachings  in  the  text.  Lama
Tsongkhapa is merely explaining their intent and elaborating on it.

Furthermore, the main adverse  conditions  for  the  mind  staying  with  an
object of meditation continuously are twofold:  laxity  and  excitement.  If
you have a strong and constant awareness that sees  the  positive  qualities
of the Three Jewels etc., it is quite easy  to  overcome  laxity,  for  many
valid sources say that its antidote is to uplift  the  mind  by  looking  at
positive qualities. If you have a strong and constant  awareness  that  sees
the disadvantages of impermanence, suffering, and  so  forth,  it  is  quite
easy to overcome excitement, because, since excitement is a distracted  mind
belonging   to   [the   category   of]   attachment,   many   texts   praise
disillusionment as its antidote (Pages 37 – 38).

Earlier in the text, there was a major division of the  outline,  “The  root
of the path: how to rely on a spiritual teacher (Page 19).”  Next  are  “The
stages of how to train mind once you have relied (Page  38).”  You  can  say
that this is the actual body of the text.

Question:  What  is  the  difference  between  reflection   and   analytical
meditation?

Answer: First you have to ascertain the order. In the  beginning,  there  is
hearing. Only then is there reflection, and then meditation.  In the  three-
fold activities of hearing, reflection and meditation,  reflection  precedes
meditation. What reflection does is to achieve a  stable  ascertainment  and
understanding with regard to the chosen object. Analytical meditation  comes
after reflection.

Question: I can’t distinguish between reflection and analytical  meditation.
Meditation is also a form of thinking so what are the differences  in  these
two different ways of thinking?

Answer: Analysis is reflection. During reflection, you engage  in  analysis.
What is the difference between  reflection  and  analytical  meditation?  In
fact, when you are reflecting, you are almost always analysing.

When you are talking about meditation, meditation  comes  after  reflection.
You can meditate while doing analysis, i.e.,  meditation  through  analysis.
That is what is called analytical  meditation.  If  you  are  talking  about
analytical meditation, it can only come after reflection.

Analysis does occur  during  reflection.  While  there  is  analysis  during
reflection, there is no meditation. What is the meaning of  meditation?  You
repeatedly familiarise yourself with what you have already  ascertained  but
you have not ascertained the object during reflection.

That is why I often say it is very important to  have  questions.  Not  only
just questions but you can also ask questions on the answer  given  to  that
question. It is very useful and it helps everyone.

I really think this is the best way to approach your studies, when you  have
questions. In the first place, in order to have a question,  you  must  have
thought about the subject. Only after thinking about  things  can  you  have
questions. Then you can ask your questions. If you are  not  satisfied  with
the answer to your question, obviously you will have  more  questions  until
you  can  get  a  satisfactory  answer  or  you  have  ascertained  it.  The
understanding that arrives at the end of this process will stay in the  mind
for a long time. You will not forget it and it is very stable.

The next section is the topic of the human life of freedoms and  endowments.
It is not  a  difficult  topic.  It  is  very  straightforward.  It  entails
identifying the human life of freedoms and endowments, how precious  it  is,
what you can achieve  with  it  and  the  difficulty  of  achieving  such  a
rebirth. Although it is a fairly straightforward section, that doesn’t  mean
that you don’t have to read it. Ideally, you should read  it  two  to  three
times or, at the very least, once. You read  and  you  also  have  to  think
about what you have read. This is the homework.


Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng
Edited by Cecilia Tsong
Checked by Shirley Soh

-----------------------
[1] Khen Rinpoche is minimising the reading of the root text  in  class.  In
accordance with his advice, only the  relevant  outline  pertaining  to  the
commentary  given  during  the  teachings  will  be  incorporated   in   the
transcripts.
[2] “Discriminating wisdom and placement meditations” can also be
translated as the “wisdom of discernment and stabilising meditations.”

