Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L26 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.490291
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


   Lesson No: 26             Date: 27th September 2011


As I mentioned in the last lesson, you really need to  think  about  refuge.
In order for there to be genuine  refuge  in  your  heart,  you  must  first
possess the two causes in your mind. What are the two causes? Briefly,  they
are fear and faith[1].

There are two conditions for being protected by taking refuge:
1. The external condition  is  the  Buddha  because  he  possesses  all  the
   necessary qualifications to protect you.
2. The internal cause is from your own side. You have  to  entrust  yourself
   completely to the Buddha by taking wholehearted refuge. When you do that,
   you will definitely be protected.

Having said that, how are you being protected?

You need to realise one very important point in order  to  understand  this.
Your  fear  and  suffering  arise  primarily  from  your  undisciplined   or
unsubdued mind. All your problems and sufferings are the results of the non-
virtuous karma that is within you. It is internal, not external.

In order to be  freed  from  your  suffering,  you  have  to  overcome  this
internal condition, the unsubdued mind that gives rise to your  non-virtuous
karma. When you can do that, you will be liberated from your suffering.

Since the main cause of  suffering  is  the  unsubdued  mind  and  the  non-
virtuous karma within you, the solution to this problem  has  to  come  from
your own side. The solution lies  within  you.  You  have  to  practise  the
solution, ethics, i.e., refraining from the ten non-virtuous actions.

With the faith of conviction in the Buddha from your  own  side,  you  guard
your  practice  of  refraining  from  the  ten  non-virtuous  actions.  Then
definitely you will be protected from the suffering of the lower realms.

In the context of  the  path  that  is  shared  with  the  person  of  small
capacity, the very thing that rescues you from the suffering  of  the  lower
realms is the practice  of  ethics  refraining  from  the  ten  non-virtuous
actions. This practice becomes the actual protection. When  your  faith  and
trust in the Buddha is strong, you will be able to practise  the  ethics  of
refraining from the ten non-virtuous actions. The stronger  your  faith  and
trust in the Buddha, the better will be your practice of ethics. There is  a
relationship here.  Therefore  faith  and  trust  in  the  Buddha  are  very
important.

You may notice that the outline,  “Identifying  the  objects  [of  refuge],”
refers not only to the Buddha but it mentions three objects of  refuge:  the
Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha.

The objects that are regarded as your refuge are the buddhas  together  with
their spiritual sons, i.e., all the bodhisattvas abiding  on  the  different
bodhisattva grounds. They all arise from the  Dharma  Jewel.  What  produces
all the buddhas who are so precious and  whom  you  hold  so  dear  in  your
hearts? It is none other than the Dharma  Jewel.  All  the  superior  beings
whom you cherish and hold in high regard also come from  the  Dharma  Jewel.
Therefore there are  three  objects  of  refuge,  the  Buddha,  Dharma,  and
Sangha.

Looking at the Three Jewels  from  the  perspective  of  cause  and  effect,
especially in relation to how your own mind can  be  transformed  to  become
like them, then the Dharma Jewel arises first. The person who  achieves  the
Dharma Jewel becomes the Sangha Jewel. This Sangha Jewel  will  progress  on
the path till one day he becomes the Buddha  Jewel.  In  dependence  on  the
Dharma, the practitioner becomes Sangha and then a buddha. So  in  terms  of
its evolution, first is  the  Dharma  Jewel,  then  the  Sangha  Jewel,  and
finally the Buddha Jewel.

Usually when we talk about the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha,  it  is  in  that
order. This order of describing the Three Jewels is from the perspective  of
the Buddha coming to this world. In terms of  that  historical  perspective,
the Buddha descended to this world, taught the Dharma,  and  by  actualising
the Dharma, there came to be the Sangha.

So in evolutionary terms, first there is a Dharma Jewel. What  is  a  Dharma
Jewel? The Dharma Jewel refers to a  particular  mind  that  can  act  as  a
direct antidote to any of your afflictions. When  this  mind  is  generated,
that is when the Dharma Jewel is produced. The person who  has  this  Dharma
Jewel in his mind becomes a Sangha Jewel.

In the last lesson we looked briefly at the good qualities of  the  Buddha’s
exalted body, speech, and mind, and his  enlightened  activities.  The  text
then continues with the good qualities of the Dharma and Sangha.

    2B4B-2B1A-2A3A-2 Positive qualities of the Dharma (Page 70)

The qualities of the Buddha’s  exalted  body,  speech,  and  mind,  and  his
enlightened activities are  inconceivable.  Where  does  this  inconceivable
Buddha come from?  He  arose  from  the  Dharma.  When  you  understand  how
inconceivable the Buddha’s qualities are, you will then  get  some  idea  of
the  potential  of  the  Dharma.  In  this  context,   the   Dharma   refers
specifically to true paths and true cessations.

A true path refers to a mind that is the direct antidote to the  afflictions
in your mental continuum. When this special mind is developed,  you  achieve
the true path. Based on the true path, you achieve  permanent  freedom  from
any of the afflictions. That factor of permanent freedom  from  any  of  the
afflictions is known as true cessation.

For now, you only need to have this level of understanding of what a  Dharma
Jewel is. You should have some idea of what a true path and  true  cessation
are. They will be explained in further detail when we come to the  topic  of
the paths and grounds in the future.

Second: On account of [your] respect for the Buddha, you should  be  mindful
[/remember] thinking: the fact that the Buddha has {89} limitless  qualities
arose  from  manifesting  and  meditating  the  Dharma  of  scriptures   and
realization, the truths [?*] of cessation and the path, the epitome  of  the
abandonment of faults and the achievement of  positive  qualities.  That  is
the meaning of the [/proposed in]Compendium  of  the  Dharma  [Sutra]  (Page
70).

    2B4B-2B1A-2A3A-3 Positive qualities of the Sangha (Page 70)

The Sangha Jewel here refers primarily to the arya or superior  beings.  You
reflect on the qualities of the superior beings: how they are the  ones  who
possess the Dharma Jewel and how they practise the Dharma.

    2B4B-2B1A-2A3B     Understanding their distinctions (Page 70)

You go for refuge after  understanding  the  distinctions  among  the  Three
Jewels based on their defining characteristics:
   • The Buddha Jewel: full enlightenment.
   • The Dharma Jewel: arising from the Buddha Jewel.
   • The Sangha Jewel: correct practice of the Dharma Jewel.

    2B4B-2B1A-2A3C     Assertion[2]

Third: As is apparent [?] from the Extensive Commentary on the  Vinaya,  you
go for refuge in terms of [/(the understanding of)] considering  the  Buddha
to be the one who teaches the refuge; the Dharma to  be  nirvana,  which  is
the actual refuge; and  the  Sangha,  to  be  the  companions  accomplishing
refuge (Page 70).

Going for refuge through commitment means upholding the  Buddha  to  be  the
one who taught you refuge, the Dharma as nirvana or the  actual  refuge  and
the Sangha as the companions who help you to achieve refuge.

    2B4B-2B1A-2A3D     Not advocating other ones (Page 70)

Having gone for refuge, you will not acknowledge  other  objects  of  refuge
because you know that the Buddha is the  one  who  has  perfected  all  good
qualities and has eradicated all faults. He is the only one who can  protect
you from the suffering of the lower realms and  the  suffering  of  samsara.
When you understand that no one else can do this, you  hold  the  Buddha  as
your sole refuge. You do not turn to someone else for protection.

After having gone for refuge to the Buddha, Dharma,  and  Sangha,  what  are
the trainings that you have to follow?

    2B4B-2B1A-2A4 The stages[/stages?] of training after having gone for
    refuge [?*](Page 71)

After having gone for refuge to the Buddha Jewel, what should  you  not  do?
In the oral tradition, the precepts of refuge are divided into (1)  specific
(or special) precepts, and (2) common (or general) precepts.

    2B4B-2B1A-2A4A     The actual content [/one/ones] [/The ? itself]

         1  Specific precepts [for the individual objects of refuge]
         2  Common precepts [for all three objects of refuge]


    2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-1   Specific[/individual/respective] precepts [for the
    individual objects of refuge][3] [?*why does the title change in
    German?]

         A  Precepts of what is to be stopped
         B  Precepts of what is to be accomplished


    2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-1A  Precepts of what is to be stopped

         1  Not to go for refuge to other gods
         2  To give up causing harm or difficulty [?*/obstruction] to
         sentient beings
             3    Not to associate with non-Buddhists [/Conni: proponents of
      non-Buddhist views]






         1  Not to go for refuge to other gods

The first of these: If one does  not  even  regard  powerful  worldly  gods,
Rudra, Vishnu and the like as long-term refuge, no need to  speak  of  nagas
and local spirits belonging to the hungry ghosts. In this regard,  while  it
is not appropriate to rely on them from a lack of conviction  in  the  three
objects of refuge, it is not inappropriate  to  seek  their  assistance  for
some action of temporary character. By way of example, it  is  like  seeking
assistance from a donor for one’s livelihood or like relying on a doctor  in
hope for a cure (Pages 71 – 72).

When you take refuge, you first have to identify whom  you  are  seeking  as
your protector. You have identified that your  objects  of  refuge  are  the
Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha. Particularly in relation to the Buddha, you  are
supposed to have gone for refuge after  you  decisively  concluded  in  your
mind that it is only the Buddha who can protect you from  the  suffering  of
the lower realms and the suffering of samsara. Having done  that,  you  then
entrust yourself completely to the  Buddha.  If  you  then  decide  to  seek
refuge from worldly gods, nagas, or spirits,  that  goes  against  what  you
have earlier committed yourself to.  You  should  avoid  that  after  having
gone for refuge to the Buddha.
What is refuge? It is  a  state  of  mind  whereby  you  decisively  entrust
yourself to the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha. You go to them for  refuge.   If
after having gone for refuge to the Buddha, Dharma,  and  Sangha,  you  then
consider some other entity as your ultimate refuge,  the  previous  mind  of
heartfelt  refuge  will  cease  to  exist.  They   cannot   exist   together
simultaneously.

It is very important that you  relate  this  to  what  have  been  discussed
earlier.  You  should  understand  that  your  sufferings,   problems,   and
unhappiness ultimately arise from your negative unsubdued mind and  are  the
result of your negative  karma.  The  cause  lies  within  you.  It  is  not
something that is external.

When you want to be free of all your problems, then  you  have  to  liberate
yourself from  the  causes  of  those  problems.  The  root  cause  of  your
unsubdued mind is your ego, i.e., apprehending a  real  and  truly  existent
self. This is called ignorance and it is the root of all your problems.  You
then have to produce an  antidote  to  overcome  that  ignorance.  Only  the
Buddha taught the antidote to ignorance.

The  Buddha  taught  dependent-arising  as  the  antidote   for   overcoming
ignorance. No one else in the world has taught dependent- arising. Based  on
your  understanding  of  this  discussion,  you  can  then  understand   how
ultimately the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha are the  highest  and  unsurpassed
objects of refuge.

One frequently asked question is, “Is it all right to  take  refuge  in  the
worldly gods or nagas?” The answer in the  text  is  very  clear.  When  you
regard these entities as your ultimate  (or  highest)  refuge  that  is  not
right because they cannot protect you. However, at times it is all right  to
seek their temporary assistance especially when the problem  is  related  to
them and  is  within  their  means  to  handle,  such  as  spirit  harms  or
sicknesses.  It is like consulting a doctor for the cure of an illness.

But it is not right  at  all  to  regard  these  worldly  entities  as  your
ultimate objects of refuge. You have to understand that  all  these  worldly
gods, nagas, and spirits are just external conditions. It is  true  that  at
times they do play a part in some of your experiences such as  spirit  harms
but, nevertheless,  they  are  still  external  conditions.  At  times,  the
problem can  be  solved  by  seeking  their  assistance,  but  you  have  to
understand  and  remember  that  the  main  cause  of  being  possessed   or
experiencing sickness is within you. It is due to your  own  unsubdued  mind
and your non-virtuous karma.

The proscriptive precept that you should cultivate after  having  going  for
refuge to the Dharma is:

         2  To give up causing harm or difficulty [?*/obstruction] to
         sentient beings (Page 72)

The second one consists in giving up  causing  harm  or  difficulty  [?]  to
humans or animals, and so forth through thought  or  actions  like  beating,
binding, ensnaring them[?*einsperren?], piercing  their  noses  and  loading
them unbearably [/overloading them].

This is very important.

         3  Not to associate with non-Buddhists [/Conni: proponents of non-
         Buddhist views]

The third one consists in not conforming to those  who  are  unconvinced  by
the protection of the three jewels, and denigrate them (Page 72).

The third proscriptive precept entails not agreeing with those  who  do  not
believe in and repudiate  the  Three  Jewels  as  objects  of  refuge.  This
precept refers to avoiding being close to such people, especially  when  you
are a beginner.

As a beginner, when your refuge is not yet stable, by mixing with those  who
are actively against the Three Jewels, there may be a danger  that  you  may
give up your refuge. It is important to understand the  rationale  for  this
particular precept. Otherwise, you may feel  you  have  lost  your  freedom,
“Now, I cannot do this. I cannot do that.”

In this context, “associate” refers primarily to  contact  at  the  physical
and verbal levels. At the physical  level,  you  do  not  maintain  a  close
relationship but in your heart you should still feel close to everyone.  You
only need to maintain a distance on the physical and verbal  levels  due  to
the danger explained earlier.

When your refuge has  become  stable  and  you  have  achieved  irreversible
faith, then there is dispensation in some situations. When there is  a  need
for it, you are permitted to do some of the things  that  are  not  allowed.
For those who have very stable and irreversible faith, there  is  a  special
dispensation for them to benefit others.

Therefore you need to have a complete understanding of the rationale  behind
this proscriptive precept. Without that understanding, then  when  you  look
at this precept at face value, you may start to wonder why  Buddhism  is  so
restrictive.

    2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-1B Precepts of what is to be accomplished [?/Conni:
    performed]

         1  How to train with respect to the representations of the Buddha
         2  How to train with respect to the representations of the Dharma
         3  How to train with respect to the representations of the sangha

    2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-1B1 How to train with respect to the representations of
    the Buddha

         A  The actual way to train with respect to the representations of
         the Buddha (Page 72)

You should regard all  representations  of  the  Buddha,  be  it  a  statue,
painting, and so forth, as the actual Buddha, treating them  as  objects  of
reverence. Your reverence and respect for these holy objects should  not  be
based on the material that they are made from,  regarding  those  made  from
precious materials as holier. When the painting of the Buddha  is  not  done
well, you should still accord it  proper  respect  and  reverence  with  the
recognition that it is an actual Buddha. You stand to gain by doing that.

    2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-1B2 How to train with respect to representations of the
    Dharma (Page 73)

Having gone for refuge to the Dharma, you should regard any  scriptures  and
Dharma texts as the actual Dharma and accord them respect and reverence.  It
is very important to accord proper reverence and  respect  for  the  Dharma,
especially those texts that you are studying and reflecting on.  You  should
regard them as  something  very  precious  and  pay  homage  to  them,  make
offerings to them, and so forth. When you do that, it makes a difference  to
your understanding and realisation of the subject matter that  is  contained
in those texts.

You should accord proper respect and reverence for the scriptures and  place
them in a high, not a low place. The scriptures contain everything you  need
to learn and are the medium through which  the  teachings  are  conveyed  to
you.

Sharawa said: “We play around with  the  Dharma  in  all  sorts  of  ways  –
irreverance for  the  Dharma  and  expounders  of  Dharma  is  a  cause  for
distorted wisdom. We are already confused enough now. What are we  going  to
do if we get more confused (Page 72)?”

You need to develop a very high regard  and  respect  for  those  scriptures
that show you what to practise and what have  to  be  learnt.  You  need  to
respect them by making offerings to them. By  respecting  these  scriptures,
you stand to gain, as you will enjoy success in  your  studies,  reflection,
and meditation. They become the causes for developing wisdom.

    2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-1B3 Precepts with regard to the Sangha
    [?*representations of the sangha]

         A  The actual [precepts] (Page 72)

Having gone for refuge to the Sangha, you should not  criticise  or  despise
them or those who merely possess the symbols of  an  ordained  person.  Even
when the person is wearing the mere symbol of the robes, you  should  regard
him as if he is the actual Sangha  Jewel.  You  should  respect  the  Sangha
Jewel and not put them down, regarding  them  as  the  actual  Sangha  Jewel
itself.

You can see around you a wide variety of different members  of  the  Sangha.
It is not sufficient for people to regard  the  Sangha  in  the  way  it  is
taught here. From the side of the  Sangha  themselves,  they  also  have  to
practise contentment and so forth. It is not  right  if  the  Sangha  member
arrogantly takes pride in himself as a Sangha member. This is not right.

In short, the householder or layperson should  not  despise  or  revile  the
Sangha. From the Sangha’s side, they have to do their part by practising  as
much as they can, especially the practice of contentment.

It is taught here that from your own side, as much as possible, you have  to
respect the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha with your  body,  speech,  and  mind.
You should also respect and revere those who are bearing the mere  signs  of
ordination.  The point is that when  you  regard  the  Buddha,  Dharma,  and
Sangha with respect, you create the cause to be respected by  others,  i.e.,
by respecting others; in return, people will respect you. So  you  stand  to
gain from such behaviour.

When you start to revile or look down on any ordained  person,  then  slowly
you may think, “This person is not good.” Then you may start to think,  “The
Dharma is not good.” If the Dharma is like that, you may end up  concluding,
“The Buddha is not good.” You end up disparaging the Dharma and the  Buddha.
It is possible that this may happen. This is the danger.  That  is  why  you
are advised not to criticise even those who are merely bearing the signs  of
ordination.

    2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-2        Common precepts [for all three objects of
    refuge]

         A  Remembering the differences [/specifics] and positive qualities
         of the three jewels and, due to that, going for refuge again and
         again
         B  Remembering their great kindness and, due to that, exerting
         oneself at all times to make offerings to [/honour] them and offer
         them even the first portion of one’s food and drink
         C  Remembering their great compassion and, due to that,
         establishing other migrating beings in such a mode [of behaviour]
         D  Whatever you do and whatever you need, worshiping the three
         jewels, then supplicating them and abandoning all other, worldly
         methods
         E  Aware of the benefits, going for refuge three times a day and
         three times at night
         F  Not giving up the three jewels for one’s life nor for a laugh
         and guarding against this


    2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-2A  Remembering the differences [/specifics] and
    positive qualities of the three jewels and, due to that, going for
    refuge again and again

First: As explained above, you think about the  differences  between  things
non-Buddhist and Buddhist [/non-Buddhist and  Buddhist  teachers,  teachings
and students] as well as among the three jewels and [consider] the  positive
qualities of those (Page 74).

You should always remember what the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha are  and  the
differences between them. You  then  entrust  yourself  and  go  for  refuge
repeatedly.

    2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-2B  Remembering their great kindness and, due to that,
    exerting oneself at all times to make offerings to them and offer them
    even the first portion of one’s food and drink

         1  Constant offerings (Page 74)

Understanding that all your happiness is due to the kindness of the  Buddha,
Dharma, and Sangha, you repay that kindness by constantly  making  offerings
to the Three Jewels.

         2  The peculiarity that the collections are completed with little
         trouble (Page 74)

Since you have to eat and drink all the time, before you do  so  every  time
you should first offer your food and drink to the Buddha by remembering  his
kindness.

         3  Impure offerings (Page 74)[?* what is the connection here?]

With regard to the kind of things that  you  should  offer  to  the  Buddha,
Dharma, and Sangha, it is said that you should offer the best, according  to
your ability. You should not  offer  things  that  are  spoilt  or  of  poor
quality.

This is again related to what was discussed earlier.  From  your  own  side,
when you decisively conclude in your heart  that  the  Buddha  is  the  only
ultimate object of refuge, then when  it  comes  to  showing  reverence  and
making offerings, it should not be a problem for you to offer the best.  But
when you do not have that kind of recognition and  attitude,  you  will  not
offer the best.

         6  High status, paths, etc. are attained through making offerings
         in that way (Page 75)

You are advised here to make offerings to the  Buddha,  Dharma,  and  Sangha
because by doing so, you will quickly  complete  the  collection  of  merit.
Therefore  you  should  honour  the  Three  Jewels,  make   offerings,   and
constantly pay homage with reverence. You  will  then  be  able  to  quickly
produce the paths and grounds, the realisations, in your mind.

As mentioned in the text:

When your intelligence is very feeble such that you do not retain the  words
while listening, do not understand  the  meaning  while  contemplating,  and
nothing  arises  in  the  mind   during   meditation,   the   quintessential
instruction is to rely on the power of the field (Page 75).

The solution is to honour the Three Jewels, pay homage, make offerings,  and
so forth. When you do that, you will then be able to retain the  words,  you
will be able to understand the meaning, and you will be able to produce  the
experience and realisations in your mind.

         7  How the size of offerings and so forth is a distinction to do
         with [/of] the mind (Page 75)

As for how extensive  your  offerings  are,  it  has  got  to  do  with  how
expansive your mind is. Those who  have  relatively  less  or  do  not  have
anything to offer should not feel, “Since I have nothing to offer, I  cannot
do anything.” This is not the case because you  can  make  mentally  created
offerings.

Having said that, the teaching also say that when  you  do  have  things  to
offer and you do not offer them but instead mentally  visualise  them,  then
that is also wrong as this is done out of miserliness. It  is  like  someone
who can see taking the blind for a ride. Even when you do not have  much  to
offer, you should still offer and slowly strive to increase the quality  and
quantity of the offering.

         9  Refutation of the manners of speaking [to the effect] that the
         way Bodhisattvas make offerings, having gained control over
         material [/mundane] things, is impure

If great bodhisattvas, having gained control over material  things,  emanate
many hundreds of thousands of bodies  and  for  each  body,  again,  emanate
hundreds of thousands of hands etc. and [if they] appear in all  the  fields
making offerings  to the Jinas for many eons, the  statement  by  those  who
know only [?*ltar snang res chog shes pa dag] the superficial appearance  of
positive qualities that “As for me, I do not hope [to  reach]  enlightenment
that way,” – is the idle talk of [people] who have very  little  familiarity
with the Dharma (Page 75).

The great bodhisattvas, especially those abiding on  the  first  bodhisattva
ground onwards, have gained control over material  things.  Yet  they  still
manifest numerous replicas of  themselves  and  go  to  the  various  buddha
fields to constantly honour the buddhas.

There are people who tell others that in  order  to  achieve  enlightenment,
there is no need to do  these  practices  such  as  making  these  extensive
offerings. Rather, one simply needs to meditate. It is  a  very  clear  sign
that whoever says this has no idea what he is talking about. This is a  sign
that the person does not have a good complete understanding  of  the  entire
Buddhadharma.

What is the advice to be extracted from this section here?  If  these  great
beings have to do these practices, it  goes  without  saying  that  we  mere
mortals have to do even more such practices. This shows  that  in  order  to
achieve enlightenment you need to amass an unbelievable amount of merit.

Therefore with that understanding,  you  should  strive  to  accumulate  the
collection of merit by honouring, by paying homage,  making  offerings,  and
so forth to the Buddha,  Dharma,  and  Sangha.  In  order  to  achieve  full
enlightenment, you have to  amass  the  complete  collection  of  merit  and
wisdom. Therefore it is important that you do so. Regarding the  basis  with
which you can accumulate the collection of merit and wisdom,  there  are  no
higher objects than the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. So  you  must  strive  to
honour the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha.



Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng
Edited by Cecilia Tsong
Checked by Shirley Soh


-----------------------
[1] The two causes of going for refuge are the fear of the suffering of  the
lower realms combined with the faith of  conviction  in  the  Three  Jewels’
ability to protect you from that fear (Lesson 25)]

[2] “Assertion” refers to going for refuge through commitment.
[3] “Precepts of what is to be stopped” can also be translated as
“proscriptive precepts” and “precepts of what is to be accomplished” can
also be translated as “prescriptive precepts.”

