Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L45 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.481439
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


   Lesson No: 45                    Date: 27th March 2012


Question:  Can you please clarify what is invariable karma?

Answer: We  talked  about  meritorious  karma,  non-meritorious  karma,  and
invariable karma (or immovable karma):
   • Meritorious karma is the karma that will project a good rebirth in the
     desire realm.
   • Invariable karma is the karma that will project a rebirth in the first
     concentration of the form realm and above.

The karma that projects a  good  rebirth  in  the  desire  realm  is  called
variable karma because the result of an action that  projects  rebirth,  for
example, as a desire realm god, can be experienced instead as rebirth  as  a
human being and not necessarily as rebirth as a desire realm god.   In  that
sense the result of the karma is variable. Therefore it is  called  variable
karma.

For the karma that projects a rebirth in  the  first  concentration  of  the
form realm, the result of that karma will only ripen as that: rebirth  as  a
first concentration being. Similarly the karma that projects  a  rebirth  in
the  second  concentration  can  only  ripen  as  a  rebirth  as  a   second
concentration being.

There is also another explanation of the term, invariable karma. The  beings
in these upper realms are not distracted  by  conceptuality.  So  the  karma
that causes those rebirths is called invariable.

Question: What is the cause of a rebirth in the form  and  formless  realms?
The karma accumulated while you are in the form or formless realms, is  that
variable or invariable karma?

Answer: With regard to the second part of the question, when one is  already
in the form or formless realms, one accumulates  all  sorts  of  karma.  For
example, when one is in the first concentration,  one  does  not  accumulate
the projecting karma to be born in the desire  realms  but  one  accumulates
the projecting karma to be born either in the form or the formless realms.

The reason why  this  is  so:  for  example,  a  god  born  into  the  first
concentration of the form realm does not  accumulate  the  projecting  karma
for the desire realm because, in order to accumulate  the  projecting  karma
to be born in  the  desire  realm,  the  projecting  cause  has  to  be  the
ignorance that belongs to the desire realm. The god in the  form  realm  has
only the ignorance of the form realm.

We will leave it at that for the time being. The reason why the god  of  the
form realm does not accumulate projecting karma to be reborn in  the  desire
realm is because he does not have the ignorance of  the  desire  realm.  The
details of this whole process can be complicated.  If  you  really  want  to
find out more on this topic, the form and formless absorptions, this can  be
found in the  elaborate  explanation  of  the  twelve  links  of  dependent-
arising.

                               **************
It may be  helpful  to  have  some  understanding  of  the  four  stages  of
existence:
1. birth existence: refers  to  the  first  moment  when  the  consciousness
   enters the womb.
2. prior time existence: refers to the second moment after birth up  to  the
   moment before the mind at death manifests.
3. death existence: refers to when the mind at death manifests
4. intermediate state existence: refers  to  when  the  consciousness  exits
   from the heart and simultaneously with that, the  intermediate  state  is
   established.

In the last lesson we talked about the intermediate state. The  person  born
in the intermediate state will have the appearance of the  type  of  rebirth
that he will take.

There are people who believe that when the  intermediate  state  being  sees
his body of the  past  life,  he  develops  an  attachment  for  that  body,
thinking, “This is mine.” This is a mistaken belief. The intermediate  state
being does not develop  attachment  for  the  body  he  has  just  discarded
because the connection to that past body has been terminated.

There are also people who believe that the intermediate state being has  the
same appearance as its previous life. For example, they may  have  a  parent
who has just passed away. They experience seeing their  late  parent  coming
to them, asking for offerings to be made. Based  on  that  experience,  they
believe that the intermediate state being has the  appearance  of  its  past
life. This  is  not  the  case.  Such  experiences  do  not  mean  that  the
intermediate state being has the appearance of its past life.


These appearances happen due to  certain  non-human  beings  taking  on  the
appearance of the deceased to deceive the living relatives of the  deceased.
This must be the reason why there  is  this  tradition  of  praying  to  and
honouring the deceased. It is likely that this is due to the  experience  of
certain individuals “seeing”  the  deceased  and  then  spreading  the  word
around.

Lama Tsongkhapa clearly states that the intermediate state  being  does  not
have the shape of the body from its previous life  but  rather  it  has  the
shape of the body of the rebirth that it is going to take.

The intermediate state can also be changed. Let’s say a  person  is  in  the
intermediate state of the hell realms. When powerful virtue  is  accumulated
and dedicated for that being, the intermediate state of  the  being  can  be
changed, for example, to the intermediate state of a human  being.  This  is
the assertion of the higher Abhidharma, The Compendium of Knowledge.


    2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-3E  How you take rebirth in a birth-existence (Page 123)



The Lamrim Chenmo explains:

      If a being of the intermediate state is to  be  born  in  a  womb,  it
      observes beings of the same type as itself at its  future  birthplace.
      The intermediate being wishes to gaze at them, play with them, and  so
      forth, and desire to reach this place (Page 311).

         1  How you transmigrate [/transmigrate] into an intermediate
         existence through a mind of attachment and so forth (Page 123)

How  does  the  intermediate  state  being  take   rebirth?   After   sexual
intercourse, the white and red drops of the parents come together, mix,  and
congeal. The intermediate state being enters into this mixture of the  white
and red drops of the parents, i.e., the semen and the egg of the parents.

Fifth: In Many Levels it is taught that, when you are  born  in  a  womb,  a
mistaken perception arises with regard  to  the  semen  and  blood  of  your
father and mother: in that moment, like an illusion, you  see  your  parents
to be having intercourse [/sex] even  though  they  are  not  [?*]  and  you
develop attachment to them. {146} However, the Commentary  on  the  Treasury
explains that you see  your  parents  [actually]  having  intercourse[/sex].
Furthermore, if you are born as a female you want to be rid  of  the  woman,
become attached to the man, and want to lie with him. If you are born  as  a
male you want to be rid of the man, become attached to the woman,  and  want
to lie with her. Once this  kind  of  desire  has  arisen,  the  closer  you
approach, other body parts of that man and woman no longer  appear  and  you
only see the male and female  characteristics  [/organs]  of  your  parents.
Getting  angry   at   that,   the   intermediate   existence   being   dies,
transmigrates, and is reborn (Pages 123- 124).

Although the mixture of the semen and the egg  is  not  the  actual  parents
lying together, this is what the  intermediate  state  being  sees.  On  the
other hand, it is said that the intermediate state being possesses  all  the
sensory faculties and also some kind of unimpeded clairvoyance. My  question
to you is this: is there an internal contradiction here?


    2B4B-2B2B-2        The measure [/gauge] that those thoughts [/the
    attitude][common to intermediate beings] have arisen

         A  Indicating the measure [/gauge] of their having arisen purely

Second: If you  have  come  to  understand  the  characteristics  of  cyclic
existence in detail from the point of view of the two, sufferings and  their
origins, and the desire to abandon them  and  the  desire  to  attain  their
complete pacification have arisen,[/great peace] that alone  is  indeed  the
attitude of renunciation, however, that alone is not sufficient.  Therefore,
you should generate that mind to the extent of  being  like  the  mind  that
does not want to be [stuck] in a house ablaze with fire or stay [locked  up]
in prison and [to the extent] that it  desires  liberation  from  them,  and
then it is still necessary to increase it (Pages 124 – 125).

Please read this over and over again and work at an understanding  of   this
paragraph. There is nothing more I can add to this.

When one’s determination to be free or one’s renunciation is not  pure,  one
will not develop the pure wish to achieve  liberation.  Whatever  bodhicitta
one may develop will also not be pure.


         B  The development of nothing but an appearance of striving for
         liberation if nothing but mediocre renunciation has developed
         [/arisen]

{148}  If  this  attitude  is  nothing  more  than  mediocre,   like   flour
thrown[/thrown] into sour milk as Sharawa put it[???*], also the  view  that
does not want the causes of cyclic  existence  -  the  origins  -  will  not
become more than that.  Accordingly,  one’s  striving  for  liberation,  the
cessation that is the ceasing of sufferings and origins, will be  the  same.
Because of that, the desire to accomplish the path  of  liberation  will  be
mere words, and there will be no basis for the compassion that  cannot  bear
the suffering of other beings who roam in  cyclic  either.  The  uncontrived
mind of unsurpassed enlightenment that has the power to  spur  the  mind  on
[/exhort the mind] will not arise, so  that  you  become  a  member  of  the
Mahayana  [/Mahayanist]  only  in  your  understanding  that  follows   upon
words[?].  For  that  reason  you  should  cultivate  [/bring   forth][these
thoughts][/that attitude] again and again (Page 125).

It is saying here that when one is able to see  the  undesirability  of  the
causes of cyclic existence, true origins, then one will be able  to  develop
a real desire to achieve liberation. In essence, we must see  for  ourselves
how our contaminated appropriated mental and physical  aggregates  are  true
suffering. We have to see how this true suffering arises from true  origins.
When we can see how our contaminated mental and physical aggregates  do  not
pass beyond the nature of suffering, we will then develop  a  desire  to  be
free of them.


When we are unable to see and we don’t recognise our  own  situation-how  we
ourselves  are  suffering-that  the   real   suffering   is   having   these
contaminated mental and physical  aggregates  that  are  in  the  nature  of
suffering, then even when we see other sentient beings who are like  us  and
focus on their suffering, we will not be able to  develop  great  compassion
for them. When we are unable to develop great compassion for those  sentient
beings who are in the same situation as ourselves, there is no  way  for  us
to develop bodhicitta.


    2B4B-2B2B-3        Eliminating misconceptions about this

         A  The manner of misconceptions [/misconceiving][?]
         B  Their elimination

    2B4B-2B2B-3A       The manner of misconceptions [/misconceiving][?]

Third:  You  may  think:   “If   you   cultivate   extreme   revulsion   and
disenchantment for cyclic existence, you  will  fall  into  the  extreme  of
peace like shravakas,  because  of  your  dislike  for  [re]entering  cyclic
existence.  Therefore,  it  is  becoming  for   Hinayanists   to   cultivate
disenchantment, but it is inappropriate for bodhisattvas. That is how it  is
explained in [the Sutra of the] Unfathomable Secret.”

    2B4B-2B2B-3B       Their elimination

         A  The meaning of [statements in] scriptures that bodhisattvas are
         not terrified by cyclic existence

The meaning of the statement “Thus a bodhisattva should not be terrified  by
cyclic existence” is not to  point  out  that  he  should  not  be  repulsed
[/despirited] at the suffering of birth, aging, illness, death and so on  of
roaming in existence under the power of karma and  the  mental  afflictions.
Rather, it is that, due to his [/the] mind of enlightenment, he  should  not
be afraid to take rebirth in existence for the benefit  of  sentient  beings
under the power of the aspirational prayers.

         B  How it is necessary to enjoy being reborn in cyclic existence
         due to compassion but to be terrified of rebirth in cyclic
         existence due to karma and the afflictions

In fact, if roaming in existence under the power of  karma  and  the  mental
afflictions, we are oppressed by many sufferings and unable  to  enact  even
our own welfare, what need is there to  mention  enacting  others’  welfare?
{149} Since it [?*kind of rebirth?] is the door to  all  degeneration  there
is a need to block it, having developed extreme  disenchantment,  more  than
the Hinayanists, while it is necessary to enjoy taking rebirth in  existence
under the power of aspirational prayers and compassion (Page  125)[?*missing
in German].

This qualm asserts that developing the wish to be free of  cyclic  existence
is the goal of the hearers and the solitary realisers. This  goal  does  not
apply to those on the Mahayana path, i.e., the bodhisattvas are not  worried
about getting out of cyclic existence.

This is not true. The bodhisattvas do fear taking rebirth due to  karma  and
the afflictions. They need to develop  the  wish  and  desire  not  to  take
rebirth  under  the  power  of  karma  and  the   afflictions.   There   are
bodhisattvas who do take rebirth in cyclic existence but they do so  through
the power of their compassion and aspirational prayers. In line  with  their
compassion and aspirational prayers, they take rebirth happily in  order  to
benefit others.

The bodhisattvas are afraid of taking rebirth under the power of  karma  and
afflictions. In  fact  their  fear  of  taking  rebirth  due  to  karma  and
afflictions  is  even  stronger  than  that  of  the  hearers  and  solitary
realisers.

If they take rebirth in cyclic  existence  under  the  power  of  karma  and
afflictions, wouldn’t that interfere in their work of benefiting  others?  I
hope you understand this qualm and work at figuring it out for yourself.


    2B4B-2B2B-4B The actual establishment [of the nature of the path]

         1  By what kind of basis is cyclic existence averted
         2  By cultivating what kind of path it is averted [/What should the
         cultivated paths be like to reverse it]


    2B4B-2B2B-4B1      By what kind of basis is cyclic existence averted

         A  The need to avert it at this time when you have obtained a basis
         of leisure and endowments (Page 126)

The kind of life through which we can stop cyclic existence is the  kind  of
the life that we have already achieved right now, i.e., this human  life  of
leisure and opportunities.


    2B4B-2B2B-4B2      By cultivating what kind of path is cyclic existence
    averted

         A  Identification of the path and transition
         B  Indication that the other trainings will be explained further on
         [?]
         C  In particular how to train in ethical discipline (Page 127)

The three higher trainings are the paths that are cultivated to stop  cyclic
existence:
1. the higher training in ethics
2. the higher training in concentration
3. the higher training in wisdom





    2B4B-2B2B-4B2B      Indication that the other trainings will be
    explained further on [?](Page 127)

The discussion here of the path of the person of medium capacity in the Lam-
rim is not aimed at those who are the actual persons of medium capacity.  It
is for the purpose of leading the person to a higher  level.  Therefore  the
higher trainings in concentration and  wisdom  are  not  discussed  in  this
section of the path of the person of medium capacity. It only discusses  the
higher training in ethics.

In terms of the goals that one  can  achieve  by  practising  on  the  path,
there are two goals:
1. high status
2. definite goodness
   • Through the practice of the higher training in ethics and  the  higher
     training in concentration, one can achieve high status, i.e.,  a  good
     rebirth.
   • Through the practice  of  the  higher  training  in  wisdom,  one  can
     actualise definite goodness.
In order to train well in the higher  training  in  wisdom,  one  must  have
trained well in the higher training in concentration.

In order to practise concentration well, one must  have  practised  well  in
the higher training in ethics.  The  higher  training  in  ethics  helps  to
eliminate distractions and the discursive thoughts in  the  mind.  Therefore
it helps when one trains in concentration  because  when  such  distractions
and discursive thoughts are removed, one is able to focus more easily.

With a solid training in concentration, one will then  be  able  to  develop
the special kind of wisdom with which one can destroy  the  afflictions  and
thereby achieve liberation.





    2B4B-2B2B-4B2C-4        The manner of training

         A  Instructions on the four antidotes for abandoning downfalls
         (Page 127)

There is also a  discussion  on  the  four  doors  through  which  we  incur
breaches in our ethical discipline:
1. not knowing what one is supposed to be training in
2. lack of conscientiousness or carelessness
3. lack of respect for the training
4. the predominance of afflictions

The remedy to not knowing what one is supposed  to  be  training  in  is  to
learn what one is supposed to observe.

Lack  of  conscientiousness  or  carelessness  is  one  of  the  causes   of
committing a breach in one’s training in ethics. The remedy to  this  is  to
cultivate mindfulness by training in what one is supposed to  adopt  and  by
abandoning what one is supposed to abandon. From time to time,  we  have  to
examine what our body, speech, and  mind  are  up  to.  We  need  vigilance,
shame,  and  embarrassment.  What  is  the  difference  between  shame   and
embarrassment?
   • Shame is an avoidance of misdeeds on account of oneself.
   • Embarrassment is an avoidance of misdeeds on account of others[1].

Disrespect is also  a  cause  for  committing  a  breach  in  one’s  ethical
training. The remedy is having respect for the teacher, the Buddha, and  the
rules on ethical training that the Buddha had set down, to have respect  for
fellow practitioners and those  who  are  ordained,  and  also  respect  for
sentient beings.

Another cause for committing a breach in one’s ethical  training  is  having
various afflictions. The remedy is  to  examine  one’s  mind  to  see  which
afflictions are predominant and then apply the antidotes to them.
The higher training in ethics is extremely important as it is  a  foundation
for the other two higher trainings.


         D  The need not just for ordained mantric practitioners but also
         for lay [/lay] practitioners of mantra to guard the majority of
         vows (Page 130)

Here is a qualm: having said that, there are people  who  may  believe  that
when one practises tantra, there is no need  to  be  so  strict  with  one’s
ethics. Some people may  even  think  that  when  you  are  practising  such
ethics, you will not be able to practise tantra.

In reality the training in the different sets of vows  is  complementary  to
one another. On the basis of keeping the pratimoksha  vows,  one  takes  the
bodhisattva vows. On the basis of those vows, one  then  takes  the  tantric
vows. It is not the case that when  one  practises  one  set  of  vows,  one
abandons another set of vows. It does not work like that.

Therefore in the Kalachakra Tantra, practitioners  who  are  fully  ordained
monks are praised to be the  best.  Next  are  the  novice  monks  and  nuns
followed only then by the laypersons.

The  spirit  of  the  pratimoksha  vows  is  to  subdue  one’s  desire   and
attachment. The same applies to the bodhisattva vows and tantric  vows.   Of
course, there is an exception for those who  have  achieved  extremely  high
levels of tantric practice. Even so, their  practices  do  not  allow  their
minds to come under the control of attachment. They have full  control  over
their minds.

In essence,  the  practice  of  the  higher  training  in  ethics  does  not
interfere with tantric practice. In fact it is praised  as  the  best  basis
for the practice of tantra. They are not contradictory.

As mentioned before a number of times, it is important  that  you  read  the
text. If there is anything that you do not  understand  from  your  reading,
you should bring it up in class. If I were to read out in  class  everything
in the text, we will never finish the module.

Question: The text says that the  best  way  to  stop  cyclic  existence  is
renunciation, i.e., to be ordained. Between an ordained  monk  who  is  busy
with the daily activities of the monastery daily activities and a lay  yogi,
i.e., who is not ordained, meditating in a cave, who will attain  liberation
first?

Khen Rinpoche: In order to be enlightened, you do not have to be a  monk  or
nun. Lay people can also get enlightened. Are you suggesting that  the  yogi
who lives in the mountains has renunciation and the monk who  lives  in  the
city does not?

In Dharamsala, there was a monk who lived in the mountains. There were  many
monks living in the mountains in their individual hermitages.
He said that there were two types of yogis in the  mountains.  One  type  of
yogi is like a fox, the other like a cow. He asked someone, “Which  type  of
meditator are you?” At first, I didn’t understand what he  meant.  He  later
explained: there are some meditators who live  in  the  mountains  but  they
don’t meditate. They just go up and down the mountain. That yogi is  like  a
fox. Another type of yogi sits in the house, eats, and  sleeps.  They  don’t
do much else. That yogi is like a cow.

This does not mean that when you live  in  the  mountains,  you  necessarily
have renunciation as there are many people living in the mountains!

In the next lesson, I will give a brief introduction to the twelve-links  of
dependent-arising although this is not in the Middle  Length  Lam-rim.  Once
we finish that, we will move on to the path of a person of  great  capacity.
For the older  students,  if  you  have  any  questions  pertaining  to  the
twelve links of dependent-arising, you should bring  them  up  in  the  next
class.
                                ************
Medicine Buddha Retreat in Kopan in October 2012
(Khen Rinpoche spoke on the purpose and the benefits of observing  silence).


Keeping silent has so many benefits.  When  you  are  silent,  you  will  be
yourself and you will find out more about yourself. That is the whole  idea.


Normally we do not live in silence. We don’t  know  ourselves  and  what  we
want very clearly.  Being  silent  allows  you  to  look  at  yourself  with
mindfulness. Then you will know very clearly your mind and  what  you  want.
You will be able to  see  yourself  more  deeply.  When  you  sit  down,  be
yourself. Think about what you  are  doing.  Try  to  live  in  the  present
moment. Don’t think so much about the past and what is in the  future.  Live
mindfully. That will help you to understand yourself and to understand  what
is the meaning of life. That is  why  it  is  really  important  to  observe
silence.

So far we are talking twenty-four hours a day. None of that  talking  brings
any benefit whereas being silent  brings  many  benefits.  At  the  simplest
level, you do not create any negative karma and you don’t  harm  or  disturb
others. If your talking is very good, then you can  talk.  If  your  talking
brings happiness to others, you can talk. But somehow it  doesn’t  work  out
that way. Your words or whatever you say somehow makes people unhappy.

So the best thing to do is to keep silent. Keeping silent is to  enable  you
to look at yourself, to know yourself clearly and mindfully.  In  this  way,
we can improve ourselves.

Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; Transcribed by Phuah Soon  Ek  and  Vivien
Ng; Edited by Cecilia Tsong
-----------------------
[1] A Necklace for Those of Clear Awareness Clearly Revealing the  Modes  of
Minds and Mental Factors by Ye-she Gyel-tsen. Translated  from  the  Tibetan
by Toh Sze Gee. An FPMT Masters Program translation. (Module 2, First  Basic
Program, February – May 2004)

