Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L25 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.289541
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


   Lesson No: 25             Date: 25th September 2011


Although you have obtained the perfect  basis  for  practising  Dharma  now,
this opportunity will not last forever. There will  come  a  day  that  this
life will end. When death comes, it is not as if you  will  become  nothing.
It is definite that you will have to take rebirth. You will  either  take  a
good rebirth or a bad rebirth.

If you die without having accumulated any virtue or done anything  positive,
beneficial, and virtuous in this life, then you will be born  in  the  lower
realms; either in the hell realms, hungry ghost realm, or the animal  realm.
Once you are reborn in these realms, you have  to  experience  inconceivable
sufferings for a very long period of time.

With regard to the suffering in the lower realms, you must  not  think  that
they are make-believe or fabricated by someone. It is  not  like  that.  The
sufferings of the lower realms were taught by the  Buddha  himself  in  many
scriptures.

So from your side, what you have to do is to understand how such  states  of
existence are possible. How is it possible that these realms,  described  by
the Buddha in so many texts  exist?  You  have  to  think  about  this  from
various angles and by applying various reasons. The point is  to  move  your
mind at least in the  direction  thinking  that  all  these  sufferings  are
possible and do exist.

I think the way to think  about  this  is  to  understand  the  relationship
between the state of your mind and such existences. The more  negative  your
mind is, perhaps then it is possible to have a correspondingly bad state  of
existence as mentioned in the text.

You can understand this by looking at how your mental  perspective  makes  a
difference to the kind of experiences that you will have to  go  through  in
life. You can see for yourself how your perspective influences  whether  you
suffer or you are able to remain calm and happy.  Due  to  different  mental
perspectives, different people can experience a situation differently.

Also in this world, you can see that  there  are  many  places  where  human
beings look like and suffer like hungry ghosts.  Many  human  beings  cannot
even find sustenance such as food and water. It is as if  they  are  in  the
hungry ghost realm right now. This can be directly perceived in the world.

Using what you see as the basis, you then  link  such  states  of  existence
with the state of the mind. The suffering you see  in  this  world  are  all
created by the negative karma  that  arose  from  the  unsubdued  mind.  You
should try to see this connection between the state  of  the  mind  and  its
effect on your state of existence.  You  should  work  at  arriving  at  the
understanding that the more unsubdued the mind, the more  non-virtuous  your
mind is, likewise there will be more suffering in  the  state  of  existence
that you would have to take rebirth in.

You can use some of your daily experiences to understand this.  Perhaps  you
can look at people who are suffering and take one of  them  as  an  example.
Imagine, “If I was to be reborn as that person and experience  his  problems
and difficulties, will I be able to continue my practice  then?  Will  I  be
able to do any virtue?” Perhaps you will not be able to practise at all.

On top of that, while you are suffering in that state,  it  is  likely  that
you will continue  to  accumulate  even  more  negative  karma.  You  cannot
guarantee and confidently say for sure that you  will  never  be  reborn  in
such a situation. This is because  you  have  already  accumulated  all  the
causes for such a rebirth. As I mentioned before, even  in  this  life,  you
have accumulated so much non-virtue. What about all the non-virtue you  have
accumulated in your past lives?

    2B4B-2B1A-1B2C-2   How it is necessary to meditate on this, until the
    experience is being produced (Page 64)

As mentioned in the Lam-Rim teachings, you have to reflect and  meditate  on
this until you get some experience and understanding of  what  it  would  be
like if you were to be reborn in the lower realms.
 • Imagine if you were to put your hands in a fire now, will you be able  to
   bear it? If not, what will it be like when you  are  reborn  in  the  hot
   hells?
 • Sometimes, you cannot even bear the cold for ten to fifteen minutes. When
   you find it so difficult to bear the cold that  you  experience  in  this
   world, what will it be like when  you  are  reborn  in  the  cold  hells,
   experiencing those sufferings for a very long time?
 • You also know what it is like when you go without food and  drink  for  a
   few days. When that is so difficult for you now, then  what  will  it  be
   like when you are reborn as a hungry ghost?
If you are reborn now in the lower realms, you have to ask yourself  whether
you will be able to bear those  unbelievable  sufferings  described  in  the
text. Furthermore the sufferings that you have to experience last not for  a
short period of time but for a very long time. Will you be  able  to  endure
all that suffering? The teachings mention  that  you  have  to  think  about
this. When you think about it, then  some  fear  will  arise.  You  need  to
reflect and meditate on this well until  you  generate  that  fear  in  your
heart.

You may ask, “What is the point of generating this fear? What do I stand  to
gain from this?” You stand to gain a lot because with this genuine fear:
 • You will be able to purify all  the  non-virtue  that  you  have  already
   accumulated in the past.
 • You will be able to stop yourself from  engaging  in  non-virtue  in  the
   future.
 • This genuine fear also helps in that you will not find any difficulty  in
   engaging in virtue. In fact in each and every single moment of your life,
   you will engage in virtue when you have this kind of genuine fear.
So there are a lot of benefits.

We have had quite an extensive discussion on  the  suffering  of  the  lower
realms. At the end of the discussion,  through  reflection  and  meditation,
you should develop the belief in your mind that the lower realms  do  exist.
It is important that you put effort into developing this conviction.

The other point that you  must  work  at  is  to  understand  that  all  the
suffering of the lower realms ultimately arises from the unsubdued mind.  It
is very important that you understand this.

There is this misconception among many people that  when  you  are  a  human
being in this life, then when you die, you will certainly  be  reborn  as  a
human being again.  They think that it is impossible to be reborn  in  other
realms. This belief is completely wrong. It does not work like that.

As I mentioned earlier, you have no control over where you will  be  reborn.
You are under the  control  of  your  karma.  The  deciding  factor  is  the
relative strength of your virtuous karma versus your non-virtuous karma.

         Explanation of how to rely on methods for the happiness of
                                future worlds

    2B4B-2B1A-2  Explanation of how to rely on methods for the happiness of
    future worlds

         A  Training to go for refuge: the holy [/sublime] gate for entering
         the teachings
         B  The root of all well-being: generating the confidence of firm
         conviction in actions and [their] effects


    2B4B-2B1A-2A Training to go for refuge: the holy gate for entering the
    teachings

         1  The causes that going for refuge depends on
         2  Depending on them, the objects you go to for refuge
         3  The way in which to go for refuge as much as one can
         4  The stages of training after having gone for refuge


    2B4B-2B1A-2A1      The causes that going for refuge depends on (Pages
    64 – 65)

There are two causes of going for refuge:
1. The fear of the suffering of the lower realms.
2. The faith of conviction in the Three Jewels’ ability to protect you  from
   that fear.
The genuine fear of the suffering of the lower  realms  arises  from  having
thought about it. In this context, how do you bring about this fear?

Thus, as you think about how you fall to bad migrations  because  the  power
of wholesome karma is small and that of  unwholesome  karma  is  excessively
extremely strong, the two arise:  fear of bad migrations and the  conviction
that that which is rare and precious [the  Jewels],  can  protect  you  from
them (Page 65).

All of us have already accumulated all the causes that will  throw  us  into
the lower realms. What decides your next rebirth  is  your  karma  but  your
virtuous karma is very weak. Your positive  thoughts  are  also  very  rare,
just like a flash of lightning in the dark sky.

On the other hand, your unwholesome thoughts are very frequent and your non-
virtuous karma is very strong. From your side, you  will  definitely  go  to
the lower realms  because  the  causes  are  already  there  in  your  mind.
Combining that understanding with your reflection  on  the  sufferings  that
you will have to experience in  your  next  life,  then  the  real  fear  of
suffering will arise in your heart. This is one of the causes of  going  for
refuge.

The teachings are saying that it is of vital  importance  that  you  develop
these two causes of going for refuge in your mind. When you have  these  two
causes of going for refuge in your mind, then your refuge  will  be  genuine
and will move your mind. Otherwise  without  the  generation  of  these  two
causes in your mind, your refuge will only be mere words.

    2B4B-2B1A-2A2      Depending on that the objects you go to for refuge

         A  Identifying the objects [of refuge]
         B  The reasons why they are worthy of refuge


    2B4B-2B1A-2A2A     Identifying the objects [of refuge]

         Buddha, Dharma, Sangha are
         The refuge of those who want liberation (Pages 65 – 66).

In this context, with regard to the path that is shared with the  person  of
small capacity, for the person of small capacity, the actual refuge  is  the
ethics of refraining from the ten non-virtuous actions. It is this  practice
that protects this individual from going to the lower realms.

In order for this person to be able to  cultivate  such  refuge,  i.e.,  the
ethics of refraining from the ten non-virtuous actions, he must  first  have
the faith of conviction in karma. In particular, he must have the  faith  of
conviction in all the explanations on the subtleties of karma given  by  the
Buddha. In order to do that, the person must first trust the Buddha.

Therefore the Buddha is one of the objects of refuge. This person must  look
at what the  Buddha  taught  in  the  Four  Noble  Truths  and  the  law  of
causality. You can see that his teachings do  not  contradict  reality.  The
Buddha proved the validity of these  explanations.  You  can  also  validate
them.

However, with regard to the subtle details of karma that you are  unable  to
validate at the present time, you can nevertheless believe in  these  subtle
details of karma based on the trust  that  you  have  in  the  Buddha.   The
Buddha has to be right because he has no reason to lie to  us.  By  thinking
along these lines, once you develop some trust and faith in the Buddha,  you
will not have much difficulty in following  his  advice  to  engage  in  the
practice of the ethics of refraining  from  the  ten  non-virtuous  actions.
Anyone who does that will protect himself from the  lower  realms.  In  that
sense, you can say that the Buddha is the actual refuge.

Otherwise you have to remember how the Buddha protects you  from  suffering.
It was mentioned in an earlier lesson:


         The Capable Ones do not wash away evil with water,
         they do not remove the suffering of beings by hand,
         they do not graft their realizations on others-
         they liberate, teaching the truth of reality’s nature (Page 21).

When you understand this, you can see  how  the  Buddha  can  be  an  actual
object of refuge and how he protects us.

For the person of small capacity,  in  order  for  him  to  produce  genuine
refuge in his heart, he must cultivate the two causes:
1. the genuine fear of the suffering of the lower realms combined with,
2. the faith of conviction in the ability of the  Three  Jewels  to  protect
   him from that fear.
When these two causes are present, he will then have the genuine  refuge  of
the person of small capacity. With this genuine  refuge  in  his  heart,  he
will not have any problems in training in the refuge precepts.

When he is able to train well in these precepts, he will be  liberated  from
the lower realms. When he is liberated from the lower  realms,  he  will  be
going to a good place. This is how he achieves happiness in the next life.

The Buddha said in one  sutra,  “I  have  already  shown  you  the  path  to
liberation. Now it is completely up to you whether  you  achieve  liberation
or not.” In this context,  you  can  imagine  the  Buddha  saying,  “I  have
already shown you the path out of the lower realms. Now it is completely  up
to you whether you take a good rebirth or not.”

It is very important that you develop a correct  understanding  of  how  the
Buddha protects you. Sometimes our understanding is  almost  like  those  of
other religious traditions that are based on divinity  and  a  creator  god.
We feel that the Buddha, like a creator god, is supposed  to  do  everything
for us. The Buddha’s teachings are not like that. It was never meant  to  be
like that. Therefore it is  very  important  that  you  understand  how  the
Buddha protects you from suffering.

Generally speaking, there must be  something  that  motivates  you  to  seek
refuge. Usually some fear is involved. You are afraid of something  and  are
seeking refuge and protection. Isn’t this the case that you will  only  look
for protection or refuge when you have some fear, problems, or  worries?  It
is the same when you go for refuge to the Buddha, Dharma, and  Sangha.   You
look for protection because of your fear  of  the  suffering  of  the  lower
realms. Without that fear, you will not seek protection.

Many factors bring about the experience of sufferings  and  problems.  There
are external conditions and there are  also  internal  conditions,  but  the
main factor is the internal  conditions.  Generally  most  people  attribute
external conditions to be the main  cause  of  problems.  They  hardly  ever
consider  the  possibility  of  their  minds  being  responsible  for  these
experiences.

In reality, the main cause of suffering is the internal  conditions.  It  is
due to the force of your non-virtuous karma that you  experience  suffering.
When you do not have the  internal  condition,  non-virtuous  karma,  it  is
impossible for you to meet with suffering. You will not even meet  with  the
external conditions. Even if you should meet with the  external  conditions,
when you do not have the cause of the  internal  conditions,  you  will  not
experience any suffering. Therefore it is most important that  you  overcome
the  internal  conditions,  i.e.,  the  negative  karma  that  brings  about
suffering.

The practice then of going for refuge is very  much  related  to  overcoming
the main cause of the suffering, i.e., the  internal  conditions.  The  main
practice that is adopted  after  having  gone  for  refuge  to  the  Buddha,
Dharma, and Sangha is living your life in accordance with the law  of  cause
and effect, karma. In this context, it refers primarily to living your  life
by intentionally avoiding the ten non-virtuous actions. When you  avoid  the
ten non-virtuous actions by giving them up, you do  not  create  the  causes
for suffering and as such you are liberated from the lower realms.

This is how refuge protects you from the internal causes of  suffering,  the
main cause of suffering. That being the case, the main  cause  of  suffering
is within you. It is your own negative mind and  non-virtuous  karma.  Since
it is within you, no one else can take it away from you. Only  you  yourself
can do that. That is the reason why it is said that you have  to  work  hard
for yourself. There is no other solution. No one else can  do  the  job  for
you.

Once you have this genuine refuge in your  heart,  you  lay  a  very  strong
foundation for further practice as indicated in the  outline,  “Training  to
go for refuge: the holy gate for entering the teachings (Page 65).”
To reiterate, for a person of small capacity, the two causes  of  going  for
refuge are:
1. the genuine fear of the sufferings of the lower realms, combined with,
2. the faith of conviction in the ability of the  Three  Jewels  to  protect
   him from that fear.

What about the refuge of the person of medium capacity? That person  is  not
motivated only by the fear of suffering of the  lower  realms.  He  is  also
motivated by the fear of the suffering of samsara as a  whole.  This  person
has the conviction that the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha have the  ability  to
protect him from the fear of these sufferings.

What about the refuge of the person of great capacity?  The  refuge  of  the
person practising the Mahayana Paramitayana is not motivated by fear of  his
own suffering, but is motivated by an unbearable compassion that  is  unable
to bear  the  suffering  of  all  sentient  beings  and  wishes  to  achieve
enlightenment for their benefit.

The refuge of the Mahayana Vajrayana practitioner is not motivated  only  by
the compassion that is unable to bear the suffering of all  sentient  beings
but one that wishes then to achieve enlightenment for them. He has the  wish
to achieve enlightenment as quickly as possible  because  he  is  unable  to
tolerate that sentient beings have to suffer for such a long time.

We have identified the objects of refuge. Next is the outline, “The  reasons
why they are worthy of refuge.”

    2B4B-2B1A-2A2B     The reasons why they are worthy of refuge

         1  The actual reasons

Second: Someone who is free from all fear, skilled in  means  of  liberating
others from fear,  steeped  in  great  compassion  toward  everyone  without
closeness and distance and who works for the benefit for the welfare of  all
regardless of whether they help him or  not  –  such  a  one  is  worthy  of
refuge. As only Buddha has those [qualifications],  while  Ishvara  and  the
like do not, he is a refuge. For that reason the Dharma  taught  by  him  as
well as the Sangha of hearers are also worthy to be refuges (Page 66).

There are four reasons why the Buddha is a worthy object of refuge:
1. The Buddha has mastered fearlessness, i.e., he  has  freed  himself  from
   all fears. Is that sufficient? No, because even if he is  free  from  all
   fears, that does not necessarily mean that he can help us.
2. The Buddha is skilled in the means of freeing others from fear.
3. The Buddha possesses great impartial compassion.  He  wants  to  free  us
   from our fears but does that mean that the Buddha will help everyone  and
   not just some?
4. The Buddha will help everyone because he acts  for  the  welfare  of  all
   sentient beings regardless of whether the recipients have  benefited  him
   or not.
These four reasons show that the Buddha is a worthy object of refuge.

         2  Advice to be [?*sich bemühen] persistent about conviction, the
         principal cause (Page 66)

There are two causes for you to be protected by taking refuge:
1. The external cause is the Buddha because he possesses all  the  necessary
   qualifications to protect you.
2. The internal cause from your own side is  your  complete  entrustment  in
   the Buddha by taking wholehearted refuge. When  you  do  this,  you  will
   definitely be protected by the Buddha because due to your  trust  in  him
   there is no problem for you to follow his advice by  entering  the  paths
   and doing the practices.  When  you  do  that,  definitely  you  will  be
   protected.

That being so,  once  you  have  derived  certainty  with  regard  to  these
[objects of refuge] set forth in the Compendium[?], when  you  are  able  to
rely on them with a single-pointed mind, it is impossible for you not to  be
protected. Therefore you should generate certainty from the bottom  of  your
heart[?*missing in German].  Of the two causes for  being  protected,  there
is no incompleteness in the external one  –  our  teacher  [,  Buddha,]  has
achieved it – however,  since  the  internal  cause,  taking  hold  of  that
[?*'dzin] refuge trustingly has not come about, we[?] suffer (Page 66).

         2  Not gaining the conviction (Page 69)

The great Kadampa master, Geshe Potowa, said that most people have a lot  of
faith  in  fortune-tellers,  soothsayers,  astrologers,  or  those  who   do
divinations. They will follow whatever advice such  people  give  them.  But
when it comes to the Buddha and his teachings, we do not react in  the  same
way. We do not have the same level of trust in the Buddha  as  we  have  for
fortune-tellers and so forth. We believe in them more  than  we  believe  in
the Buddha. When we look at his teachings, we have little faith in them.

When someone points to advice that is related to the Buddha’s teachings,  we
will interpret them in our  own  way  and  give  our  own  reasons  for  not
following the teachings of the Buddha. This happens. It shows  very  clearly
that we do not have much faith in the Buddha. Our belief in  the  Buddha  is
wavering and our faith in the Buddha’s instructions  and  teachings  is  not
there. In order to have the faith of conviction  and  entrust  ourselves  to
the Buddha, we need to know the qualities of the Buddha.

    2B4B-2B1A-2A3      The way in which to go for refuge as much as one can

           A     Understanding their positive qualities
           B     Understanding their distinctions
           C     Assertion[1]
           D       Going for refuge by not advocating other ones
           [/Promise ?*Annehmen?]
The second one has four points: Going for refuge (by) understanding their
positive qualities, understanding their distinctions, assertion and going
for refuge by not advocating other ones.

    2B4B-2B1A-2A3A     Understanding their positive qualities

         1  The Buddha’s positive qualities
         2  The positive qualities of the Dharma
         3  The positive qualities of the Sangha

First: Since it is necessary to be mindful of the positive qualities of  the
refuges, this  has  three  points:  the  Buddha’s  positive  qualities,  the
positive qualities of the Dharma and the Sangha.

    2B4B-2B1A-2A3A-1   The Buddha’s positive qualities

         A  The actual qualities
         B  Supplementary points


    2B4B-2B1A-2A3A-1A  The actual qualities

         1  The positive qualities of [the Buddha’s] body
         2  The positive qualities of [the Buddha’s] speech
         3  The positive qualities of [the Buddha’s] mind
         4  The positive qualities of [the Buddha’s] exalted activities

The first one has four points: the  positive  qualities  of  [the  Buddha’s]
body, speech, mind and exalted activities.

    2B4B-2B1A-2A3A-1A1 The positive qualities of [the Buddha’s] body (Pages
    66-67)

Please read on your own the section that describes  the  good  qualities  of
the Buddha’s exalted body. In short the Buddha’s exalted body possesses  the
32 signs and 80 exemplifications.[2]

    2B4B-2B1A-2A3A-1A2 The positive qualities of [the Buddha’s] speech
    (Page 68)

The Buddha is able to respond to various questions simultaneously with  just
one voice, i.e., by saying only one thing,  everyone  will  get  the  answer
they seek.

    2B4B-2B1A-2A3A-1A3 The positive qualities of [the Buddha’s] mind

         A  The positive qualities of knowledge
         B  The positive qualities of mercy

The third one has two points: the positive qualities of  knowledge  and  the
positive qualities of mercy.

         A  The positive qualities of knowledge (Page 68)

The Buddha perceives all phenomena directly,  both  their  real  nature  and
their diversity:
First: As all knowable objects – modes and varieties - are  engaged  by  the
Muni’s unobstructed knowledge like a dhatri berry placed on the palm of  his
hand, the diverse knowable  objects  are  pervaded  [/?encompassed]  by  the
Muni’s knowledge. However, they are not pervaded by other’s [knowledge],  as
knowable objects are vast and their consciousnesses are[/es]  [/are]  narrow
(Page 68).

         B  The positive quality of mercy (Page 69)

The Buddha has great concern for sentient beings who are under  the  control
of their karma circling uncontrollably in cyclic existence.  The  Buddha  is
bound by great compassion for sentient beings  and  is  always  working  for
their welfare and benefit.
Second: Just as[/Just like] sentient beings are  bound  by  the  afflictions
without any control, the Muni is bound by great compassion  without  control
and therefore great compassion continuously arises in him when he  perceives
suffering migrating beings (Page 69).

    2B4B-2B1A-2A3A-1A4 The positive qualities of [the Buddha’s] exalted
    activities

Fourth:  By  means  of  both  spontaneous  and  [/either   spontaneous   or]
uninterrupted  exalted  activities  of  [his]  body,  speech,  and  mind  he
benefits all sentient beings. In fact insofar  as  a  trainee[/disciple]  is
fit for guidance, it is impossible for the Muni not  to  give  that  trainee
what is excellent and pull him out of his degeneration (Page 69).

         3  Insistent advice to achieve certainty (Page 70)

On the basis of having ascertained the qualities  of  the  Buddha’s  exalted
body, speech and mind, and his enlightened activities, you  will  develop  a
strong faith and belief in the  Buddha.  On  the  basis  of  this  faith  of
conviction  in  the  Buddha  that  comes  from  understanding  his   various
qualities, you will also come to regard the teachings, the Dharma that  gave
rise to the Buddha, to be excellent and wonderful. You  will  also  come  to
regard  the  practitioners  of  the  Dharma,  the  Superior  beings,  to  be
excellent and wonderful as well.

Question: In other texts, there is a discussion about rebirth in the  higher
realms. Lama Tsongkhapa here does not seem to go into details  about  taking
rebirth in the god and demi-god realms but mainly focuses on rebirth in  the
lower realms. Is there any reason for this?

Answer: The suffering of the higher realms, which includes the god and demi-
god realms, will be discussed in the section that talks about the path  that
is shared with the person of medium capacity. Here in this  context,  it  is
about the person of small capacity. Therefore it focuses  on  the  suffering
of the lower realms.

Question: In relation to the  topic  of  death  and  impermanence,  can  you
please comment on the relationship between (1) karma,  (2)  the  conditions,
and (3) our effort for any given result in  our  present  or  future  lives.
What weight would you give to the importance  of  these  three  elements  in
relation to a given or desired result?

Answer: Let us use your studies as an  example.  First  you  must  have  the
karma  to  have  the  intelligence  to  study.  Without  that  it  would  be
difficult. It is karma that determines the level of  intelligence  you  have
in this life.  It is not some other factor. This  shows  that  karma  is  so
important.

On top of that, you need to work hard as the harder you work  and  the  more
effort you put in, the greater will be the result.

I guess the conditions will refer to the kind of support you  have  such  as
companions and friends who help you.


I don’t exactly know the weighting but I guess, maybe, karma is 50%  because
this determines your starting point. Perhaps, effort will be  40%  and  then
the remaining 10% will be the favourable conditions.

If you understand this, especially about karma, you should then know how  to
prepare for your future lives. Therefore it is important to  study  in  this
life and put in as much effort as possible so as to plant imprints  for  the
future.

If in this life you study and learn as much as you can  in  order  to  plant
imprints, this will make a difference in your future lives because  in  your
future lives, you will be intelligent. Because of  having  planted  imprints
in this life, then when you hear these teachings again  in  the  future,  it
will become much easier to learn them and it  will  also  become  easier  to
develop the experience and realisations of them.

With regard to imprints, this is definitely true. It does make a  difference
whether you have the imprints or not. You can see  the  difference  in  this
very life. You may have heard a particular teaching many  years  ago.   When
you hear the same teachings again, because of  having  heard  the  teachings
before, it is easier to understand and is much clearer.

Since that is the case, you can infer that whatever imprints  you  place  on
your mind now will make a difference in your future lives.  Therefore  there
is no need to be disheartened if you think you are not so intelligent.  That
does not matter. The point is that if you know about imprints and karma,  it
becomes important for you to try your best and leave  as  much  imprints  as
you can in this life by working hard.

It does not matter whether you understand the teachings or not but you  need
to try as it does make a difference in your future lives. You do  not  study
and learn the teaching for the purpose of this life alone.  It  is  for  all
your future lives. Therefore you should work as hard as  possible  and  pray
that you will continue to meet with the Buddha’s teachings  in  your  future
lives. That is why I always say you need to try your best and work hard.

You have to listen  to  the  teachings  and  reflect  on  them  as  much  as
possible. You read the text and  keep  on  reading  even  when  you  do  not
understand for the purpose of placing as many strong  imprints  as  possible
in your mind. This will make a difference  in  the  future.  When  you  stop
reading the text and feel discouraged because you do not understand it,  you
are stopping the placement of imprints in your  mind.  This  will  not  make
your life any easier. Stopping does not mean it will become easier  for  you
in the future. Please don’t do that. Just try your best.

Question: Since karma expands, is it not better for negative karma to  ripen
as quickly as possible so that we do not have to pay a higher price later?

Answer: It will be good if we can experience  the  results  of  our  actions
immediately but that is not how karma works. For most karmas,  it  does  not
mean that having accumulated them, they will ripen immediately.  If  we  can
experience everything at one time, then the presentation of  virtuous  karma
and non-virtuous karma can be complicated.

Question: In the Lam-Rim, why does the  presentation  on  refuge  only  come
after the topics, precious human rebirth, and death and impermanence? For  a
strong practice of refuge, must it be based  on  the  ascertainment  of  the
precious human rebirth and death and impermanence?

Answer: We are first introduced to the fact that we have  a  human  life  of
freedoms and endowments. It is something very  wonderful  yet  it  will  not
last. If we end up in the lower realms after we die, then it  would  not  be
good for us. It is only then that we can talk about looking for help.

Although we have a good situation now, this will not  last  forever  and  we
may go to the lower realms when we die. That would be  terrible.  Only  with
this insight will we look for help.

The minimum entry level to generating refuge has to  be  based  on  the  two
causes:
1. The genuine fear of the sufferings of the lower realms, combined with,
2. The faith of conviction in the Three Jewels’ abilities  to  protect  from
   that fear.

The next section will be the precepts of  refuge  and  the  presentation  on
karma. Please read as much as you can.



Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng
Edited by Cecilia Tsong
Checked by Shirley Soh


-----------------------
[1] “Assertion” can also be translated as “Through commitment.”
[2]  The  signs  show  that  he  has  the  mind  of  a  great  person.   The
exemplifications indicate the nature of his internal qualities.


