Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L12 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.344805
================================================================================



Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi

Root text: The Middle Length Lam-Rim by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by  Trijiang  Rinpoche  are
in small lettertype, to be distinguished from Lama Tsongkhapa’s own  outline
that is in larger lettertype.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


Lesson No: 12                             Date: 26th July 2011


As usual, we will do the seven-limb practice. The first limb is the limb  of
prostration or homage. There are physical, verbal and  mental  prostrations.
Amongst these three, the most important is  mental  prostration  or  homage,
making obeisance with your mind. That means having  a  single-pointed  clear
faith in and  devotion  towards  the  deity  that  arises  from  seeing  the
qualities of the deity.

Before you start, it is important to generate faith in and devotion  towards
the deity in question. In  the  last  lesson,  on  the  topic  of  correctly
devoting to a teacher, you saw how important faith is  for  the  development
of  any  kind  of  qualities.  Faith  is  the  foundation  of  all  positive
qualities.

When you  are able to generate faith in  the  beginning  of  the  seven-limb
practice,  then  you  will  do  well  the  subsequent  practices  of  making
offerings, confession, rejoicing, requesting the buddhas to turn  the  Wheel
of Dharma, beseeching them not to pass away to nirvana, and dedication.  All
these practices will become perfect. In order for the  latter  practices  to
be done perfectly, each depends on the preceding practice.

The seven-limb  practice  begins  with  the  limb  of  homage.  It  is  very
important to generate faith from the very  start  and  to  think  about  why
faith is so important. This is  something  that  you  have  to  think  about
constantly. When you have faith, what does it do for you?  Does  it  make  a
difference when you do not have faith? You  have  to  figure  this  out  for
yourself why faith is the foundation of  all  good  qualities.  Please  keep
this in mind.

So the first limb is the limb  of  homage  or  paying  obeisance.  The  main
thing, at this point, is to develop  faith  and  devotion.  When  these  are
present, at the beginning of the practice, will it enhance the next limb  of
making offerings? This is something that you have to think about.

With regard to offerings, you may have the idea that you are being asked  to
think about imaginary offerings  that  do  not  really  exist,  e.g.,  skies
filled with flowers. When you make offerings, you should remember  to  focus
on whatever good qualities that you have and whatever  roots  of  virtue  or
merit that you have accumulated. You then  visualise  that  these  roots  of
virtue and good qualities take on the aspect of  offerings.  You  then  make
these offerings to the merit field. When you  do  this,  I  think  there  is
greater benefit.

At the end, when you make dedications, what  are  you  dedicating?  You  are
dedicating the good qualities that you  have  acquired.  You  dedicate  your
virtue and merit for  the  benefit  of  others  and  you  dedicate  for  the
flourishing and preservation of the Dharma. There is a relationship  between
the quality of your mind and the virtue that you have accumulated  with  the
limb of dedication.

What are  you  dedicating?  You  are  dedicating  what  you  have  achieved.
Dedication is focusing on the positive aspects, the  qualities,  virtue  and
merit that you  have  and  wishing  them  to  become  causes  of  something.
Dedication means you are focusing  on  the  good  mental  aspects  and  then
increasing them. When you focus on these good  mental  qualities,  it  helps
the mind to be more virtuous in the future because  of  the  attention  that
you pay to such qualities and virtue all the time.

So, as much as possible,  please  do  the  seven-limb  practice.  First,  by
visualising the special deity, Manjushri, in the space in front of you  and,
on the basis of your devotion towards him, you then perform  the  seven-limb
practice.

                          *************************

We have started the topic of guru devotion, i.e., correctly relying  on  the
guru or virtuous friend. As for the actual ways  of  relying  on  the  guru,
there are: (1) relying correctly in thought and  (2)  relying  correctly  in
action.

Relying correctly in thought  consists  of  two  points:  (1)  the  root  is
training in faith and  (2)  through  remembering  his  kindness,  developing
respect.

With regard to developing faith in  the  guru,  faith  arises  in  different
ways. For some, they develop faith in a particular teacher just  by  hearing
about his qualities. Then, there are others who  do  not  leave  it  at  the
level of hearing about the qualities of a  particular  teacher.  They  check
out the teacher. When they see  the  qualities  for  themselves,  they  then
develop faith. So, in general,  there  are  these  two  ways  of  developing
faith. There are some who develop faith just by hearing about the  teacher’s
qualities and there are some who develop faith after they have  checked  out
the teacher for themselves.

This is not only applicable to developing faith  in  the  teacher.  It  also
applies to developing faith in the Buddha, Dharma and  Sangha.  Some  people
develop faith through hearing about the Triple Gem, whereas there  are  some
who develop faith only after they have checked things out.

The second way is the best way of developing faith. Faith that  arises  from
understanding is the best kind of faith. You can develop irreversible  faith
through this process.

In the context of developing faith in the guru, you must first overcome  the
conception of faults in him and, as much as possible, be  able  to  see  his
qualities.  That  is  the  condition  for  developing  faith  in  the  guru.
Therefore, the teachings advise that you  should  look  at  the  guru  as  a
buddha. Why?

You, as the student, want only profit and you do  not  want  to  suffer  any
losses. Whether, in reality, the guru in question is a buddha  or  not,  you
will only profit when you see the guru as a buddha.

If you need to see the guru as a buddha, in reality, are you able to do  so?
The answer is yes. It is a matter  of  familiarity.  When  you  continuously
focus on the guru’s good qualities and  not  his  faults,  it  is  simply  a
matter of familiarity that you will be able to see the guru as a buddha.


         3  The need to discriminate a Buddha with regard to the spiritual
         master

Furthermore, as for the way of looking at the spiritual master, it  says  in
the Vajrapani Empowerment Tantra:

         Oh Lord of secrets, how should a disciple see the master? Just like
         he would see the Buddha Bhagavan.


{31} Similar statements can be found in the collection  of  Mahayana  sutras
and in the vinaya. Their meaning is this: If you understand that someone  is
like a buddha, a mind conceiving faults in him will not arise, but rather  a
mind thinking about his positive  qualities.  Likewise,  with  regard  to  a
spiritual master, you should purposely abandon any  concepts  of  faults  in
every respect while training the mind conceiving  positive  qualities  (Page
24).

This is the most difficult part. Even after  taking  someone  as  the  guru,
the mind that sees faults can still arise. You  may  see  more  faults  than
qualities. When you conceive faults  in  the  guru,  at  that  time,  it  is
important to stop the arising of such conception. That is why the  teachings
say you should focus on the good qualities of the  guru,  because  the  more
you focus on the good qualities, the conception of faults will weaken.  This
is one way of stopping the conception  of  faults  in  the  guru,  i.e.,  by
constantly focusing on the qualities.

Another method is that when you see faults, ask yourself, “Is this really  a
fault from the side of the guru or am I seeing this fault,  due  to  my  own
impure mind?” Is everything that you see necessarily the only truth?

Another piece of advice that is given in the teachings is  that  you  should
understand how much obscurations you  have  accumulated.  Your  obscurations
are so thick that, even if all the buddhas were  appear  in  front  of  you,
complete with all the major marks and signs, you will not  be  able  to  see
them in those pure aspects. Even if the Buddha himself were to  come  before
you, he would not appear in a manner other than the way in which  your  guru
is appearing to you now. In other words, you do not have the fortune  to  be
able to see the Buddha in his pure aspect due to your obscurations.

You should think that, because of your  obscurations  and  limitations,  the
aspect of the guru is the best that you can do. You will not be able to  see
an aspect better than that. When you can think in  such  a  way,  this  will
also help you to weaken the conception of faults in the guru.

Another way of thinking is to look at the holy beings,  such  as  the  great
past masters in India and Tibet. They are same in that they were  born  from
the womb, they ate food, they grew old, they fell sick,  and  so  forth.  In
those respects, they were the same as you. This is what you can see.

When you think about these great masters of the past, can you say  that  all
of them were ordinary beings, that there was not  a  single  holy  being  or
buddha amongst them? I think you will not be able to say  that.  Definitely,
there must have been, at least, one  buddha  or  holy  being  amongst  these
great masters.

You should understand that the buddhas can only work for sentient beings  by
depending on an  ordinary  aspect.  The  buddhas  cannot  work  for  you  by
appearing in their pure aspect, with all  the  marks  and  signs.  You  just
don’t have the fortune to see them that way. So the buddhas have  no  choice
other than to work for you in an ordinary aspect, at a level  that  you  are
familiar and can associate with. The buddhas have no  other  better  way  of
helping you. If the buddhas are working for you,  then  there  is  no  other
better way of doing so other than in an ordinary aspect that you can see.

You are not able to tell whether a person is a buddha or not by judging  the
physical  characteristics  of  the  person.  You  will  not   be   able   to
differentiate who is a buddha and  who  is  not  a  buddha,  based  on  this
superficial way of looking at things. Whether someone is  a  buddha  or  not
depends on the quality of that person’s mind.

This is how you should look at your guru, “He  is  like  a  buddha/he  is  a
buddha/he is equal to the Buddha. He is showing me this ordinary  aspect  in
order to benefit, to subdue and to guide me.”  When you are  able  to  think
in this way, in relation to your guru,  then  seeing  him  in  his  ordinary
aspect does not become a condition  for  you  to  lose  faith.  Rather  than
losing faith in your guru, seeing him in his ordinary  aspect  can  increase
your faith in him, because you remember that the Buddha has no other way  of
benefiting you, other than through this ordinary aspect. He  can  only  help
you through this ordinary aspect. Therefore,  this  ordinary  aspect  is  so
precious and your guru is so kind in showing such an aspect. When you  think
in this way, your faith will increase.
I think the best thing to do is to recall the good  qualities  of  the  guru
all the time and to remember his kindness. When you  are  able  to  do  this
constantly, then even when the conception of faults in the  guru  arises  in
your mind, that does not affect your faith in him. You need  to  familiarise
yourself with and to get used to always thinking about  the  good  qualities
of the guru.

I will give you an example. You may have a very nice piece of clothing  but,
as soon as there is a small stain on it,  you  will  not  find  it  so  nice
anymore. When that garment is stained, it then appears undesirable. But,  if
you decide to decorate that garment with some design, using black ink,  that
garment now appears to you as desirable because you did it on purpose,  even
though it is the same stain.

Khen Rinpoche: For example, my mole here  (pointing  to  his  chin).  A  few
years ago, some one told me that a mole can be cancerous. I  thought  I  had
to remove it. After a while, someone else said that having a mole  near  the
cheek is good because it means you will have a lot of food to eat.

Then my mind changed. I saw my mole in a different way. Before,  I  saw  the
mole as bad but  later,  I  saw  it  as  a  decoration  after  someone  said
something else about the mole. Anyway, I have no idea which  is  true.  Now,
it does not bother me so much.

This is an example of how your mind can change depending on how you look  at
things. When you see a black dot on your face, depending on how you look  at
it, it can be ugly or it can be something positive and pleasant  that  makes
you happy, even though it is the same dot. It depends on how you  label  it.
This has nothing to do with the dot itself, but it depends on how your  mind
sees it.

Another example is when I see some one wearing a  dress  with  many  tassels
(or fringes). To me, it does not look good and is rather ugly.  But  to  the
person wearing the dress, it is different. She likes it so much  and  thinks
it looks so good and is the best dress. She is so happy with it.

Another example are jeans that are purposely torn to expose  the  knee  and,
sometimes, even the backside. Actually, that does not look nice  but  it  is
fashionable. So, it all depends on your mind.

It is the same with antiques. In my hometown, no one cares  about  antiques.
When things get old, we will just throw them into the rubbish bin but  here,
in Singapore, it is different. An  antique  is  used  as  a  decoration,  as
something valuable to be placed in a nice house. When you look  at  it,  the
object does not look so  nice.  It  is  worn  or  some  parts  are  missing.
Depending on how you see at it, a bad thing can become a good thing in  your
home.

Another example is your hair. Even when the  hair  touches  your  mouth,  it
doesn’t bother you much. But when your own hair falls into  your  food,  the
food becomes dirty and you feel like throwing it  away.  This  is  your  own
hair but the concept of it has changed when it is separated from your  body.
Immediately, your mind changed. Before the hair  was  clean,  but  after  it
fell into the food, within  seconds,  it  becomes  unclean.  Even  the  food
becomes unclean.

This is especially so in a restaurant. You reject the food when you see  one
strand of hair in it, “I cannot eat the food because  there  is  a  hair  in
it.” If your concept is changed, you can just take out the  hair  and  throw
it away. You can even enjoy the meal. Actually, hair is  not  dirty  but  it
depends on how your mind labels it. Hair is very clean as nothing sticks  to
it. When you go to a restaurant, you will complain when you see  one  strand
of hair in your food. But you don’t have to reject the food.  You can  still
eat the food by just removing the hair. It is how you train  your  mind.  It
is better when you can change your mind.

In relation to your guru, it is like looking at the garment. When you  focus
on that one tiny little stain, you will not see the garment  as  attractive.
But when you do not focus on that small stain, you are  still  able  to  use
the garment. Likewise, you can focus on the good qualities  of  the  teacher
and not pay any attention to the bad qualities.

Sometimes, it is useful to think in  this  way,  “Whether  the  teacher  has
faults or not, even if he has faults, it is  none  of  my  business.”  As  I
mentioned earlier, it is ideal when you are able to use the faults as a  way
to increase your faith.

When you see faults, remember to think,  “This  is  what  ‘ordinary  aspect’
means. The Buddha has to work  for  us  through  this  ordinary  aspect.  An
ordinary aspect means having faults and making mistakes. There is  no  other
way to call it an ordinary aspect.”  Then  you  remember  that  it  is  only
through this ordinary aspect that the Buddha can work for you. When you  can
think in this way, it will increase your faith in your guru.

As mentioned earlier in the text, the Lam-Rim  is  an  instruction  that  is
arranged in a particular order  for  any  one  individual  to  achieve  full
enlightenment. It is arranged in such a way that the  disciple  can  be  led
into the Vajrayana one day. This is the reason why  there  is  an  extensive
discussion of the practice of guru devotion, right at the beginning  of  the
Lam-Rim. This is also one of the reasons why the quotations are from  tantra
itself.

            4 The disadvantages of conceiving faults

In addition, the above tantra says:

           Apprehend the master’s positive qualities,
           do not ever apprehend his faults,
           apprehending his qualities you will gain siddhis,
           apprehending his faults they cannot be gained.
You should act accordingly. Thus if  positive  qualities  predominate  in  a
spiritual master, but you think about him in terms  of  the  few  faults  he
has, this will become an obstacle  to  your  own  accomplishments.  Even  if
faults predominate, if you train in confidence from the perspective  of  his
positive qualities without thinking about him in terms of his  faults,  this
will become a cause for accomplishments to come about.  Therefore,  when  it
comes to your own spiritual master, whether his faults  are  big  or  small,
contemplate the disadvantages of thinking about him from  that  perspective,
repeatedly generate a mind to abandon this and make it stop (Page 24).

The advice is to always keep the good qualities of the guru  in  your  mind,
to always think about the good qualities of the guru and not to  seize  upon
his faults. Whether the guru is a buddha in reality or not, when  you  focus
on his good qualities, you will achieve realisations.  On  the  other  hand,
even when the guru is a buddha in reality, but you do not look at him  as  a
buddha, you will not achieve realisations.

It does not matter whether the guru is a buddha in reality or not. When  you
focus on the good qualities of the guru and you see the guru  as  a  buddha,
then you will achieve all the realisations. When you have  that  faith,  all
the realisations will come. So it doesn’t really depend on whether the  guru
is a buddha or not in reality. It depends on your  faith  and  your  way  of
looking at things.

           5. The way of restraining concepts of faults
If concepts of faults arise due to carelessness, a lot of afflictions,  etc.
you should apply yourself to restraint through confession. If  you  accustom
yourself in this manner, you may see that there are a few faults, but  since
your mind holds on to the side of positive qualities, it will not become  an
obstacle to your confidence. For instance, the great Jowo  upheld  the  view
of the Madhyamaka, while Serlingpa upheld the view of the  True  Aspectarian
Cittamatra which is why, in terms of view, one was higher  than  the  other.
However, as he discovered the general stages of the Mahayana  path  and  the
mind of enlightenment relying on him, he regarded  Serlingpa  as  unequalled
among spiritual teachers (Page 25).

You should remember the context for this discussion. We  are  talking  about
the relationship between the guru who possesses all the  necessary  defining
characteristics or  qualities  and  the  disciple  who  also  possesses  the
necessary qualifications  as  the  disciple,  i.e.,  how  such  a  qualified
student relies on the qualified teacher.

When a qualified student relies correctly on  the  qualified  teacher,  what
are the benefits? When a qualified student does not rely  correctly  on  the
qualified teacher, what are the disadvantages?

You may be aware that there are many people who question  this  practice  of
guru devotion. They believe that this practice of guru devotion was made  up
by  the  Tibetans  in  order  to  make  themselves  powerful.  This   is   a
misconception.
The practice of guru devotion or correctly relying on  the  virtuous  friend
is not made up by  the  Tibetans.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  Buddhist
teachings that are practised in the Tibetan tradition have their origins  in
India. The practice of guru devotion  was  taught  by  the  Buddha  in  many
sutras, for example; the Array  of  Stalks  Sutra  that  mentions  the  nine
attitudes that you should cultivate in  relation  to  your  guru.  This  was
taught by the Buddha himself.

We will not go through the nine attitudes as they are not mentioned  in  the
Middle Length Lam-Rim but they are mentioned in the  Lam-Rim  Chen  Mo.  The
nine attitudes are:
1. The attitude which is like the dutiful child.
2. The attitude which is like a diamond.
3. The attitude which is like the earth
4. The attitude like the foothills
5. The attitude like a worldly servant
6. The attitude like a sweeper
7. The attitude like a foundation
8. The attitude like a dog
9. The attitude like a ferry

If you are someone who wonders about the authenticity  of  the  practice  of
guru devotion and if you have your doubts, you should refer  to  this  Array
of Stalks Sutra that was taught by the Buddha himself. In  that  sutra,  the
Buddha clearly indicated the attitudes with which you should devote  to  the
guru in thought.

By remembering the qualities of the guru, you develop faith. By  remembering
his kindness, you develop respect.

           2B4A-1B3B-1B   Remembering the kindness and being respectful

Second:
In the [Sutra of the] Ten Dharmas it says:

      He looks for me who has roamed in cyclic existence for a long time; he
      awakes me from a long time of obscuration and torpor due to ignorance;
      he pulls me out as I sink within the ocean of existence; he shows good
      paths to me who has entered bad ones; he frees me who has  been  bound
      in the prison of existence; he is a doctor to me  who  has  long  been
      tormented by illness; I should generate the notion of [of him as] rain-
      clouds, pacifying me who has been ablaze with the fire of passion  and
      so on (Page 25).

Earlier, it was mentioned:

         The Capable Ones do not wash away evil with water,
         they do not remove the suffering of beings by hand,
         they do not graft their realizations on others-
         they liberate, teaching the truth of reality’s nature (Page 21).

Let’s say that all the buddhas were to appear in front  of  you  right  now.
We are not talking about just one buddha but all the buddhas. What can  they
do to you? What are your gurus doing for you? They  teach  you,  unerringly,
the Four Noble  Truths.  They  teach  you  what  is  positive  and  what  is
negative, the law of cause and effect, and so  forth.  If  all  the  buddhas
were to come in front of you  right  now,  they  will  not  be  able  to  do
anything beyond what your gurus are doing for you now. When you think  about
this, you will be able to see that all the buddhas will not be  able  to  do
anything more than what our guru is doing. In the first place, even  if  all
the buddhas were to appear in front of you right now,  you  won’t  have  the
fortune to see them. Therefore, all the buddhas have  to  work  for  you  by
depending on the ordinary aspect of the teacher.

Even if all the meditational deities of the four classes of tantra  were  to
appear in front of you right now, they will  not  be  able  to  do  anything
beyond  what  your  vajra  masters  have  done  for   you,   by   conferring
empowerments and giving commentaries, explaining the meaning of tantra.  You
don’t have the fortune to be able to receive  empowerments  or  initiations,
and the tantric teachings directly from the deities. But,  by  depending  on
the kindness of the guru, you are able to receive them all.

In short, you are able to receive every single teaching on sutra and  tantra
through the guru. If you are  travelling  on  the  path  to  liberation  and
enlightenment, the person who is showing and guiding you  on  that  path  is
none other than your guru. When you understand this, you will then  be  able
to see how the guru is kinder than the numberless buddhas.

Although numberless buddhas exist, who is benefiting you  directly  in  your
life now? That is none other than your guru or teacher. He is  the  one  who
is guiding you on the correct path to enlightenment and  stopping  you  from
entering the wrong path. By thinking along these lines, you will be able  to
develop respect for the teacher, especially when you remember his  kindness.



    2B4A-1B3B-2  The manner of relying through actions

         A  The need for reliance through actions
         B  Condensed explanation of the three means of pleasing [him]
         C  The extensive explanation of those three

    2B4A-1B3B-2A The need for reliance through actions

The second one:
In the Fifty [Verses about the] Guru it says:

         What need is there to say a lot of words here?
         do everything to make your guru happy
         give up anything that does not please him
         apply yourself to that, examine that!
         This was said by Vajradhara himself:
         ‘spiritual attainments follow the guru’,
         aware of this, use anything there is,
         and make your guru totally[, utterly] happy.


In brief, you try hard to please him and to give up what he does not like.

    2B4A-1B3B-2B Condensed explanation of the three means of pleasing [him]

The three means of pleasing [the guru] are  (1)  offering  material  things,
(2) serving him and paying  him  respect  with  body  and  speech,  and  (3)
practicing in accordance with his advice. In this  regard  it  says  in  the
Ornament of the Sutras:

         Through homage and pure offerings and service
         and practice you should rely on a spiritual friend.

By seeing the reasons for doing so,  you  then  apply  yourself  in  relying
correctly on the guru in action or practice. This includes:
1. making offerings,
2. showing respect, such as rising in his presence, making prostrations  and
   so forth and serving him, and
3. putting into practice whatever he has advised

Next is the discussion on the benefits of correctly relying on the guru  and
the disadvantages of not relying on the guru. Please read  this  section  on
your own. We are about to finish the  section  on  guru  devotion.  We  will
continue with the outline, “Summary of the meaning  of  these  [points]”  on
page 28 of the text in the next class.

Question: It is stated in the Lam-Rim Chen  Mo,  “All  the  significant  and
insignificant good  qualities  that  pertain  to  the  Mahayana  arise  from
relying on a guru.” What about the qualities of the Hinayana?

Answer: The text talks about the defining characteristics  of  the  Mahayana
guru right from the very start. Therefore,  in  relation  to  the  qualified
Mahayana guru, all the qualities of the Mahayana path, big or small,  depend
on him.

We are not talking about any guru. Do you remember the first three  defining
characteristics  of  the  Mahayana  virtuous  friend?  They  are   qualities
pertaining to the  three  higher  trainings  that  are  the  main  practices
cultivated by a  person  of  the  Hinayana  path,  whether  that  person  is
following the hearer’s or the  solitary  realiser’s  vehicle.  That  is  the
Hinayana path. Those are the Hinayana practices.

Since the Mahayana guru must possess the qualities of having trained in  the
three higher trainings, the Mahayana guru will definitely be able  to  guide
his Hinayana disciples.

In the first place, if you are planning to practise the Hinayana path,  then
you can just follow a Hinayana  teacher.  You  don’t  have  to  look  for  a
Mahayana teacher. There is no absolute need for this. A  qualified  Hinayana
teacher must be able to lead Hinayana followers on that path. As such,  when
you are a Hinayana follower, you need not necessarily  rely  on  a  Mahayana
teacher. The point is that the qualities of  the  Hinayana  path,  small  or
big, do not necessarily depend on a Mahayana teacher.

Question: What kind of guru devotion practice do Hinayana followers  do?  Do
they need to regard their guru as a buddha?

Answer: The  Hinayana  followers  must  necessarily  have  respect  for  the
teacher. I am not sure whether they look at their guru  as  buddhas,  but  I
guess they have to look at their teacher as being like a buddha.

Seeing the guru as a buddha is not just a general Mahayana practice.  It  is
primarily a teaching and  practice  of  tantra.  In  tantra,  it  is  highly
emphasised that you must look at your guru as  a  buddha.  The  practice  of
guru yoga, where you see the deity and guru  as  inseparable,  comes  mainly
from tantra.






Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Angie Xiao
Edited by Cecilia Tsong
Checked by Shirley Soh


