Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L23 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.371448
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


   Lesson No: 23                Date: 6th September 2011


What  are  the  benefits  of  cultivating  the  mindfulness  of  death   and
impermanence? What are the faults of  not  cultivating  the  mindfulness  of
death and impermanence?

When you cultivate the mindfulness of death and impermanence, this opens  up
all the other paths and enables you to actualise those paths.  When  you  do
not cultivate the mindfulness  of  death  and  impermanence,  then  whatever
virtue you create does not become perfect.  You  also  tend  to  continually
accumulate negativities.

Amongst the students gathered here, there are some who are learning the Lam-
Rim, the Stages of the Path to  Enlightenment  and  hearing  this  topic  of
death and impermanence for the first time. There are also  others  who  have
already heard this explanation before. So there is a wide range of  students
here:
 • Those of you who are hearing this topic for the first  time,  please  pay
   attention, listen well, and try to understand what is being explained.
 • For those of you who have heard the teachings on death  and  impermanence
   before, then you should go to the next level by  reflecting  on  what  is
   being said.  You  should  use  your  intelligence  and  apply  logic  and
   reasoning to arrive at a definite ascertainment of  this  topic  in  your
   heart.
 • For those of you who have already gained an ascertainment of this  topic,
   then this is the time for you to meditate and familiarise  yourself  with
   what you have ascertained.

How are you supposed to cultivate the mindfulness of your death? You  should
do so by way of the nine reasons. In the last class we started on the  first
root: “It is certain that we will  die”  that  is  supported  by  the  three
reasons:
         A  The Lord of Death will certainly come and there are no
         conditions for warding him off
         B  One’s life span cannot be increased and diminishes incessantly
         C  You die without having had time to practice Dharma while alive
         (Page 53)


We completed the first two reasons and will review them again briefly.

       2B4B-2B1A-1A4A-1A     The Lord of Death will certainly come and there
       are no conditions for warding him off (Page 53)

You will definitely die. This cannot be avoided  because  there  is  nothing
that enables you to overcome death. You have no  means  to  overcome  death.
That makes it definite that you are going to die.

      2B4B-2B1A-1A4A-1B     One’s life span cannot be increased and
       diminishes incessantly (Page 53)

Your  lifespan  cannot  be  extended.  Not  only  that,  it  is   constantly
diminishing. Sometimes you do not need to think of too many  things.  It  is
enough to think about the actual reasons. For  example,  the  second  reason
shows that your death is certain because your lifespan cannot  be  extended.
On top of that, it is constantly diminishing, moving closer  to  death  with
each and every single moment. When you  contemplate  well  just  this  small
little point, your heart moves and you will get some insight into this.

    2B4B-2B1A-1A4A-1C  You die without having had time to practice Dharma
    while alive (Page 54).

While you are alive there is little time for practice. As the  great  master
Gungtang Rinpoche said, “For the first 20 years of our  lives,  we  did  not
get to practise the Dharma. Then we spent the next 20  years  of  our  lives
thinking of practising the Dharma, i.e.,  thinking  of  practising  ‘one  of
these days.’ In the last 20 years, we look back at our  lives  thinking,  “I
did not get a good opportunity to practise the Dharma  well.”  Then  at  the
end of our lives, we have to die with this regret in our hearts.”

Gungtang Rinpoche is basically describing our  situation  now.  We  are  all
like that. Even if we were destined to live for a hundred years,  still  our
lives will turn out to be like what  Gungtang  Rinpoche  described.  We  may
have a long life but we will still have to die with the regret that  we  did
not get to practise the Dharma well.

Most people for  the  first  20  years  of  their  lives  do  not  think  of
practising the Dharma. Then what about the  remaining  years  of  your  life
when you grow old? By that time, your  physical  and  mental  strength  will
have deteriorated such that even if you want to practise, you  will  not  be
able to do so because the body is a burden, the mind is not  as  sharp,  and
the memory is not as good as before.  So  the  only  time  to  do  any  real
practice is during the good years in the middle part of your life.

But when you look at the majority of people, they have  already  spent  half
their lives sleeping. With whatever time is left, even if you may  have  the
interest to  practise  the  teachings,  you  may  meet  with  all  sorts  of
difficulties and obstacles such as sickness, spirit harms and so  forth.  In
that sense, there is not much time left for you to practise the  Dharma.  If
this is the story of your life, then you will end the  story  by  having  to
die without practising the Dharma.

By reflecting on these three reasons, you should  ascertain  in  your  heart
that you are definitely going to die. Once you have  ascertained  this  from
the depths of your heart, then what should  you  do?  At  the  end  of  that
reflection, when you feel that death is definitely going to  happen  to  you
and you are definitely going to die, you must then make the first  decision:
I must practise the Dharma!

    2B4B-2B1A-1A4A-2   The decision to practice Dharma

{69} Since it is like that, at the time of death all the excellence of  this
life will only be an object of recollection – like  the  recollection  of  a
happy experience in a dream after you have woken. Why would you  delight  in
being beguiled by this life, if the enemy who is death will certainly  come?
With this thought in mind you should take the decision that  you  definitely
need to practice the  Dharma  and  reiterate  this  innermost  feeling  many
times. From the Jataka Stories:
         Alas, afflicted worldly beings,
         Your stay is not stable, there is no joy,
         Even this water lily’s splendour
         Will soon be but a memory (Page 54).

      2B4B-2B1A-1A4B   The time of one’s death is uncertain (Page 54)

You are definitely going to die but it is questionable as to when that  will
happen to you. There is no certainty with regard  to  your  time  of  death.
There are three reasons that you should think about  in  order  to  generate
the understanding that the time  of  your  death  is  uncertain.  The  three
reasons are:
         A  There is no certainty with regard to a life-span in Jambudvipa
         which is why the time of death is uncertain.
         B  There are many conditions that lead to death and few that
         promote life.
         C  The body is extremely vulnerable and the time of death therefore
         uncertain.


         A  There is no certainty with regard to a life-span in Jambudvipa
         which is why the time of death is uncertain (Page 55)

According to the Buddhist cosmology of the different world systems,  we  are
in the southern  continent,  Jambudvipa.  There  is  a  northern  continent,
Uttarakuru, where it is said that human beings have a definite  lifespan  of
a thousand years. If  you  are  born  as  a  human  being  in  the  northern
continent you will definitely live for a thousand  years.  For  the  eastern
and western continents, in general,  human  beings  there  have  an  average
lifespan of 500 years. It is almost certain that they will  live  out  their
full lifespan although it is possible that some of them may die  before  500
years.

However, for human beings in our world system, Jambudvipa, it is  said  that
our lifespan is highly uncertain as there is no definite lifespan.  When  we
look at the lifespan of human beings in this world,  there  are  people  who
live for 100 years. There are also some  who  live  beyond  100  years.  But
there are also people who die as young as at 10 years  old.   The  range  is
very big. It is not guaranteed that you will only die  when  you  grow  old.
There are people who die when they are still young. There are also many  old
people who are still alive. So there is no fixed lifespan in this world.

When you look at the present era of Shakyamuni Buddha’s teachings, even  the
founder of the teachings, Shakyamuni Buddha himself  had  passed  away  into
parinirvana.  Numberless great  masters,  scholars,  and  practitioners  who
came  after  Shakyamuni  Buddha  such  as  the  great  Indian  scholar  like
Nagarjuna are already dead. They are no longer here  now.  In  Tibet,  there
are also many great practitioners, masters, and scholars as  well  but  only
their mere names remain with us. When you look at your contemporaries,  your
generation, and your  virtuous  friends  and  teachers,  many  of  them  are
already dead. You see them dying and you hear of them dying. When  you  look
at your friends, relatives, and your loved ones of this life,  how  many  of
them have already departed? By  thinking  of  these  various  examples,  you
should realise that you are exactly in the same situation as them.  Whatever
happened to all these people is definitely going to happen to you.  You  are
definitely going to die. On top of that, there is no guarantee  as  to  when
that will happen.

Although you see your contemporaries dying, be they loved  ones,  relatives,
friends, colleagues, and so forth, your heart is not moved. You  never  ever
think that will happen to you. You don’t have that feeling  in  your  heart.
Your mind is really stubborn.

Even when you think of death, in the end, you  conclude  that  other  people
are dying and that they are definitely going to  die.  But  you  never  ever
arrive at the conclusion of  your own impending death. The  point  of  using
others as examples, how others are dying or have already died, is to  relate
 those examples to our own existence  and  situation  and  then  learn  from
them,  to  tell  yourself  that  what  has  happened  to  others  will  also
definitely happen to you. That is the point. There is  no  benefit  to  just
looking at how other people are dying. That in itself has no benefit.

         B  There are many conditions that lead to death and few that
         promote life (Page 55).

By reflecting on this reason, that the causes of death  are  many  and  that
the causes of life are few, you should come to understand how  the  time  of
your death is uncertain.

There are many conditions for death:
• There are human beings who may harm you.
• You may also be harmed by non-humans such as  the  worldly  gods,  nagas,
  landlord spirits, and so forth.
• Even insects, germs, and animals can also harm your life.
• There are also many different diseases and sicknesses that can kill  you.



You can also be harmed and killed by the four elements, earth, water,  fire,
and wind. Your body is made  up  of  these  four  elements.  When  they  are
balanced, you feel strong and healthy but when they are  imbalanced,    when
some are in excess and others are  deficient,  you  will  develop  different
kinds of sicknesses some of which can take away your life.

So the danger lies within you and not external to you. The very things  that
can take away your life, the causes of death, are present  within  you.  You
may have the idea that your body is very strong and healthy. You may  think,
“There is nothing wrong with me. I am not going to die.”  This  thinking  is
superficial. Think about how your body is constituted of the four  elements.
As soon as you meet with any unfavourable conditions and there is  imbalance
in  the  elements,  you  will  start  to  experience  problems.  Nagarjuna’s
Precious Garland says:

         We live amidst the conditions for Yama,
         Like a butter lamp in a gale (Page 56).

When you put a butter lamp in an open  area  and  there  is  a  strong  wind
blowing from all directions, you do not really  know  how  long  the  butter
lamp is going to last. There is no way of telling. Likewise,  there  are  so
many external and internal conditions for you to die. There  is  no  way  of
telling when you will die.

Besides life itself permeates the reality of death so that  many  conditions
for life are unreliable: From the Precious Garland:

         There are many conditions of death
         Those for living are only few
         Even they may well be deadly
         Therefore, always practice dharma (Page 56).
There are many  causes  and  conditions  for  dying.  Furthermore  even  the
conditions that are necessary to sustain life sometimes turn out to  be  the
causes of your death. For example, food sustains life but it can cause  your
death. People die from eating food and taking  medicine.  By  reflecting  on
how the causes of death are many and the causes  of  life  few,  you  should
come to understand how the time of death is really uncertain.


         C  The body is extremely vulnerable and the time of death therefore
         uncertain

{71} The body is as vulnerable as a water bubble -  therefore this and  that
such as a thorn piercing it may be to blame and occasion the destruction  of
life without the need for major harm. Thus it is  very  easily  overcome  by
conditions of death. In the Friendly Letter it says:

         If physical things – the ground, Mount Meru, and oceans –
         Are burnt up by the seven blazing suns
         And even ashes are not left behind
         What need to mention exceedingly feeble humans (Page 56)?
After contemplating that the time of death is indeed  uncertain  because  of
these three reasons, then you should  make  the  second  decision,  “I  must
practise the Dharma now.”


    2B4B-2B1A-1A4B-3   The decision that it is necessary to practice Dharma
    from now on

At the end of thoughts like  these  you  should  reiterate  many  times  the
innermost decision to practice Dharma from  this  very  moment,  for  it  is
uncertain when the body and life will be overcome by the Lord of  Death  and
it should no be assumed that there is still time. As Shri Jagatamitra said:

         Earth lord as long as this borrowed body
         Abides in pleasure – not sick not decayed,
         At that time do take its essence
         Not fearing illness, death, decay.
         In times of illness, old age, and decay
         You may be concerned, but to what avail (Page 56)?

This advice here is very important and is something that you  must  keep  in
your heart. This is because this quotation is  a  description  of  your  own
situation. Most people are like this. When things are going well,  they  are
happy. When the body is strong and healthy, you  will  never  think  of  the
Dharma. Even when you do think  of  the  Dharma,  you  will  think,  “I  can
practise later.”  Then comes the time when you start to age  and  get  sick.
Only then do you remember the Dharma. By that time it is too late. What  can
you do then? So you are advised to practise  the  teachings  while  you  are
still strong and healthy.

There are three roots in cultivating the mindfulness of death:
   1. Death is certain.
   2. The time of death is uncertain
   3. At the time of death nothing helps except Dharma practice.

Among the three root[ thought]s the one about the uncertainty  of  the  time
of death is most important, which is why you should  make  an  effort  (Page
56).

    2B4B-2B1A-1A4C     At the time of death nothing is of benefit except
    for the Dharma

         1  The actual reasons
         2  Decision

    2B4B-2B1A-1A4C-1 The actual reasons

         A  [You cannot take along friends] (Page 56)

At time of death, even if you  have  a  huge  entourage,  many  loved  ones,
friends, and relatives, you will not be able to bring even one of them  with
you. Comes the day when you die, they cannot do anything for you.  You  have
to leave all of them behind. You have to go on alone to the next life.

         B  [You cannot take along possessions] (Page 57)

However much money, resources, and possessions you may  have,  even  if  you
happen to own the whole world, at the time  of  death,  you  have  to  leave
everything behind and you have to go to the  next  life  alone.  You  cannot
even bring a single dollar or even a small piece of  your  possessions.  You
can bring along nothing.


A great Kadampa master of the past said, “When  the  king  dies,  he  leaves
behind the entire kingdom. When  the  beggar  dies,  he  leaves  behind  his
walking stick.”  The beggar owns nothing except his walking stick, his  only
possession but he has to leave it behind as he cannot take  it  along.   The
king who owns an entire kingdom also has to leave that behind  as  well.  No
matter who you are, you have to leave everything behind when you die.

It is also mentioned in the teachings that you may own enough sustenance  to
keep you alive for a hundred years, but at the time of death,  you  have  to
leave it behind because you cannot eat everything when you die. You have  to
go on to the next life with an empty stomach.

Even if you owned enough garments and clothing so that you can  wear  a  new
outfit every single minute for the rest of your life, at the time of  death,
you have to leave them behind and go on naked.

Khen Rinpoche: In our tradition, when a person dies, there  is  no  clothing
on the body. Even if there are clothes, they must be removed because  it  is
difficult to burn cloth in the fire. There is no electricity for burning  as
we burn the body with fire from wood. If the body is wrapped with cloth,  it
is difficult to burn the body. So all clothes are removed for easy  burning.


In Singapore, the dead body is better  dressed  than  when  the  person  was
alive! The body is washed. There is make-up. Some people even have  a  piece
of diamond placed inside their mouth.

         C  [You cannot take along your body] (Page 57)

You cherish your body so much. You spend a lot of time and  effort  to  look
after it, but at the time of death, you have to leave  your  body  here  and
move on to your next destination.

Your friends and loved ones are of no use at  the  time  of  death.  Neither
does your wealth have any use. Even this  body  of  yours  has  to  be  left
behind. That being the  case,  what  can  you  bring  along  and  what  will
benefit the mind? It is only the Dharma.

This is the way to be mindful of death and impermanence. You contemplate  by
means of the three roots, nine reasons, and the three decisions.  There  are
three roots each of which has three reasons. At  the  end  of  contemplating
each root, you arrive at one decision. Therefore in  the end you have  three
decisions.

Coming to class and by doing your reading, at the  end  of  it,  you  should
have an idea of how to cultivate the mindfulness of death and  impermanence.
You have to remember these points.

Summary
The first root is the contemplation that death is certain.
The three reasons are:
1. The Lord of Death will certainly come and there are no conditions for
   warding him off.
2. One’s life span cannot be increased and diminishes incessantly.
3. You die without having had time to practice Dharma while alive.
The decision is that death  is  definite.  Therefore  I  must  practise  the
Dharma.

The second root is the contemplation that the time of death is uncertain.
The three reasons are:
1. There is no certainty with regard to a lifespan in  Jambudvipa  which  is
   why the time of death is uncertain.
2. There are many conditions that lead to death and few that promote life.
3. The body  is  extremely  vulnerable  and  the  time  of  death  therefore
   uncertain.
The decision then  is  that  since  the  time  of  my  death  is  completely
uncertain, therefore I must practise Dharma now.

The third root is the contemplation that, at the time of death,  nothing  is
of benefit except the Dharma.
The three reasons are:
1. You cannot take along friends.
2. You cannot take along possessions.
3. You cannot take along your body.
The decision then is that, as nothing but the Dharma will  help  me  at  the
time of death, I must practise the Dharma purely.





Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng
Edited by Cecilia Tsong
Checked by Shirley Soh



