Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L52 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.308628
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


   Lesson No: 52                      Date: 24th April 2012


(Meditation on Manjushri)

Let us spend a few minutes to do some meditation. During this  time,  it  is
important that you try to make sure that your mind is alert.  Sometimes  you
may use these few minutes to  relax  instead  of  meditating.  That  is  not
meditation. Of course this is not the ideal time of the day to  meditate  as
everyone has ended a long day at work and is tired. On top of that, most  of
you had just had your dinner.

Khen Rinpoche: Naturally this is the time for you to  close  your  eyes  and
sleep. I am joking!

This  is  the  situation  but  we  will  try  to  meditate.  Generate   some
determination to try to meditate for a few minutes. As  usual,  as  much  as
possible, bring Manjushri to mind and visualise the  flow  of  nectar,  make
the requesting prayers and so forth.

                                 ***********
The main practice of the Mahayana  is  developing  the  wish  or  intent  to
achieve the welfare of others. “Others” here do  not  refer  to  a  specific
individual. Rather it refers to every  single  living  being.  Every  living
being has the capacity for love and compassion but mainly  only  the  desire
to achieve the welfare of a  specific  individual.  But  in  our  discussion
here, we are not learning how to develop love and compassion  for,  and  the
wish to accomplish the welfare of one specific  individual.  We  already  do
this for specific individuals.

The instructions we are learning here are the  instructions  for  developing
unbiased love and unbiased compassion. The  question  then  arises,  “Is  it
possible to develop unbiased love and unbiased compassion  that  extends  to
every living being?”

The teachings tell us that, in order to develop unbiased love  and  unbiased
compassion,  we  must  first   develop   equanimity,   even-mindedness,   or
impartiality towards everyone. Equanimity or even-mindedness  means  a  mind
that is not influenced by either attachment or hostility. Without  achieving
equanimity,  there  is  no  way  to  develop  unbiased  love  and   unbiased
compassion.

The text tells us to cultivate equanimity by first  focusing  on  a  neutral
person. After having some success with that, we  then  cultivate  equanimity
by focusing on a loved one. Only then do we move on to someone  we  consider
an enemy. After that we should gradually  extend  this  equanimous  attitude
towards all living beings.

In  the  last  class,  we  looked  at  the  instructions  for  reducing  our
attachment for our loved one and reducing  hostility  towards  our  enemies.
The main method for reducing attachment and hostility is to reflect on  how,
in life and in samsara in general, nothing is certain. Even  when  you  look
at one lifetime, enemies become friends and friends become enemies. This  is
also the case when you  think  about  past  and  future  lives.  Nothing  is
certain. Everyone has  harmed  you  equally.  But  they  have  also  equally
benefited you. Therefore, based on  this  reason,  the  conclusion  is  that
there is no point in getting upset or being so emotionally attached.

Reflecting on this continuously, it is possible  to  reduce  our  attachment
and hostility and eventually to be able to  achieve  some  equanimity.  When
there is a situation where we are being  harmed  by  an  enemy  and  we  are
feeling hostile towards that person, we can think how things  are  uncertain
and the situation can  change.  This  will  help  to  reduce  our  hostility
towards the enemy.

When we meditate in accordance with the teachings in  the  text,  equanimity
can be achieved. You have to try  it  out  for  yourself  and  put  it  into
practice. Otherwise these instructions seem difficult  unless  we  get  some
taste or experience with or some practical benefits from them.

Having  equanimity  towards  all  sentient  beings  is  extremely  important
because  it  is  the  basis  for  developing  unbiased  love  and   unbiased
compassion. It is very important to be able to have affection  for  everyone
and to be able to see everyone  as  pleasant.  Here  it  is  translated  as,
“Establising them all as having an attractive aspect” or, as in  the  Lamrim
Chenmo, “Having affection for all beings.” What  should  we  do  to  achieve
this?


    2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A1B     Establishing them all as having an attractive
    aspect

         1  Meditating on them as one’s mother
         2  Remembering their kindness
         3  Meditating on repaying [their] kindness

The second one has three [points]: meditating on  them  as  [one’s]  mother,
remembering their kindness, and meditating on repaying [their] kindness.

The text mentions three points:
   1. Meditating on all sentient beings to be one’s mothers
   2. Remembering their kindness
   3. Meditating on and developing the wish to repay their kindness

In trying to develop affection for all sentient beings, the first  point  we
should reflect on is recognising that all sentient beings are your  mothers:
  how everyone has been our mothers before and how they will continue to  be
our mothers in the future.

How does the text establish that all sentient beings are our mothers?
1. Cyclic existence is beginningless. Since that is so, we  must  have  been
   born in cyclic existence since time without beginning. We died  and  took
   rebirths countless times. We must have had a mother every time.  In  that
   sense, everyone has been our mother.
2. Following from that, there is  no  body  that  we  have  not  assumed  in
   samsara. In order to assume all these different kinds of bodies, we  must
   have a mother.

It is emotionally  difficult  for  us  to  understand  how  samsara  has  no
beginning. It cannot fit our mind. It is difficult to  assert  that  samsara
has a beginning. At the same time, a beginningless samsara is  something  we
find difficult to accept.  When we look at  our  own  existence,  we  cannot
think, “I have no beginning.”

Question from Khen Rinpoche: Is it better to say that we  have  a  beginning
or that we have no beginning?

Khen Rinpoche: Which one would you choose? No beginning or no end?

This is something we need to figure out: why there  isn’t  a  beginning  and
what will be the problem if we were to say that there is a  beginning?  What
is wrong with saying that?

In essence, the text is saying  that  all  sentient  beings  have  been  our
mothers because:
1. cyclic existence has no beginning and
2. our own rebirths are without beginning
Therefore everyone has  been  our  mothers  and  will  continue  to  be  our
mothers. Based on these reasons, we will not be  able  to  find  a  sentient
being who has never been our mother.

    2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A1B-1   Meditating on them as [one’s] mother

         A  The thought that they have been [our] mothers in the past

First:  In  the  sutras  it  is  taught  that,  since  cyclic  existence  is
beginningless, our births are also beginningless.  Therefore  we  have  been
born and we have  died  incessantly,  so  that  there  no  body  in   cyclic
existence that we have not taken, no place in[/spot] which we have not  been
born, and also no one who has not been a relative such as our mother and  so
forth[/close relative or friend].

         B  The thought that they are still [our] mothers

Moreover, this is not only true of the past,  they  will  again  be  in  the
future [?]. Therefore reflecting  in  that  way,  you  should  try  to  gain
unshakable [/firm?] certainty that all living beings have been your  mother,
for, once that certainty [/it] arises, it will be  [/is]  easy  to  remember
their kindness and so forth. On the other hand, if  it  [/this  certainty]it
does not arise, there will be no foundation for remembering  [/an  awareness
of/mindfulness of] their kindness and so forth (Page 141).

The Lamrim Chenmo says:

      Asanga's Levels of Yogic Deeds cites a sutra as follows:
      I have difficulty seeing a place wherein you have not been born,  gone
      to, or died in the distant past. I have difficulty seeing  any  person
      in the distant past who has not been your father, mother, uncle, aunt,
      sister, master, abbot, guru, or someone like a guru (Page 38).

Once we are able to  ascertain  that  all  sentient  beings  have  been  our
mothers and  will  continue  to  be  so,  we  move  on  to  the  next  step:
remembering  their  kindness.   In   cultivating   this   remembrance,   the
instruction is, first, to remember the kindness of our mother in this  life.


In general, for most people, the mother has  been  very  kind  to  them.  We
remember that kindness. We are then instructed to recall  the  kindness  she
had extended to us in the past when she was also  our  mother.  We  have  to
think about this continuously. Besides thinking about the  kindness  of  our
mother in this life, we recollect how in the past she must  have  been  kind
to us when she had been our mother numberless times.  Some  special  feeling
should arise for how precious and kind our mother has been to us.

Being able to feel the kindness of the  mother  of  this  life  becomes  the
basis for recollecting, remembering, and thinking about  the  kindness  that
she must have extended to us in the past when she was our mother  numberless
times. In order to be able to do that, in the first place, we must  be  able
to feel her kindness in this very lifetime.

The text mentions that once we are able to generate the remembrance  of  the
kindness of our mother – the kindness which she shows us in  this  life  and
the kindness she had shown us in our numberless past lives – we  switch  the
object of our reflection to a loved one such as our father or someone  close
to us. We do the same reflection again.

We then extend this reflection slowly to our  friends  and  relatives.  Only
after that do we extend the reflection to our enemies. Once we are  able  to
generate this feeling for how all sentient beings have been kind to us  when
they were our mothers, naturally we have the wish to repay their kindness.


    2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A1B-2   Remembering their kindness

         A  The thought that it is skilful and so forth [?/skilful/wise] to
         start with one’s mother of this life etc.

Second: [Geshe]  Potowa  maintained  that  [the  thought  remembering  their
kindness] will arise quickly if, after meditating on all sentient beings  as
[your] mothers, you initially meditate on your  mother  of  this  life.  [?]
That is how you should meditate. You visualize your mother in front  of  you
in a clear aspect and repeatedly reflect: “She has been my mother  not  only
now[/She is my mother not only at present, but has been...], but times  past
counting since beginningless cyclic existence. That way,  when  she  was  my
mother, she protected me from all harm and accomplished  all  happiness  and
benefit for me.

         B  The way in which she also protected one in this life

In particular, even in this life, she initially carried you in her womb  for
a long time. Then, when she had given birth to you, she pressed your  yellow
tousled hair against the heat of her body, she swung you on her  fingertips,
nursed you with her milk, fed you as an infant from her mouth,  {168}  wiped
away your saliva [?/mucus] with her mouth, cleaned your filth [?]  with  her
hands, caring for you untiringly in many different ways. In  addition,  when
you were hungry or thirsty, she gave you  food  and  drink.  When  you  were
cold, she gave you clothing. When  you  were  in  need,  she  gave  you  her
possessions that she herself had hardly  used.  When  even  the  most  basic
necessities [/basic necessities] where hard  to  come  by,  she  bore  great
hardship and spared herself no negativity, suffering or bad talk [?] to  get
it and give them to you.

         C  A mother cherishes her child more than herself

Whenever her child suffers from a disease and so forth, she wishes from  the
depths of her heart [?]to to die, rather than for her child to  die,  to  be
ill rather than for her child to be ill, and  so  forth.  With  effort,  she
does whatever she can to eliminate [his [/his or her]suffering].

         D  How to meditate about the essential points separately

To summarize, by whatever level of knowledge and whatever level  of  ability
she had, she thought single-pointedly about the way in which  to  accomplish
your  happiness  and  benefit,  and  to  remove  any  harm   and   suffering
[for][/from] [you].

         E  How to meditate progressing gradually

If, mediating in this way, a mind remembering  her  kindness,  that  is  not
just words has arisen, you should meditate on recognizing other friends  and
relatives, your father and so forth, as also  having  been  [your]  mothers.
Then, you should also meditate on recognizing neutral  [persons]  as  having
been your mothers. Once a similar mind arises[/consciousness?/mind]  towards
them as that towards your friends and relatives, you  should  also  meditate
on recognizing your enemies as having been  your  mothers.  Once  a  similar
mind arises towards them as that towards  your  mother  has  developed,  you
should proceed from the recognition  of  all  beings  as  having  been  your
mothers, and meditate, gradually extending it more  and  more  (page  141  –
142).

Cultivating the wish to repay the kindness of  our  mothers,  i.e.,  to  all
sentient beings, is not simply repaying them  in  terms  of  providing  them
with temporary benefits or material comforts. The meditation of  cultivating
the wish to repay our mothers’ kindness is this: because they have  been  so
kind to us, we have to repay their kindness in the best way  possible.  What
would this be? The best way to repay the mothers’ kindness is to  free  them
from suffering by helping them to be liberated from their own ignorance.

         C  As it would be inappropriate to repay the benefit with something
         contaminated, one should liberate them from ignorance (Page 143)

If you recall our discussion on the path of the persons of medium  capacity,
all the undesirable sufferings and problems of  this  life  ultimately  come
from ignorance. Ignorance is the root cause.  Until  we  help  to  free  all
sentient beings from their ignorance, they will never ever  be  truly  happy
no matter what we do for them.  Therefore  the  best  way  of  repaying  the
kindness of all sentient beings is to help them to be free from ignorance.

    2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A1B-3   The wish to repay [their] kindness

         A  Even though you do not recognize them due to birth, death, and
         transmigration, it would be shameless to neglect them.

Third: There is  nothing  less  shameful  than  carelessly  neglecting  your
suffering, protectorless[/defenceless], kind mothers, just  because  you  do
not recognize them anymore due to  birth,  death,  and  transmigration,  and
being preoccupied with freeing yourself from cyclic existence (Page 142).

We develop affection for  all  living  beings  by  cultivating  these  three
points:
 • on the basis of recognising how everyone has been our mothers
 • remembering their kindness when they were our mothers
 • wishing to repay their kindness with  the  understanding  that  they  are
   suffering because of their ignorance
A very strong wish to do something for them will arise. You  will  feel,  “I
must do something for them.”

When we are able to develop affection for every living being  by  reflecting
in this way, we will be able to develop the  attitude  intent  on  achieving
their welfare. In order to develop  this  attitude,  we  have  to  cultivate
love, compassion, and wholehearted resolve.  So,  on  the  basis  of  having
developed  affection  for  all  sentient  beings,  what   follows   is   the
cultivation of love.


    2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A2 Actual generation of the mind striving for the
    welfare of others

         A  Meditating on love
         B  Meditating on compassion
         C  Meditating on the extraordinary attitude

The second one  has  three  [points]:  meditating  on  love,  meditating  on
compassion, and meditating on the extraordinary attitude

    2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A2A     Generation of loving kindness

         1  The observed object

First: The observed object of love  is  sentient  beings  who  do  not  have
[/without] happiness.

         2  The aspect [of love]

Its aspect is the thought [/are the thoughts]: “How wonderful  it  would  be
if they met with [/were to find]  happiness.  May  they  meet  with  [/find]
happiness!” And: “I will make them [?] meet with [/find] happiness!” [?]
 (Pages 142-143).

The definition of love is a mind that, when focusing on sentient beings  who
do not have happiness, thinks, “May they be happy. How nice it would  be  if
they were all happy.”

What are the benefits of having this mind? Lama Tsongkhapa quotes  from  the
King of Meditative Stabilisation Sutra:

         3  The merit is even greater than constantly making offerings to
         the buddhas

As regards the benefit, it says in  the  King  of  Meditative  Stabilization
Sutra:

         Many kinds of immeasurable offerings
         In myriads of neighbouring pure fields
         Constantly offered to the most excellent beings,
         Fall short of a fraction of the mind of love.

This is to say that the merit  is  much  greater  than  that  of  constantly
making offerings [of things] to the field that  is  the  final  object  with
very vast things.

          4 If you cultivate love in this field, [the merit] will exceed
         even the former

Also, in Arraying the Buddha Field of Manjushri it is explained:

         In the world sphere called “Thousand Ornaments” of the  great  king
         Buddheshvara, at the northeastern  border,  {171}  sentient  beings
         possess a happiness similar to  that  of  monks  who  have  entered
         cessation. If  a  mind  [/mental  attitude]  of  love  towards  all
         sentient beings, generated in this [/our]ffield for  as  little  as
         the duration of a finger snap [/it takes to snap]pproduces far more
         merit than practicing  pure  conduct  there  for  hundred  thousand
         millions of years, what need is there to mention that of abiding in
         [that mind] day and night? (Page 144)

Here you see the benefits of generating love.  Even  if  one  develops  such
love for a very short period of time,  say  a  fraction  of  a  moment,  the
benefits far surpass the merit  of  making  offerings.  Even  if  we  cannot
sustain such love for a long period of time, it is important to think  about
love for a short period of time. We should try to do this.

In terms of the stages of cultivating love, we cultivate  love  towards  (1)
our friends, (2) people towards whom we have neutral feelings, and  (3)  our
enemies.


The way to cultivate love is to remember that as long  as  a  person  is  in
cyclic existence, there is no real happiness. It  doesn’t  matter  who  that
person may be nor does it matter where that person is in  cyclic  existence.
As long as one is in cyclic existence, one is  deprived  of  and  devoid  of
real happiness. When you  have  the  realisation  that  everyone  in  cyclic
existence is deprived of the genuine highest happiness,  the  wish  for  all
living beings to be truly happy will naturally arise.

         6  The stages of meditation on love

The stages of meditation on love are to respectively meditate initially  [on
love] for your friends and relatives, then for  neutral  persons,  then  for
your enemies, and then towards all sentient beings.

         7  The way in which to meditate [on love]

The way in which to meditate [on love is as  follows].  Just  as  compassion
arises when you reflect again and again on  how  sentient  beings  have  the
suffering of suffering, likewise you should reflect again and again  on  the
fact that sentient beings lack  contaminated  and  uncontaminated  happiness
and on the manners in which they are devoid  of  happiness.  Once  you  have
familiarized yourself with this, the wish for them to  find  happiness  will
arise naturally. In addition, directing your mind to the  various  kinds  of
happiness, you will then {172}  provide  sentient  beings  with  them  (Page
145).

In order for us to generate love for everyone, we  must  first  realise  how
they are all deprived of real happiness in cyclic existence.  Based  on  our
own experience and understanding of happiness,  if  we  can  then  sincerely
wish that everyone else can experience such happiness as well  by  thinking,
“How wonderful it would be if they also have happiness,”  it  is  said  that
that will bring immeasurable benefit.

The objects of compassion are suffering sentient beings. Focussing on  them,
you develop the wish for them to be free of suffering, thinking,  “May  they
be free from suffering.” This mind is called compassion.

Similar to developing love, we cultivate compassion  in  this  sequence.  We
cultivate compassion for (1) our loved ones, followed by (2)  those  towards
whom we have neutral feelings and (3) our enemies. Only then  do  we  extend
our compassion to (4) the rest of sentient beings.


    2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A2B     Meditating on compassion

         1  The observed object [of compassion]

Second: The observed  object  of  compassion  is  sentient  beings  who  are
suffering due to any of the three kinds of suffering.

         2  The aspect [of compassion]

The [/Its] aspect is the  thought:  “If  only  they  were  free  from  these
sufferings”, “May they be free from  them,”  and  “I  will  free  them  from
them”.

         3  The sequence of the meditation [on compassion]

The sequence of meditation is to meditate [on  compassion]  first  for  your
friends and relatives, then for neutrals persons,  then  for  your  enemies,
and then for all sentient beings of the ten directions (Page 145).

In order to develop compassion for all living beings, it is  very  important
to realise how they are tormented by suffering in cyclic existence. Once  we
are able to see this, the wish for them  to  be  free  from  suffering  will
naturally arise. Here the material that was covered in the  section  on  the
persons of medium capacity becomes  extremely  important.  We  started  with
understanding the general suffering followed by the specific  sufferings  in
cyclic existence, such as the specific sufferings of the six  realms.  Those
topics become very important: the eight types of suffering,  the  six  types
of suffering, and the three types of suffering.


         4  The main point of meditating in that sequence [/following that
         sequence in one's meditations]

This gradual meditation  on  equanimity,  love,  and  compassion  where  you
divide the  objects  into  specific  categories  was  developed  by  Acharya
Kamalashila following [/follows]  the  Abhidharma  Sutra.  This  is  a  very
important point,  because  if,  from  the  start,  you  train  in  observing
[sentient beings] in general without diving them into  specific  categories,
it  will  seem  [/seems]aaas  though  [these  attitudes]  have  arisen  [/as
intended], but when you then think about them individually, it  will  appear
that it does not arise for any of them. However, if you experience a  change
in your mind towards the individual [persons] as explained above,  and  then
extend it to many, when at the end you observe them in general  and  sustain
[that attitude], it  will  arise  purely  regardless  of  who  is  observed,
whether a group or an individual (Pages 145 – 146).

This  paragraph  highlights  an  extremely  important  point.  When  we  are
cultivating our practice of equanimity, love, and compassion, first we  have
to start  with  the  meditation  focusing  on  specific  persons.  Once  you
experience some transformation in your mind with relation to those  persons,
you then gradually expand the number  of  individuals  in  your  meditation.
Only then do you extend  the  meditation  in  a  general  way  to  encompass
others. Then you will have success.

If right from the  beginning,  you  were  to  engage  in  these  meditations
without thinking of a specific  individual  but  instead,  thinking  of  all
sentient beings, …

Khen Rinpoche: Then when one sentient being comes in front of you,  that  is
it! All sentient beings disappear.

This is really very good advice. We should try to put it into  practice.  It
will be amazing if we can put it into practice. Even to  be  able  to  hear,
understand, and to have some faith in  these  teachings,  I  think  that  is
really amazing. Needless to say, it will be even more  amazing  if  you  are
able to practise these teachings.

         6  The measure [/gauge] for the development of compassion

The measure [/gauge] for the development of  compassion  is  taught  in  the
First Stages of Meditation (Bhavanakrama) [by Kamalashila]:

      At the point where the compassion that has the aspect  of  the  desire
      constantly to remove the suffering of all beings - just as if your own
      beloved child was unhappy – operates naturally  in  you  spontaneously
      and operates in accordance with  your  own  nature,  it  is  complete.
      Thereby, it obtains the name “[?]great  compassion”,  as  it  is  then
      complete.
      .
[Thus] if compassion towards all sentient beings  naturally  arises  to  the
extent it arises in a mother when the child she loves  with  all  her  heart
suffers, it is said to  be  a  fully-qualified  great  compassion.  By  that
token, the same is true for [?] the measure [?] of the generation  of  great
love (Page 146).

A mother is tormented upon seeing her  beloved  only  child  suffering  from
sickness and so forth. Spontaneously and naturally, she will have  a  strong
desire for her child to be released from that suffering. She will think  day
and night when that will happen. This is an example. It is  said  that  when
you are able to have  this  kind  of  compassion  for  all  sentient  beings
spontaneously, that is when great compassion has arisen in your mind. It  is
the same for great love as well.

Question: When Khen Rinpoche was going over the aspect of love (pg.  144  of
the MLLR), the text mentions, “I will make them  meet  with  happiness!”  It
seems that the extraordinary attitude (or wholehearted resolve)  is  already
there. The same applies when it talks about  compassion.  How  different  is
what is stated here from wholehearted resolve?

Answer: It is a matter of the strength of the resolve.  In  developing  love
and compassion one will have  the  thought,  “I  will  cause  them  to  have
happiness. I will cause them to be free of suffering.”

But  when  it  comes  to  wholehearted  resolve,  the  strength   of   those
convictions is much stronger. In wholehearted  resolve,  not  only  are  you
saying, “I will do it,” but you are  thinking,  “I  will  do  it  by  myself
alone.”

Question: (1) With reference to  the  process  of  developing  the  mind  of
equanimity, we are instructed to start with someone  that  is  neutral.  Can
Khen Rinpoche elaborate what this mind of  equanimity  is  like?  I  thought
that if it is someone towards whom you have neutral feelings, your  mind  is
already even-minded with neither attachment nor hostility.
(2) What is the measure of having achieved this mind of equanimity?

Answer: Usually when we think of a neutral person,  we  have  no  particular
feelings for him because he has neither harmed nor  benefited  us.  This  is
how we conceive a neutral person.
But this is not the case. There is no  need  to  meditate  to  develop  this
disinterested attitude.

This meditation is a way to  work  with  our  attachment  and  hostility.  A
neutral person is someone towards whom, at  that  point  in  time,  we  have
neither any particular feelings of hostility nor  attachment.  If  hostility
or attachment were to arise in relation to that person, generally  speaking,
it would be easier for us to stop such feelings compared to  a  person  with
whom we are emotionally involved in either a positive or negative  way.   It
is a matter of the degree of difficulty.

With regard to cultivating equanimity, we are first taught to focus  on  the
neutral  person,  followed  by  the  loved  one  or   friend.   It   becomes
increasingly difficult.

Khen Rinpoche:  I  don’t  know  what  is  the  measure  of  having  achieved
equanimity. I didn’t bring my measuring tape!

    2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-2A2C     Meditating on the extraordinary attitude

         1  The actual way to meditate [on the extraordinary attitude] [/way
         to meditate](Page 146)

Having developed well the  thought  wishing  all  sentient  beings  to  have
happiness and to be free from suffering,  i.e.,  love  and  compassion,  one
will be able to develop wholehearted  resolve,  thinking,  “I  will  achieve
this by myself alone.” One will be able to  assume  the  responsibility  for
achieving this by oneself alone. The text seems to be saying that  once  you
have reach this point, the way to bring about this wholehearted  resolve  is
to remember these few lines and train by continuously thinking, “I  will  do
this by myself alone.”

Khen Rinpoche: You repeat the words over and over  again,  like  chanting  a
mantra, “I will do this by myself alone. I will do this by myself alone.”

By keeping these few words in your mind, “I will do this by  myself  alone,”
you train in mindfulness, reminding yourself of  this  all  the  time.  This
training in wholehearted resolve comes only after one  has  cultivated  love
and compassion.

Khen Rinpoche: Otherwise you will become crazy!

         2  Clearing up doubt

Although this point  has  already  been  made  briefly  in  the  context  of
repaying the kindness, it is shown here that the love  and  compassion  that
think: “If only they were to meet with happiness” and  “If  only  they  were
free from suffering” are not sufficient. This is because it  was  taught  it
is  necessary  to  generate  the  love  and  compassion  that  are  able  to
induce[/engender] the thought: “I myself will accomplish the  happiness  and
benefit of sentient beings.” This is not to be done just  during  meditation
sessions, but is to be sustained continuously,  remembering  it  during  all
behaviours after the session and so forth,  as  is  taught  in  the  (Middle
Stages of Meditation) Bhavanakrama.
Question from Khen Rinpoche: What is the qualm that  is  being  raised  here
and what is the answer to the qualm?

Khen Rinpoche: There is a qualm here. You must first  get  the  qualm.  Then
there is the answer to the qualm. You must get these  two  things  when  you
read the text. I will stop here. On Thursday, you bring the  qualm  and  the
answer to the qualm.

We are about to finish the  sevenfold  cause  and  effect  instructions  for
developing bodhicitta. In the next class, we will complete this and move  on
to the instructions of exchanging self and others.

When we say “reading the text,” the way to read our text is not the  way  we
read newspapers and magazines. When we read the text and we  come  across  a
qualm, we must recognise that there is a qualm and try  to  figure  out  the
answer to the qualm raised. It is important to  think  as  we  read.  Having
said that, even if you were to read the text quickly,  you  will  accumulate
immeasurable merit. But if you can do something better than  that,  such  as
analysing the text as you read it,  of  course  the  benefit  will  be  much
greater.

Question: Why is the cultivation of impartiality, followed by affection  and
love causes to generate compassion? Why are they in such a sequence?

Answer: I have already given you the answer. It is said very clearly in  the
text that, in general, there  is  no  order  in  the  arising  of  love  and
compassion.

Question: But in the sevenfold cause and effect  instructions,  there  is  a
definite order?

Answer: It is in the text.[1]  The causal  relationship  between  compassion
and the love that is the wish for beings to have happiness is  not  definite
in general. But in the context of sevenfold cause and  effect  instructions,
love and compassion  have  a  definite  order  because  the  love  in  these
instructions is not just love alone, but it is the love that arises  through
the force of affection.[2] This is the answer for such a  question  but  you
have to think about the answer.

Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; Transcribed by Phuah Soon  Ek  and  Vivien
Ng; Edited by Cecilia Tsong
-----------------------

         [1] D    With respect to mere love and compassion it is not certain
         which is the cause and which is the effect

With respect to the love  that  wishes  them  to  meet  with  happiness  and
compassion, there does not seem to be any certainty as to which one  is  the
cause and which one is the effect.

[2] Refer pages. 10 & 11 of edited transcript for Lesson 50.

