Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L37 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.271017
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


   Lesson No: 37               Date: 23rd February 2012


Question from Khen Rinpoche:  A person of  small  capacity  is  supposed  to
stop his over-emphasis on and reverse his attraction  to  the  happiness  of
this life. What is the best way of doing this?

Khen Rinpoche: I want a very short answer. Someone should say, “This is  the
method.” We have covered all the relevant topics so  now  give  me  a  short
answer.

When you reverse the attraction to this life’s happiness, at the same  time,
you are supposed to develop a sincere interest  in  the  happiness  of  your
future lives. What is the method for developing that  sincere  interest?  Is
that method the same as the method one uses to overcome one’s  over-emphasis
on the happiness of this life?

Student: To reflect on the sufferings of this life and future lives.

Khen Rinpoche: Your answer  is  that  the  method  is  to  meditate  on  the
suffering of this life. Can you explain  why  this  is  so?  How  does  that
meditation reverse one’s attraction to the happiness of this life?

Student: Reflecting on the suffering of this life lessens  one’s  attraction
to the enjoyments of this life.  Furthermore,  one  should  reflect  on  the
impermanent nature of such enjoyments.

Khen Rinpoche: When you meditate on the suffering of  this  life,  how  does
that cause you to develop a sincere interest  in  the  happiness  of  future
lives since the experiences in future lives will be the same as  this  life?
They are all in the nature of suffering.

Student: Then if one continues to meditate in that manner, one will have  to
ask what is beyond the medium scope. We haven’t got there yet.

Khen Rinpoche: Did you not say that in order to overcome  the  over-emphasis
on the happiness of this life, you have to  meditate  on  the  suffering  of
this life?

Student: Yes.

Khen Rinpoche: The meditation on the suffering of this life comes mainly  in
the practices of the person of medium capacity. It doesn’t  come  under  the
practices of the person of small capacity.

Student:  That was why I was thinking you have  to  meditate  on  the  great
scope as the next step …

Khen Rinpoche: The question now relates to the  small  scope.   Your  answer
relates to the great scope so it is incorrect.

Another student: By reflecting on death and  impermanence,  we  can  reverse
our attachment to the present life’s happiness because you would  then  know
that nothing is permanent  in  this  life.  Therefore  why  be  attached  to
whatever happiness you may experience in this life? Am I correct to say so?

Khen Rinpoche: Yes, I think so.

The main cause of us getting so attached to,  over-emphasising,  and  giving
top  priority  to  the  happiness  of  this  life  is  mainly  due  to  this
apprehension of permanence. We grasp at and believe strongly that  phenomena
are permanent; in particular, our own lifespan and our enjoyments.  We  feel
that they will never change. They will remain as  they  are  and  they  will
last for a very long time. There is this kind of very strong innate  feeling
and belief within us. Due to that, we over-emphasise and become so  attached
to the happiness of this life. That being  the  case,  the  best  method  to
counteract this grasping at permanence is to do  the  nine-point  meditation
on death.

At the very least, what we need to  do  is  to  reduce  that  current  over-
emphasis on the happiness of this life. In order to  do  that,  we  have  to
weaken its cause, i.e., this apprehension of permanence,  by  reflecting  on
death and impermanence. We all know that death will happen sooner or  later.
We all accept that. While  we  may  live  our  life  with  that  belief  and
understanding, yet in each and every day of our lives, we never  ever  think
that death may happen today. Instead we think that  death  will  not  happen
today. It  will  happen  sometime  in  the  future,  maybe  it  will  happen
tomorrow.

Look at how we see ourselves: within a day, we don’t  think  that  there  is
any difference between our life in the morning and our life in the  evening.
We don’t even really feel that there is any  difference  between  today  and
yesterday.  We  think  things  are  somehow  permanent,  solid,  fixed,  and
unchanging. We then carry on day after day thinking, “I will not die.”  This
is the very source of our strong attachment.

If you want to meditate, then the way to reduce  the  overemphasis  on  this
life is to reflect and meditate on death and impermanence. If  you  want  to
change this attitude, then  this  is  what  you  have  to  do:  reflect  and
meditate on how you are definitely going to die and yet the  time  of  death
is uncertain.

Until we are  able  to  reduce  our  current  overemphasis  on  this  life’s
happiness, our attachment to the happiness of this  life  will  remain  very
strong. When our attachment to the happiness of this life  is  very  strong,
then our whole focus is on what  we  do  in  this  life.  Our  energies  are
directed towards achieving the goals of this life alone. In that  situation,
the happiness of future lives will become incidental, i.e.,  it  becomes  of
secondary importance.  At the back of our mind, even  though  we  may  think
that the happiness of our future lives is important but the feeling  is  not
that strong.

The main reason why we feel that this life’s happiness is more important  is
because of our strong attachment to the happiness of this life. So until  we
reduce that attachment, there is nothing much we  can  do  to  overcome  our
overemphasis on this life’s happiness.

It is mentioned in the teachings that the best method to overcome our  gross
attachment to the happiness of this life is to reflect and meditate  on  our
own death and our own impermanence. This is something we have to do all  the
time.  Although  this  is  mentioned  in  the  teachings,  we  all  have  to
experience and see that this is so  for  ourselves:  Are  things,  including
ourselves, our lives, and friends changing or  not?  Are  they  all  in  the
nature of impermanence or not? When we remember  impermanence  and  when  we
remember our own death, do they help us to reduce our attachment?

The text says that to develop  a  sincere  interest  in  our  future  lives’
happiness is to have a good rebirth, i.e., to be reborn as a human being  or
worldly god.  The way to do that is to  reflect  on  the  suffering  of  the
lower realms. When we realise that the chances of  us  going  to  the  lower
realms, where there are tremendous sufferings, is very high only  then  will
we have the sincere wish to be reborn as a human  being  or  in  the  higher
realms.

 • The most effective method for overcoming the attraction  to  this  life’s
   happiness is the reflection and meditation on death and impermanence.
 • The most effective method for developing a genuine sincere wish to have a
   good rebirth in the next life is to reflect on  the  sufferings  that  we
   will have to experience in the lower realms.
Once you have this real interest in wanting to have  a  good  rebirth,  then
you will look for the causes that will enable you to have  such  a  rebirth.
Upon investigation, you will find that in order to have a good rebirth:
 • You have to engage in virtuous actions. In particular, you have  to  live
   your life in an ethical way by intentionally refraining from the ten non-
   virtuous actions and by cultivating the ten virtuous actions.
 • You will also have to engage in  the  practices  of  purifying  the  non-
   virtuous actions  that  you  had  already  accumulated  in  the  past  in
   conjunction with the applications of the four opponent powers.

Therefore the practices of a person of small capacity  are  to  reverse  the
attraction to this life through:
 • reflecting and meditating on death and impermanence and
 • developing a sincere interest in future lives

By changing the mind-set from the current preoccupation with  this  life  to
one that focuses on future lives with the sincere interest  to  get  a  good
rebirth and, on that  basis,  if  one  were  to  live  an  ethical  life  by
intentionally abandoning the ten non-virtuous actions  and  purifying  one’s
negativities, one will achieve a good rebirth either as a human being  or  a
worldly god.

If you were then to  ask,  “Is  that  all?  Is  it  sufficient  just  to  be
satisfied with a good rebirth?”  Then the  answer  is,  “No.”  We  shouldn’t
just stop there as that is not enough. At  this  point  in  time,  then  the
practices that are shared with a person of medium capacity are taught.

               Explanation of the stages of the path common to
                             intermediate beings


    2B4B-2B2     Explanation of the stages of the path common to
    intermediate beings

         A  Transition
         [B The actual training]

    2B4B-2B2A    Transition (Page 104)

As discussed in the last lesson,  we  saw  how  having  an  excellent  body,
resources, and helpers are  included  within  cyclic  existence.  These  are
things that we should still aim for whilst keeping in mind  that  these  are
temporary and not the ultimate goals.

At this point in time then the practices of  a  person  of  medium  capacity
will be introduced. There will be an explanation  of  how,   even  when  you
obtain a good rebirth as a human being  or  a  god,  nevertheless,  all  the
experiences of those existences  are  ultimately  still  in  the  nature  of
suffering.

They do not  go  beyond  suffering.  Although  a  god  or  human  being  has
pleasurable experiences, in reality, those experiences are in the nature  of
suffering. However most people  think  they  are  real  happiness  and  real
pleasure.  That  is  a  wrong  conception.   This   conception   is   called
apprehending that which is by nature unpleasant as pleasant and it needs  to
be overcome and removed.

Through not realising that which is in the nature of suffering to be so,  we
develop  attachment  to  those  experiences.  Through  the  apprehension  of
permanence, we regard these experiences to be permanent and we get  attached
to them. As we pursue these experiences  due  to  our  attachment,  we  will
engage in all kinds of non-virtuous actions and in the  process,  accumulate
negative karma.

Therefore it is said that even when if you do get a good rebirth, it is  not
so special because it is always possible for  you  to  fall  back  into  the
three lower realms. This is so  especially  when,  due  to  attachment,  you
create the causes for doing so through engaging in non-virtuous actions.

So if you were to ask, “Is it enough to get a good rebirth as a human  being
or a god? Is it all right to just aim for that  alone?”  The  answer  is  no
primarily for these two reasons:
1. Even when you get a good rebirth, all your experiences in those  rebirths
   will be in the nature of suffering.
2. Even when you get a good rebirth, it is always possible for you  to  fall
   back into the lower realms.

    2B4B-2B2B    The actual [training]

         1  The actual training in that attitude
         2  The measure [/gauge] of its development
         3  Elimination of misconceptions about it
         4  Determining the nature of the path leading to liberation


       Explanation of how to develop the mind striving for liberation


    2B4B-2B2B-1        The actual training in that attitude

         A  Identification of the mind striving for liberation
         B  The methods for generating [/developing] [the mind striving for
         liberation]

The first one has two  points:  identification  of  the  mind  striving  for
liberation and the methods for generating [/developing] [the  mind  striving
for liberation].

      2B4B-2B2B-1A     Identification of the mind  striving  for  liberation
      (Page 104)

As for the actual training in the mind of the path shared with a  person  of
medium capacity, we first have to identify what is this mind that is  intent
on liberation and the methods for developing this mind. But  before  we  can
identify what is this mind that is intent on liberation, we  first  have  to
identify correctly what is liberation.

         1  Identification of liberation (Page 105)

First: “Liberation” is freedom [/release] from bondage.  Specifically  there
are two things binding one in cyclic existence, karma and  the  afflictions.
Through [/, through] the power of  these  two,  the  very  aggregates  join.
From the point of view of realms, [they do so] in the  three  realms,  those
of desire etc., when divided by way of migrating  beings,  as  five  or  six
[types], gods etc. and in terms of birthplaces, in a womb and  so  on.  This
is the essence of bondage, therefore freedom from them is  liberation  (Page
105).

Liberation means freedom from bondage. What binds us  to  cyclic  existence?
It is karma and the  afflictions  that  bind  us  to  cyclic  existence.  So
liberation means freedom from being bound to cyclic existence due  to  karma
and the afflictions.

Due to karma and the afflictions, we  circle  in  cyclic  existence  in  the
three realms where we are reborn as the six types of  beings.  The  type  of
births are: being born from a womb, born  from  eggs,  born  from  heat  and
moisture, and spontaneous birth.

When we are no longer bound by karma and the afflictions, we are  liberated.
However, when we think more deeply about liberation, it boils  down  to  the
nature  of  our  mind.   When  we  said  we  are  bound  by  karma  and  the
afflictions, what is the main thing that is bound by karma and  afflictions?
It is the mind. Comes a  day  when  the  mind  is  completely  free  of  the
afflictions, that is when we achieve liberation and  when  the  clear  light
nature of the mind will be fully revealed. That clear light  nature  of  the
mind is the very nature of our mind, the suchness of our mind.

On the basis of having identified the goal of liberation,  we  then  develop
the mind that is intent on liberation. What is the method  for  doing  this?
When you want to develop a real wish  to  achieve  liberation  you  have  to
understand the four noble truths.

    2B4B-2B2B-1B The method[s] [?*Methode oder Methoden?] for generating
    [/developing] [the mind striving for liberation]

         1  Transition
         2  The actual method[s]

    2B4B-2B2B-1B1      Transition

Second: The development of the desire to  obtain  the  pacification  of  the
suffering of thirst, for instance, depends on  seeing  the  torment  due  to
thirst as undesirable. Likewise the development of the desire to attain  the
liberation that is  the  thorough  pacification  of  the  suffering  of  the
appropriated aggregates also depends  on  seeing  the  shortcomings  of  the
appropriated aggregates, i.e.  that  they  have  the  nature  of  suffering.
Therefore, if you meditate on the shortcomings of cyclic existence  and  the
mind that desires to reject them does not arise[/a mind  of  rejection  does
not arise with regard to them], the desire to  attain  the  pacification  of
suffering will not emerge either, because [?] in the Four Hundred Verses  it
says:

         Who is not disenchanted here,
         How could he have respect for peace?(Page 105)

It is  extremely  important  to  be  able  to  see  for  ourselves  how  the
appropriated aggregates are in the nature of suffering. The way to  do  that
is:

    2B4B-2B2B-1B2      The actual method[s]

         A  Thinking about the shortcomings of cyclic existence, the truth
         of suffering
         B  Thinking about the stages of involvement in [/steps of entry
         into] cyclic existence, the origins (Page 105)


    2B4B-2B2B-1B2A     Thinking about the shortcomings of cyclic existence,
    the truth of suffering

         1  Indicating the intention [?*] of stating the truth of suffering
         as the first of the four truths
         2  The actual meditation on suffering


    2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-1        Indicating the intention [?*] of stating the
    truth of suffering as the first of the four truths

         A  Setting out a doubt
         B  Reply (Page 105)

When the Buddha taught the four noble truths, the Buddha taught them in  the
following sequence:
   1. The truth of suffering
   2. The truth of the origins of suffering
   3. The truth of cessation
   4. The truth of the path


    2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-1A       Setting out a doubt

First:  You  may   wonder:   “If   origins   are   earlier   and   suffering
later[/precedes suffering] sinss since the origins are causes and the  {126}
truth of suffering their effect, why is that the Bhagavan, contrary to  this
sequence, taught: ‘Monks, this is the noble truth of suffering. This is  the
noble truth of the origin’?(Page 105)”

At this point in the text, there is a qualm: Why did the Buddha  talk  about
the four noble truths in that order?  If  you  talk  about  the  four  noble
truths in terms of their evolution,  in  terms  of  cause  and  effect,  the
Buddha should have first mentioned the truth of the  origins  of  suffering,
i.e., the causes of the truth of suffering.

If the four noble truths are  taught  from  the  perspective  of  cause  and
effect, the sequence will be:
   1. The truth of the origins of suffering
   2. The truth of suffering
   3. The truth of the path
   4. The truth of cessation
Why didn’t the Buddha teach them in that way?

    2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-1B        Reply

         1  Summary indication in reply
         2  Extensive explanation

    2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-1B1 Summary indication in reply

There is no fault in that, since the fact that our teacher stated cause  and
effect  in  reverse  order  has  great  significance   for   practice[/great
significance for practice].

    2B4B-2B2B-1B2A-1B2 Extensive explanation

         A  The need to teach the truth of suffering, origins, cessation and
         path one after the other in accordance with the scriptures [/the
         scriptures handed down]

If you go on to ask: How so? It is like this: If the unerring [?]  wish  for
liberation from cyclic existence has not initially arisen  in  the  disciple
himself, how should he be guided to liberation while lacking  its  root?  In
fact, initially, disciples are shrouded by the  darkness  of  ignorance  and
deceived [/betrayed] by the  misconception  that  apprehends  the  suffering
excellences [?] of cyclic  existence  as  happiness.  In  the  Four  Hundred
[Verses] it says:
         If the ocean of this suffering
         Has no limits in any respect[?/every],
         Child, you who are sinking in it,
         Why   are   you   not   gripped   with   fear    [/so    unafraid]?
         [58]


Thus, many aspects  of  suffering  having  been  taught  saying:  “This,  in
reality, is not happiness but rather suffering,” it is necessary to  develop
disenchantment, which is why the truth of suffering was stated first.  Then,
having seen that you yourself have fallen into the ocean  of  suffering,  if
you want to be liberated from it, you see [/realize] the need  to  ward  off
suffering. Having come to understand that unless you  ward  off  its  cause,
you will not avert it, thinking “What is the cause?” you come to  understand
the truth of the origins.  That is why the truth of the origins  was  stated
next[/afterwards]. Then, once an understanding of the truth of  the  origins
has arisen - the fact that the suffering of cyclic existence is produced  by
contaminated actions, that they are produced [/and  that  karma]  by  mental
afflictions, and that the root of those is the  apprehension  of  a  self  –
{127} and you see that the apprehension of a self  can  be  opposed[?],  you
vow to actualise the cessation that puts a  stop  to  suffering.  Therefore,
the truth of cessation was taught next (Page 106).

True suffering
It is stated very clearly from the onset that one  has  to  develop  a  mind
that is intent on liberation from one’s own side. We must first have a  real
interest in wanting to achieve liberation. Otherwise no one will be able  to
help and lead us to that liberation. So that is the  most  essential  thing:
to develop this mind right from the beginning.

The way to develop this mind that is intent on  liberation  is  to  see  for
ourselves the faults of cyclic existence and the sufferings that  are  found
there. When we see the faults and sufferings of cyclic  existence,  we  will
become disenchanted with them. Then we will develop a real wish  and  desire
to achieve liberation from cyclic existence.

True origins
Once we have that wish, we will investigate what is  binding  us  to  cyclic
existence. This is when we have to understand the truth of  the  origins  of
suffering, i.e., the very things that bind us to cyclic existence are  karma
and our afflictions causing us to experience all those sufferings.  When  we
think of our afflictions, we have to realise that all our afflictions  arise
from their root. What is the very root of all our afflictions? The  root  of
our afflictions is none other than the apprehension of the self or our self-
grasping, our ego.

True cessation
The question then arises, “Can this apprehension of the  self  be  removed?”
You have to check this up for yourself: whether it is possible  to  overcome
the apprehension of the self?  When you analyse and see  for  yourself  that
this apprehension of the self can be  removed,  then  liberation  becomes  a
reality. Something that was a  possibility  becomes  something  that  really
exists. When you see that the root of all our problems can be removed,  then
you will see that cessation, i.e., liberation, is  possible.  When  you  see
that liberation is possible, will  you  not  then  have  a  strong  wish  to
achieve that cessation?

True path
When you prove to  yourself  that  the  apprehension  of  the  self  can  be
removed,  then  for  you  liberation  becomes  a  real  possibility.  It  is
something that is achievable. You are very sure that  it  can  be  achieved.
With that stable thought, you will then think about the ways  in  which  you
can achieve such cessation. Your investigation will lead you to  the  fourth
noble truth, the truth of the path  that leads to this cessation.

In the Lamrim Chenmo, the analogy of  a  sick  person  is  used.  First  the
patient has to recognise that he is sick and has the  wish  to  be  free  of
that sickness. It is only when the patient  wishes  to  be  freed  from  his
sickness that he will then investigate the causes of his sickness. When  the
patient understands the causes and understands that  there  is  a  cure,  he
will be relieved as the problem can be solved. The patient  will  then  take
the medicine.


         B  Giving up objections to a presentation [of the truths] in this
         order

You may wonder: “Well then, as the  wish  for  liberation  arises  when  the
truth of suffering is presented, it would make sense to  present  the  truth
of cessation after the truth of suffering”. [However,] There  is  no  fault,
for, even though, at that point, the wish for liberation thinking  “If  only
I achieved the cessation that pacifies [?] suffering” is be  present,  since
you have not identified the cause of suffering  and  do  not  see  that  the
cause can be averted,  you  do  not  apprehend  [/apprehend]  liberation  as
something to be attained  thinking  “I  should  actualise  cessation”  (Page
106).

After having realised what is true suffering and all the  faults  of  cyclic
existence, won’t  you  then  develop  a  desire  to  be  freed  from  cyclic
existence? If you say yes, then after teaching the truth of  suffering,  the
Buddha should teach the truth of cessation of that  suffering,  i.e.,  after
you realise true suffering, the Buddha should tell you what  true  cessation
is. After introducing you to true cessation, you can take your time to  find
out what are the origins of suffering and what is  the  true  path.  So  the
Buddha could have taught in this  order:  true  suffering,  true  cessation,
true origins, and true path. So actually teaching the four noble  truths  in
this order: true suffering, true origins, true cessation and true  path,  is
wrong. What are you going to say? Please give me a short and sweet answer.

When you realise true suffering and you see the faults of cyclic  existence,
would you develop a wish to be freed from cyclic  existence?  When  you  see
that cyclic existence is in the nature of sufferings, would  you  develop  a
wish to be freed from cyclic existence? Yes or no?

Student A: You need to know  that  ceasing  the  suffering  is  possible  by
knowing its cause and understanding that ceasing it is  attainable.  Knowing
true cessation without knowing the cause  will  make  one  question  whether
such cessation is attainable or not.

My point of asking this question is not so much for the answer itself.   The
answer is already there in  the  text  but  are  you  able  to  extract  and
summarise what the text is saying?

Student B: I know that I am sick and you give me a  bowl  of  medicine.  Why
should I take it? It can be medicine or it can be poison.  I  want  to  know
what the medicine is for and what is causing my sickness to make  sure  they
match up. Without knowing this, why should I take the medicine.

Khen Rinpoche: What is she trying to say? I didn’t get the point.

Student C: If you simply tell me life is  suffering,  my  response  is,  “So
what?” If you cannot tell me what I am suffering from, why should I want  to
stop it? Maybe, to me, suffering is pleasurable. Right  now,  we  are  happy
with the things that we can get, e.g. a purple wallet. Unless you  can  tell
me why desiring and the process of acquiring that purple wallet  is  a  form
of suffering, why should I strive to stop my desire for the purple wallet?

The qualm is this: When you realise that cyclic existence is in  the  nature
of suffering, you will develop the wish  to  achieve  liberation.  So  after
talking about true suffering, can the next truth be the truth of  cessation?
Is there anything wrong with that?

The answer is:  There is no mistake. In fact you have to  explain  the  four
noble truths in this  order:  first  there  is  true  suffering,  then  true
origins of suffering, true cessation, and true path. After you realise  true
suffering, i.e., after you have seen how cyclic existence is in  the  nature
of suffering, although you do develop a mere wish to achieve liberation,  it
is not strong and stable.

After you present true suffering, then you  have  to  talk  about  the  true
origins of suffering. Once you realise that the causes of  cyclic  existence
can be removed, then from your own mind your wish to achieve  liberation  is
no longer just a mere wish. It becomes a very strong wish  because  you  now
realise that it is possible for you to achieve liberation. Now you have  the
conviction in and you understand that it is possible.  Earlier  on,  it  was
just a mere wish  as  there  wasn’t  any  conviction  or  real  belief  that
liberation is attainable.

Another question: Do you need to realise emptiness  before  you  can  really
develop the mind that is intent on liberation?

Student: (inaudible)

   • In order to develop a strong stable mind that is intent on liberation,
     you first have to see for yourself that liberation is attainable.
   • Before you can develop this, you first must realize for yourself  that
     true suffering is the object to be abandoned; in particular, the  root
     of all suffering, the apprehensions  of  a  self,  is  the  object  of
     abandonment.
   • In order to see that the apprehension of a self can  be  removed,  you
     first have to see that its conceived object can be removed.
This is something for you to think about.

The next section is the presentation of the different  kinds  of  suffering:
the eight types of suffering, the six  types  of  suffering  and  the  three
types of suffering. You should read this  on  your  own.  If  you  have  any
questions, you can bring it up at the Sunday class (1.30pm to  3.30pm).  The
discussion session will be on Tuesday.

Questions for discussion:

1. For persons of small capacity, the sufferings of  the  hell  beings,  the
   hungry ghosts and so forth are  explained.  Do  these  beings  experience
   those sufferings literally or in a metaphorical manner?

The desired outcome of this discussion  is  to  see  for  yourself  how  the
sufferings  of  the  lower  realms  as  explained  by  Buddha  are  entirely
possible. You have to move your mind in  that  direction.  Those  sufferings
are not made up.

2. What is the meaning of going for refuge? Why  is  the  Dharma  Jewel  the
   actual refuge? How are we freed from the lower  realms  when  we  go  for
   refuge?

This question is for you to arrive at an understanding on what it  means  to
go for refuge and how does going for refuge actually protects  us  from  the
lower realms.

3. There are four permutations to karma that  is  done  and  karma  that  is
   accumulated. Explain their differences.

The point here is to come to an understanding of what these  two  are.  When
we talk about how we accumulate this karma  and  that  karma,  what  exactly
does accumulating karma mean?

If time allows, you can also answer the following  questions:  (from  Lesson
34)

4. With respect to the  three  non-virtuous  mental  actions  (covetousness,
   malice and wrong views), there are no actions that  are  accumulated  but
   not done. Does that mean that the three non-virtuous mental  actions  are
   necessarily actions that are done and accumulated?

5. Why are the three non-virtuous  mental  actions  not  karma?  The  answer
   given in the text is that it is because they are  afflictions.  You  then
   have to explain why an affliction cannot be karma.

The point of giving you  the  discussion  questions  before  the  discussion
session is so that you can think about  them  and  read  the  text.  If  you
prepare for the session, it will benefit you when you come on  Tuesday.  The
discussion session is very important. In fact, it is the best way  to  learn
the subject. When you come for the discussions, you will have  a  chance  to
air your views and to ask questions  as  well.  It  is  important  that  you
attend.




Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme;

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng;

Edited by Cecilia Tsong;

Checked by Shirley Soh
