Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L06 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.232530
================================================================================



Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi

Root text: The Middle Length Lam-Rim by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by  Trijiang  Rinpoche  are
in small lettertype, to be distinguished from Lama Tsongkhapa’s own  outline
that is in larger lettertype.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


Lesson No: 6                                   Date: 28th June 2011


Lama Tsongkhapa says in his “Dependent Arising - A Praise of the Buddha”:
      35
      Alas! My mind was defeated by ignorance;
      Though I’ve sought refuge for a long time,
      In such an embodiment of excellence,
      I possess not a fraction of his qualities.


      36
      Nonetheless, before the stream of this life
      Flowing towards death has come to cease
      That I have found slight faith in you –
      Even this I think is fortunate.

This is an expression of Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  personal  life  experience.  He
says that, since he was very young, he has been reciting the refuge  prayer,
“I go refuge to the Buddha, I go refuge to the Dharma, I go  refuge  to  the
Sangha” but he has not been able to realise the specific  qualities  of  the
Buddha who taught the meaning of dependent origination.

Lama Tsongkhapa studied extensively the works of the  great  Indian  masters
of the past, paying particular attention  to  the  texts  dealing  with  the
subject of dependent  origination.  By  studying  and  reflecting  on  these
texts, Lama Tsongkhapa realised that, in this world, only the Buddha  taught
correctly the meaning of dependent origination.

Having extensively reflected and  meditated  on  the  meaning  of  dependent
origination, Lama Tsongkhapa realised what dependent origination is. He  was
especially captivated by the Buddha’s explanation of dependent  origination.
He developed very strong and deep faith in and devotion towards the  Buddha,
his object of refuge, before his life came to an end. He felt  he  was  very
fortunate.

Lama Tsongkhapa is saying that although he  has  been  reciting  the  refuge
prayer since he was young, it was only upon seeing the special qualities  of
the Buddha’s enlightened speech, in particular, his enlightened activity  of
teaching dependent origination, that  he  developed  greater  faith  in  the
Buddha.

It is not that Lama Tsongkhapa did not have any faith in the Buddha,  Dharma
and Sangha prior to his realisation of dependent origination. He  is  saying
that, after he has realised dependent origination, his faith in  the  Buddha
grew tremendously. This happened to Lama Tsongkhapa  himself.  He  developed
such faith towards the Buddha  on  the  basis  of  studying  and  reflecting
extensively on the teachings of the Buddha.

It has to be the same for us. Therefore, it is  very  important  for  us  to
study, to learn and to think critically about what the  Buddha  has  taught.
It is very important to engage in the extensive learning  of  these  classic
texts. The more you study and analyse the  great  treatises,  when  you  can
see for yourself the truth of what is in  the  texts,  definitely  you  will
also be able to generate the same kind of deep  faith  in  the  Buddha  that
Lama Tsongkhapa generated.

As I have always said before, the more you  study  the  Buddha’s  teachings,
the stronger your faith in the Buddha. That is the whole point  of  studying
the Buddha’s teachings, so that your faith in the Buddha can  increase.  The
more you understand the  teachings,  the  more  you  see  for  yourself  how
wonderful and true they are, naturally, your faith in the person who  taught
those teachings will grow. This is an extremely important  point.  When  you
are able to develop the faith that arises through such  understanding,  then
you have fulfilled the purpose of being born a human being in this life.

It is stated in the teachings that faith precedes all  virtuous  Dharma.  It
is like a door. Without it, it is difficult for virtuous  Dharma  to  arise.
Faith is likened to a mother. Without a  mother,  there  can  be  no  child.
Likewise, without faith, there is no virtuous Dharma.

Once you develop the faith that arises from  understanding,  all  the  other
qualities will come naturally. I always say that studying  the  Buddhadharma
extensively is the condition for developing such faith. Therefore,  this  is
what we are doing here. It is  important  that  you  all  ensure  that  this
happens, that your faith increases and strengthens.

                             *******************
In the last two lessons, we have been trying to eliminate all the  different
kinds of wrong views with regard to the  teachings,  for  example,  how  the
Mahayana  and  the  Hinayana  teachings  are  not  contradictory.  You  must
understand the  reasons  that  show  that  the  Mahayana  and  the  Hinayana
teachings are not contradictory. Scriptural authorities are then brought  in
to support the reasons employed. You should know what these sutras are:  for
example, what did Maitreya and the Buddha say about  this.   You  should  be
able to trace the assertion that the Mahayana  and  the  Hinayana  teachings
are not contradictory back to the Buddha himself.
You should be able to account for this on the basis of logic  and  reasoning
as well as be able to show that the Buddha himself mentioned  this  clearly,
in his own words. You  need  to  employ  logic  and  reasoning.  It  is  not
sufficient to say that the Buddha said so.  When  you  compare  the  use  of
logic and reasoning and scriptural authorities, logic and reasoning is  more
important. However, you must be able  to  show  that  your  reasons  do  not
differ from what the Buddha said. You should  be  able  to  link  it  to  an
authentic source.

Geshe-la: A student showed me how she did an exercise on  how  the  Mahayana
and the Hinayana  teachings  are  not  contradictory.  She  wrote  down  the
reasons. In order to support them, she wrote down  the  quotation  from  the
sutra of what Shakyamuni Buddha said. She  also  wrote  down  what  Maitreya
said.

I found what she did very good. She read the text and then took the  reasons
from the text. When you read the text, it is not clear with  regard  to  the
reasons. You have to find out the logic and reasoning of  why  the  Mahayana
and the Hinayana teachings are not contradictory. I think it  is  very  good
to do your own exercise. It is helpful when you do this.

There is another huge misconception with regard  to  the  Paramitayana  (the
Mahayana Sutra) and the Vajrayana (the Mahayana Tantra). Many  people  think
that these two are contradictory and have nothing to do  with  one  another.
We also need to eliminate this huge misconception by proving  that  this  is
not so.

What are the reasons that are stated in the text  that  the  Mahayana  Sutra
and Mahayana Tantra are not contradictory? What are the scriptural  sources?
It will be useful if you can extract these from  the  text  and  write  them
down.

But the main way to eliminate these  misconceptions  is  to  use  logic  and
reasoning. If you can quote the scriptural sources, that is good.  But  even
if you cannot quote exactly those verses, it is all right because  the  main
thing is to understand the logic and reasoning.

In the last lesson, we also talked about another huge misconception.  It  is
very common for people to think that there is no need to study  extensively,
especially with regard to the great treatises, because they  are  not  meant
for practice but  only  for  knowledge.   I  think  most  people  have  this
misconception.

You have to understand what this misconception  can  do  to  you.  When  you
regard the great treaties that  actually  contain  the  instructions  to  be
practised, as something that are not meant for practice, then you  will  not
have any regard or respect  for  those  teachings.  You  will  not  see  the
instructions in these texts as something that you should adopt. Rather,  you
will think that they are to be discarded. Then, you end up  criticising  and
looking down on these texts. When you start to think of these texts in  such
a way, there is the danger of creating the extremely  heavy  negative  karma
of abandoning the Dharma. These are the consequences.

The great treatises contain the unmistaken instructions  that  you  have  to
practise. Although that is the reality, it is your problem when you  do  not
realise this. In order to realise that  the  texts  contain  the  unmistaken
instructions for practice, you have to devote your body, speech and mind  to
understanding them. Lama Tsongkhapa says this in this text.

People also make one very big mistake. Despite  having  studied  the  Dharma
for a very long time, maybe 10 or 20 years, but when it comes  to  practice,
they look elsewhere for something to practise, i.e., they do  not  know  how
to practise despite having studied for a long  time.  This  is  one  of  the
biggest mistakes that anyone can make.

When we study the Buddhadharma, there will be  things  that  we  will  learn
about the Buddhadharma. We are then supposed to  reflect  of  what  we  have
studied and learned. It is not as if you then  reflect  on  something  other
than what you have studied and learned. It is not like that.

There is a relationship between listening to the  teachings  and  reflecting
on them. We should reflect or critically analyse  what  we  have  heard  and
learned so as to induce a  genuine  ascertainment  of  the  subject  matter,
i.e., to induce a real understanding of the material.

At the end of the reflection process, you gain a thorough  ascertainment  of
what you have learnt. The knowledge you gain through such  ascertainment  is
the  very  same  thing  that  you  should  meditate  on.  Meditation   means
familiarising your mind with what you have ascertained.  So  here,  you  can
see that listening, reflection and meditation are connected.

There are also people who propagate the view that if you use  your  mind  to
think about the Buddhadharma, it will harm your  meditation  practice.  This
is because, when you think, the thoughts that come  up  in  your  mind  will
harm the meditation practice. So, when you meditate, you should  not  think.
This is because, when you meditate, you are  supposed  to  get  rid  of  all
thoughts. They believe meditation must be undertaken  without  any  thoughts
arising.

Actually, this is  what  most  people  think  meditation  is.  To  them,  to
meditate is to gain some peace and, in order to do that, you  have  to  stop
thinking.  When  meditation  is  just  about  gaining  inner  peace  through
stopping all thoughts, Lama Tsongkhapa says that is a mistake and is  wrong.


Lama Tsongkhapa says that there are two types of meditation: (1)  analytical
meditation and (2) stabilising meditation.  He  places  great  emphasis  and
importance on analytical meditation.

What do you  analyse  during  the  process  of  analytical  meditation?  You
analyse the teachings that you have come  to  understand  through  listening
and reflection. Here, Lama Tsongkhapa uses the analogy of  showing  a  horse
the racecourse to highlight this point. The purpose  of  showing  the  horse
the racecourse is for it to be familiar with it. Likewise,  the  purpose  of
learning the Dharma, through listening and reflection, is to enable  you  to
meditate on what you have heard and reflected on.

Coming back to the analogy of the horse, it will be ridiculous to  show  the
horse one racecourse and then make it race on another. Similarly,  when  you
are learning the  Dharma  through  listening  and  reflection,  it  will  be
ridiculous for you to then meditate on something completely different.

You should see now how the three-fold activities  of  listening,  reflection
and meditation are interconnected. What should you meditate on?  You  should
meditate on the  teachings  that  you  have  learnt  through  listening  and
reflection, not something else. Therefore, these three are interconnected.

In order to substantiate this point, Lama Tsongkhapa quotes from  Stages  of
Meditation by the great Indian master Kamalasila:

“Whatever has been  realized  by  the  wisdom  arising  from  listening  and
reflecting is precisely what should be cultivated by  means  of  the  wisdom
arising from meditation. Just like a horse runs  along  the  course  it  has
been shown (Page 10).”

The quotation from Kamalasila’s Stages of Meditation is to  show  that  what
Lama Tsongkhapa has said so far is not  his  own  creation.  This  quotation
substantiates what Lama Tsongkhapa  is  saying.  What  Kamalasila  said  can
ultimately be traced back to the Buddha, because these great Indian  masters
elucidate the Buddha’s intent.

The Lam-Rim, the Stages of  the  Path  to  Enlightenment,  is  the  personal
instructions  of  the  great  masters.  By  depending  on   these   personal
instructions, you will be able to see all  the  scriptures  as  instructions
for practice.


         C  Indication of analytical meditation as a means of making all
         teachings appear as instructions

Thus, through summarising all the topics of paths set out in  the  excellent
teachings and commentaries - starting  from  how  to  rely  on  a  spiritual
teacher up to calm abiding and special insight  -  they  are  all  condensed
into stages of practical application  in  terms  of  performing  stabilizing
meditation where stabilizing meditation is required and analyzing  with  the
wisdom of individual investigation where analytical meditation is  required.
Thereby, these instructions guide you so that all  the  excellent  teachings
dawn on you as instructions. Then the certainty develops  that  they  should
be understood as supreme  instructions,  and  the  misconception  that  they
should be understood as mere background [knowledge] for  the  Dharma  rather
than as actual instructions {14} is completely reversed (Page 10).

Here, we are talking about the sutra teachings that  contain  the  words  of
the Buddha as well as the commentaries that clarify their intent.  The  main
points of all these teachings are condensed into  the  paths  of  the  three
types of persons of different capacities.

When you understand that the Lam-Rim, which  shows  the  practices  for  the
three types of persons, are meant for individual  practice,  then  you  will
realise and understand the essential  points  of  the  entire  Buddhadharma.
When you understand how all the essential  points  of  the  Buddha’s  sutric
teachings, i.e., the words of the Buddha himself and the  commentaries  that
elucidate the intent of those words, are contained in the Lam-Rim, then  you
will understand that the Lam-Rim is actually instructions for  everyone  who
wants to achieve enlightenment. When you are able to see this, then  without
much difficulty, you will be able to appreciate  the  tantric  teachings  of
the Buddha in the future.

When you are able to realise that all the essential points of  the  Buddha’s
teachings are contained in the Lam-Rim and  that  they  are  meant  for  all
individuals to practise in order to achieve  enlightenment,  then  the  huge
misconception we have been discussing  will  be  eradicated.  What  is  this
misconception? The misconception thinking that  these  great  treatises  are
only for  knowledge  but  not  for  practice.  That  misconception  will  be
eliminated.


    2B2C-3 The greatness of allowing you easily to discover the Jina’s
    intention

Third:  the  greatness  of  allowing  you  easily  to  discover  the  Jina’s
intention (Page 10).

We have been talking about the greatnesses of the Lam-Rim:
(1) The greatness of recognizing all teachings as non-contradictory
(2) The greatness of enabling one to understand that all of  the  scriptures
are instructions for practice.

The third greatness of the Lam-rim is  the  greatness  of  enabling  one  to
easily find the Jina’s (or the Conqueror’s) intent.

You may have noticed that I have spent quite a lot  of  time  talking  about
the first two greatnesses. I thought it is important and beneficial  that  I
do this. You have to understand that all the  misconceptions  we  have  been
talking about exist here:
   • Many people  think  that  the  Hinayana  and  Mahayana  teachings  are
     contradictory.
   • Likewise, they also think that the  Mahayana  and  the  Vajrayana  are
     contradictory.
   • In particular, there is the huge misconception of  thinking  that  one
     does not need to study the great treatises as they have nothing to  do
     with one’s practice.
   • Lama Tsongkhapa also discusses the huge misconception that there is no
     relationship between listening, reflection and meditation,  i.e.,  the
     idea that what you  meditate  on  is  not  what  you  have  heard  and
     reflected on.
These  misconceptions  exist  and  they  are  great   obstacles   for   your
development. So I thought it beneficial to talk about them again.  You  have
to pay attention to these points and to think  about  them.  Also,  this  is
Lama Tsongkhapa’s  explanation.  He  was  not  an  ordinary  person.  He  is
presenting this based on his own experience of having learnt, reflected  and
meditated on the entire Buddhadharma. He is explaining  this  from  his  own
realisations and experience.


         A  For beginners the Jina’s intention is not easy to find without a
         guru’s oral instructions

Although the great texts, teachings along with their commentaries, form  the
supreme  instructions,  completely  uneducated  beginners  cannot  find  the
intention - even though delving into  it  -  without  relying  on  excellent
direct instructions, and even if they find it, they spend a lot of time  and
enormous effort.

         B  It is found through a guru’s oral instructions

If they rely on a guru’s direct instructions and the like, it  becomes  easy
to understand (Page 10).

When you depend on these excellent personal  instructions  of  the  Lam-Rim,
you will be able to discover easily the intent of the  Buddha.  The  Lam-Rim
can be condensed into the paths of the three types  of  persons,  i.e.,  the
persons of the three different capacities. The point is to  understand  that
all the instructions in the Lam-Rim, i.e., all  the  Buddhadharma,  are  the
instructions  for  any  one  person  to  put  into   practice   to   achieve
enlightenment. Therefore, when you understand the Lam-Rim well, you be  able
to  easily  discover  the  Buddha’s  intent.  Therefore,  it  becomes   very
important for you to learn and reflect on the Lam-Rim.


    2B2C-4 The greatness of a grave misdeed stopping by itself

Fourth: the greatness of a grave misdeed stopping by itself: (Page 10).

The fourth greatness of the Lam-Rim is the  greatness  of  enabling  one  to
easily refrain from wrongdoing, specifically, the wrongdoing  of  abandoning
the Dharma.

As I have explained earlier, when  you understand the practice of  the  Lam-
Rim well, you will understand that all the teachings of the Buddha, all  the
scriptures, treatises and commentaries are instructions that are to  be  put
into practice to achieve enlightenment. When you are able  to  see  all  the
scriptures and the great treatises as instructions for  practice,  then  you
will not create the grave misdeed of abandoning the Dharma.

When you are able to understand the  Lam-Rim  well,  you  will  be  able  to
appreciate all the words of the Buddha and all the  commentaries.  You  will
be able to see them as something to be put  into  practice.  When  you  have
that kind  of  appreciation,  you  will  definitely  not  create  the  heavy
negative karma of abandoning the Dharma.

Next, the text goes on to explain how serious it is to abandon  the  Dharma.
Lama Tsongkhapa quotes from the  White  Lotus  Sutra,  the  Chapter  of  the
Truthful One and the King of Concentration Sutra to  show  how  serious  the
negative karma of abandoning the Dharma is.


         A  Showing that abandoning the Dharma as the biggest misdeed

As explained in the White Lotus [Sutra] and  the  Chapter  of  the  Truthful
One, it amounts to abandoning the Dharma, if you hold that  some  utterances
of the Buddha are means of attaining Buddhahood while others  are  obstacles
to  Buddhahood,  dividing  them  into  good   and   bad,   appropriate   and
inappropriate or  Mahayana  and  Hinayana,  and  thereupon  holding  that  a
bodhisattva needs to train in some and not in others  because  you  fail  to
understand that all the words of the Buddha  directly  or  indirectly  teach
means of attaining Buddhahood. In the Sutra Gathering  All  the  Threads  it
says that the karmic obscuration due to abandoning the Dharma is  so  subtle
that it is hard to recognize. Concerning the grave disadvantages that  ensue
if you abandon the Dharma, it says in the King of Concentration Sutra:

         Someone here in Jambudvipa
         tears down all the stupas found,
         someone abandons a class of sutras
         the latter’s misdeed is far more grave.


         Someone even murders arhats-
         as many as sand grains in the Ganges
         someone abandons a class of sutras
         {15} the latter’s misdeed is far more grave.


Although there generally appear to be many ways in which  the  Dharma  might
be abandoned, the one described previously seems to be the  greatest,  which
is why we should try hard to give it up.

         B  When there is a realization along the lines of the first two
         greatnesses, the misdeed stops by itself

That is to say since this is reversed simply by gaining certainty  regarding
what was shown above, the misdeed stops by itself.

         C  You should come to realize such certainty from the White Lotus
         Sutra and other texts

This certainty should be sought by studying the Chapter of the Truthful  One
as well as the [Sutra of the] Excellent  Dharma’s  White  Lotus.  The  other
ways of abandoning the Dharma should be learnt from the Sutra Gathering  all
the Threads (Pages 10 – 11).

It says here that the negative  karma  of  abandoning  the  Dharma  is  very
subtle. That means it is very difficult for you to see  how  serious  it  is
and to realise its negative consequences.

To give an illustration, let us say there is a particular  teaching  of  the
Buddha. If, from  your  heart,  you  really  believe  that  this  particular
teaching is of no benefit and it cannot help you to  achieve  enlightenment,
then you will have created this negative karma of abandoning the Dharma.

Another example: you think of yourself as a follower  of  the  Mahayana  and
you come across the teachings of the Hinayana. You  think  that  this  is  a
Hinayana text and it has nothing to do with you because  you  are  following
the Mahayana path. If you really believe  that  this  text  is  unnecessary,
useless and of no benefit to you, then you will have created  this  negative
karma of abandoning the Dharma.

Yet another example: if you are a follower of the Hinayana path and  you  do
not accept the Mahayana teachings, thinking, “Those are  Mahayana  teachings
and not Hinayana teachings. Therefore, they are of no use  to  me.”  If  you
really believe that, then you will  have  created  this  negative  karma  of
abandoning the Dharma.

   • What are you actually  implying  when  you  criticise  the  Dharma  by
     thinking that these are not the teachings of the Buddha and  they  are
     useless? You are denigrating and criticising the Dharma Jewel.
   • When you criticise the Dharma  Jewel,  it  also  means  that  you  are
     actually criticising the Buddha Jewel. Why is that?  This  is  because
     the Buddha is the  one  who  taught  the  Dharma.  In  fact,  you  are
     criticising the Buddha.
   • Likewise, it also means that you are  saying  that  those  people  who
     practise those teachings are wrong. Then, you are also criticising and
     putting down the Sangha  Jewel,  particularly,  the  arya  beings  who
     practise them.
You can see that by abandoning the Buddhadharma, you end up criticising  and
putting down the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. Therefore,  the  negative  karma
has to be very heavy.

This is also related to the unity of all Buddhists as the whole.  There  are
many Buddhist traditions such as the Mahayana, the Hinayana  and  so  forth.
When  one  abandons  the  Dharma  and  cannot  respect  the  other  Buddhist
traditions, then how can there be harmony?

However, if everyone was to  know  the  essential  points  of  each  other’s
traditions, whether it be the Mahayana or Hinayana, then you  will  be  able
to appreciate the other traditions. From  that,  comes  mutual  respect  and
appreciation. Then harmony ensues.

When one puts down other religious traditions just because they do not  suit
one’s mind and does not benefit oneself,  problems  will  arise.  People  of
different religious traditions will fight  and  there  will  be  disharmony.
Just because a particular religious tradition does not  fit  an  individual,
it does not mean that it has no  benefit  for  other  people.  When  we  can
recognise that fact, then there can be mutual respect and harmony. For  that
reason, we also need to respect other religious  traditions.  Here,  we  are
not talking about faith. Even though we may not have their  same  faith  and
belief, we can still appreciate and respect other religious traditions.

For the next class, please read the next section: Explanation of how  Dharma
possessed of the two greatnesses should be listened to and explained.
                             ******************
Regarding the homework that is due next Tuesday, the point is to get you  to
think. Then, you write down what  you  think.  Please  do  not  hand  in  an
assignment that paraphrases what has been mentioned in the text. It  is  not
so straightforward. You have to write what you think and you  also  have  to
defend what you write. You have to imagine that  if  someone  were  to  read
what you have written and raises some objections, are  you  able  to  defend
what you have written?

I am not sure whether you can finish the assignment within a day. Maybe  you
need more time to think about it.

We are not looking for a correct answer. The point is,  whatever  you  think
is right, you write it with confidence so that you can defend what you  have
written.  Think about it before you write so that what you write  can  stand
up to objections. After you have written it, you  should  read  it  and  see
whether you need to improve it further and make  the  necessary  amendments.
That is the reason why I gave you two weeks to complete this assignment.
                                *************
Question: If I bring my children to take refuge with a guru,  but  when  the
children grow up, they may  choose  another  religion.  Is  this  considered
abandoning the Dharma?

Answer: I personally think this is not an issue  because  they  have  simply
gone through the ceremony. Whether they  receive  refuge  or  not,  that  is
another question because when they are young, they may not  even  know  what
the Three Jewels really are. It is uncertain  whether  they  even  have  any
faith in the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. They would  have  gone  through  the
ceremony as part of the tradition. I am not sure but if this person  chooses
to follow another religion, I don’t see anything wrong with this.

On the other hand, if  you  went  through  the  refuge  ceremony  with  full
understanding and  some  faith,  having  accepted  the  vows  and  made  the
promise, then if you give up your promise, there is a danger  of  abandoning
the Dharma.

This may not be applicable for kids as they  may  not  know  what  they  are
doing.  The exception is for kids, not adults!
Question: On page 11, “B: When there is a realization  along  the  lines  of
the first two greatnesses, the misdeed stops  by  itself,”  what  does  this
“misdeed” refer to? Does it refer to abandoning the Buddhadharma?

Answer: The “misdeed”  refers  to  the  negative  karma  of  abandoning  the
Dharma.

Question: “C: You should come to  realize  such  certainty  from  the  White
Lotus Sutra and other texts. This certainty should  be  sought  by  studying
the Chapter of the Truthful One as well as  the  [Sutra  of  the]  Excellent
Dharma’s White Lotus.” Is this saying  that,  in  order  to  have  a  better
ascertainment of why you should not abandon  the  Buddhadharma,  you  should
study the Chapter of  the  Truthful  One?  This  is  because  the  following
sentence, “The other ways of abandoning the Dharma  should  be  learnt  from
the Sutra Gathering all the  Threads”.  If  abandoning  the  Dharma  is  not
correct, why would I want to learn other ways of abandoning the Dharma?

Answer: By realising the first two greatnesses  of  the  Lam-Rim,  one  will
refrain automatically from the great misdeed of abandoning the Dharma.

As abandoning the Dharma can happen in many  ways,  therefore  in  order  to
know more about what abandoning the Dharma  really  is,  you  then  have  to
refer to texts such as the Chapter of  the  Truthful  One  as  well  as  the
[Sutra of the] Excellent Dharma’s White Lotus. In these  sutras,  abandoning
the Dharma is discussed in more detail than what appears here in this  text.
That is the reason why Lama Tsongkhapa  is  referring  to  those  sutras.  I
myself have not had the opportunity or time to read these sutras.

Question: So it is more of reading them in order  to  avoid  abandoning  the
Dharma?

Answer: Yes.





Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng
Edited by Cecilia Tsong
Checked by Shirley Soh


