Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L40 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.353542
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


   Lesson No: 40                     Date: 6th March 2012


Visualise Manjushri in the space in front of you. On that basis,  accumulate
merit and  purify  all  obscurations  through  the  practice  of  the  seven
branches of worship. Do the visualisation of the flow of  light  and  nectar
coming into  you  and  purifying  all  obscurations.  Think  that  you  have
received the blessings to increase your intelligence and wisdom. In the  end
make a single-pointed request to Manjushri to pacify whatever obstacles  you
may be encountering in your Dharma studies and practice.

Question: Can you please give an example of mental karma that  is  done  but
not accumulated and is also something that is not done consciously  or  done
forgetfully (with reference  to  the  ten  exceptions  where  karma  is  not
accumulated)?

Answer: Maybe getting upset in a dream or having very  strong  malice  in  a
dream. You have to think about this. I think perhaps generating malice in  a
dream could be mental karma that is done but  not  accumulated.  However  it
seems that malice is something that is done voluntarily.

Khen Rinpoche: It is voluntary because it is from  your  own  side.  No  one
forces you to generate malice unlike this example: you do not want  to  kill
but someone forces you to kill. Your mind belongs to you.  It  is  your  own
mind and no one can force you to think a certain way.

It is clear in the case of malice that it is not something that  people  can
force upon you. You do it yourself. Malice, covetousness, and  wrong  views:
these are actions that are not forced upon us. They come from our  own  side
unlike certain actions of the body and speech where sometimes we are  forced
to do them.


Question: For karma that is  neither  done  nor  accumulated,  what  is  the
result that one will definitely or possibly experience?

Answer: When we look at karma in terms of its result, there are two:
1. Karma whose result you will definitely experience
2. Karma whose result you will only possibly experience

   • Karma that is accumulated falls under the karma whose result you  will
     definitely experience.
   • Karma that is done but not accumulated is the karma whose  result  you
     will only  possibly  experience.  Karma  that  is  not  done  and  not
     accumulated will also be under the karma whose result  you  will  only
     possibly experience.

In the case of creating karma in a dream, we are not saying  that  you  will
definitely  not  experience  any  result.  It  is  possible  that  you   may
experience its result.

Let’s say you develop malice in your dream for a short period of  time.  You
may still experience its result. If you  think  about  it,  the  thought  of
killing that may last for a very short period  of  time  is  nevertheless  a
negative mind. So you may experience its result.

Question: If that is the case, can I assume that the karma that  is  neither
done nor accumulated does not fall under the paths  of  action  but  is  the
action at the time of the motivation, not at the time of performance. Can  I
say that this karma (i.e., at the time of the motivation)  falls  under  the
category of karma that  is  neither  done  nor  accumulated,  that  even  if
generated for a short period of  time,  there  is  still  a  possibility  of
experiencing its result?

Answer: Let’s say that you develop a wish to kill for a  very  short  period
of time. That can be considered an example of karma that is not done and  is
not accumulated. Because there  is  karma  that  is  not  done  and  is  not
accumulated, therefore we must come up with an illustration of  such  karma.
Perhaps having the thought to kill that lasts for a  very  short  period  of
time can be an example of this.

This thought to kill, although it is  for  a  very  short  period  of  time,
exists at the time of motivation. So there will be karma but it is  not  the
path of action. This karma exists during the motivation phase.

                                *************
In the previous lesson, we saw  how  karma  and  the  afflictions  are  both
necessary  as  causes  for  the  creation  of  cyclic  existence   but   the
afflictions are primary. There are two reasons to support that.





    2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-1A       How the mental afflictions are chief
    [/foremost/the main cause/the main thing]

Although both karma and mental afflictions  are  necessary  as  causes  that
establish cyclic existence, the  mental  afflictions  are  chief[/foremost].
This is because if there are no mental afflictions,  even  though  there  is
karma  beyond  calculation  [/immeasurable  karma]  accumulated  previously,
since the cooperative  conditions  for  karma  are  absent,  the  sprout  of
suffering is not established – just like a [real] sprout is not  established
from a seed lacking humidity, soil, and so forth.  It  is  also  because  if
there are mental afflictions, even though there may be no karma  accumulated
previously, it will immediately be accumulated  anew  [/afresh]  and  future
aggregates will be taken (Page 116)[/received].

In identifying the afflictions, we looked  at  what  an  affliction  is:  an
affliction is a mind that, when it arises, is disturbed.

There are ten afflictions:





    2B4B-2B2B-1B2B-1B1 [The actual] identification of the mental
    afflictions

         A  Desirous attachment
         B  Anger
         C  Pride
         D  Ignorance
         E  Doubt
         F  The view of the transitory collection
         G  Views holding on to an extreme [position]
         H  Holding on to a view as best [?*]
         I  Holding on to an ethical discipline and ascetic practice as best
         J  Wrong views

         A  Desirous attachment

The first one has ten points.  The  first  of  those,  desirous  attachment,
observes an  attractive,  pleasant,  external  or  internal  object  and  is
subsequently attached to it. To illustrate: just as oil that has  penetrated
into cloth is hard to remove, desirous  attachment,  too,  clinging  to  its
object and pervading it only separates  from  that  object  with  difficulty
(Page 116).

   • An external object refers to a phenomenon that is not  conjoined  with
     the consciousness such as one’s abode or resources.
   • An internal object refers to a phenomenon that is conjoined with one’s
     mental continuum such as one’s aggregates.

Attachment focuses on either an  attractive  external  or  internal  object,
views that object to be, by nature, pleasant  and  attractive,  and  desires
that object. It is as if the mind is completely absorbed in the object  and,
as the text says, it is difficult to separate oneself from the object.

The function of attachment is that it serves  as  the  basis  for  producing
suffering. Because of having attachment for the object, when harm or  damage
is done to the object of attachment, anger arises.  Karma  is  then  created
and once one accumulates karma,  one  has  to  circle  in  cyclic  existence
thereby experiencing the various sufferings.


          B Anger

Anger is a hostile attitude upon observing a  basis  of  suffering  such  as
sentient beings, suffering, weapons, thorns, and  so  forth,  a  rough  mind
intending to inflict harm on those objects (Page 117).

With regard to the objects of anger, one can be angry  with  living  beings,
suffering, weapons or thorns, and  so  forth.  “Suffering”  here  refers  to
one’s own suffering. “Weapons, thorns” describe the sources  of  sufferings.
Anger is a mind that, when focusing on these  objects,  is  unable  to  bear
them and wishes to harm them.

The function of anger is to cause one not to  abide  in  happiness  in  this
lifetime and to produce immeasurable suffering in future lives.

Even  though  you  may  be  pleasant-looking  by  nature  and  have  a  nice
complexion and shape, when you develop anger, you may not look nice.

Even though you may  be  adorned  with  beautiful  ornaments  and  are  well
dressed,  when  you  are  upset,  suddenly  your  whole  appearance  becomes
unpleasant.

Even though you may have a comfortable bed in which  you  can  have  a  good
rest, but when you are upset and angry, you may not be able to fall  asleep.


Because of anger, you may have forgotten the  kindness  of  those  who  have
benefited you. Due to anger, you forget the benefits  they  had  given  you.
Instead of returning their kindness, you act in the opposite way.

Due to anger, you may lose friends, companions, and so forth. As  a  result,
you will not be able to accomplish your own goals.

When you are upset, even the good and helpful advice given to  you  by  your
loved ones will not benefit you because due to your anger, you will  not  be
able to distinguish between what is right and what is wrong.

These things are obvious in our life and are things that we can  understand.
This is why the function of anger is to cause suffering in  this  life.  Due
to anger, we become habituated to non-virtue and due to  that,  we  have  to
experience the result of taking rebirth in the lower realms  in  our  future
lives where we have to suffer for a long time.

Anger is a mind that is  unable  to  tolerate  those  objects  that  I  have
mentioned. Anger is a mind that contemplates  harming  those  objects.  When
anger arises, immediately the mind is disturbed.

Question: In the text, a thorn is stated as an object of anger. How  do  you
get upset with a thorn and how do you contemplate harming the thorn?

Khen Rinpoche: I will tell you a story. When I was in the monastery I had  a
friend. At that time we didn’t have gas. We had to cook with a  stove  using
kerosene and a pump. You have to hold the stove with one hand and pump  with
the other. Only then will the fire start so that you can proceed to cook.

In India, the stoves have a small hole that sometimes get jammed.  You  have
to clean it with a small needle. I think the older  generation  should  know
what I am talking about. The younger ones may not have seen  such  a  stove.
If you are not careful with the cleaning sometimes  the  needle  will  break
and get stuck inside. There is no way then to take out the needle.

Most of us had that kind of stove but my friend had a special  stove.  Maybe
it was from Europe. In any case, it is better than  the  Indian  stoves.  It
was small and portable whereas the Indian ones were big. I think he was  the
only one who had that kind of stove. When he cooked, sometimes no gas  would
come out. Sometimes there was too much kerosene.

One day he was rushing the cooking because he had class afterwards.  As  the
stove was not working well, he used the needle to clean it  but  the  needle
broke inside the stove. As he couldn’t do anything then, he got very  angry.
In the kitchen, he took the rolling pin he found beside him and smashed  the
stove. The top of the stove became dented. As he was so angry, he threw  the
stove outside the kitchen.

A few minutes later, he regretted what he had done. He took the  stove  back
to the kitchen and started to look at it, thinking of  how  to  fix  it.  So
when strong anger arose, he totally forgot himself. This may be  an  example
of how one can be angry with some objects.

I think he took back the stove. Somehow he could not fix  it.  Someone  then
asked him for the stove and he gave it to that  person.  That  other  person
managed to repair the stove. My friend then had the thought of  wanting  his
stove back but he couldn’t do that. He thought, “I am so stupid!”


         C  Pride

Based on the view of the transitory collection, pride is a  puffed  up  mind
upon observing one’s external or internal level  or  qualities.  It  engages
them with an aspect of superiority (Page 116).

When pride observes something that is external, it refers  to  one’s  wealth
or possessions. When it observes something that is internal, this refers  to
one’s qualities.

Pride is developed based on the view  of  the  transitory  collection.  That
means that pride is developed based on this innate  conception  that  thinks
of the “I,” allowing the mind to become inflated and assuming an  aspect  of
superiority.

You can develop pride by thinking that you  are  just  slightly  lower  than
those who are actually far superior to yourself. You can also develop  pride
with reference to those who are lower than you and  thinking  that  you  are
more superior to them. By thinking like this, your mind becomes inflated  or
puffed up.

Pride has the function of making you generate disrespect towards  those  who
possess qualities thus  obstructing  your  own  attainments  and  qualities.
Pride can cause you to engage in actions that will result  in  your  rebirth
in the lower realms. Even when you are reborn as a human, it can  cause  you
to be reborn in a lower caste such as being reborn as a servant.





         D  Ignorance

Ignorance is afflicted [/afflicted]  not-knowing  due  to  a  mind  that  is
unclear with regard to the nature of the  four  truths,  actions  and  their
results, and the three jewels (Page 117).

With regard to identifying what ignorance is:
1. ignorance can mean the mere lack of knowledge of something
2. ignorance can mean a mistaken way of apprehending an object

Due to the different explanations given by the past Indian lineage  masters,
there are different ways of identifying ignorance. For example, Arya  Asanga
and Vasubandhu explained ignorance to be the mere lack of  understanding  of
a particular object, i.e., it is a state of unknowing.  However  Dharmakirti
asserts that ignorance is an active misapprehension of something.

The function of ignorance is that it acts as the basis  for  all  the  other
afflictions to arise.

         E  Doubt

Upon observing th[os]e three [objects], the four truths etc., doubt  is  the
thought: “Do they exist or do they not exist.  Are  they  ...  or  are  they
not?” (Page 117)

Doubt is a two-pointed mind that thinks of a particular phenomenon,  “Is  it
so or is it not so?” For example, a mind that  focuses  on  the  four  noble
truths and wonders, “Do they exist or do they not exist?”  or  a  mind  that
focuses on the Three Jewels and wonders whether there are the  Three  Jewels
or not.

Doubt  obstructs  you  from  gaining  an  ascertainment  and   the   correct
understanding of the four noble truths. By doubting karma and  its  effects,
it prevents you from living your life according to the principles of  karma.
For example, doubting karma may obstruct you in the accumulation of  virtue.
You have to think about how doubt interferes with your understanding of  the
four noble truths and how it interferes in your accumulation of virtue.

If it is doubt tending towards the non-factual, for example, with  reference
to karma, you will think, “There is unlikely to be such a thing  as  karma,”
then of course that will interfere with you  living  a  life  in  accordance
with karma.

What about doubt tending towards the factual? You still have doubt  but  you
think, “Maybe there is such a thing  as  karma.”  Does  that  doubt  tending
towards the factual interfere with you living an ethical way life? Does  the
doubt tending towards the factual harm or benefit you?

The doubt tending towards the factual is  not  a  mind  that  has  developed
certainty with respect to its object. For example, with  respect  to  karma,
you may think, “Very likely there is karma” but  you  have  yet  to  have  a
definite ascertainment of this as you still have doubt. Does  that  kind  of
doubt interfere with or does it help your practice?

For now it is sufficient for  you  to  have  a  rough  idea  of  what  these
afflictions are. When we study minds and mental factors in the next  module,
more details will be given.


         F  The view of the transitory collection

The view of the  transitory  collection:  an  afflicted  intelligence  that,
observing the appropriated aggregates,[?] views them as a  self  or  of  the
self and thinking ‘I’ or ‘mine’. (Page 117).

The object of observation of the view of the transitory collection is  one’s
appropriated aggregates. Based on that,  the  concept  of  “I”  arises.  One
apprehends the “I” to be self-sufficient substantially existent. The “I”  is
seen to be something that is separate from the body and  mind.  The  “I”  is
apprehended to be the owner of the  aggregates  or  the  master  owning  the
aggregates.

At this point in time we are talking about the view  of  the  self  that  is
shared by the major Buddhist tenets. The view of the  transitory  collection
focuses on one’s appropriated aggregates and  then  the  sense  of  the  “I”
arises. One apprehends this “I” to be something separate from the  body  and
mind, apprehending it to be the owner of the aggregates. One apprehends  the
“I”  to  be  self-sufficient  substantially  existent  in  this  sense.  One
apprehends the “I” to exist without depending on the body  and  mind,  i.e.,
one apprehends the “I” to be self-sufficient.

As said in the text, the view of the transitory collection is  an  afflicted
intelligence that observes the appropriated aggregates and regards  them  as
“I” or  “mine.”  This  does  not  mean  that  the  view  of  the  transitory
collection apprehends the aggregates as “I” or “mine.” This is not  what  it
means.  The  meaning  is  that,  with  the  aggregates  as  the  objects  of
observation, then the sense of “I” arises and one apprehends this “I” to  be
distinct from the aggregates, to be the owner  of  the  aggregates.  Such  a
mind is called the view of the transitory collection.

For those of you hearing this for the first time it will take some  time  to
understand this because even the words themselves are  challenging.  If  you
get discouraged from the beginning, then nothing can happen.  The  point  is
to hear these terms more often, to discuss this amongst  yourselves  and  to
learn more. Then it will become clearer.

The view of the transitory collection  has  the  function  of  acting  as  a
support for all bad views.

Here ‘transitory’ implies impermanence and ‘collection’ many,  so  the  base
that it views is a mere impermanent and manifold  phenomenon.  In  order  to
indicate “There is no permanent, unitary person,”  it  has  been  given  the
name ‘view of the transitory collection’ (Page 117).

The explanation here is to help us understand  that  a  permanent,  unitary,
and independent self does not exist. On top  of  that,  it  is  to  help  us
understand that a self-sufficient substantially existent  person  also  does
not exist. The explanation here  is  to  help  us  negate  the  non-Buddhist
assertions of a self. The non-Buddhist  philosophical  systems  assert  that
the  self  or  the  soul  is  something  that  is  permanent,  unitary,  and
independent whereas in reality such a phenomenon does not exist.

According to the Buddhist view, a permanent, unitary, and  independent  self
does not exist. When you examine this a little  deeper,  there  is  also  an
explanation of how a self-sufficient substantially existent person does  not
exist. When you go deeper than that, then there is also  an  explanation  of
how a person existing by way of its own character also does not exist.

For our purposes here, the view of the transitory collection is a mind  that
apprehends the “I” or “self” to be something separate  from  the  aggregates
and apprehends this “I” to be the controller of the  aggregates,  the  owner
of the body and mind.  A mind apprehending the “I” in such a way  is  called
the view of the transitory collection.

Question: The aspect of the “I” as not being independent  is  not  mentioned
here. It only mentions “‘transitory’ implies impermanence  and  ‘collection’
many,” but not the “I” being independent.  Where  can  we  find  this  being
taught?

Answer: Here we are trying to explain the meaning of the words  “transitory”
and “collection” in the term, “the view of the  transitory  collection.”  It
is “transitory” because the aggregates are impermanent and changing in  each
and every single moment. It  is  a  “collection,”  because  there  are  many
aggregates and therefore they are not unitary. What it is trying to show  is
that the permanent, unitary, and independent self does not  exist.  I  guess
the word “independent” is not mentioned here because here it  is  trying  to
explain the words, “transitory” and “collection.”

Question: Is there any reason why in  the  list  given  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa
ignorance is not at  the  top  of  the  list  of  ten  afflictions?  Instead
attachment is mentioned first even though ignorance  is  the  basis  of  all
suffering?

Answer:  When  we  talk  about  the  three  mental  poisons,  the  order  is
attachment, anger and ignorance. I guess in Tibetan the words  are  arranged
in that order for ease of pronunciation.

Question: What is the meaning of “appropriated” in appropriated  aggregates?


Answer: The aggregates  are  the  products  of  karma  and  afflictions.  In
English,  we  say  that  the  aggregates  are  appropriated  by  karma   and
afflictions. “Appropriated” means that the aggregates are taken  on  due  to
the power or influence of karma and afflictions.

Question: Apprehending the “I” to be something that  is  separate  from  the
body and mind and apprehending this “I” to be the owner of  the  aggregates.
I am wondering whether these relate to the word, “appropriated”?

Khen Rinpoche: I  don’t  quite  understand  what  you  are  asking  in  that
question.

Answer: But relating this to  the  discussion  you  are  referring  to,  the
meaning is that there isn’t a self or person that is of a  different  entity
from the aggregates. The Buddhist philosophical system  asserts  that  there
isn’t an “I” or self or person that is of a different entity from  the  body
or mind. Having said that, we are not saying that the body and mind  is  the
“I.” It is incorrect to think or to assert that there is an “I” that  is  of
a different entity from the body and mind.

However for us we believe strongly that we  ourselves  or  the  “I”  or  the
person is something that exists and that it exists as  something  completely
separate from our body and mind, i.e., it has nothing to do  with  our  body
and mind. We have such a mind. We believe that ourselves,  the  “I”  or  the
person or the self is something that exists  completely  separate  from  the
body and  mind.  Such  a  belief  is  called  the  view  of  the  transitory
collection.

This is something that is difficult to understand. It requires time before
it becomes clearer.






Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng

Edited by Cecilia Tsong

