Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L48 (Upload) .doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.260895
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


   Lesson No: 48                        Date: 5th April 2012


(Meditation on Manjushri)

We have now completed the four noble truths  and  the  presentation  of  the
twelve links of dependent-arising. If you have any questions  pertaining  to
these topics, you can bring them up now.

Question: At the time of death, there are the actualising causes of  craving
and grasping that nourish the karmic imprint to be born as  a  human  being.
What follows after that  are  the  projected  results.  Do  these  projected
results refer to the aggregates of the bardo being?

Khen Rinpoche: Are you asking whether the name and form refer only to
the aggregates of the bardo being?

Student: Yes, I was wondering whether there are two sets of name  and  form:
one set for the aggregates of the  bardo  being  and  the  other  when   the
consciousness enters the womb.

Answer: The link of name and form  usually  starts  when  the  consciousness
moves on to the next rebirth. Generally speaking, the link of name and  form
refers to the birth existence, i.e., when  the  consciousness  goes  to  the
next rebirth. I mentioned before that the  aggregates  of  the  intermediate
state being are subsumed under this link.

Question: Due to craving and grasping, the karma to go to the  lower  realms
ripens and I enter into the intermediate state of a hell being.  You  create
merit for me. My intermediate state changes into the intermediate  state  of
a human being. How to you explain the twelve links in this case?

Answer: When we take the position of the lower Abidharmakosha, it  is  easy:
the intermediate state cannot change.

Khen Rinpoche:  Can someone answer this question?

Student: When the intermediate state being dies  and  takes  rebirth,  maybe
there are also actualising causes at that  time.  The  projecting  karma  is
activated so there is a change, keeping in mind that the  bardo  being  dies
every seven days and takes rebirth.  I  think  maybe  that  state  can  only
change after every seven days even when you do pujas for the deceased?

Khen Rinpoche:  Not necessarily seven  days.  During  any  time  within  the
seven days, there can be a change.

Question: It seems to me that the  cycle  of  the  twelve  links  is  almost
complete once name and form are taken on. For example, even  if  one  was  a
foetus, one can die if one is aborted. From what I read, it said  that  name
and form and potential existence happen at the same time.  Immediately  when
the consciousness goes into the ovum, straight  away  there  is  form.  Once
there is a form, there  is  aging  and  possibly  death.  So  the  cycle  is
complete. My question is this: can name and  form  and  potential  existence
occur simultaneously?

Khen Rinpoche: It is not possible because there  are  the  three  projecting
causes,  four  projected  results,  three  actualising   causes,   and   two
actualised results.

The link of potential existence is a cause whereas  the  link  of  name  and
form is an effect. As the cause has to precede the  effect,  in  that  sense
they cannot arise simultaneously because cause  and  effect  do  not  happen
simultaneously.

Potential e and so forthaceswer,  the actualising causeserojected results  d
takes rebirth. xistence and name and form do not happen simultaneously.  But
this could be a translation issue. If “existence” is  translated  as  birth,
then  the  link  of  birth  and  the  link  of  name  and  form  do   happen
simultaneously, i.e., the very first moment  of  name  and  form  is  birth.
Sometimes the words, “coming into  existence,”  referring  to  the  link  of
birth are used. In that context, “existence” does not refer to the  link  of
potential existence but to the meaning, “coming into being.”

What is the tenth link of potential existence? It is  karma.  Between  cause
and effect, it is an actualising cause. As cause  and  effect  cannot  exist
together, therefore potential existence and name  and  form  do  not  happen
simultaneously.

Let’s say a person’s karma to be born in the lower  realms  is  nurtured  by
craving and grasping. As a result, he enters into the intermediate state  of
a lower realms being. Something is done to change  his  intermediate  state.
When his intermediate state is changed, then saying that one  cycle  of  the
twelve links of dependent-arising has to  be  finished  in  the  maximum  of
three lifetimes may be a little problematic.

Question: How does the presentation of the twelve links help us  to  develop
an understanding of emptiness or generate renunciation of samsara?
Answer: One can meditate on the twelve links of dependent-arising while  one
is on the path that is shared with the person  of  small  capacity.  In  the
same way, one can meditate on the twelve links of dependent-arising  in  the
context of the path of the person of medium capacity and  the  path  of  the
person of great capacity.

A person of small capacity can reflect on  how  one  takes  rebirth  in  the
lower realms through the twelve links. When one reflects well on the  twelve
links of dependent-arising in the context of the person of  small  capacity,
it is possible to develop a sincere and strong desire to get a good  rebirth
as a human being or a god.

A person of medium capacity can use the twelve  links  of  dependent-arising
to reflect on how one circles in cyclic existence.  Through  this,  one  can
develop renunciation and the desire to be  free  from  cyclic  existence  by
achieving liberation.

Based on your understanding of how you are circling in cyclic  existence  by
using the twelve links of dependent-arising,  in  the  same  way,  when  you
think of how other sentient beings are also circling  in  cyclic  existence,
you can develop the altruistic intention, bodhicitta. Then comes the  desire
to achieve buddhahood.

The twelve links of dependent-arising is an  instance  of  dependent-arising
on the level of causality, a cause giving rise  to  its  effect.  With  this
understanding, it can help us to understand subtle dependent-arising,  i.e.,
how all phenomena are devoid of existing inherently.

Question: I still don’t understand why there is this division of the  twelve
links of dependent-arising into two sets of causality.

Student A (asked by Khen Rinpoche to answer the question): The twelve  links
show how what was created in the past  results  in  the  suffering  you  are
experiencing now. As such, if one continues with such actions, one will  get
the same suffering results in the future. You can see how the cycle goes  on
and on. What was projected in the past result in the projected effects  now.


Khen Rinpoche (addressing the class):  I  am  putting  you  all  on  notice.
Whenever I get a  question,  the  question  is  not  just  directed  at  me.
Everyone should think about the question. All of you have to play a part  by
figuring out your own answer. Whenever a question is asked, you  should  pay
attention to the question and see if you know  the  answer  or  not,  rather
than waiting for me to answer it. That is helpful.

Student A (continues): There are two sets of causality because, in the  same
way,  when  the  actualised  results  occur,  you  continue  to  create  the
projected causes again and actualisation occurs again in the future.

Student B (asked by Khen Rinpoche to answer the  question):  There  are  two
ways of presenting the twelve links:
(1) the chronological sequence based on the analogy of the farmer  with  the
projecting and actualising causes leading to their projected and  actualised
results. These links are from one cycle of the twelve links.
(2) the scriptural presentation based on links 1 – 12  that  are  meant  for
meditation purposes to achieve  the  goals  of  the  persons  of  the  three
capacities outlined earlier by Khen Rinpoche.

Khen Rinpoche: Why do we  need  the  division  into  projecting  causes  and
actualising causes? Why are there two instances of causality?

Student B: To help us understand that one cycle  of  the  twelve  links  can
only be completed in a minimum of two  lifetimes.  The  projecting  and  the
actualising factors  in  one  lifetime  and  the  projected  and  actualised
effects in the subsequent lifetime. To help us understand that these  twelve
links cannot be completed within one lifetime and to  explain  the  sequence
of their actual evolution in reality.

Khen Rinpoche: Based on your answer, “It shows that one cycle of the  twelve
links of dependent-arising  can  only  be  finished  in  a  minimum  of  two
lifetimes,” how is that a reason to establish the thesis that two  instances
of causality are needed? Why do we  need  to  divide  the  causes  into  the
projecting causes and the actualising causes?

Student B: To show that there is a difference  between  the  projecting  and
the actualising factors and to show that  craving,  an  actualising  factor,
and the link of feeling that gives rise to it do  not  come  from  the  same
sequence of twelve links.

Khen Rinpoche:  You are going to some other place with this.

Student C (asked by Khen Rinpoche to answer the question):  The  reason  why
there are two sets  of  causes  is  because  the  two  sets  of  causes  are
different! I was thinking about the  analogy  that  Khen  Rinpoche  gave  us
where ignorance is likened  to  a  farmer,  the  compositional  activity  is
likened to a seed and consciousness is likened to a  field.  Those  are  the
projecting causes.

The farmer may plant his seed in a  field  but  if  he  didn’t  do  anything
beyond that such as  putting  in  fertiliser  and  so  forth,  nothing  will
happen. That is why another set of what is  called  the  actualising  causes
are required. Using the same analogy, those actualising causes  are  craving
and grasping that lead to potential  existence.  Craving  and  grasping  are
likened to the water and fertilisers that  nurture  the  seed  and  make  it
flourish and grow.

Then birth comes and the name and form and  that  sequence  of  links  four,
five, six, and seven arise. That is why there  are  two  different  sets  of
causality.

Khen Rinpoche: I got what you said.  You  want  to  try  to  summarise  that
answer into just a sentence or a few words?

Student C: The  projecting  causes  cannot  give  rise  to  their  projected
effects without the function of the actualising causes. They work  together.
Just having one set of causality, the projecting causes  and  the  projected
effects, won’t work.  You  need  the  actualising  causes  to  energise  the
projecting causes to give rise to their projected effects  as  well  as  the
actualised effects.

Khen Rinpoche: Your answer is getting longer!

Student C: To cut it really  short,  I  would  say:  the  projecting  causes
cannot give rise to their projected effects without  the  existence  of  the
actualising causes.

Khen Rinpoche: The effects of one cycle of the twelve  links  of  dependent-
arising must be preceded by its own  causes.  But  within  the  category  of
causes, there are different divisions. There are different causes. It is  to
highlight that.

The reason why there are two instances of  causality  is  because  different
causes have their own different potential. As I have mentioned before:
   • the function of the three projecting causes is to  make  it  conducive
     for the effects to arise
   • the function  of  the  three  actualising  causes  not  only  make  it
     conducive for the effects to arise but they make the  arising  of  the
     effects definite

Having say that, if the function of the actualising causes is  to  make  the
arising of the effects definite, how about the case of a  karmic  propensity
to take rebirth  in  the  lower  realms?  When  that  karmic  propensity  is
nurtured by craving and grasping, it is certain that the aggregates  of  the
lower realm being will be projected. If that is the  case,  would  you  then
have to say that the intermediate state cannot be  changed?  You  can  think
about this because once the projecting and actualising causes  are  present,
the results have to come.

Let’s say due to negative karma, a person is to be reborn in a lower  realm.
That karma is nurtured by craving  and  grasping  bringing  forth  potential
existence. This person enters the intermediate  state  of  a  being  of  the
lower realm. As mentioned in the teachings,  the  intermediate  state  being
possesses the body shape of the next rebirth that he is going  to  take.  In
fact, the intermediate state being  has  all  the  five  sensory  faculties.
Having said that, is that considered a completion of the  twelve  links?  As
the intermediate state being has all the five sensory faculties and has  the
kind of body he will get in the next  rebirth,  can  that  be  considered  a
completion of the twelve links?

When you say the intermediate state can change and, at the  same  time,  you
say that the twelve links are not completed, although the  six  causes  have
already occurred, are you saying that, in a future life,  the  imprint  that
will cause the person to go to the lower realms  has  to  be  nourished  and
nurtured by craving and grasping again? If you say  that  is  possible,  the
assertion that the twelve links of dependent-arising have  to  be  completed
within a maximum of three lifetimes falls apart.

Question: Going by your explanation, you  probably  have  to  say  that  the
being in the bardo state has died. Let’s say I am  destined  to  go  to  the
lower realms. While in the bardo state, someone does prayers for me  and  my
karma changes. I am heading for another  realm.  Does  this  mean  that  the
original bardo being is considered to have died? How else  will  the  twelve
links be completed?

Answer: If the intermediate state can be  changed,  the  intermediate  state
being has to  die  and  be  reborn  again  in  another  intermediate  state.
Someone in the intermediate state of, say, a hell being, in order  for  that
intermediate state to change into the intermediate state of a  human  being,
the intermediate state hell being has to die.

There must be a process of changing from one intermediate state to  another.
This means that before the intermediate state being dies, the imprint to  be
born as a human being must be nurtured by craving and grasping in  order  to
change the intermediate state.

Student D: If you consider that the being of the  bardo  state  being  as  a
lifetime in itself, that cycle  has  already  been  completed.  The  earlier
cycle of the twelve links of the person being  born  as  a  hell  being  has
already been completed. The bardo state is birth and also name and form.  At
the end, there is also death in the bardo state. Isn’t that a  complete  set
of twelve links?

Khen Rinpoche: For a person who is in  the  intermediate  state  of  a  hell
being and whose intermediate state is going to change to  that  of  a  human
being, while he is in the intermediate  state  of  a  hell  being,  the  six
causes are already complete. Are the six results also complete while  he  is
in the intermediate state of a hell being?  That is  something  for  you  to
think about.

Student D: The results  should  be  considered  complete  because  there  is
already birth, name and form, and all the sense faculties.

Khen Rinpoche: The intermediate state being does possess a complete  set  of
sensory faculties. If we were to say that all the six results are  completed
in the intermediate state, will it be all right to say that?

Student D: I think it should be ok.

Khen Rinpoche:  (Student D) says it is ok to say that but (Student  C)  says
it is not ok. Why do you say that it is not okay?

From the perspective of someone who is in the intermediate state of  a  hell
being changing into the intermediate state of a human being, are the  twelve
links of dependent-arising complete? What is your  reason  for  saying  that
the twelve links cannot be completed while in the intermediate state?

Student C: The links of name and form, six sources,  and  so  forth  do  not
pertain to the bardo state but to the actual  rebirth  that  the  person  is
going to take as a human being.

Khen Rinpoche: After entering into the intermediate state of a  hell  being,
the six links that are the results starting from  name  and  form,  the  six
sources, contact, feeling and so forth, aren’t they all there?

Student C: I don’t know. I get  the  sense  somehow  that  those  links  are
“interrupted” during the bardo phase.

Khen Rinpoche: Student C says the twelve links  are  not  completed  in  the
intermediate state and Student D says they are  completed.  We  are  talking
from the perspective of someone who changes intermediate  state  during  the
intermediate state.

What do the rest of you think?

[Khen Rinpoche asks the opinions of some senior  students.  Most  share  the
view of Student D.]

In the case of a person who was heading for the  lower  realms  but  changes
that outcome during the intermediate state, if you say the twelve links  are
complete, it is the same as saying that he will not have to  experience  the
suffering results of something that he had done. It  would  seem  that  that
person will not have to experience the result of the projecting  karma  that
he had accumulated in the past for going to the lower  realms.  If  you  say
that all the twelve links are completed in the  intermediate  state,  it  is
the same as saying that the results have been experienced.

If you assert that the twelve links are not completed  in  the  intermediate
state, that means in order  for  the  same  cycle  of  twelve  links  to  be
completed, the actualising causes must occur again. The assertion then  that
the twelve links of dependent-arising of one cycle must be completed  within
a maximum of three lifetimes falls  apart.  It  seems  that  you  need  four
lifetimes.

Khen Rinpoche:  The twelve links are becoming more complicated now.
Question: It is said that a single action of  killing,  say,  a  goat,  will
result in one experiencing five hundred lifetimes of being a goat. How  many
cycles of the twelve links is that? Is that still one  cycle  with  multiple
effects or more than one cycle?

Since karma multiplies, does it become many cycles? If  that  is  so,  maybe
you can explain how even though you may die in the  bardo  state,  as  karma
multiplies, the karmic seeds are still there.

Answer:  According  to  Vasubandhu’s  Treasury  of  Knowledge   (the   lower
Abhidharmakosha), one projecting karma will only result in  one  rebirth.  I
recall that in the case of someone having to take five hundred  rebirths  as
the result of one action, one projecting karma will result  in  one  rebirth
and the other remaining rebirths are the results of the completing karma.

However, in the higher Abhidharmakosha, Asanga’s  Compendium  of  Knowledge,
it is not necessarily so because one action can have more than  one  result.
In the Compendium of Knowledge, it is stated that  one  action  can  project
one rebirth or more than one rebirth. In the Lamrim Chenmo, it states:

      The Compendium of Knowledge:


           There is karma where a single action projects one body. There is
           karma where a single action projects many bodies. There is karma
           where many actions project a single body. There is  karma  where
           many actions project many bodies (Page 240).

This is quite complicated. You can think about it.

This is a question for the senior students. In the forward  process  of  the
twelve links of dependent-arising, after feeling comes craving. If there  is
the link of feeling, does the link of craving necessarily arise? How do  you
account for  instance  of  the  forward  process  of  the  twelve  links  of
dependent-arising where after feeling, there is no craving?

[Response from student is inaudible]

Student E: Not all feelings produce craving.

Khen Rinpoche: If you say that, how then do you account for the order:  from
feeling comes craving followed by grasping?

Student: But your question was: do all feelings produce craving or not.

Ven. Gyurme: No, that was not the question. The question was: in the  twelve
links, after feeling, is there necessarily craving or not?

Student E: Yes. I think so.
Khen Rinpoche: If you have feeling, do you necessarily have craving?

Student E: No.

Khen Rinpoche:  Give an example.

Student E: I feel I like you but I don’t crave for you. Craving  is  a  very
strong form of feeling that does not necessarily arise unless you have  very
strong delusions.

Khen Rinpoche: Are you say that from feeling, craving does  not  necessarily
arise?

Student E: Correct.

Khen Rinpoche: How is this so?

Isn’t  it  the  case  that,  because  of  ignorance,  you  will   definitely
accumulate karma. The karma is then infused in  the  consciousness  and  the
order goes on.  Because  of  ignorance,  there  is  compositional  activity.
Likewise because there is feeling, then comes craving.

If you have the ignorance that  belongs  to  the  twelve  links,  don’t  you
necessarily accumulate karma? I am not talking about ignorance in general.

Student: Is there such a thing as ignorance of the twelve links?

Khen Rinpoche:  Of course. There is no such thing?

When you have the  ignorance  of  the  twelve  links,  you  will  definitely
accumulate karma,  right?  Because  you  accumulate  karma,  definitely  the
imprint  has  to  be  left  somewhere.  Therefore  you  have  the  link   of
consciousness. If there is feeling, craving is  necessarily  there.  Do  you
agree or not?

Student E: No.  This feeling comes from the projecting karma …

Khen Rinpoche: The answer is actually in the Lamrim Chenmo.

Student A: The experience of craving definitely comes from  feeling  in  the
sequence of the twelve links. Craving is  the  actualising  factor  and  the
feeling that gives rise to this craving is not from the same  cycle  but  is
the result of some other cycle.

Khen Rinpoche: We accept this. But my question is: feeling is the  condition
for craving to arise. Basically as  long  as  there  is  feeling,  there  is
craving. That is the question, do you accept that or not?

Student A: We are talking about the boundary of feeling  within  the  twelve
links.

 and so forthaceswer,   the  actualising  causeserojected  results  d  takes
rebirth. Khen Rinpoche:  That is different.

and so  forthaceswer,   the  actualising  causeserojected  results  d  takes
rebirth. The answer is in the Lamrim Chenmo. I am just asking this to  check
whether the senior students do their reading or not:

(Another student reads the following from the Lamrim Chenmo):

      The statement in a sutra that "craving is  caused  by  feeling"  means
      that feelings accompanied by ignorance cause craving. Where  there  is
      no ignorance, craving does not occur, even  if  feelings  are  present
      (Page 318)).

The questions raised in this discussion are mainly  directed  at  the  older
students. Those of you  who  are  new,  don’t  get  discouraged.  The  older
students have been learning the Dharma for seven to eight  years,  yet  they
still have many doubts and unresolved questions. So don’t get discouraged.

The purpose of conducting this discussion with the question  and  answer  is
not to discourage you but to encourage everyone to pay  more  attention,  to
think more, and to increase your interest.

I think I have talked before about my personal experience.  I  have  studied
for seventeen to eighteen years but if I compare what I know to  what  I  do
not know, the things that I do not know  outnumber  the  things  that  I  do
know. But this doesn’t discourage me. In fact it makes me want to  find  out
more.

When it comes to the Dharma, until we  become  a  buddha,  there  is  always
something that we do not know. Only after we achieve enlightenment,  we  can
then say  that  we  know  everything.  So  everyone  here  is  in  the  same
situation.

You have to remember this: until we achieve enlightenment, there  is  always
something to learn and to know. Because of that we just have to continue  to
study and learn. Not knowing should not  be  a  condition  or  a  cause  for
discouragement to arise. In fact, it should be a condition for  us  to  work
harder and to find out more about what we do not know.

When you have that desire, definitely you will place more imprints  on  your
mind. Those imprints will make your life easier  in  the  future.  Otherwise
when  you  see  your  present  lack  of  understanding  as  the  reason  for
discouragement and you give up, you will stop placing any positive  imprints
in your mind.


Therefore, you have to try your very best and work as hard  as  you  can  to
leave as many strong imprints as you can on your mind.  When  you  do  this,
you will make your life easier in the future.  It  will  become  easier  and
easier.

Think about this. Take our situation here. The same material  is  taught  to
everyone but there will be individuals who just get it and there are  others
who may take a longer  time.  What  is  the  reason?  When  we  analyse  the
reasons, we will probably have to conclude in the end  that  it  is  due  to
imprints, be it an abundance or a lack of imprints.

Keep this in mind. Just work hard and try your best.



Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng

Edited by Cecilia Tsong


