Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M1 L05 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.157240
================================================================================



Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi

Root text:The Middle Length Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by  Trijiang  Rinpoche  are
in small lettertype, to be distinguished from Lama Tsongkhapa’s own  outline
that is in larger lettertype.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


Lesson No: 5                                   Date: 23rd June 2011


At this point in your life, you have met the teachings of  the  Buddha  that
still exist in this world. From your side, you have the  interest  to  study
and put those teachings into practice. When you think about  this,  you  can
certainly say that you have accumulated some virtuous karma and much  merit,
in your previous lives, for all this to happen now.

All the conditions are here for you to study: the  teacher  is  present  and
you have the interest to learn.  These  conditions  must  come  together  in
order for this class to happen, but you cannot take this  for  granted.  You
should understand that these conditions will not remain forever and are  not
the natural state of things. With this understanding, you will  realise  how
fortunate  you  are  and,  therefore,   you   will   generate   a   stronger
determination to make sure that you do not waste this opportunity.

If there is only one teacher teaching a few students, it  is  very  unlikely
that such a class will be taking place. The fact that many people, with  the
same interest, coming together  to  attend  the  same  class,  does  make  a
difference. Naturally, when you are part  of  such  a  group,  it  helps  to
motivate and encourage you, when you see  that  there  are  so  many  people
trying to do the same thing.

We are all in this together as members of  the  same  class  and  we  should
support one another. When you see  each  other,  you  should  remember  that
these are companions who can help you  in  your  studies.  You  should  feel
happy to see them. This is something you should keep in mind all  the  time.
Just like a family  with  siblings,  where  there  are  feelings  of  mutual
understanding, love and respect, likewise, you should  cultivate  that  kind
of relationship with your classmates. In fact, the  relationship  should  be
even closer than that, as you are all in this together.

It is very important to cultivate this family feeling  towards  one  another
in class. Please remember this. This  is  very  important.  You  should  pay
attention to this and put in the effort. When you are able to do  this,  the
centre benefits and, you, as an individual, also  benefit.  Along  the  way,
others will also benefit from your actions. Everyone benefits. This  is  how
the centre improves and progresses.
After looking at the first greatness of  the  teachings,  i.e.,  recognising
that all the teachings are non-contradictory, what is the  main  thing  that
you must understand?

Many people have the misconception  that  the  Hinayana  teachings  and  the
Mahayana teaching are contradictory, i.e., that they are not related in  any
way, that they are in conflict with one another and when  you  practise  one
system, you should not practise the other. In  this  text,  Lama  Tsongkhapa
explains, very clearly, that this is not the case. To  hold  on  to  such  a
view is a huge mistake.

Lama Tsongkhapa explains that the Hinayana and the  Mahayana  teachings  are
not contradictory but are, in fact, complementary to one another. Even  when
one is a follower of the Mahayana, one must still  learn  and  practise  the
Hinayana teachings. This is the essence of  this  particular  outline,  that
the Buddha’s teachings are not contradictory.

Only saying that is not enough. You must understand why this  is  the  case.
Why are the teachings of the Buddha, the Mahayana  and  Hinayana  teachings,
not contradictory? You should be able to explain this.

Just bringing up quotations from  the  Buddha’s  teachings  to  substantiate
this point is insufficient. The main thing is to prove this through the  use
of logic and reasoning.  In  this  context  then,  what  is  the  logic  and
reasoning  that  is  employed  to  prove  that   the   teachings   are   not
contradictory? Only then do you bring in the scriptural authorities and  the
relevant quotations from the Buddha’s  teaching  to  support  that  line  of
argument.

There is another misconception with  regard  to  the  Mahayana  Paramitayana
(the Mahayana Perfection Vehicle) and the Mahayana Vajrayana  (the  Mahayana
Vajra Vehicle) that you have to dispel. “Yana” means  vehicle.  Many  people
think that the Paramitayana and the Vajrayana have nothing to  do  with  one
another and are contradictory.

These two yanas are not contradictory. Do you understand  why  this  is  so?
You have to establish this by logic, followed by the scriptural  authorities
to substantiate your argument. Even as a Vajrayana  practitioner,  you  must
practice  the  teachings  of  the  Paramitayana.  The   teachings   of   the
Paramitayana do not contradict the teachings  of  the  Vajrayana.  So,  with
respect to this outline on the first greatness, from page 8 of the  text  to
the first paragraph of page 9, you should be able to  understand  these  two
things:
1. Why the Hinayana and Mahayana teachings are not contradictory and how  to
   prove  this  by  logic  and  reasoning,   substantiated   by   scriptural
   authorities.
2. With regard to the  Paramitayana  and  the  Vajrayana,  the  reason  that
   proves these two are not contradictory and the scriptural authority  that
   is used to substantiate that reason.

I have talked about this now, at some length,  and  I  will  not  repeat  it
again. We need to move on. Otherwise, we will spend a lot of  time  on  this
particular section. You have to read the text and, after having  read  these
few paragraphs, you should see the points that  I  have  mentioned.  If  you
have read the text a few times and you have thought about it,  but  you  are
still unable to figure out the reasons, then you can ask me.  Then,  when  I
give you the answer, you will remember it for  a  long  time  because,  from
your side, you have tried to look for the answer yourself.


    2B2C-2 The greatness of all of the Buddha’s teachings dawning on you as
    useful instructions

Second: the greatness of all of the Buddha’s teachings  dawning  on  you  as
useful instructions (Page 9).

This is the second greatness of the Lam-Rim: the greatness of  enabling  you
to understand that all of the  scriptures  are  instructions  for  practice.
There is this serious misconception that these great philosophical texts  do
not contain anything that is to  be  practised.   With  regard  to  all  the
sutras, the Kangyur (the translated words of the  Buddha)  and  the  Tengyur
(the  translations  of  all  the  commentaries  of  the  past  great  Indian
masters), you do not think that they are instructions for practice. This  is
an extremely serious misconception, so it is extremely important that it  be
eliminated.


         A  The distinction of pure and impure manners of comprehending

Anyone construing the great scriptures to be explanatory teachings  that  do
not contain the points of practice who thinks that guidance  indicating  the
meaning of the essential points of practice  exists  separately  from  them,
and holds that even in the holy Dharma  the  explanatory  and  accomplishing
teachings are found in different places…(Page 9).

When you believe that the Dharma is divided into  (1)  the  Dharma  that  is
explained  and  (2)  the  Dharma  to  be  practised,  this  is   a   serious
misconception. When you talk about this misconception,  you  need  not  look
elsewhere because it is in your mind. This is what you  think,  is  it  not?
Why is this so? Think about your attitude towards  the  great  philosophical
texts, such as the extensive Stages of  the  Path  literature,  the  various
Perfection of Wisdom Sutras, the Middle Way  treatises  and  so  forth.  You
think that they are just philosophy, something to be learnt.  You  may  even
think  that  the  purpose  of  studying  such  teachings  is  to  gain  more
knowledge, to make one’s mind sharper  but  you  do  not  think  that  these
teachings are meant for practice.

When you talk about practise, you think of the texts that you use  for  your
daily prayers and your sadhanas, or  the  short  mind-training  and  Lam-Rim
texts. You think that these are the things  that  you  should  practise.  In
your mind, there is a distinction between  the  teachings  that  are  to  be
studied and the teachings that are to be practised.  What  is  the  negative
consequence of thinking in this way? The text states as follows:
…will create an obstacle for the origination of  deep  respect  towards  the
immaculate sutras and tantras as well  as  the  treatises  clarifying  their
intent. One should be aware that the karmic obscuration  of  abandoning  the
Dharma is accumulated by despising  them,  saying  that  they  only  outline
external knowledge without presenting the inner meaning (Page 9).

When you have the idea that the actual words of the Buddha in the  stainless
sutras, the tantras and the  treatises  clarifying  their  intent  are  only
meant for knowledge and not something to be put  into  practice,  obviously,
you will then not have much faith in and respect for them. You will not  see
that they are necessary for your development.

When you think that something is not useful, the chances of you  putting  it
down are much greater. Likewise, you will start to  despise  and  look  down
upon the teachings. When that happens, you are in  danger  of  creating  the
negative karma of abandoning the  Dharma  and  if  this  happens,  you  will
really incur a heavy loss for yourself.

Hence, for those who want liberation, the infallible,  supreme  instructions
are indeed the great scriptures.  Nevertheless, it is possible that, due  to
poor intelligence etc., one cannot reach certainty through relying on  these
scriptures only as supreme instruction (Page 9).

Lama Tsongkhapa says that these classic texts are the supreme  instructions.
Your lack of understanding that they are so is your own fault  and  mistake,
and this arises due to:
   • Lack of intelligence
   • Lack of merit
   • Having a lot of negativities and obscurations obscuring the mind
   • Not relying on a qualified teacher who can point out the way
These are the reasons why you do not  understand  that  the  scriptures  and
great treaties are instructions for practice.  It  is  not  that  the  great
treatises do not contain the instructions for practice, but  rather  due  to
your own limitations, you fail to realise this.

The question then is: If these sutras, tantras and classic texts  clarifying
their  intent  are  the  best  instructions,  how  should  you  extract  the
instructions from these teachings?

Therefore and one must seek certainty with respect to  them  by  relying  on
excellent direct instructions, but one  should  not  think  that  the  great
scriptures do not contain the heart of the matter because they only  outline
external knowledge while the direct instructions are  supreme  because  they
present the inner meaning (Page 9).

In other words, you should seek out personal instructions from  a  qualified
teacher. Let us take the Perfection of Wisdom Sutra that was taught  by  the
Buddha as an example:
 • In order to understand the actual intended meaning  of  that  sutra,  you
   have to rely on the great treatises that were composed by the past Indian
   masters. But when you  refer  to  these  classic  texts,  you  will  have
   difficulties understanding them.
 • In order to be able to understand those great treatises, you have to rely
   on the commentaries on them.
 • In order to understand the commentaries, you have to rely on the personal
   instructions of a qualified teacher. Only by  relying  on  such  personal
   instructions can you then understand the great treatises that clarify the
   intent of the sutra.
Therefore, you have to rely on the  personal  instructions  of  a  qualified
teacher who possesses the unbroken lineage of unmistaken  instructions  that
originates from  the  Buddha  himself.  You  should  understand  that  these
personal instructions will help you to understand the  intended  meaning  of
and the  supreme  instructions  found  in  the  sutras,  tantras  and  great
treatises. You should not have the idea that such personal instructions  are
different and separate from these supreme instructions.  That  is  why  Lama
Tsongkhapa says, “One should not think that  the  great  scriptures  do  not
contain  the  heart  of  the  matter  because  they  only  outline  external
knowledge while the direct instructions are  supreme  because  they  present
the inner meaning.”

Next, the text goes on to explain what the personal  instructions  that  you
should rely on are.


         B  How all the Buddha’s teachings dawn on you as useful
         instructions

The great Yogi Jangchub Rinchen said:

         Someone who has reached certainty concerning a handy little volume,
         cannot be said to know all the topics of direct instructions,  this
         is said about someone who understands all of the Buddha’s teachings
         as instructions (Page 9).

Sometimes, you may think that you can just rely on a small  text,  but  that
text does not contain the essential points of the entire path. It  may  only
show a portion of the path. That is not the way. Rather, you should rely  on
those treatises that contain the instructions pertaining to the entire  path
and all the teachings.  In  order  for  all  the  scriptures  to  appear  as
instructions and in order to realise that all the scriptures are  meant  for
practice, from your own side, you have to gather all  the  necessary  causes
and conditions for that to happen.

We need the kind of  understanding  Great  Jowo  [Atisha]’s  disciple  Gompa
Rinchen Lama expressed saying he had ground his body,  speech  and  mind  to
dust in a single  meditation  session  on  Atisha’s  instructions  and  that
thereby the understanding had now arisen in  him  that  all  scriptures  are
instructions (Page 9).

What does “in a single meditation” mean? It means that, with regard to  what
you are  practising,  until  you  have  achieved  an  ascertainment  of  the
subject, you will have to continually analyse  and  work  on  it  till  that
ascertainment is generated.

How do you conduct that single meditation session?  As  Gompa  Rinchen  Lama
said, “he had ground  his  body,  speech  and  mind  to  dust  in  a  single
meditation session.” This means that, in  order  to  arrive  at  a  thorough
ascertainment of whatever you are practising, you have to continuously  work
at it with your body, speech and mind.

You are  now  here  to  study  the  Lam-Rim,  the  Stages  of  the  Path  to
Enlightenment. Therefore, you have to devote your body, speech and  mind  to
studying the Lam-Rim so that you can arrive at a definite ascertainment  and
understanding of this text. In order to achieve  success  in  your  studies,
you have to strive and put in the effort to accumulate  merit,  purify  your
mind of obscurations and, in particular, engage  in  the  practice  of  guru
devotion and guru  yoga.  Then,  when  all  these  different  practices  and
conditions come together, all the scriptures will arise as instructions.

There are people who, despite having received many teachings, when it  comes
to practice, they have no idea where to start and what to do. Why does  this
happen? Lama Tsongkhapa explains:

In the words of the precious [Drom] Tonpa:

      If, after studying the Dharma a lot,  you  feel  the  need  to  search
      elsewhere for a way of applying the Dharma, you are mistaken.

Likewise, those who  study  the  Dharma  a  lot  over  a  long  period  and,
completely ignorant as to how to set about it, develop the wish to  practice
Dharma, do not understand and therefore err in the  manner  described  above
(Page 9).

Lama Tsongkhapa is saying that their mistake lies in not understanding  what
I have already explained. What are the supreme instructions?  They  are  the
great classical texts, the sutras, tantras  and  the  great  treatises  that
clarify the intent of those teachings. In  order  for  you  to  realise  the
meaning of  these  great  treatises,  you  have  to  rely  on  the  personal
instructions of a  qualified  teacher.  The  purpose  of  relying  on  these
personal instructions is  to  understand  the  great  classical  texts  that
clarify the intent of the Buddha’s teachings. When  you  do  not  understand
this process, even when you have studied a lot but you then have no idea  of
what to practise, this is a clear sign of not having understood what I  have
just mentioned.

When  you  understand  what  has  been  discussed  so  far,  then  you  will
understand that the scriptural and the realisational teachings are  related.
When your Dharma studies and listening to the teachings have hit  the  mark,
so  to  speak,  then  you  will  realise  that  the   scriptural   and   the
realisational teachings are complementary to each other.
As it says in the Treasury:

      The Buddha’s teachings have two aspects:
      their nature is scripture and realization.

In accordance with this dictum, the  teaching  is  nothing  apart  from  the
scriptural teaching and the realizational teaching.

The  scriptural  teaching  is  how  the  Dharma  should  be  practiced   and
establishes the manner of accomplishment, while the  realizational  teaching
is what is [thus] established. Since one practices in accordance  with  what
is to be established, these  two  act  as  cause  and  effect.  To  give  an
analogy: when you have a horse race, the horse is  first  shown  the  course
and afterwards, likewise, it runs there (Pages 9 – 10).

When there is a horse  race,  first  you  show  the  horse  the  racecourse.
Similarly, you  are  supposed  to  practise  the  teachings  that  you  have
received. If the teachings that you have heard have nothing to do with  what
you are supposed to practise, then something is wrong. If that happens:

It would be  ridiculous  to  show  it  a  course  and  then  have  the  race
elsewhere. When it comes to attainments[1], how could it be  appropriate  to
accomplish  something  after  having  determined  something   else   through
listening and reflecting (Page 10)?

During the course of your practice, you are likely to engage  in  analytical
meditation. There are people, however, who have the misconception  that  you
should not engage in such meditation. They say, “It is fine to analyse  when
you  are  listening  to  and  reflecting  on  the  teachings.   But   during
meditation, you should not do any analysis at all. You  should  abandon  all
conceptualities.”  These  people  assert  that  analytical  thought,  during
meditation,  is  a  hindrance  to  achieving  enlightenment.   This   is   a
misconception because they are saying  that  whatever  you  learned  through
listening and reflection is not related to what you are  going  to  meditate
on. Therefore, what you meditate on is  something  that  is  different  from
what you learned through listening and reflection.

Lama Tsongkhapa says that, if the conclusion  that  you  arrive  at  through
listening to and reflecting on the  teachings  is  completely  unrelated  to
what you are going to meditate on, that is wrong. In order to  support  this
fact, Lama Tsongkhapa relies on scriptural authority.

That is  also  expressed  in  the  last  volume  of  Stages  of  Meditation:
“Whatever has been  realized  by  the  wisdom  arising  from  listening  and
reflecting is precisely what should be cultivated by  means  of  the  wisdom
arising from meditation. Just like a horse runs  along  the  course  it  has
been shown” (Page 10).

Summary
 • Whatever you learned from listening to and reflecting on the teachings is
   what you must meditate on. It is a mistake to meditate on something  that
   is not the conclusions you draw from your listening to and reflection  on
   the teachings.  Later in the text, Lama Tsongkhapa explains,  in  detail,
   the meaning of meditation. It is clearly mentioned  that  there  are  two
   types of meditation (1) analytical meditation and (2)  stabilisation  (or
   concentration) meditation. Of these two, analytical  meditation  is  more
   important. This will come later.
 • How can you be able  to  see,  one  day,  that  all  the  scriptures  are
   instructions? In order to realise that, you have to rely on the  personal
   instructions of the master, such as the Lam-Rim, the Stages of  the  Path
   to Enlightenment. You will then come to the understanding  that  all  the
   scriptures are the instructions through such reliance.
 • How should you seek out the intent of the  great  treatises?  You  should
   dedicate your entire body, speech and mind to that endeavour.
Today, what you have to understand is  that  the  three-fold  activities  of
listening to, reflecting and meditating on the teachings  are  interrelated.
They support, rather than obstruct, one  another.  They  are  not,  in  that
sense, separate entities.

Lama  Tsongkhapa  says  very  clearly,  in  the  text,  that   the   supreme
instructions are none other than those great treatises. It is difficult  for
you to understand that now as you have not yet studied extensively  but  you
should know that it is Lama Tsongkhapa who says this.

Another thing to remember is that Lama Tsongkhapa  says  very  clearly  that
you must never make a distinction between the teachings that  are  explained
and the teachings to be practised. He says that thinking of  the  Dharma  in
this way is a huge obstacle. Whatever you learned is what you  are  supposed
to practise. You must keep this in your heart all the time and, as  much  as
possible, you should apply this in your daily life.





Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng
Edited by Cecilia Tsong
Checked by Shirley Soh

-----------------------
[1] This can also be translated as “practice.”

