Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L47 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.335494
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


   Lesson No: 47                        Date: 3rd April 2012


(Meditation on Manjushri)

We have not yet completed the twelve links  of  dependent-arising.  I  would
like to say a little bit more about them.

You have to know the twelve links of dependent-arising individually  and  in
the correct order, starting from ignorance up to aging and death.  You  have
to memorise them. After that, you have to know that:
1. the three projecting causes are ignorance, compositional  activity,   and
   consciousness
2. the four projected results are name and form, six sources, contact,   and
   feeling
3. the  three  actualising  causes  are  craving,  grasping,  and  potential
   existence
4. the two actualised results are birth and aging and death

|                 |              |                 |                  |
|Projecting Causes|Projected     |Actualising      |Actualised        |
|                 |Results       |Causes           |Results           |
|                 |              |                 |                  |
|1.Ignorance      |4.Name and    |8.Craving        |11.Birth          |
|2. Compositional |Form          |9. Grasping      |12. Aging and     |
|activity         |5. Six sources|10. Potential    |death             |
|3. Consciousness |6. Contact    |existence        |                  |
|                 |7. Feeling    |                 |                  |

   • What is the function of the projecting causes? They function  to  make
     it possible for the projected results to arise.
   • What is the function of the actualising causes? They function  to  not
     only to make it possible for the actualised results  to  manifest  but
     they also reinforce and strengthen the actualised results.
There are two sets of causes and two sets of effects in the twelve links  of
dependent-arising: (1) projecting and actualising causes and  (2)  projected
and actualised effects.
Completion of the twelve links in two lifetimes
Let’s say one is going to be reborn in the  lower  realms.  Before  one  can
receive the aggregates of a lower realm being, e.g.,  an  animal,  both  the
projecting causes and the  actualising  causes  must  exist  prior  to  that
happening. Both the projecting causes and the  actualising  causes  must  be
from one cycle of the twelve links.

   • Motivated by ignorance, one accumulates very strong karma to be reborn
     in the lower realms. The imprint of this strong non-virtue is left  on
     the mental consciousness. These are the three projecting causes.
   •  In  that  same  life,  this  imprint  that  is  left  on  the  mental
     consciousness is nurtured and nourished by craving and grasping.  This
     is followed by potential existence. These are  the  three  actualising
     causes.
   • Therefore, within that same lifetime, the six causes, i.e., six of the
     twelve links, are completed.

What remains now are the results: four are projected  results  and  two  are
actualised results. These six results will be experienced in  the  immediate
next life. This is how the twelve links of  dependent-arising  of  the  same
cycle are completed in two lifetimes.

Summary:
   • In this life, you have the  three  projecting  causes  and  the  three
     actualising causes.
   • The projected results (or effects) and the actualised results are  not
     experienced in this life.
   • These two sets of effects are experienced in the next life.
   • The six causes of this life give rise to the six results in  the  next
     life.
   • In order for the twelve links of dependent-arising of the  same  cycle
     to be completed, you need two lifetimes.

Having said that, the twelve links of dependent-arising are not  necessarily
completed  in  two  lifetimes.  While  they  can  be  completed  within  two
lifetimes, it is not necessarily so. This is because  the  twelve  links  of
dependent-arising can be completed within three lifetimes.  How is this  so?


Completion of the twelve links within three lifetimes
Going back to the earlier example, in this  life,  motivated  by  ignorance,
one accumulates very strong non-virtue. This action  leaves  an  imprint  on
the mental consciousness.  Towards the end of  this  life,  the  imprint  of
going to the lower realms that was left on the mental consciousness  is  not
nurtured or nourished by craving and grasping.   Rather  the  imprint  of  a
positive action is nourished or nurtured by craving  and  grasping.  Instead
of going to the lower  realms,  one  heads  for  a  good  rebirth.  In  this
scenario, only the three projecting causes have been completed.

Let’s say this person is reborn as a human being  because  that  is  a  good
rebirth.  However, in that lifetime as a human being,  the  imprint  of  the
negative action that will cause him to go to the lower realms  is  nourished
and nurtured by craving and grasping in that lifetime. That  gives  rise  to
potential  existence.  Therefore,  in  that  second  lifetime,   the   three
actualising causes are completed.

That person is definitely going to the  lower  realms.   After  that  person
dies, he gets the aggregates of a lower realm being. The six results,  i.e.,
the four projected results and the two actualised results are  completed  in
that third lifetime.

Summary:
This is how the twelve links of dependent-arising  of  the  same  cycle  are
completed in three lifetimes:
   • in the first lifetime, you have the three projecting causes
   • in the second lifetime, you have the three actualising causes
   • in the third lifetime, you have the four projected results and the two
     actualised results.

The twelve links of dependent-arising are not taught in  the  Middle  Length
Lam-Rim but it is taught in the Lamrim Chenmo.   In  the  teachings  of  the
twelve links of dependent-arising, it is explained how the twelve  links  of
the same cycle are completed within  either  two  or  three  lifetimes.  You
don’t need more than three lifetimes to complete one  cycle  of  the  twelve
links.

In order to experience the four projected results  and  the  two  actualised
results, the two sets of causes, i.e., both the projecting  causes  and  the
actualising causes, must be completed before the results can manifest.

This is related to the qualm mentioned in the  Lamrim  Chenmo  on  page  319
that was highlighted by a student in the previous class. Before this  qualm,
there is a quotation that says that the twelve links are  divided  into  two
sets of causalities.

    The Compendium of Knowledge:


         What sort of categories do you obtain by abbreviating the  factors?
         There  are  four  types:  the  projecting  factors,  the  projected
         factors, the actualizing factors, and the actualized factors.
            What  are  the  projecting  factors?  Ignorance,  compositional
         activity, and consciousness. What are the projected factors?  Name-
         and-form, the six sources,  contact,  and  feeling.  What  are  the
         actualizing factors? Craving, grasping,  and  existence.  What  are
         the actualized factors? Birth, aging, and death (Page 319).



In this text, first it talks about the projecting  causes  followed  by  the
projected  results,  then  the  actualising  causes  and  their   actualised
results.  The following qualm is then raised:

         Qualm: Well then, do the two types of  causality—one  with  respect
      to projection and the other with respect to  actualization—demonstrate
      one instance of causality wherein one person takes rebirth or do  they
      demonstrate two instances? If the former, it  would  be  incorrect  to
      claim that the actualizing factors, craving and so on, occur after the
      establishment of the group of factors beginning with resultant  period
      consciousness and ending with feeling [the projected factors]. If  the
      latter, there would be no ignorance, compositional activity, or causal
      period consciousness [projecting  factors]  in  the  latter  cycle  of
      causality [the ordering of projection], and no craving,  grasping,  or
      existence [actualizing factors] in the former cycle of causality  [the
      ordering of actualization] (Page 319).

This is not in the Middle Length Lam-Rim. I brought this up because some  of
you may be interested in this. Actually there is no need to talk about  this
topic. If you haven’t read this, there is no point  for  me  to  talk  about
this now. It will be a waste of time.

For those of you who have completed the  previous  Basic  Program,  this  is
something you can pay attention to. There are still  many  things  you  have
not learnt or have yet to understand. You should  read  the  Lamrim  Chenmo.
For those of you who are doing this module for  the  first  time,  you  only
have to focus on what is taught in the Middle Length Lam-rim.

The qualm arises because on the one hand, there is the presentation  of  the
twelve links of dependent-arising that we know, i.e., from the first to  the
twelfth link. However with regard to the projecting and actualising  causes,
the text refers to the projecting causes followed by the projected  effects,
then the actualising causes followed by the  actualised  effects.   This  is
the basis for the arising of the qualm

The usual presentation of the twelve links is from the first to the  twelfth
link but that presentation is not indicative of how the twelve links of  one
cycle are completed. The order is different  in  terms  of  how  the  twelve
links of the same cycle actually evolve. That general  presentation  of  the
twelve links is not taught from the perspective of how the twelve  links  of
the same cycle are completed but rather from the perspective of showing:
   • how we have come from the previous life into this life, and
   • how we are going on to the next life.

In a previous life motivated by ignorance, one creates karma.  The karma  is
left on the consciousness.  That is the consciousness of the causal  period.
When that karma ripens in this life, one has name and form.

The consciousness that is there when we  come  into  this  lifetime  is  the
resultant period consciousness.

The third link, consciousness, can be looked at from:
   • the perspective of the causal period
   • the perspective of the resultant period

You come into this life. The link of name and form is  established  followed
by the six sources, contact, and feeling. Craving, grasping,  and  potential
existence will bring us to the next life. In the next life, we are born,  we
age, and we die.

You have to understand how the twelve  links  of  dependent-arising  of  the
same cycle are completed in either two or three lifetimes. Those of you  who
are  referring  to  the  Lamrim  Chenmo  may  want  to  take  note  of  this
explanation on page 320:

      Therefore, the two factors of (1) craving,  which  is  an  actualizing
      factor, and (2) feeling, which gives rise to this craving, are not  in
      the same sequence of dependent-arising. The feeling that gives rise to
      craving is an effect of some other sequence of dependent-arising.

This is saying that the sequence in the twelve  links  of  dependent-arising
from feeling to craving is  not  an  explanation  of  the  twelve  links  of
dependent-arising of the same cycle. It is the twelve  links  of  dependent-
arising of two different cycles.

As mentioned earlier, the twelve links  of  dependent-arising  of  the  same
cycle can be completed in either two lifetimes or three lifetimes.  When  we
say the  twelve  links  of  dependent-arising  of  the  same  cycle  can  be
completed within three lifetimes, it does not  necessarily  refer  to  three
consecutive lifetimes because the intervening period between the  projecting
causes and the projected effects can be very long and last  for  even  eons.
Having said that, if I were then to say:

“The intervening period between the  projecting  causes  and  the  projected
effects can be eons. It follows that the twelve links  of  dependent-arising
of the same cycle need not necessarily be completed within  three  lifetimes
because an eon is such a long period of time.”  What are you going to say?

Actually there is no need for any  qualm  to  arise,  because  if  you  have
listened carefully to my very good explanation, this is not a problem now!

(Discussion with student A who attempts to answer Khen Rinpoche’s qualm).

Khen Rinpoche:
   • If I say: “You need more than three lifetimes to complete  the  twelve
     links of dependent arising of the same cycle. In fact, you  need  many
     more lifetimes because within an eon, you can die numberless times and
     you have numberless lifetimes.” What is your response to that?
   • Explain how even if there is a long  intervening  period  between  the
     projecting causes and the  projected  effects,  the  twelve  links  of
     dependent arising of the same cycle must  be  completed  within  three
     lifetimes.
   • Explain how there is no contradiction when  you  wait  for  numberless
     eons and yet the twelve links are completed within three lifetimes.

(Student A is confused as to when the long intervening  period  between  the
projecting causes and the projected effects occurs: is it between the  first
and second lifetime or between the second and third lifetime?  Also  amongst
the three lifetimes for the completion of a set of  twelve  links  from  the
same cycle, which lifetimes are necessarily consecutive?)

Khen Rinpoche: Why does the second and third lifetime  have  to  consecutive
whereas the first and second lifetime need not be consecutive?

Student B: It is due to potential existence that is about to ripen  for  the
seed to sprout. Khen Rinpoche did mention that for actualisation  to  occur,
the projecting causes and the actualising causes must be complete. Once  the
actualising causes are complete, there is no stopping  them  from  ripening.
So lifetimes two and three are  necessarily  consecutive  whereas  lifetimes
one and two need not be consecutive.

Khen  Rinpoche:  There  can  be  a  long  intervening  period  between   the
projecting causes and the actualising causes.   During  that  period,  other
cycles of the twelve links of dependent-arising can be operating,  but  once
the actualising causes occur,  the  projected  effects  and  the  actualised
effects follow.

Summary
How are the twelve links of dependent-arising of the  same  cycle  completed
in two lifetimes?
   • In the first lifetime: the  three  projecting  causes  and  the  three
     actualising causes are completed.
   • In the immediate next lifetime, the six results take place:  the  four
     projected results and the two actualised results.

When the twelve links of dependent-arising of the same cycle  are  completed
over three lifetimes:
   • in the first lifetime, you have the three projecting causes.
   • between the first and the second lifetime, there can be  a  very  long
     intervening period. Its duration does not matter.
   • When the three actualising causes manifest  in  the  second  lifetime,
     then in the immediate next (or  third)  lifetime,  you  have  the  six
     results.

This is how the twelve links of dependent-arising  of  the  same  cycle  are
completed over three lifetimes.

Question: I refer to the second link, compositional activity, and the  third
link, consciousness. Is it only karma that is accumulated  that  will  leave
karmic imprints on our consciousness?

My second question: When I  am  doing  purification  practice,  which  links
amongst the twelve links am I purifying?

Answer: I think everything is purified.

Whether it is karma that is done or karma that is accumulated,  they   leave
imprints on the mind. Once the karma is accumulated, it  leaves  an  imprint
on the mind.  It’s only a matter of the strength of the imprints.  Something
is left on the mind.

Does the projecting karma that impels a rebirth in the lower realm  have  to
be both karma that is done and karma that is accumulated? This is  something
you can think about. In the discussion on karma, we saw how  karma  that  is
accumulated  is  a  karma  whose  result  we  will  definitely   experience.
Connecting this with projecting karma, is it the same?

When you look at the wheel of life, there is a  monster  holding  the  wheel
firmly with its hands and mouth. This  symbolises  impermanence  and   shows
that once we are born in cyclic existence, we definitely have to  die,    as
we are born under the control of  karma  and  the  afflictions.  With  these
causes, we are impermanent and we definitely have to die.

Of the four noble truths, the wheel of life shows true sufferings  and  true
origins.

Forward process of the twelve links of dependent-arising of  the  thoroughly
afflicted class

From ignorance ( compositional activity (  consciousness  (  name  and  form
(six sources  (  contact  (  feeling  (   craving  (  grasping  (  potential
existence ( birth ( aging and death.

Reverse process of the twelve links of dependent-arising of  the  thoroughly
afflicted class:

Starting from aging and death ( birth ( potential  existence  (  grasping  (
craving ( feeling ( contact ( six sources ( name and form ( consciousness  (
compositional activity ( ignorance.

By meditating on the forward and reverse processes of the  twelve  links  of
dependent-arising of  the  thoroughly  afflicted  class,  we  will  come  to
understand true sufferings and the true origins.
Forward process of the twelve links of dependent-arising of  the  thoroughly
purified class:

   • By stopping ignorance, you stop compositional activity.
   • By stopping compositional activity,  you  stop  consciousness  and  so
     forth.

Reverse process of the twelve links of dependent-arising of  the  thoroughly
purified class:

   • The stopping of aging and death has  to  come  from  the  stopping  of
     birth.
   • The stopping of birth has to  come  from  the  stopping  of  potential
     existence and so forth.

Meditating on the forward and reverse  processes  of  the  twelve  links  of
dependent-arising of the thoroughly purified class helps  us  to  understand
true paths and true cessations.

In the upper right-hand corner of the drawing, the Buddha is pointing  to  a
beautiful full moon that represents true cessations.

There should also be two verses beneath the moon  that  symbolise  the  true
paths.

The verses say:
   • that you need to put in effort and think about the  faults  of  cyclic
     existence whereby you then generate the determination to be free.
   • the essence of the Buddha’s teachings are the three  higher  trainings
     which you should practise in order  to  conquer  the  afflictions  and
     overcome the four maras.
   • that those desiring liberation should be conscientious.
   • the main method for disciplining and subduing the mind is  the  wisdom
     realising selflessness.
   • the basis for actualising this wisdom is the strong practice of ethics
     as explained in the vinaya.   The  good  practice  of  ethics  is  the
     foundation for actualising wisdom.
   • that when one practises  in  that  way,  one  is  certain  to  achieve
     liberation whereby one will not have to experience any more suffering.


The verses talk about the importance of the practice  of  the  three  higher
trainings for achieving liberation. These verses symbolise true paths.

Khen Rinpoche: I have now completed the twelve links. I will start with  the
path of the person of great capacity on Thursday.

Question: For a person who has realised emptiness, be it a once-returner  or
stream-enterer, which part of the twelve links has he stopped?  Is  it  only
compositional activity, with the other links  remaining  intact?  As  he  is
about to become an arhat soon, what links has he  stopped?  Does  ignorance,
craving and grasping still remain after he has realised emptiness?

Answer:  From  the  stream-enterer  onwards,  that  practitioner  does   not
accumulate fresh projecting karma. In  order  to  experience  the  projected
effects, they must be preceded by the actualising causes  like  craving  and
grasping. Do they have these?

Student: Yes.

Question: Up to this point in the teachings, with reference  to  the  twelve
links and the earlier discussion on the  afflictions,  the  reference  point
seems to be the view of the Mind Only  School.  For  the  training  that  is
shared with the person of medium capacity, is the final view  of  emptiness,
i.e., the view of emptiness in accordance with the  Consequence  Middle  Way
School, important at this point in time?

Answer: It depends on the perspective of the tenets from which the topic  is
being  explained.  Most  of  the  presentation  on  the  mind  such  as  the
afflictions and also the topic of karma are based on either  the  higher  or
the lower Abhidharma. Because  the  explanations  are  based  on  these  two
texts,  therefore  the  explanations  of  ignorance  and  the  view  of  the
transitory collection are given in accordance  with  their  views.  All  the
tenets from the Autonomy Middle Way School and below share the same view  of
the selflessness of a person. So the explanation given  here  is  from  that
perspective.

Question: Can we leave the understanding of these teachings at the level  of
the lower tenet systems?

Answer: Well, it is not exactly like that.  Remember I  did  say  that  with
regard to ignorance, there are  so  many  different  views  as  to  what  is
ignorance.

It depends on the perspective of the tenets you are following.   If we  take
the shared assertions of the Sutra School, the Mind  Only  School,  and  the
Autonomy Middle Way School with regard to the selflessness of a  person,  we
can stick with  what  is  in  this  text.  But  if  we  were  to  base  that
explanation from the perspective of the Consequence Middle Way School,  then
this  presentation  would  be  incorrect.  It  depends  from  which  tenets’
perspective you explain the path that is  shared  with  the  person  of  the
medium capacity.  Basically you are not happy with  this  so  you  want  the
view of the Consequence Middle Way School, right?

Student: Something like that.

Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; Transcribed by Phuah Soon  Ek  and  Vivien
Ng; Edited by Cecilia Tsong
