Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L24 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.388850
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


   Lesson No: 24             Date: 22nd September 2011


At  this  time  from  your  own  side  all  the  favourable  conditions  for
practising the paths are there. Moreover the favourable external  supporting
conditions are also present. At this time when you have some faith and  some
interest, it is important to persevere and put in  the  effort  to  continue
your studies and practices.

We usually procrastinate over our studies and practices,  thinking  that  we
will do it tomorrow or the day after tomorrow. In that sense we are all  the
same. In order to stop ourselves from procrastinating over our  studies  and
practices, there is the reflection on death and impermanence.

There are three roots to this reflection. Each  root  has  three  supporting
reasons giving us nine points to reflect on. The three roots are:
1. Death is certain.
2. The time of death is uncertain.
3. At the time of death nothing helps except the Dharma.

Reflecting  on  death  and   impermanence   in   this   way   acts   against
procrastination or postponing your practice.  By  reflecting  on  death  and
impermanence, you are able  to  persuade  yourself  to  engage  in  virtuous
activities, be it studying, practices, or daily recitations.

By remembering and being mindful of death and impermanence, at  the  end  of
reflecting on these nine points, you should arrive at these  conclusions  in
your heart and mind, “I must practise the Dharma.  Not  only  that,  I  must
practise the Dharma right now and I will only practise pure  Dharma.”  These
are the conclusions that you should arrive  at  after  having  reflected  on
death and impermanence. Then on the basis of these  conclusions,  you  carry
out your Dharma practices.

However, it is not easy to produce such  an  experience  or  realisation  on
death and impermanence in your heart. Lama  Tsongkhapa  says  in  the  text,
“This arises with difficulty (Page 57).”

Nevertheless when you  cultivate  conditions  such  as  accumulating  merit,
purifying your mind of obscurations, and making  single-pointed  request  to
the guru deity and, from your own side, you work  hard  and  strive  at  the
meditation,  even  the  experience  and  realisations  that  you  think  are
impossible will happen. Why? This is because things are impermanent and  can
be changed.

You now have a human life of freedoms and endowments. You know it  will  not
last forever. There will come a time when it will end and for sure you  will
die. What happens at the time of death? Do you disappear  into  nothingness?
The answer is no. Life continues after death.  As  said  in  the  teachings,
“You will be born in either the  happy  migrations  or  the  bad  migrations
(Page 58).” It is in this context we now move on to the next  main  outline:
“Explanation of what will become of you  in  future  worlds:  How  to  think
about the happiness and suffering of the two  [types  of]  migrating  beings
(Page 58).”

          Explanation of what will become of you in future worlds:
               How to think about the happiness and suffering
                   of the two [types of] migrating beings


    2B4B-2B1A-1B The happiness and suffering of the two [types of]
    migrating beings: Thinking about what will become of you in future
    existences

         1  Thinking about what will become of you in future worlds
         [2 From among the happiness and suffering of the two migrations,
         considerations about the suffering]

    2B4B-2B1A-1B1      Thinking about what will become of you in future
    worlds (Page 58)

After death, you will either get a good or bad rebirth but do  you  actually
have a say in or control over where you are going? The  answer  is  no.  You
don’t have any control.

Then what determines the kind of rebirth you are going to get  in  the  next
life? A good rebirth or  a  bad  rebirth  will  be  decided  by  your  karma
depending on whether it is virtuous or non-virtuous  karma.  When  the  non-
virtuous karma in your mental continuum is more powerful than  the  virtuous
karma, then you will be reborn in the lower realms in your next life.

If you are going to be reborn in the lower realms in your  next  life,  what
kind of suffering will you experience there? The text will be talking  about
this.

    2B4B-2B1A-1B2B     How thinking about suffering is a vital point (Page
    58)

  • At this particular juncture, it is of vital  importance  to  contemplate
    and reflect on the suffering of the lower realms because  reflecting  on
    these sufferings will reduce your arrogance, pride, and so forth.

  • It is important to reflect on these sufferings  because  you  will  then
    think about the causes of suffering. When you see that suffering is  the
    result of non-virtue, you will be able to refrain from  committing  non-
    virtue, i.e., you will be able to restrain yourself from engaging in non-
    virtue.

  • By reflecting on suffering, you develop the dislike  for  suffering  and
    the wish to be free from it. When you have this wish  to  be  free  from
    suffering, then the wish to achieve happiness will naturally arise.  You
    will start to think about the causes  of  the  happiness  that  you  are
    seeking. By seeing that virtue is  the  cause  of  happiness,  you  will
    naturally put effort into  creating  virtue  and  engaging  in  positive
    activities. You will do them happily.

  • By reflecting on the different kinds of suffering that you will have  to
    experience and based on your personal experience of what it is  like  to
    suffer, you will be able to empathise with the suffering of  others.  In
    that sense,  knowing  suffering  on  a  personal  level  is  helpful  in
    developing empathy for others and, in particular, developing  compassion
    for them.

  • In this context by reflecting on the suffering of the lower realms  that
    you will have to experience if you were to be born there  in  your  next
    life, you develop the wish to be free from  such  suffering.  With  this
    wish, naturally there is a desire to have a good rebirth  in  your  next
    life.

  • When you reflect on how  you  have  already  accumulated  such  powerful
    negative karma and how that will  definitely  ripen  as  a  lower  realm
    rebirth in your next life, when you are able to really feel  this,  then
    naturally you will look for protection. This is when  refuge  comes  in.
    With the feeling that you will be in trouble if you were to  go  to  the
    lower realms in your next life,  refuge  will  arise  strongly  in  your
    heart.

These are  the  points  as  to  why  reflecting  on  suffering  is  so  very
important. From here, you  can  see  how  important  it  is  to  reflect  on
suffering even if you are just thinking about  refuge.  In  order  for  pure
refuge to arise in your heart, i.e., when  you  really  look  for  help  and
protection, you must first have the wish to be free from suffering.

As the minimum basis for having pure refuge, you should be motivated by  the
real fear of the suffering of the lower realms. Without this  genuine  fear,
it is impossible to have refuge in your heart. In order for you to  be  able
to take pure refuge from your heart, you must have the  fear  of  suffering.
In this context, it is the fear of the suffering of the lower realms if  you
are born there in your next life. Therefore it is vital that you must  first
reflect on the suffering of the lower realms.

Therefore for the purpose of generating the fear of  the  suffering  of  the
lower realms, the text describes the various kinds  of  suffering  that  are
found in the lower realms. In this text,  the  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim,  the
reflections are:

         A  Thinking about the sufferings of hell beings
         B  Thinking about the sufferings of animals
         C  Thinking about the sufferings of hungry ghosts (Page 59)

The order is slightly different in other Lam-Rim texts where you  are  asked
to think about the suffering of (1) the hell realms  (2)  the  hungry  ghost
realm, and then (3) the animal realm. This order is  arranged  primarily  in
accordance with the intensity of the suffering in these  realms.  Since  the
suffering of the hell realms is the  greatest,  you  are  asked  to  reflect
first on the suffering there, then the hungry ghost realm  followed  by  the
animal realm.

In the present Lam-Rim  text,  the  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim,  the  order  is
slightly different. You are asked to think first about the suffering of  the
hell beings, then the animals, and finally the hungry ghosts. This order  is
arranged from the  perspective  of  the  intelligence  of  those  beings  in
general. Since it is said that  hungry  ghosts  are  more  intelligent  than
animals, from that perspective, you are to reflect on the suffering  of  the
hungry ghosts after having reflected on the suffering of animals.

When you look at their relative abilities to practise the  Dharma,  I  guess
you can say that the hungry ghosts are in a better position to practise  the
Dharma than animals. Do you now understand  why  here,  in  this  text,  the
suffering of animals is discussed before the suffering of hungry ghosts?

    2B4B-2B1A-1B2C-1A1 The actual [considerations]

         A  The great hells of sentient beings
         B  The neighbouring hells
         C  The cold hells
         D  The occasional hells (Page 59)

There are four divisions of the hell realms:
   1. The eight hot hells
   2. The eight cold hells
   3. The neighbouring or adjoining hells
   4. The occasional hells

The eight hot hells are:
1. The Hell of Continual Revival
2. The Black Line Hell
3. The Crushing Hell
4. The Howling Hell
5. The Great Howling Hell
6. The Hot Hell
7. The Extremely Hot Hell
8. The Hell Without Respite (Avici Hell)
There are descriptions of the sufferings found in each of  these  eight  hot
hells in the text.

In the first of those eight, the hell  of  Continual  Revival,  beings  come
together and stab each other  with  various  weapons  emerging  through  the
power of their karma. Whenever they faint  and  collapse  on  the  ground  a
voice rings out from the sky, “You shall come back to life!” Upon that  they
stand up again and start  stabbing  again  as  before,  due  to  which  they
experience immeasurable suffering (Page 59).

What about the lifespan of the beings who are reborn  in  this  first  hell,
the hell of Continual Revival?

…it is stated that 50 human years are one day in  the  [god  realm  of  the]
Four Great Kings, thirty of those one month, and twelve of those  one  year.
500 such years is the life span of the beings of the  [realm  of  the]  Four
Great Kings. All of that  is  one  single  day  in  the  hell  of  Continual
Revival, 30 of those a month, twelve of those a year  and  500  of  those  a
life span (Page 60).

The beings reborn in the first hot hell,  the  hell  of  Continual  Revival,
have to undergo the suffering of being attacked,  fainting,  and  collapsing
and then being revived over and over again for a very long period  of  time.
The suffering of the second,  third,  fourth,  fifth,  sixth,  seventh,  and
eighth hot hells become increasingly more intense. Not only  is  there  much
more suffering, the lifespan of the beings in those  subsequent  hells  also
become increasingly longer. The lifespan in  each  subsequent  hot  hell  is
double that of the preceding hot hell.

         C  The cold hells (Page 61)

The eight cold hells are:
   1. The Hell of Blisters
   2. The Hell of Bursting Blisters
   3. The Chattering-Teeth Hell
   4. The Hell of Lamentation
   5. The “Brr” Hell
   6. The Splitting-Apart-Like-an-Uptala-Flower Hell
   7. The Splitting-Apart-like-a-Lotus Hell
   8. The Great-Splitting-Apart-like-a-Lotus Hell
In the same way, the suffering  of  each  subsequent  hell  is  increasingly
greater and the lifespan of beings there also become increasingly longer.

    2B4B-2B1A-1B2C-1B  Thinking about the sufferings of animals (Page 63)

The powerful animals kill the weaker ones. Worldly gods and  humans  exploit
them. Since they are controlled by others,  animals  have  no  independence.
They are harmed, beaten, and killed. Animals experience all these  different
kinds of suffering. Some have a very long life, e.g., it is said  that  some
animals live for as long as an eon.

    2B4B-2B1A-1B2C-1C  Thinking about the sufferings of hungry ghosts (Page
    63)

Third: Those who predominantly attend to miserliness will be born as  hungry
ghosts. They, too, are hungry and thirsty. As their skin,  flesh  and  blood
are dried up, they are like  burned  logs.  Their  faces  are  hair-covered,
their mouths are exceedingly dry and are licked by the tongue (Page 63).

There are three types of hungry ghosts:
1. Those who have external obstacles to obtaining food and drink.
2. Those who have internal obstacles to obtaining food and drink.
3. Those who encounter obstacles within the food and drink themselves.

         A  Those with external obstructions to food and drink

As for the first ones, if they wander  towards  springs,  lakes  and  ponds,
they are hindered externally by sentient beings holding swords,  spears  and
lances. They also see the water as pus and blood and do not  want  to  drink
it.

         B  Those with internal obstructions to food and drink

The second ones have mouths  only  like  the  eyes  of  needles.  They  have
goitres and big bellies and their mouths are on fire. Even if  they  end  up
finding  food  and  drink  without  others   creating   obstructions,   they
themselves are not able to eat and drink.

         C  Those with obstructions to food and drink itself

As for the third ones, the so-called “fire-garlanded  ones”  get  burned  as
{82} everything they eat and  drink  catches  fire.  The  so-called  “filth-
eaters” eat excrement and drink urine. They only eat and  drink  that  which
is unclean, smelly, harmful and despicable. Some cut  their  own  flesh  and
eat it. They cannot make use of clean and good food or drink (Pages 63-64)
.
The sufferings of the individual lower realms are  described  in  the  text.
You should read these descriptions on your own and think about them.   Think
about how great the sufferings are and how long  the  beings  in  the  lower
realms have to suffer.

As mentioned in the text, the distance between you and the suffering of  the
lower realms is not very great. The lower realms are only  a  single  breath
away.

When you think of yourself in  relation  to  those  sufferings,  you  should
think about how you have already accumulated the causes for  such  rebirths.
In each and every single day of your life, you are accumulating  the  causes
to be born in such realms. You have been  accumulating  these  causes  every
day for your entire life.

This is not all. What about all your past lives? You have  also  accumulated
the causes for rebirth in the lower realms in all your past lives.

When you think seriously  about  your  own  life  and  situation,  you  will
realise that you have accumulated numerous causes to be born  in  the  lower
realms. Presently you are also accumulating the causes to  be  born  in  the
lower realms and it is almost certain that you will continue  to  accumulate
the causes for the lower realms. It is definitely like  that  in  the  past,
present, and future.

If that is the case, if you were to die now, it  is  very  likely  that  you
will be born in one of these lower realms. When you realise this,  obviously
real fear will arise. When you have this real fear,  I  guess  that  is  the
time when you will persuade yourself to do something about  it  by  engaging
in Dharma practice.

When you think about the suffering of the lower realms, your mind  may  find
it difficult to understand them.  The  suffering  seems  inconceivable.  The
duration of the lifespan there is also difficult for the mind to imagine  or
conceive.

You have to understand what leads to these sufferings.  The  cause  is  none
other than your own mind. Your own mind is the cause  of  these  sufferings.
When your mind is in a state that causes you to accumulate  non-virtue,  the
result of such non-virtue will be the  suffering  that  is  described  here.
Whatever kind of sufferings that you have to experience in the lower  realms
in your next life and including all the problems that  you  have  now,  they
have primarily arisen from your own mind.

In the Cloud of Jewels Sutra, the Buddha said, “If  you  have  control  over
your own mind, you have control over all phenomena. Non-virtue will lead  to
suffering. ”

Shantideva said in his famous text, Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds:
      Who intentionally created
      All the weapons for those in hell?
      Who created the burning iron ground?
      From where did all the women (in hell) ensue?


      The Mighty One has said that all such things
      Are (the workings of) a negative mind,
      Hence within the three world spheres
      There is nothing to fear other than my mind.
                                                   (Verses 7 & 8, Chapter 5)

It is important to understand what Shantideva said. What he meant  was  that
all these sufferings of the lower realms arise from the  non-virtuous  mind.
It is the non-virtuous unsubdued mind that gives  rise  to  such  suffering.
The more non-virtuous the mind is,  the  more  suffering  will  arise  as  a
result. It is important to understand  that  all  the  sufferings  described
here in the text exist.

Even when we think about the good things, there are many  good  things  that
are also beyond our comprehension and are  difficult  for  us  to  conceive,
although  we  believe  in  them.  The  text  later  describes  the  Buddha’s
qualities. For example, it is said that when you describe the  qualities  of
the Buddha’s exalted mind, that mind is omniscient. There  is  nothing  that
the  Buddha  does  not  perceive  directly.  Whatever  the   Buddha’s   mind
perceives, the  Buddha’s  exalted  body  is  there.  Wherever  the  Buddha’s
exalted body is, the  Buddha’s  exalted  speech  is  also  there.   This  is
inconceivable for us.


But you have to understand that this is possible. Again it  all  depends  on
the state of mind. In this case, the more subdued  the  mind  and  the  more
qualities the mind have, then the results will be correspondingly greater.

This principle also applies to sufferings. The more unsubdued the mind,  the
more non-virtuous the mind is,  the  greater  is  the  resultant  suffering.
Therefore there are all these different realms.

You can use your own experience to gain an understanding of this.  At  times
when you are upset or angry, you will see the world and  the  people  around
you in a certain way. When you are upset, even the people whom you  normally
consider to be pleasant or friendly will appear unpleasant.  When your  mind
is really unhappy, then everything appears unpleasant. This is not  just  an
appearance.  You actually experience it. Where  does  this  experience  come
from? It comes from the mind because when the mind is upset, the  mind  sees
its surroundings and  the  people  in  it  in  a  different  way.  Both  the
appearance and the experience are created by the mind.

On the other hand when the mind is calm and happy, you look  at  others  and
the world around you in a different way. They appear to  you  as  happy  and
pleasant. This is what happens to you.  From  this  you  can  see  that  how
things appear to you and how you experience them  depend  on  the  state  of
your mind.

A lot of the time all your fears and worries are created  by  yourself.  For
example, some people who  are  very  sick  react  to  their  sickness  in  a
negative way and they become unhappy. They fear and worry  about  what  will
happen to them. But there are also people who have  the  same  sickness  and
look at it as something wonderful. Why is there such  a  difference?  It  is
the mental perspective.

From this you can see that your mental perspective makes a difference.  When
your mind is not subdued, the unhappier you  are,  the  more  suffering  you
will experience. When the mind is unsubdued, it seems  that  everything  can
be the cause for you to be unhappy. By thinking along these  lines,  perhaps
you can see how the mind does impact the kind of experience  you  will  have
in your next life. The  more  unsubdued  the  mind  is,  perhaps,  the  more
suffering you will experience.

You have to think about how the lower realms are the  results  of  the  non-
virtuous karma that is created by your own unsubdued  mind.  Then  you  will
understand how the lower realms are actually possible.  Once  you  see  that
possibility, once you understand the sufferings that are found in the  lower
realms, and develop the fear of those sufferings, then  you  need  to  start
avoiding non-virtue and, as much as possible, give up  non-virtuous  actions
however small they may be.


The essence of this reflection is  to  understand  that  your  mind  is  the
creator of all your suffering, especially the  non-virtuous  mind,  and  how
suffering is the result of  your  non-virtuous  actions.  By  reflecting  on
this, you will start to avoid and give up non-virtue.

The text mentions the inconceivable  duration  of  the  lifespans  in  these
lower realms.  The point is that when the mind is unhappy, even  though  you
may be suffering for only a short period of  time,  during  that  time,  the
suffering seems to last forever. At those times when you are happy, they  do
not seem to last. The happy times always  seem  too  short.  You  can  think
about this from your own experience. When you are unhappy for even  a  short
period of time, it feels as if the unhappiness lasts the  whole  day.  There
is this feeling and appearance. In the same way, in terms  of  the  lifespan
in the lower realms, the lifespan in the hell realms is  unbelievably  long.
That is the experience and appearance to the mind.

In the next lesson, I will start on the topic of going  for  refuge  to  the
Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha.






Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng
Edited by Cecilia Tsong
Checked by Shirley Soh
[pic]

