Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L27 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.640801
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


   Lesson No: 27             Date: 29th September 2011


The Buddha once asked in a sutra, “What are the benefits that an  individual
will  stand  to  enjoy  by  not  forgetting  the  Buddha,  recollecting  and
remembering him, and  holding  on  to  the  Buddha’s  name  with  faith  and
devotion?”
 • Comparing the merit accumulated by this individual to someone  who  makes
   countless offerings equal to the number of particles of the worlds of the
   ten directions for an eon, the merit of the one making such offerings  is
   smaller.
 • The teachings always mention the benefits of making extensive  offerings.
   But when compared to the merit you stand to gain  by  generating  single-
   pointed faith in and devotion to the Buddha, that is said  to  accumulate
   more merit.
 • It is said that you accumulate even more merit from hearing the teachings
   of the Buddha.
 • The merit will be even greater if you  were  to  take  the  teachings  to
   heart,  reflect  on  them  until  you  attain  ascertainment,  and   then
   familiarise your mind with them through meditation.
This is what the Buddha said in the sutras.

You should remind yourself how incredibly fortunate you  are  to  have  this
opportunity now to learn  and  to  reflect  on  this  text  that  shows  the
unmistaken path that you  are  going  to  follow.  You  should  also  remind
yourself that you are accumulating merit in the process.

We have been talking about the Three Jewels: the Buddha, Dharma and  Sangha.
When you look at the Three Jewels from  the  perspective  of  the  order  of
generating them in your own mind, you first  have  to  generate  the  Dharma
Jewel in your mental continuum.  You  subsequently  become  the  Sangha  and
ultimately, you will progress to become a buddha. In terms of your  personal
progression, this is the order of how you  become  the  Buddha,  Dharma  and
Sangha. You have to thoroughly ascertain and understand this.

The actual refuge that protects you from the suffering of the  lower  realms
and the sufferings of cyclic existence is the Dharma Jewel. With  regard  to
the Dharma Jewel, we are primarily referring to  the  realisational  Dharma.
How does the realisational Dharma come into your mind? That  has  to  depend
on the scriptural Dharma. You first have to learn the scriptural Dharma  and
by putting it into practice, you actualise the realisational Dharma.  Simply
having some faith and belief in the scriptural  Dharma  is  not  sufficient.
You have to learn and understand the scriptural Dharma.

With regard to the Buddha, Dharma and  Sangha,  there  is  also  the  causal
refuge and the resultant refuge. The resultant refuge  refers  to  the  goal
that you want to achieve; to generate the Three Jewels in your own mind.  In
order to achieve that, you first have to learn and actualise the  Dharma  in
your heart.

You can see from this how important studying and reflecting are as they  are
the indispensable elements in your quest to actualise the Dharma.  You  have
to see for yourself why you have to learn and to study in order to  practise
the Dharma? You have to ascertain for yourself the need to study.  Once  you
have ascertained this, you should put in  as  much  effort  as  possible  to
continue learning.

Let us use the example of refuge and link it to your studies and  reflection
by looking at the refuge prayer that you usually recite: Sang gya  cho  dang
sog kyi chog nam la (I go for refuge until I am enlightened to  the  Buddha,
Dharma and Sangha).

After having studied a little the topic of refuge, when you think about  its
meaning as you recite this prayer, your studies will help  you  to  identify
correctly the objects to whom you are going for protection  and  refuge.  It
is insufficient to say the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha.  Due  to  having  done
some studies, you will have some idea in your heart of what is  the  Buddha,
what is the Dharma, and what is the Sangha. On the basis of that  knowledge,
as you reflect on this prayer during your recitation, perhaps, you  will  be
able to develop some special kind of  faith  in  and  devotion  towards  the
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. This is a  simple  example  of  what  can  happen
based on the little understanding of refuge you have gained so far.

In order for genuine refuge to arise in  your  heart,  two  causes  must  be
present: fear of the suffering of the lower realms combined with  the  faith
of conviction in the abilities of the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha  to  protect
you from that fear. In order to develop this  feeling  in  your  heart,  you
must first know what the two causes are. That comes from learning.

On that basis, you think about them and get some understanding. You have  to
understand what the sufferings of the lower realms are. If you  were  to  be
reborn there, how could you endure them? It  is  only  by  thinking  of  the
sufferings of the lower realms that you  can  develop  a  genuine  fear  and
worry for your future. Only then will you seek help and protection from  the
depths of your heart.

I am using the example of refuge to highlight the  huge  difference  between
having studied and done some reflection and not having done any  studies  or
reflection. When you have done some studying  and  some  reflection  on  the
meaning of refuge, when you recite the prayer, you will be able to at  least
identify correctly to whom you are going for refuge: the Buddha, Dharma  and
Sangha.

For someone who has a little knowledge or who has not studied,  that  person
may recite the prayer with faith but I  don’t  think  he  will  be  able  to
generate the same understanding and the faith and  devotion  of  the  person
who has studied the topic of refuge.

Of course, you have to understand that studying alone does  not  necessarily
mean that you will have stronger faith  compared  to  someone  who  has  not
studied. But the point is that you have to study and then  reflect  on  what
you have learnt. Only then will your refuge  become  stronger  than  someone
who has not studied or reflected  on  the  subject.   For  someone  who  has
merely studied the topic of refuge but not reflected on it, it  is  possible
that his refuge may be weaker than a person who has not studied at all.

There are some people who have studied a lot but they  don’t  seem  to  have
any faith in and devotion towards the Three Jewels. You can compare them  to
some elderly people who may  not  know  much,  but  they  show  unbelievable
devotion in the way they prostrate and make offerings to the Buddha,  Dharma
and Sangha.

You can see how  some  of  these  elderly  people  show  great  respect  and
devotion to Sangha members, the way they bow and pay respect. Some even  pay
homage at the feet of the  Sangha.  Yet  these  people  have  not  done  any
studies. The devotion of those people who have done a lot of studying  pales
in comparison to these elderly people. Forget about  asking  them  to  touch
the feet of a Sangha member. It is even difficult to ask them to  bow  to  a
Sangha member as a sign of respect.

My point  is  that  studying  is  important  but  studying  alone  does  not
necessarily mean that there is transformation. On the basis of learning  the
Dharma, you must reflect on it and gain  an  ascertainment  in  your  heart.
Only then will you be able to see transformation  in  your  mind.  You  will
change for the better. You will be able to quickly develop  the  experiences
and realisations of the path.

When you do what I have mentioned, only then will  the  benefits  of  having
gone for refuge as mentioned in the text happen.
         1  It is measure [/gauge] of being a Buddhist
         2  It is the basis of all vows
         3  The karmic obscurations accumulated previously are reduced and
         exhausted
         4  One accumulates vast merit
         5  One will not fall into the[?] bad migrations
         6  One will not be harmed by human and non-human obstacles
         7  One will attain everything one wishes for
         8  One will swiftly attain buddhahood (Page 76)


We have been looking at the general  or  common  precepts  that  you  should
undertake after having gone refuge to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha.

    2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-2        Common precepts [for all three objects of
    refuge]

         A  Remembering the differences [/specifics] and positive qualities
         of the three jewels and, due to that, going for refuge again and
         again
         B  Remembering their great kindness and, due to that, exerting
         oneself at all times to make offerings to [/honour] them and offer
         them even the first portion of one’s food and drink
         C  Remembering their great compassion and, due to that,
         establishing other migrating beings in such a mode [of behaviour]
         D  Whatever you do and whatever you need, worshiping the three
         jewels, then supplicating them and abandoning all other, worldly
         methods
         E  Aware of the benefits, going for refuge three times a day and
         three times at night
         F  Not giving up the three jewels for one’s life nor for a laugh
         and guarding against this (Page 74)


    2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-2A  Remembering the differences [/specifics] and
    positive qualities of the three jewels and, due to that, going for
    refuge again and again

There are 10 sub-points under this outline:

1. Constant offerings
2. The peculiarity that the collections are completed with little trouble
3. Impure offerings
4. The manner of respect when offering
5. The need to exert oneself in making offerings
   6. High status, paths, etc. are  attained  through  making  offerings  in
      that way
   7. How the size of offerings and so forth is a distinction to do with the
      mind
   8. How to train in upright[ness  with  regard  to]  offering  substances,
      following the masters of former times
   9. Refutation of the manners of speaking [to the  effect]  that  the  way
      Bodhisattvas make offerings,  having  gained  control  over   material
      things, is impure
10. How to make offerings with other vast things (Page 74 – 75)

         10 How to make offerings with other vast [/extensive] things (page
         75)

This outline explains what you should think and do to  make  your  offerings
extensive.  The way to do this is by adopting a wider perspective.
 • For example, when we make offerings to the Buddha, rather  than  thinking
   that we are making offerings to just one Buddha, we should think that  we
   are making offerings to the numberless buddhas in the ten directions.
 • In terms of duration, we can think that we are making such offerings  for
   the rest of our lives all the way up to enlightenment.
 • With regard to the number of offerings, rather than thinking that we  are
   offering only those items that are being  presented  physically,  we  can
   mentally multiply these offerings and think that we are making numberless
   offerings.
 • As regard the quality of the offerings,  we  should  think  that  we  are
   making offerings of the very best quality.
 • With regard to  the  attitude  that  we  should  adopt  when  making  the
   offerings, we should worship the Three Jewels with faith and devotion  in
   our hearts and make the offerings with a happy  enthusiastic  mind.  This
   will make a huge difference to the result.
 • At the end of  such  acts  of  worship,  we  should  dedicate  the  merit
   accumulated towards the achievement of full enlightenment.

The way to make our offerings extensive does not depend  on  how  physically
extensive our offerings may be. The main thing  is  to  make  our  offerings
extensive through the mind, by thinking in the way that  I  have  explained.
We need to accumulate merit but we also have to  be  skilled  in  doing  so,
e.g., by making our practice of offering extensive.

The result of making offerings over time is that our devotion will  increase
and more transformation will occur in our minds.  It  seems,  however,  that
most people are not like that. The more offerings they make over  time,  the
less enthusiastic they become. Their devotion  also  diminishes.  When  that
happens, this shows that that person does not understand the purpose  behind
making offerings and the way to make offerings. It may also  show  that  the
person is unable to correctly identify the objects of refuge.

Ultimately, it boils down to lack of faith. In our previous lessons  on  the
topic of guru devotion, we discussed how faith  is  the  forerunner  of  all
qualities. When you don’t have faith, this is what happens. It is  mentioned
in  the  Jewel  Garland,  “The  person  who  has  faith  becomes  a   stable
practitioner. The Dharma practice in his mind becomes stable.”

When the word, ‘refuge,’ is used, it refers to the faith  of  conviction  in
the Buddha,  Dharma  and  Sangha.  Once  we  have  attained  this  faith  of
conviction in the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, this is the  beginning  of  our
practice. When you have this genuine refuge, then  you  become  a  Buddhist.
All the other qualities will then follow. When  we  go  for  refuge  in  the
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, we will not fall into the  lower  realms  because
the process of closing the door to the lower realms has already begun.

    2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-2C  Remembering their great compassion and, due to that,
    establishing other beings in such a mode [of behaviour] (Page 76)

“Remembering  their  great  compassion”  may   not   have   been   correctly
translated. The idea here is that by thinking of  living  beings,  motivated
by great compassion and concern for them, you help them to practise  refuge.


In order to do this, you yourself must know the purpose of refuge. You  must
know the reason for seeking the help and protection of  the  Buddha,  Dharma
and Sangha. Knowing these reasons and then motivated by sincere concern  for
other living beings, you try to guide them to take refuge also.


    2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-2D  Whatever you do and whatever you need, worshiping
    the three jewels and supplicating them, abandoning all other, worldly
    methods (Page 76)

After having gone for refuge to the Buddha,  Dharma  and  Sangha,  the  main
practice is to lead our lives according to the laws of karma.  But  life  is
such that along the way we will meet with  problems  and  difficulties,  and
things may not turn out the way we want them to. We have to understand  that
this is due to our own karma. Nevertheless, if there is anything we need  to
accomplish, we should honour the  Three  Jewels  and  entrust  ourselves  to
them.

    2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-2E  Aware of the benefits, going for refuge three times
    a day and three times at night

         1  It is measure [/gauge] of being a Buddhist
         2  It is the basis of all vows
         3  The karmic obscurations accumulated previously are reduced and
         exhausted
         4  One accumulates vast merit
         5  One will not fall into the[?] bad migrations
         6  One will not be harmed by human and non-human obstacles
         7  One will attain everything one wishes for
         8  One will swiftly attain buddhahood (Page 76)

There are eight benefits of going for refuge

         1  It is the measure [/gauge] of being a Buddhist (Page 76)

We cannot really make this distinction by  looking  at  the  externals.  The
distinction is made internally. Depending on our mind-set,  when  we  uphold
the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha as our refuge single-pointedly in our  hearts,
then we are Buddhists. Otherwise, we are not.

         2  It is the basis of all vows (Page 76)

When we have genuine refuge, we will be considered  as  Buddhists.  We  then
become the suitable bases  to  receive  the  pratimoksha  vows,  bodhisattva
vows, and tantric vows. Without refuge and faith in our hearts, there is  no
way we can take and generate those vows in our minds.

         3  The obscurations accumulated previously are reduced and
         exhausted (Page 77)

With genuine refuge, we reduce  and  eliminate  our  previously  accumulated
karmic obstructions. There are accounts  of  how  people  in  the  past  had
prevented themselves from going to the lower realms  by  taking  refuge  and
how they are able to take rebirths  as  celestial  beings  or  worldly  gods
after having gone for refuge.

As mentioned earlier with regard to the  benefit  of  having  faith  in  the
Buddha, a person with simple devotion and real  faith  in  the  Buddha  will
accumulate more merit than someone who  makes  countless  offerings  over  a
long period of time. With such faith, we can accumulate powerful merit  that
can eliminate previously accumulated karmic obstructions.

         4  One accumulates vast merit (Page 77)

Just to give you an idea of the merit that you accumulate after having  gone
for refuge, the text quotes  Aryasura’s  Summary  of  the  Perfections  that
says:

         If the merit of refuge took shape
         These three realms would even be small as a container.
         Great oceans, foremost of water bodies
         Could not hold [/fathom] or measure it (Page 77).


         5  One will not fall into [?] bad migrations (Page 77)

When you have vast amounts of merit, then of course you will not  fall  into
the lower realms.

         6  Not being harmed by human and non-human obstacles (Page 77)

The reason we encounter obstacles or things that do  not  go  in  accordance
with our wishes is due to our lack of merit or our merit  not  being  strong
enough. When we have genuine refuge, we will have such a lot of  merit  that
humans and non-humans will not adversely affect us.

         7  One will attain everything one wishes for (Page 77)

When you have genuine refuge in your  heart,  you  will  accumulate  a  vast
amount of merit and then things will  go  your  way.  You  will  succeed  in
everything you do.

         8  One will swiftly attain buddhahood (Page 77)

With genuine refuge, you will accumulate a lot of merit.  This  creates  the
causes for you not to be born in a place where there is a  lack  of  Dharma.
Instead you will be born in a place with  both  the  internal  and  external
conditions that will enable you to practise the Dharma.  By  practising  the
Dharma, you will quickly achieve enlightenment.

These are the eight benefits of going for refuge to the Buddha,  Dharma  and
Sangha. We are advised to remember these benefits in our daily lives.  While
remembering these benefits, we should then go for refuge three times in  the
day and three times at night. When we know the benefits of going for  refuge
to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, we will collect  the  benefits  of  making
offerings, honouring, and worshipping the Three Jewels.  If  we  do  not  do
that, the opportunity will be wasted. So we  should  remember  the  benefits
and go for refuge three times in the day and three times at night.

    2B4B-2B1A-2A4A-2F  Not giving up the three jewels for one’s life nor
    for a laugh and guarding against this (Page 77)

All of us consider our lives and our bodies to be very precious and we do  a
lot to protect them. It is said that maintaining our  refuge  and  faith  in
the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha is even more important than that.

If we choose our lives and bodies over the Buddha,  Dharma  and  Sangha,  we
will not achieve any great purpose by forsaking  these  objects  of  refuge.
It says here that we are to maintain our refuge even  at  the  cost  of  our
lives. Why?

There is no doubt that we will  be  separated  from  this  life,  body,  and
possessions. If we give up the three jewels for their sake,  there  will  be
continuous suffering in all successive lives [to come], therefore we  should
vow not to abandon [our] refuge, come what may, and  not  even  utter  words
about [/of] giving up [our] refuge for a laugh.

    2B4B-2B1A-2A4B     Eliminating inaccuracies [with respect to the
    precepts of going for refuge]


         1  Refutation of that which is not a precept

Former masters stated a precept to the  effect  [/saying]  that  you  should
train in going for refuge to the Tathatgata of  whatever  direction  you  go
in, but I have not seen a source [for that] (Page 78).

When Lama Tsongkhapa says: “I have not seen a  source  [for  that],”  he  is
saying, “I have not seen a source that says that if you are heading  towards
the west, you should take refuge in the Buddha, Dharma and  Sangha  of  that
direction and if you are going towards  the  north,  then  you  should  take
refuge in the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha of that  direction.’  The  point  is
that it does not matter what direction you are heading towards,  you  should
just take refuge in the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha.

         2  The sources for the specific precepts

Thus the six common precepts [for all the objects of refuge] are  just  like
they appear in the Commentary on the Lamp on the Path. {98} The first  three
specific precepts are explained in the sutra collection, whereas the  latter
three appear in the Six Branches of Going for Refuge.

         3  The difference between degenerating and relinquishing [the
         precepts]

As for the way transgression against  these  precepts  becomes  a  cause  of
degenerating and relinquishing them, transgression of the rule not  to  give
up your  refuge  even  for  the  sake  of  your  life  actually  constitutes
relinquishing it. Similarly, even if you do not give up  the  three  jewels,
but dualistically uphold the three –  teachers  and  so  forth  –  that  are
incompatible with them, you trangress the precept of not advocating  another
refuge. By not having confidence in the refuge you  also  relinquish  it.  I
think that, if these do not  occur,  it  is  a  mere  transgression  of  the
precepts but not a cause for relinquishing them (Page 78).

The above paragraph is explaining the difference when we forsake our  refuge
as opposed to degenerating it. We lose our refuge  when  we  contravene  the
sixth general precept, i.e., to maintain our  refuge  and  not  forsake  the
Three Jewels even in jest or at the cost of our lives. One cause  of  losing
our refuge is to forsake the Three Jewels.

The other cause of losing our refuge is when we hold the Buddha, Dharma  and
Sangha as our ultimate refuge but, at the same time,  we  are  also  holding
another entity as our ultimate refuge. When we are doing this, it  means  we
have doubt and are  not  entrusting  ourselves  completely  to  the  Buddha,
Dharma and Sangha.

When we go against the specific and common precepts that are stated  in  the
text, this will only constitute a contravention but will not constitute  the
forsaking of refuge as a whole.  For example, if you  forget  to  offer  the
first portion of your food  and  drink  to  the  Three  Jewels,  that  is  a
contravention of the precepts but  it  will  not  cause  you  to  lose  your
refuge.
Refuge is the single-pointed faith of conviction in the Buddha,  Dharma  and
Sangha. When  this  faith  of  conviction  is  weakened,  your  refuge  will
degenerate. When you lose this single-pointed faith  of  conviction  in  the
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, basically you lose your refuge.

         4  The advice not to transgress the precepts because of how great
         the benefits are: being the entrance gate to the teachings etc.

Thus going for refuge is the great entry gate to the Buddha’s teachings.  If
your going for refuge does not consist in mere words, you  will  be  relying
on a superior [/eminent] power.  Therefore  you  will  not  be  thwarted  by
external or internal obstacles, and the various qualities  will  come  about
easily and hardly deteriorate, whereby they will increase more and more.  So
it is vital that you uphold [your] refuge by means of being mindful  of  the
fear and the positive qualities explained above, and  that  you  put  effort
into not transgressing its precepts (Page 78).

This paragraph summarises all the important points that we have  covered  so
far:
1. We should develop the fear of suffering. In this context, it is the  fear
of the sufferings of the lower realms.
2. We should recall the good qualities of the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha.

With these two causes, we single-pointedly entrust ourselves to the  Buddha,
Dharma and Sangha. After having done that, we should make an effort to  live
by these refuge guidelines.

As mentioned in the text, there are so many benefits to  going  for  refuge.
One of the benefits is that we will not fall into the lower realms. This  is
something we have to think about for ourselves. We have  to  understand  why
we need to go for refuge.

You have to read the text and think, “How  does  taking  refuge  protect  me
from the sufferings of the lower realms?” After having  read  the  text  and
thinking about it, when you develop the ascertainment in your heart that  it
is so, you would have fulfilled the purpose of studying this topic.

Question: I heard that the Buddha actually manifests in different  forms  to
teach disciples of different inclinations. For Buddhists,  he  manifests  as
the Buddha. For those who are disinclined towards Buddhism, he manifests  in
other forms such as Jesus Christ who taught Christianity, or in the form  of
other religious leaders. The main purpose  is  to  teach  them  to  practise
ethics.

If this is the case, do their practices, at least their practice of  ethics,
constitute a Buddhist path? Is it all right to take refuge in Jesus?

Answer: The Buddha does manifest in various forms to work  for  the  benefit
of sentient beings. What if we view the object of refuge of other  religious
traditions as being the manifestations of Buddha? With that  view  in  mind,
it should not be any problem if we entrust ourselves to the Buddha and  take
refuge.

Question: So then we can become Christians?

Answer: You are not regarding Jesus as Jesus. You are viewing Jesus  as  the
manifestation of the Buddha so you are still taking ultimate refuge  in  the
Buddha. It is different from what we discussed earlier where we forsake  our
refuge by going for refuge to another entity other than the Buddha,  Dharma,
and Sangha. If you do that, you will lose  your  refuge.  But  here,  taking
refuge by viewing Jesus as the manifestation of Buddha,  i.e.,  relating  to
that entity as the Buddha, this is not forsaking your refuge.

Question: Is it true that as a Buddhist, we should not convert  others  from
their own religions?

Answer: Life is such that we cannot force someone to do  something  that  he
doesn’t want to do. But  if  the  other  party  has  the  interest  and  the
conditions are suitable, you can encourage  and  help  him.  If  he  is  not
willing, then it is not going to work.

As mentioned in the precepts, we should consider them  with  compassion.  If
the situation is right, we can introduce them to the practice of refuge  and
encourage them to take refuge. Basically, we do not force.

Question: The Buddha said that he does not wash away our  sins  with  water.
However, Amitabha Buddha says that whoever hears his name  at  the  time  of
death will be reborn in his Pure Land. How can this  be  possible  when  the
dying person has not prayed to Buddha, made  any  offerings,  or  taken  any
refuge? From his side, he has not created any cause for the result to  ripen
in being born in the Pure Land.

Answer: The Buddha possesses inconceivable qualities. When we  look  at  the
qualities of his exalted body, exalted speech, and exalted mind,  they  just
cannot  fit  our  minds.  Of  course  whatever  the  Buddha  says  is   also
inconceivable and has benefits as well. It is  possible  that  the  Buddha’s
speech has that inconceivable power.

Generally speaking, from the Buddha’s own side, he  possesses  inconceivable
and unbelievable qualities of exalted  body,  speech,  and  mind.  From  the
Buddha’s own side, hearing the Buddha’s name has inconceivable benefits.

But when we think about this, it takes two hands to clap. If the person  did
not do anything from his own side and does not even have  a  little  bit  of
faith, to say then that everything depends on the Buddha,  i.e.  the  Buddha
alone can do everything, I think that is difficult  to  explain,  especially
when we look at it from the perspective of the entire Buddhadharma.  It  can
be very difficult to explain and believe when you  say  that  everything  is
from the side of the Buddha.

As it takes two hands to clap, to say that one can just go to the Pure  Land
by hearing Amitabha Buddha’s name  and  his  mantra  without  having  to  do
anything from one’s own side and with no cause, I personally think  that  is
difficult. Of course, this is an extremely hidden phenomenon.

It is stated in the teachings that in order  to  go  to  the  Pure  Land  of
Amitabha Buddha, you must have three causes:
   1. You must have irreversible faith.
   2. You must repeatedly bring to mind the qualities of the Pure Land.
   3. You must make single-pointed requests.
Only when these three causes come together, then you stand a good chance  of
going to the Pure Land. When these three conditions  are  present,  we  then
can explain and justify the result because when the  three  conditions  come
together, you are accumulating merit and you  are  purifying  your  mind  of
obscurations.

Having said that, we cannot deny that there  is  benefit  in  promoting  the
benefits of reciting the mantra of Amitabha Buddha. When we talk about  such
things, it interests many people and they begin to generate some belief  and
start to recite the mantra. When they recite the mantra of Amitabha  Buddha,
definitely they will get some benefit. Does it mean that  just  by  reciting
the mantra alone, one will go to the Pure Land? That is something  to  think
about and to analyse further.

Question: This is with  regard  to  the  benefit  of  being  included  among
Buddhists. I can understand if you are  a  Buddhist  with  relation  to  the
other seven benefits, e.g., being a Buddhist is a basis for  all  vows.  But
just being included amongst Buddhists, that being a  benefit  on  its  own…A
non-Buddhist may say, “So what.”

Khen Rinpoche: Does anyone have the answer? Anyone can answer this.
I don’t know how to answer this.

Student: I am not sure if my question is clear.

Khen Rinpoche: I got your question but I didn’t get my answer!


Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng
Edited by Cecilia Tsong
Checked by Shirley Soh



