Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L28 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.121637
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


   Lesson No: 28                    Date: 4th October 2011


It is said in a sutra that the merit from seeing  any  representation  of  a
buddha, be it a statue or a drawing or  even  hearing  the  word,  ‘Buddha,’
exceeds the merit of making offerings of divine  garments  for  millions  of
eons.

If this is so, then it goes without saying that those who, out  of  devotion
to the Buddha, put their palms together, pay homage to  the  Buddha,  recite
the praises of the Buddha, or make offerings to  the  Buddha,  will  acquire
even more merit.

From this quotation of a sutra, you can  understand  the  benefits  you  get
from coming to the centre for classes. You should never  think  that  coming
to the centre is a waste of time. Just by coming to the centre for  classes,
you come into contact with numerous representations and holy images  of  the
Buddha’s exalted body, speech and mind. When you come  to  class,  you  hear
the Buddha’s teachings. So can you imagine how much merit you accumulate  by
seeing these holy objects and by hearing the Buddha’s teachings?

When you listen to the Buddha’s teachings, positive imprints  will  be  left
on your mental continuum. Before class, we usually recite  prayers  such  as
the prayer of going for refuge and generating  bodhicitta.  Whenever  we  do
that, we get immeasurable benefit. We also make offerings to the buddhas.

You have to understand the benefits  you  get  just  by  stepping  into  the
centre. Keeping these benefits in  mind,  then  as  much  as  possible,  you
should continue  to  come  to  the  centre  to  continue  your  studies  and
learning. You have to realise for yourself the benefits you  will  get  just
by coming to the centre. Sometimes, when you are not mindful of  this  fact,
perhaps it is possible you may wonder why you are  at  the  centre,  wasting
your time. You may feel this way.  So  it  is  important  that  you  do  not
entertain such thoughts.

Wherever you are, when you take your first step in heading for  the  centre,
you should set the motivation that you are coming here to learn the  Dharma,
the Buddha’s  teachings.  When  you  set  off  on  your  journey  with  that
motivation,  you  already  accumulate  virtue  and  your   merit   will   be
commensurate with each and every single step you take  on  your  journey  to
the centre.

In the sutras, the Buddha mentioned the benefits that one will get  just  by
seeing  the  various  holy  objects  and  coming  into  contact   with   the
representations of the Buddha’s exalted body, exalted  speech,  and  exalted
mind. Therefore from this viewpoint, as much as possible,  you  must  remind
yourself that you must definitely come here.

If just seeing the representations of the Buddha is so beneficial,  then  it
hardly seems necessary to talk about the benefit and  the  amount  of  merit
you stand to gain from listening to, studying,  and  learning  the  Buddha’s
teachings. The purpose of accumulating  merit  is  for  us  to  develop  the
experiences and realisations of the path  as  mentioned  in  the  teachings.
There is really no better way to  develop  these  positive  experiences  and
realisations in our minds other than through learning and  discovering  what
the Buddha’s teachings are.

Your purpose for coming  here  is  to  learn  and  study.  Therefore  it  is
important that you read the text. It does not matter whether you  understand
what you are reading. If you can understand what you are reading, of  course
that is even better.

But definitely just reading the course material generates merit. Anyway  you
all accept that there is merit in reciting sutras such as the  Golden  Light
Sutra even though you may not fully understand its meaning.  If that is  the
case, then the benefit you get from reading the course text, even if it  may
not be more meritorious than reciting a sutra, at the very least,  you  will
get some merit.

In fact, the merit may actually be more (than sutra recitation) because  you
are studying the Buddha’s teachings. Since that is the case,  therefore  you
have to read the text.

On an individual level, the main thing we have to do is to try our best  and
put in the effort. In order to learn something, many factors  have  to  come
together. So from our side, we should read  the  text.  On  that  basis,  we
should think about what we  have  read,  reflect  on  it,  discuss  it  with
others, and so forth.

We completed the section on refuge. Are  there  any  questions?  Whenever  I
give you the opportunity to ask questions, I am not asking you to  think  of
a question now. The questions should be those that you have  really  thought
about before coming to class. In order to generate such questions, you  must
develop the habit of continuously analysing  and  thinking  about  what  you
have read. You may have doubts and qualms. Then when you ask your  question,
your doubts and qualms will be eliminated through  the  ensuing  discussion.
This is one of the best ways to learn.

A question was raised in the previous lesson regarding the benefit of  being
included amongst Buddhists once you have taken refuge in the Buddha,  Dharma
and Sangha. How is that a benefit? I don’t  really  have  an  answer  but  I
guess it is like going to a restaurant and getting a membership or VIP  card
that gives you some benefits.

Question: Can we say  that  since  only  the  Buddha’s  teachings  have  the
features of the Four Seals, it is the highest refuge and therefore it is  of
great benefit to be amongst the ranks of Buddhists?

Answer: Of course the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha are  the  best  and  highest
objects of refuge, but there are different levels in terms of  the  attitude
with which you go for refuge: there is the refuge of a  person  with  small,
medium, or great capacity.

Question: In relation to the question on the benefit  of  taking  refuge  in
the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha as being  included  among  Buddhists,  when  I
read the Lam-Rim Chenmo, the explanation there seems to imply  that  one  is
included among the Buddhists when you are someone  who  knows  how  to  take
refuge and does not give up your refuge. Is this  a  more  specific  way  of
explaining that benefit?

Answer: There is only one way of becoming a Buddhist.  Calling  a  person  a
Buddhist does not make him a Buddhist. A Buddhist is someone  who  goes  for
refuge and who must possess the causes of refuge in his mind.  If  you  have
the causes of refuge in your mind and you  go  for  refuge  in  the  Buddha,
Dharma and Sangha, then you are included  among  Buddhists.  Otherwise,  one
can call oneself a Buddhist but by definition one is still not a Buddhist.

Question: The text says that you should go for refuge  three  times  in  the
day and three times at night. Does this means reciting three times, “I  take
refuge in the Buddha, I take refuge in the Dharma,  I  take  refuge  in  the
Sangha” in the day and at night?

Answer: Yes.

Question: You mentioned having the causes of refuge in your mind.  What  are
the causes of refuge?

Answer: The two causes for going for refuge are:
   1. The genuine fear of the sufferings of the lower realms.
   2. The faith of conviction in the Three Jewels’ abilities to protect  you
      from that fear.

    2B4B-2B1A-2B Generating the faith of conviction in karma and its
    results

         A  Considering karma and its results in general
         B  Considering karma and its results in particular
         C  Having considered them[/After these considerations], how to
         engage [in virtuous actions] and counteract [/oppose] [the non-
         virtuous]


    2B4B-2B1A-2B1      Considering karma and its results in general

         A  The actual way to consider karma and its results in general
         B  Considering the specific divisions


    2B4B-2B1A-2B1A     The actual way to consider karma and its results in
    general

         1  How karma is certain
         2  The great increase of karma
         3  You do not meet with karma you have not created
         4  Karma you have created does not dissipate


    2B4B-2B1A-2B1A-1        How karma is certain

In the Precious Garland it says:

         From non-virtuous deeds: all suffering;
         Likewise all the bad migrations.
         From virtuous deeds: all happy realms –
         Happiness in all rebirths (Pages 78–79).

All the pleasures and happiness that we experience in our  mental  continua,
starting from the  smallest  pleasures  and  slightest  happiness,  are  the
result of virtue. It is  impossible  for  them  to  arise  from  non-virtue.
Conversely, all the sufferings and unhappiness that  we  experience  in  our
mental  continua,  starting  from  the  smallest  suffering  and   slightest
unhappiness, arise only from non-virtue. This is how karma is certain.

All the happiness and sufferings that we experience:
   • do not arise without a cause, i.e., they arise from causes.
   • are not created by someone else.
   • do not arise from discordant causes.
   • can only arise from concordant causes.
Happiness can only arise from virtue. From the concordant  cause  of  virtue
comes the concordant result, happiness. From the concordant  cause  of  non-
virtue comes the concordant result, suffering. By thinking  about  this,  we
have to develop the conviction that all the suffering and happy  experiences
we undergo in life can only arise from their own causes.

Developing this conviction that karma, in terms of how certain actions  lead
to certain results, is called the correct view. In  this  context,  when  we
refer to the correct view,  we  are  referring  to  the  conviction  in  the
workings of karma; in this case, that karma is definite.

When we manage to develop this correct view, we would then  have  the  basis
for all our wholesome activities and for us to engage in virtue.  With  this
faith of conviction in karma, we will establish the very foundation for  all
the happiness and enjoyments to come in the future.  Therefore  we  have  to
develop the understanding of the  certainty  of  karma:  from  virtue  comes
happiness and  from  non-virtue  comes  suffering.  We  should  develop  the
decisive conclusion in our hearts, “This is so,”  and  with  this  faith  of
conviction in karma should come the decision, “I must engage in  virtue  and
I must abandon non-virtue.”  We  as  individuals  have  to  arrive  at  that
decision in our minds.

    2B4B-2B1A-2B1A-2        The great increase of karma

In the Udanavarga[1] [/Collections of spezial statements] it says:

         Even committing a small negativity,
         Will effectuate great fear and
         Great disaster in future worlds.
         Like poison seeping through to the core (Page 79)[/marrow].

We can see by way of this example how karma increases. Even if  we  were  to
ingest just a small amount of poison, once it enters our  body  systems,  it
will spread and cause us suffering, and eventually kill us.  Likewise  here,
even when we commit a small non-virtue, when it increases, it will  lead  to
our downfall.

The analogy of an external phenomenon  is  used  here  to  show  how  things
magnify and  increase.  Amongst  external  phenomena,  there  is  no  better
example than poison. Even a small amount of poison can lead to a  disastrous
result. It can kill you. It is said that the workings of karma within us  is
even greater than that, i.e., the increasing effect of  an  action  is  much
greater than any external phenomenon.

         Even committing a little merit,
         In future worlds will bring great happiness,
         Causing greatly meaningful things,
         Like grains that ripen to excellence (Page 79) [?].

The next verse from the Udanavarga uses the analogy of how  one  can  get  a
bountiful harvest just from sowing a  few  grains.  Likewise  from  a  small
virtuous action, one can experience happiness and great positive results.

By depending on these worldly examples, you  should  strive  to  develop  an
understanding  of  how  karma  increases.  Once  you  have   developed   the
conviction in this, then you need to make the decision, “Even  if  it  is  a
very small virtue, I must engage in it. Even if it  is  a  very  small  non-
virtue, I must strive to abandon it.”

It is difficult to fully understand how karma magnifies and  increases.  The
point is by thinking about these  examples,  we  try  to  abandon  all  non-
virtues and accumulate even very small virtues.

How does karma increase? In the case  of  non-virtue,  we  possess  all  the
causes  for  enhancing  and  fertilising  non-virtue  in  the  form  of  our
afflictions such as attachment and anger.  They  are  like  the  fertilisers
that fuel the growth of the seeds of  non-virtues.  They  continuously  make
these seeds of non-virtue that we have already planted become  stronger  and
stronger.

We can see this from our own daily experiences.  Due  to  a  small  specific
condition, we may get upset with a particular individual.  Even  though  the
event is already over, yet when  we  come  into  contact  with  that  person
again, either by seeing  or  hearing  about  that  person,  somehow  we  are
reminded of the unhappiness we have felt and  the  faults  we  see  in  that
person. All these things come to mind and we start to think about  them.  As
anger is always there within us,  this  increases  whatever  unhappiness  we
have with that person, like adding fuel to fire.

But in fact, right from the  very  beginning,  it  was  just  a  very  small
condition that caused us to be upset with that person.  From  this,  we  can
see that even a small moment  of  anger,  when  left  unattended,  can  grow
stronger and stronger. If we had done something to stop it  right  from  the
beginning, perhaps it will not  grow  at  all.  However,  when  it  is  left
unattended, it starts to grow. This causes more unhappiness to both  oneself
and others.

In the case of non-virtue, when you think about it  in  this  way,  you  can
perhaps see how non-virtue magnifies because the  causes  for  fuelling  the
growth of non-virtue, i.e., our afflictions such as  anger  and  attachment,
are always there in our minds. When you think along  these  lines,  you  can
see how non-virtue increases; how something small can  grow  into  something
big, just like ingesting a small  amount  of  poison  can  actually  kill  a
person. With this understanding, as much as possible, try  to  abandon  even
the smallest non-virtue.

The opposite of non-virtue is virtue. As virtue is karma,  it  increases  as
well. We have to see how that actually works. In  the  case  of  non-virtue,
the cause for fuelling non-virtue is there in the mind. But for all  of  us,
the cause for fuelling virtue is hardly there.

It is a completely different case if you are already on  the  path,  if  you
have very good refuge in your mind, or  already  have  bodhicitta.  Then  of
course, it is quite easy to explain how the virtue in  the  mental  continua
of such people can increase. But for us, how do we explain that  the  virtue
in our minds can actually increase? It is quite  difficult  to  explain  how
the virtue in our mental continua can increase on  its  own  accord  without
any effort from our side. You have to think about this. Even if  you  cannot
figure out how karma increases when it comes to virtue, you  still  have  to
engage in virtue, no matter how small it may be.  If  you  feel  that  small
virtues have little effect,  then  you  need  to  engage  in  more  virtuous
actions and more powerful virtue.

We have to think about how karma magnifies and increases. When we use  these
worldly examples given in the text, then there is something to think  about.


    2B4B-2B1A-2B1A-3        You do not meet with karma you have not created

Third: {100} If you have not accumulated the  karma  that  will  become  the
cause for experiencing happiness or suffering,  you  will  never  experience
the happiness or suffering that is its result. Also,  those  who  enjoy  the
effects of the Teacher’s accumulation  of  an  incalculable  collection  [of
merits], do not need to accumulate all its causes,  however,  they  need  to
accumulate part of them (Pages 79 – 80).

When we do not accumulate the  causes  to  experience  either  happiness  or
suffering, there is no way we will experience such effects, be it  happiness
or suffering. In terms of enjoying and  experiencing  the  benefits  of  the
Buddha’s  accumulation  of  merit  from  our  own  side,  we  also  need  to
accumulate the cause to enjoy that merit.

From the Buddha’s own side, he has his own pure body, speech and  mind.  The
buddhas do give teachings and have established their  own  pure  lands,  but
the mere fact that these pure lands exist does  not  necessarily  mean  that
everyone will enjoy them. We must also  have  created  and  accumulated  the
causes, i.e., the merit and virtue from our side to be  able  to  experience
them. I believe this is the explanation for:  “Also,  those  who  enjoy  the
effects of the Teacher’s accumulation  of  an  incalculable  collection  [of
merits], do not need to accumulate all its causes,  however,  they  need  to
accumulate part of them.”


    2B4B-2B1A-2B1A-4        Karma you have created does not dissipate (Page
    80)

The King of Concentration Sutra states:

         Plus you cannot but touch your deeds,
         What others did you will not feel (Page 80).

And from the Foundation of [Vinaya] Scriptures[2]:

         Karmas do not go to waste
         Even in a hundred eons
         When they find the collection [of conditions] and time,
                  They will become effects for beings.

Once a non-virtue is accumulated and when one  does  not  purify  that  non-
virtue, for example through confession, even a hundred eons later, that non-
virtue will still exist and not disappear. When it ripens,  it  will  result
in suffering.

In the case of virtue, if  it  has  not  been  weakened  by  or  degenerated
through other causes, that virtue will give rise to its  effect,  happiness,
even after a very long period of time.

These are the general characteristics of karma. You have to  remember  these
four points:
1. The certainty of karma.
2. The magnification of karma.
3. You will not experience the effects of actions that you have not done.
4. The actions you have done do not perish.

By  thinking  of  the  third  and  fourth  characteristics  of  karma:  “Not
experiencing the effects of  actions  that  you  have  not  done”  and  “The
actions you have done do not  perish,”  what  kind  of  decision  should  we
arrive at? We have to purify non-virtue through confession. With respect  to
the virtue that we have already accumulated, we have  to  try  our  best  to
ensure that they do not degenerate or get destroyed  by  anger.   We  should
adopt correctly what needs to be adopted and  we  should  abandon  correctly
what needs to be abandoned.

The next section is the reflection in detail on karma and its effects.  This
is a discussion of the ten non-virtues. Please read up.




Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng
Edited by Cecilia Tsong
Checked by Shirley Soh


-----------------------
[1] This text is also known as the Collection of Indicative Verses.
[2] This text is also known as the Bases of Discipline.

