Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L13 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.191791
================================================================================



Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi

Root text: The Middle Length Lam-Rim by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by  Trijiang  Rinpoche  are
in small lettertype, to be distinguished from Lama Tsongkhapa’s own  outline
that is in larger lettertype.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


Lesson No: 13                          Date: 28th July 2011



    2B4A-1B6     Summary of the meaning of these [points]

         A  The importance of proper reliance on the root of perpetual
         striving

Sixth: That being so, the instructions widely  known  as  Guru  Yoga  should
also be understood according to what has been explained before. It will  not
be enough to do the visualisation in just one  meditation  session,  though.
When you do one Dharma practice from the bottom of your  heart,  you  should
long rely on a spiritual teacher who guides  you  unmistakenly.  As  Chekawa
also said about that time span: “when you rely on  a  guru,  there  will  be
doubtful questions whether to give up[1]”.  Accordingly,  since  there  will
only be loss without profit if you do not  know  how  to  rely,  it  becomes
evident that the cycles of teachings about relying on  a  spiritual  teacher
are more important than any other ones and the root  of  perpetual  striving
(Page 28).

In general, the word ‘yoga’ in guru yoga refers  to  training,  just  as  in
physical yoga, you train your body to become flexible.  In  the  context  of
guru yoga, you train the mind, focusing on the guru,  with  the  purpose  of
transforming the mind into something positive,  so  that  you  are  able  to
develop faith in your guru.

As discussed before, first, you must look for  a  qualified  teacher.  After
you have found a qualified teacher and have taken  him  as  your  guru,  you
must rely on that guru correctly in thought and  in  action.  When  you  are
able to rely on that guru correctly in thought and in action, then  that  is
guru yoga.

Sometimes, you may think that practising guru yoga means meditating  on  the
guru for one or two sessions. That is not the meaning  of  guru  yoga.  Guru
yoga means developing the idea, from your side, looking at your own guru  as
a buddha. You look at the guru as a buddha in order to stop  the  conception
of faults. You then reflect on  the  qualities  of  the  guru  in  order  to
develop faith and reflect on his kindness in order to generate  respect.  In
that process, you develop a single-pointed  faith  in  your  guru.  That  is
known as guru yoga.

To be able to see the guru as  a  buddha  is  really  a  difficult  practice
because it requires the stopping  of  the  conception  of  faults.  It  also
requires constantly remembering or focusing on the qualities. But,  as  much
as possible, you should stop the conception of faults in the guru and  think
about his qualities. That is achievable, but it is very  challenging  to  be
able to see the guru as a buddha.

It becomes extremely important to constantly think about the  benefits  that
you stand to gain when you rely correctly  in  thought  and  action  on  the
guru. It also becomes extremely important to constantly  analyse  and  think
about the drawbacks and the faults of not relying correctly in  thought  and
action on the guru.

If you have a strong interest in the Dharma, then you have  to  rely  on  an
unmistaken qualified teacher and you have to do so for a long  time.  During
that long period of time, as you become closer to your teacher  and  because
of you seeing faults in him, somehow, that can make you give him up as  your
guru.

When you are not looking for that kind of long-term relationship,  then  for
just a short time, maybe one or two days, from your  side,  the  guru  looks
magnificent! Then, there is no real danger for this to happen  as  there  is
no opportunity for you to see faults. In that case, you  will  not  give  up
the teacher, but you will not have any real faith in the teacher either.

In order to develop faith and trust in the teacher, first you  need  to  see
the qualities of that person. In order to see the qualities of the  teacher,
you must have access to him and observe him for a while. Only then will  you
see more qualities. When you don’t have that kind of contact, you  will  not
see the qualities. When you do not see the qualities, how will you  be  able
to develop any kind of real faith in that teacher?   That  is  why  it  says
here that when you rely on the teacher  for  a  short  time,  you  will  not
really have any kind of faith in him.

In  my  own  case,  I  had  different  teachers:  teachers   who   gave   me
empowerments, teachers who guided me through my  studies  and  teachers  who
taught me on a daily basis, and so forth. When I think about it, there  were
teachers who had guided and trained me from day one  when  I  did  not  know
anything.

I had close contacts with those teachers on a daily basis, when  I  attended
classes. When I think about my own situation and what I  had  gone  through,
whatever small quality I may have is due mainly to  the  kindness  of  those
teachers with whom I had close daily contact and who guided me  through  the
different classes. I see the teachers who have helped and  guided  me  on  a
daily basis, over a very long period of time, as most kind. In  my  case,  I
think the reason why I am able to have some understanding of the Dharma  and
am able to share it with others is due  solely  to  the  kindness  of  these
personal teachers of mine.

Of  course,  I  also  had  other  gurus  who  gave  me  oral  transmissions,
commentaries, empowerments and so forth. I am not saying that they were  not
kind to me. Because of various reasons, they did benefit my mind.

But, when I think about the whole situation in detail,  personally,  I  feel
that the teachers with whom I had close contact, on a daily  basis,  over  a
long  period  of  time,  and  who  have  guided  me  through  the  different
philosophical classes, as being the most kind. Because  of  their  kindness,
naturally, my faith in them is also stronger and I feel closer to them.

I think I told this story before. One day, I went to see  my  teacher  as  I
wanted to offer him something. It  happened  that,  at  that  time,  he  was
seeing some other people. So I waited outside  my  teacher’s  room  for  the
guests to leave. I think I waited for almost one hour. I didn’t really  want
to go in because I thought I might disturb them.

Somehow, my teacher found out that I was there and he asked me  to  go  into
the room. The moment I went into the room, I was scolded. My  teacher  said,
“What are you doing out there? Why don’t you just come in?  Are  you  trying
to listen to my secret conversation?”

My teacher is a no-nonsense person. When he gets upset,  he  will  tell  you
straight to your face. I explained to him that I did not go  into  his  room
because there were people in the room and I wasn’t listening to  his  secret
conversation. Then I gave whatever offerings I had intended to pass  to  him
and left. At the same time, I was feeling upset.

It was basically a difference in perception of what had  happened.  From  my
side, I didn’t feel I did anything wrong. My reason was  I  just  wanted  to
make an offering to my teacher and I had no intention of  listening  to  his
conversation. But my teacher  perceived  it  differently.  He  was  probably
wondering why I did not just  go  straight  in  instead  of  hanging  around
outside his room.

Isn’t this the case for all of us? We all think that our truth is the  truth
and we hold on to it very, very strongly, thinking, “I am not wrong.”

I had no intention or any interest in  listening  to  what  my  teacher  was
saying. All I wanted was to wait for his guests to  leave.  When  I  thought
about it, that was the truth. That was the reality. But the  fact  is  that,
even if it is the truth, that truth or reality can upset us at times.

When I went back to my room, I was pretty upset and was  wondering  what  to
do next. I thought about it. If, at that time, I had  decided  to  stop  the
relationship, that would have meant a permanent end  to  that  relationship.
That means I would have to look for another teacher.
Anyway, I don’t know what happened. I decided to take out whatever  money  I
had and offer it to my teacher. I bought quite a  lot  of  things,  such  as
fruits and so on.  Then I went to see my teacher in the evening and  offered
them to him, but I did not talk about the whole  incident.  I  talked  about
something else.

Sometimes, we think the truth is on our side  but,  nevertheless,  it  still
makes us upset or angry. Isn’t that so? It happened in my case.

It only happened once. Somehow, that situation was  pacified.  It  was  just
one incident. Subsequently, everything was fine. I was  able  to  finish  my
studies and now, I have some understanding of the Dharma.

When I think about it, I can see that it is really due to  the  kindness  of
my teacher. It is also an example of how, even by holding on to  the  truth,
you can still feel upset. When  you  are  upset,  then  you  will  start  to
conceive faults in the teacher. At that time, there  is  a  real  danger  of
severing the relationship with the teacher. You may give up.  So,  at  those
times, you must really know how to think and how to analyse  the  situation.
When you give up on your teacher, you will be the one to lose out. You  will
suffer a great loss, especially when you give up  a  qualified  teacher.  In
fact, you will suffer the loss from life to life.

At that time, I did think about who was going to be the one  who  will  lose
out. So, with that understanding, I went back to see my teacher again.

Yes, it is very difficult and it is extremely challenging to be able to  see
the guru as a buddha. But, as much as possible, you have to put effort  into
this practice. To be able to have guru devotion, i.e. seeing your guru as  a
buddha, is extremely difficult and challenging.

But when you have that  realisation  then,  of  course,  everything  becomes
easy. When you are really able  to  conceive  of  your  guru  as  a  buddha,
nothing will affect you even when your guru accuses you or scolds  you.  You
will have no problems with this. It will  be  like  looking  at  a  wrathful
deity. A wrathful deity is supposed to be terrifying  and  scary,  but  when
you know that he is a buddha, you will not be scared. You will have no  fear
at all. You may even think that  the  wrathful  deity  is  better  than  the
peaceful looking buddha, with your faith  in  the  power  of  this  wrathful
deity.

Lama Tsongkhapa gave  all  this  wonderful  advice  on  the  topic  of  guru
devotion:
 • The first thing is to find a qualified teacher.
 • After you have relied on him as your guru,  you  then  have  to  generate
   faith and respect.
 • You have to rely on that guru for a long time.
 • When the conception of faults in that guru arises, you have to put a stop
   to it.

As I have mentioned before:
   • Even if the buddhas were to appear before you in  the  aspect  of  the
     sambhogakaya, the complete enjoyment body, you will not be able to see
     them because only  the  bodhisattvas  have  the  fortune  to  directly
     perceive the buddhas in that aspect.
   • The dharmakaya, the truth body of  a  buddha,  can  only  be  directly
     perceived by another buddha, so you won’t have the fortune to see that
     either.
   • Even if the buddhas manifested in the form  of  the  nirmanakaya,  the
     supreme emanation body, I  guess  you  would  still  not  be  able  to
     perceive them in that aspect, because you need to have pure  karma  to
     be able to see the supreme emanation body.

The Buddha mentioned in different sutras that he would come in the  form  of
a teacher and so forth, in order to benefit sentient  beings.  If  what  the
Buddha said is true and he is working for you right now, then when you  look
in your own life, where is the Buddha? Probably, you will have to  say  that
he has to be your guru. By thinking along this line of reasoning, then  your
mind will move closer to the idea that the guru is the Buddha.

As I mentioned before, even if all the  buddhas  and  bodhisattvas  were  to
appear in front of you right now, they would not  be  able  to  do  anything
more or anything higher than what your teachers  had  already  done  or  are
doing for you right now. Do you agree? When you understand  this,  then  you
will see how kind the guru is, the one who shows you, without mistake,  what
to adopt and what to abandon.

Most of us claim to have faith in the guru. You  may  have  some  faith  but
when do you get upset or angry with the guru? For most people, most  of  the
time, the anger towards and displeasure or unhappiness with the  guru  arise
when the precious “I” or self  is  hurt.  When  the  guru  does  not  behave
according to your expectations or does not do what you want, you  are  upset
and lose faith in your guru.

On the one hand, you say you have faith in the guru, but,  in  reality,  you
want to control him. The guru has to do what you want,  right?  In  reality,
what you actually want is to become the guru’s guru!

Khen Rinpoche: You want to be higher than the guru.

When you analyse  and  really  think  about  this,  everyone  has  the  same
problem. When the precious “I” or self is upset or hurt,  because  the  guru
doesn’t do what you want or doesn’t fulfil your expectations, that  is  when
you suddenly lose faith.

Let’s say, in the context  of  the  teachings,  sometimes,  you  may  think,
“Perhaps, my teacher should not be  talking  about  this  now.  Perhaps,  he
should be talking about something else or he should be  talking  about  this
from a different angle and present it in  a  slightly  different  way.”  You
want the guru to teach what you want to hear. Isn’t this your situation?

Guntang Rinpoche said, “Although we rely on our teacher as  our  refuge  for
this and all future lives, however, we hold on  to  our  own  truth  as  the
highest truth. This is the saddest thing”.

In fact, the practice of guru devotion  is  very  difficult  and  developing
real faith in the guru is challenging. Therefore, practising  guru  yoga  is
not simple or an easy thing. Nevertheless,  it  is  very  important  because
when you get this right, it will make a huge difference to the way you  will
progress on the path and how your mind will turn to  the  Dharma.  When  you
get this right, you will establish a very firm foundation  for  your  entire
practice. As Lama Tsongkhapa said, “The cycles of  teachings  about  relying
on a spiritual teacher are more important than any other ones and  the  root
of perpetual striving (Page 28).”

It is difficult but you have  to  understand  the  topic  of  guru  devotion
correctly. Why do you need to do this practice? There are  many  people  who
have the misconception that this guru devotion practice was  not  taught  by
the Buddha but was made up by the  Tibetans  in  order  to  make  themselves
important in the eyes of the disciples. As I mentioned earlier, this is  not
the case.

Although there are many things to think about, what you  need  to  sort  out
for yourself is this: When I rely correctly on my guru  in  thought  and  in
action, what are the benefits for me? What profit do I get?

When the practice of guru devotion is done well, all  the  things  that  you
want - all the qualities, realisations and  experiences  -  will  come  your
way. That is the point. That is what the teachings are saying. That is  what
Lama Tsongkhapa is saying here.

The point is not to just arrive at that conclusion  here  but  you  have  to
arrive at that conclusion for yourself. You  have  to  think  about  whether
that is true or not. Why do you need  to  do  this  practice?  How  does  it
benefit you? You have to gain an ascertainment for yourself. Once  you  have
gained that ascertainment, you will have to put effort into this practice.

If, for whatever reasons, your reliance is incorrect, then you will have  to
engage in confession and restraint.


         B  The need for confession and vows[2], if that proper reliance
         does not come about - because it is a great fault

With our coarse mental afflictions we have  often  allowed  many  faults  of
reliance on a spiritual teacher to occur  in  regard  to  listening  to  the
Dharma - not knowing how to rely or knowing how to but not doing so.  It  is
difficult for an  awareness  of  that  to  develop  through  confession  and
vows[3].  {36}  Having  understood  the  advantages  and  disadvantages   as
explained previously you should therefore sincerely confess any  occurrences
that are not in accordance with  proper  reliance,  developing  many  strong
resolves.

         C  How the realization of reliance is not far away, if you act in
         that manner

If you act in that  manner,  you  will  before  too  long  become  like  the
bodhisattva Sadaprarudita and the young Sudhana who was  insatiable  in  his
quest of a spiritual teacher (Page 28).

Question:  Why  is  the  realisation  of  bodhicitta  not  amongst  the  ten
qualities of the qualified Mahayana guru?

Answer: One  of  the  ten  qualities  of  the  qualified  Mahayana  guru  is
possessing loving concern. I guess you can take loving concern here to  mean
great compassion that is the root of  the  Mahayana.  Therefore,  possessing
loving concern includes bodhicitta, right?

Question (Paraphrased by Ven. Gyurme): If my guru is a buddha, how  come  he
cannot see my pure intentions? In the case  of  Khen  Rinpoche’s  story,  if
your guru is a buddha, how come he didn’t know that you were  there  to  see
him and not to listen to his conversation? He should know this.  Then,  what
is the solution? To me, there  are  two  options:  (1)  train  my  mind  and
pretend that he is a buddha or (2) think that it is my  own  negative  karma
that caused me to get a scolding.

Ven Gyurme: Many people may have this issue. When you see a  fault,  do  you
pretend that you didn’t see it? What  do  you  do  when  you  see  a  fault,
especially when it is really a fault?

Answer: I mentioned before with regard to seeing the  faults  in  the  guru.
There are two possibilities:
1. There is really a fault and you see that fault as a fault.
2. You see a fault that is actually not there.

In relation to your loved ones and everyone around you, not just your  guru,
whether you see a fault or a quality, that does not come from  the  side  of
the object but it has more to do with your own perspective.

When you are in a happy mood, you don’t see many faults. For  example,  when
there is attachment, you don’t see many or even any faults at  all  in  that
person. But, when you are unhappy, then you will see  a  lot  of  faults  in
that object. So, doesn’t that have to do with how you look at things?

When the mind is upset, angry or disturbed, everything appears  differently.
There is a Tibetan saying, “Everything appears as  unpleasant.”  Isn’t  this
your experience? You can verify this for yourself. When you are upset,  when
your mind is disturbed, you see everything as unpleasant. Not only  do  they
appear  unpleasant,  you  believe  that  they  are  completely   unpleasant,
completely bad. You never even consider that, actually,  this  is  only  one
way of looking at things.

After a while, when your anger subsides, you may gradually realise that,  in
fact, it is, after all, your mistake. But  this  realisation  cannot  happen
when the mind is still disturbed and angry.

But there are certain faults that everyone acknowledges to  be  faults.  For
example, everyone will see that that teacher exhibits that  fault.  In  that
case, it is a fault.

When it is a fault, then you just have to recognise it as a fault.  But  how
should you think at that time? You should analyse whether  it  is  really  a
fault of the guru or is it just an appearance, something that  the  guru  is
manifesting? Is it all right for you to think, “Perhaps my  guru  is  making
this mistake in order to subdue my mind?”  Is it okay to  think  in  such  a
way?

I mean, it is possible that the teacher may be  displaying  that  particular
fault, specifically for the purpose of subduing your mind.  In  life,  there
are people who generally don’t make any problems,  but  when  they  want  to
make a problem for whatever reason, they will make that problem.

So, there is a benefit in thinking in such a way.  When  you  think,  “Maybe
the teacher is doing this for my benefit, for my sake, specifically to  tame
my mind,” when you are really able to feel  this  way,  does  it  not  help?
Won’t  whatever  mental  discomfort  or  unhappiness  directed  towards  the
teacher be, at least, reduced?

In the case of my  own  example  that  I  mentioned  just  now,  seeing  one
specific fault or mistake in the guru should not be a reason for  giving  up
that person as your teacher. There is no reason for that. Even when you  see
a fault or mistake, that should not make you give up your teacher. You  have
to think about who will suffer the  loss  when,  just  by  seeing  a  single
fault,  you  give  up  everything.  You  will  suffer  the  loss  and   lose
everything. That is the way to think.

As I have explained in the previous class, you don’t  have  the  fortune  to
see the buddhas in their pure aspect. Even if they were to appear  in  front
of you right now, you won’t be able to see them. Therefore, when  you  can’t
see them, they cannot do anything for you. They cannot  guide  you  in  that
aspect. But when the buddhas come in the  ordinary  aspect,  then  they  can
help you. It is through that ordinary aspect that they can help you.

What is the definition of an ordinary aspect? The definition of an  ordinary
aspect means having faults and  making  mistakes.  Otherwise,  there  is  no
basis and reason to call it an ordinary aspect.

Really believing that the guru is a buddha is  very  difficult.  Unless  you
are a  single-pointed  practitioner  and  you  really  put  in  the  effort,
perhaps, there is some chance for you to achieve this. Otherwise,  I  think,
it would be quite unlikely.
It is normal that, every time when you see a fault, you  immediately  wonder
why this is so. That is a sign that you do not see  the  guru  as  a  buddha
yet.

What are you really looking for when you  take  someone  as  your  guru?  It
boils down to that. In this context, when you look for a guru, you  rely  on
that person as your teacher because you  want  certain  teachings.  If  that
person is able to give you the teachings that you are looking for, then  you
have accomplished your goal.

Therefore, in that case, it really doesn’t matter whether  your  guru  knows
your life, whether he  can  read  your  mind  or  has  clairvoyance  or  can
prophesise the future. All these things do not matter because  all  you  are
looking for are teachings, i.e., he can give you what you want.

Dharmakirti, the great Indian logician said in his Pramanavarttika, “If  you
want to have the ability to see very far away, then you  should  rely  on  a
vulture as your guru.”  This line in the Pramanavarttika by  Dharmakirti  is
always in my mind. If what you want is just to be  able  to  see  far  away,
then invite a vulture and rely on it as your guru.

If all you want is to know your past lives and where you are going  in  your
future lives and what will happen to you in the future, then you  just  look
for someone who can make such predictions, be it an astrologer or a  fortune
teller.

It all boils down to what you are looking for and what you want.  The  qualm
that was brought up is not just the qualm of this student. It  is  something
that is in everybody’s mind.

With regard to the conception  of  faults  in  the  guru,  when  the  faults
appear, there are only two possibilities:
1. there is a conception of faults because there is really a fault or,
2. it is just an appearance of a fault, even though, in  reality,  there  is
   no fault.
Whatever the case may be, that is not the point. The point here is  how  you
deal with it and how you think.

Question: (Inaudible)

Answer: It is very important to check up on the prospective teacher.

That is why Lama Tsongkhapa took great pains to explain  clearly,  what  are
the  qualities  that  a  qualified  Mahayana  teacher  should  possess.   He
explained these in detail. On the  basis  of  understanding  these  defining
characteristics, he advises you to check whether that person whom  you  want
to take as a teacher possess them  or  not.  If  the  person  possesses  the
qualities then you can rely on him. If  the  person  does  not  possess  the
qualities, then you do not have to rely on him.


Question: For teachers who come to Amitabha  Buddhist  Centre  for  a  short
time, such as Kyabje Lama Zopa Rinpoche, or when  we  go  to  His  Holiness’
teachings where we only  have  a  few  days  with  him,  before  we  receive
initiations from him, what is the best way for us to think before we  accept
them as gurus, when we don’t have the chance to  spend  so  much  time  with
them, to check up on them?

Answer: With regard to His Holiness, I guess there shouldn’t  be  a  problem
as His Holiness is famous throughout the world. I don’t think there  is  any
serious problem arising from people devoting to His Holiness as their  guru.
I don’t think there problems will arise in the future.

If people experience problems in viewing  His  Holiness  as  their  teacher,
after they have taken him as their teacher, it is probably not  coming  from
His Holiness’ side. From His Holiness’s side, he has no faults. It  is  more
of how the student perceives the guru.

As for our centre, we try our  very  best  to  ensure  that  teachers  of  a
certain calibre are invited. We have our sources and our  ways  of  checking
this. From the side of the centre, we try our best to  ensure  that  whoever
is invited is a valid teacher.

But that does not mean that whoever  comes  to  teach  at  the  centre,  you
should rely on them as your guru. I am not  saying  that.  You  should  take
your time to check and see whether that person is someone whom you can  rely
on as your guru. Although we do invite teachers, I am not  saying  that  you
have to rely on them or that you must immediately take the  person  as  your
guru without checking. You still have to check from your side.

The next section in the text deals with the six  preparatory  practices.  It
is straightforward and easy to read. So please read up on your own.


Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek, Vivien Ng and Angie Xiao
Edited by Cecilia Tsong
Checked by Shirley Soh


-----------------------
[1] “When you rely on a guru, there will be doubtful questions whether to
give up” can be understood to mean, “When relying on the guru, there is the
chance that you might give up your guru.”
[2] “Vows” here should be translated as “restraint.”
[3] “Vows” here should be translated as “restraint from future wrongdoing.”

