Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L58.doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.524203
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


   Lesson No: 58                           Date: 24th May 2012


(Meditation on Manjushri)

Try to bring to mind as  clearly  as  possible  the  object  of  refuge  and
generate  single-pointed  faith  towards  it.  That  is  important.  Try  to
recollect the qualities of the Buddha’s exalted body,  exalted  speech,  and
exalted mind as well as recollect and rejoice in the benefits of  generating
mind generation. When we can do that, we will accumulate a lot of merit.

All of you have studied the teachings of the  Buddha  for  some  time.  With
whatever understanding you have, you  will  now  be  able  to  see  how  the
teachings are so different from other teachings. The Buddha’s teachings  are
so logical and make so much  sense.  Seeing  these  characteristics  of  the
teachings of the Buddha, you can generate faith in them.

Whether we are able to put these teachings into practice or not,  even  when
we simply  examine  the  Buddha’s  teachings,  we  can  see  that  they  are
distinctively outstanding and different. They accord with common sense.  You
can see that these teachings are very logical, very good, and wonderful.

Recognising their qualities, we can  see  how  these  instructions  are  the
source of happiness and the path for others as well. We  can  then  generate
the wish for the teachings of the Buddha to be preserved, to  endure  for  a
long time, and to spread in order to achieve the happiness of other  people.


From our own side, we should see now  how  important  it  is  to  learn  the
teachings. In order to be able to learn the  Buddha’s  teachings,  first  we
must have the aspiration to do so. In order to want to learn the  teachings,
we first have to understand their amazing qualities. Once  we  can  see  how
wonderful the Buddha’s teachings are, we will  generate  the  aspiration  to
learn them.

Therefore by  thinking  of  these  points,  try  to  develop  faith  in  the
teachings of the Buddha and the strong aspiration of wanting to learn  them.
We have to think about this. The  whole  point  is  to  develop  the  strong
intention of wanting to listen, to learn, and to study the  teachings.   So,
think about these points for the next few minutes.

                             ******************
Question: It was mentioned that generating the aspirational mind  generation
six times a day  is  an  uncommon  precept.  Can  you  please  explain  with
relation to what is it an uncommon precept?

Answer: The precept of generating the mind generation six  times  a  day  is
said to be an uncommon precept to be observed after one  has  generated  the
aspirational mind generation that comes with the commitment. Perhaps  it  is
uncommon or unshared with the engaged mind generation.

Khen Rinpoche: I think so. It must be like that but I am not sure.

We have been talking about  the  four  black  dharmas  and  the  four  white
dharmas. The training to abandon the four black  dharmas  and  to  cultivate
the four white dharmas is to prevent whatever mind generation that  one  has
developed from degenerating. After one has adopted the mind generation  with
the commitment, one has to train in the four white dharmas.

The fourth  white  dharma  is  maturing  or  ripening  the  mind-streams  of
sentient beings by connecting them to the Mahayana. Essentially,  it  is  to
do something to cause them to develop the mind generation.

Question from Khen Rinpoche: If you have tried but they don’t  generate  the
mind generation, is it a black dharma or not? The question is for  everyone.
If you say “no,” do you have a reason for saying that?

(A student attempts to explain the following passage from the root text  and
a discussion ensues with Khen Rinpoche:


    2B4B-2B3B-2C2B-2D1 The actual [fourth white dharma][?]: object and
    action

… Moreover, while from your side you should cause the  [/your]  disciple  to
make a connection with it, if that thought does not  arise  in  the  [/your]
disciple, it  does  not  become  a  mistake,  because  you  were  unable  to
accomplish that (Page 163)).

Khen Rinpoche: Anyway, the answer is in the text. This is to  check  whether
you read the text or not.

Khen Rinpoche: Did anyone read the next section of the text? If  you  didn’t
read it,  it  is  complicated  even  if  I  explain  it  now.  If  you  read
beforehand, maybe you will understand. If you didn’t read, then I  think  it
will be more difficult.


    2B4B-2B3B-3  Having generated the mind of enlightenment how to train in
    the conduct


    A The reason why it is necessary to train in the trainings, having
    generated the mind [of enlightenment]

         B  Demonstration that buddhahood is not achieved by training in
         method or wisdom alone
         C  Explanation of the actual stages of training in the trainings
         (Page 164)  [?]


This section in the text talks about the need to practice  both  method  and
wisdom together in order to achieve buddhahood,  i.e.,  full  enlightenment.
Practising either method or wisdom alone will not lead one to buddhahood.

It is very important that we understand why we need both method  and  wisdom
in order to achieve buddhahood. We need to know  why  buddhahood  cannot  be
achieved by cultivating wisdom alone. We need to know why buddhahood  cannot
be achieved by practising method alone.

In the Precious Garland by the protector Nagarjuna, it says:
      The Buddha’s embodiment of form (i.e.,  the  form  body  or  rupakaya)
      arises through the collection of merit.  The  Buddha’s  embodiment  of
      truth (i.e., the truth body or dharmakaya) arises from the  collection
      of wisdom.

We need to think:
 • How does the collection of merit result in achieving  the  Buddha’s  form
   body?
 • How does the collection of wisdom result in achieving the Buddha’s  truth
   body?

In the following section, the answer given is this:   in  order  to  achieve
full enlightenment, you need a path that unifies both method and wisdom.

There is a wrong assertion that claims that  any  kind  of  thought,  be  it
virtuous or non-virtuous, is an obstacle to  achieving  enlightenment,  that
the path to enlightenment does not involve conceptuality.  People  who  hold
on to this view also believe that the practices of generosity,  ethics,  and
so forth are also obstacles to achieving the path.

The  proponents  of  this  view  assert  that,  in  order  to  achieve  full
enlightenment, you do not need to practise the  six  perfections.  In  fact,
they  are  hindrances.  According  to  them,  in  order  to   achieve   full
enlightenment, all you need to do is to settle your mind in a state that  is
devoid  of  any  kind  of  thought.   That  in  itself  is   the   path   to
enlightenment.


    2B4B-2B3B-3B2B-2   How some unfortunate beings adhere to it despite
    those refutations

…there are still some who scorn the side of conduct, such  as  guarding  and
restraint, and who discard it while cultivating the  paths,  acting  as  has
been described above. It appears  that  some,  apart  from  deprecating  the
factor of method, discard the way of understanding the  view,  while  others
discard the search for the view of  suchness  by  means  of  the  wisdom  of
individual investigation, and then skilfully assert the  meditation  of  the
Chinese [sect] of not thinking about anything.

    2B4B-2B3B-3B2B-3   How non-abiding nirvana has to be accomplished by a
    path of both wisdom and method

         A  That there is no need for method and wisdom to be complete
         contradicts all scriptures as well as logic.

This {197} does not even seem to  be  in  the  category[/to  hold  for?]  of
meditation  on  emptiness.  However,  even  if  it  were  permitted  to   be
meditation on emptiness, the statement  “Those  who  meditate  well  on  the
meaning of emptiness  should  meditate  on  emptiness  alone  and  need  not
cultivate  conciousnesses  of  conventionalities,  the  side   of   conduct”
contradicts all the scriptures [of the Buddha], and  simply  seems  to  have
gone [/go] beyond the path of reasoning (Page 166)[?].

Firstly emptiness is not nothingness. One  may  meditate  on  emptiness  and
assert that there is no need to cultivate the method side of the path.  That
is wrong. The text goes on to say:

The object to be  achieved  by  Mahayanists  is  non-abiding  nirvana.  With
respect to that, non-abiding in cyclic existence is  achieved  through  what
is called “the wisdom realizing suchness”, “the stages of the  path  relying
on the ultimate”, “the path of  the  profound”,  and  what  is  called  “the
collection of exalted wisdom” and “the factor of  wisdom”,   …(Pages  166  –
167).

When you say, “You can practise wisdom alone. There is no need  to  practise
method,” this contradicts scriptural authority and also defies logic.

The following are different expressions with the same meaning:
1. The wisdom realising suchness
2. The stages of the path relying on the ultimate
3. The path of the profound (or the profound path)
4. The collection of exalted (or sublime) wisdom
5. The “factor of wisdom”

… whereas non-abiding in nirvana or peace is  necessarily  achieved  through
what is called “the wisdom cognizing varieties”, “the  stages  of  the  path
relying on conventional truth”, “the path of the vast”, “the  collection  of
method”, and “the factor of merit” (Page 167).

Likewise, the following expressions have the same meaning:
1. The wisdom cognising varieties (or  that  understands  the  diversity  of
   phenomena)
2. The stages of the path relying on conventional truth
3. The path of the vast (or the vast path)
4. The collection of method (or merit)
5. The factor of merit (or method)

These different expressions should give you the same understanding.  We  are
not analysing the limits of their pervasion here. We  just  say  that  these
different expressions mean the same thing.

The main object of attainment (or  the  goal)  of  the  bodhisattva  is  the
attainment of non-abiding nirvana that  is  the  great  liberation  (or  the
great nirvana). It refers to not abiding in the two extremes:
1. not abiding in the extreme of samsara
2. not abiding in the extreme of the peace, i.e., nirvana

What enables someone to not abide in the  extreme  of  samsara?  It  is  the
wisdom that knows reality. Without that wisdom  knowing  reality,  one  will
not be able to avoid abiding in samsara.

When one achieves enlightenment, one  does  not  abide  in  the  extreme  of
nirvana. Here, nirvana refers to the lower nirvana, the liberation  that  is
achieved by the hearers  and  the  solitary  realisers.  When  one  achieves
enlightenment, what enable ones to not abide in nirvana? It  is  the  factor
of method, primarily compassion and mind generation.

In order to achieve non-abiding nirvana, you need to have  both  the  factor
of method and the factor of wisdom. Without them, one will not  achieve  the
non-abiding nirvana because it is the factor of method  and  the  factor  of
wisdom that allow one to not abide in either samsara or nirvana.

This is how you can prove the need  for  both  the  factors  of  method  and
wisdom in order to achieve buddhahood through reasoning.

Next is providing the scriptural sources.

         B  Establishing by way of scriptural passages how wisdom and method
         refute the two extremes

The following words are  taken  from  the  Sutra  of  Inconceivable  Perfect
Secret:

         The collection of exalted  wisdom  is  what  abandons[/becomes  the
         abandonment of] all mental afflictions. The collection of merit  is
         what fully nurtures all sentient beings. As this is  so,  Bhagavan,
         the bodhisattva mahasattvas strive in the collection of  merit  and
         exalted wisdom.

         C  Establishing by way of scriptural passages how we are bound to
         the extremes of existence and peace as long as method and wisdom
         are not complete

Also, in the Sutra  Taught  at  the  Request  of  Vimalakirti  [/Vimalakirti
Nirdesha Sutra] it says:


         In response to the questions “What is the bondage of bodhisattvas?”
         and “What is liberation?”


         Wisdom not conjoined with method is bondage.
         Wisdom conjoined with method is liberation.
         Method not conjoined with wisdom is bondage.
         {198} Method conjoined with wisdom is liberation …

         D  The achievement of buddhahood depends on both wisdom and method

And in [/from?] the Gayagori Sutra:

The bodhisattva path, in brief, is made up of two. What are  the  two?  They
are the following: method and wisdom (Page 167).

The purpose of quoting these scriptures is to highlight the  need  for  both
method and wisdom in achieving enlightenment.


    2B4B-2B3B-3B2B-4   How the emptiness possessing the best of all aspects
    I  is necessary for the attainment of buddhahood

In the Crown  Jewel  Sutra  [?]  it  is  taught  that  it  is  necessary  to
meditate[/meditating] on the  emptiness  that  possesses  the  best  of  all
aspects [?]wiwhich is complete  in  all  the  factors  of  method,  such  as
generosity and so forth (Page 168).


This sutra says  that  it  is  necessary  to  meditate  on  “emptiness  that
possesses the best of all aspects,” i.e.,  an  emptiness  that  is  complete
with all the facets of method, generosity, and so forth.


    2B4B-2B3B-3B2B-5   How the position that only accepts wisdom is refuted
    in the treatises

In the [Sutra] Gathering All the Threads [?] it says:

      Foolish people intend to repudiate the bodhisattvas’ practice  of  the
      six perfections for the sake  of  enlightenment  saying:  “You  should
      train in the perfection of wisdom alone. {199}  What  is  the  use  of
      training in the remaining?”


         And:
         Foolish people also say: “One becomes enlightened through only  one
         approach, that is, through the  approach  of  emptiness.”  However,
         they do not have completely pure conduct (Page 168).

This quotation also rejects the view that meditating on  the  perfection  of
wisdom alone is sufficient to achieve enlightenment.

The many sutric quotations show that it is incorrect to  say  that  one  can
achieve enlightenment without unifying method and wisdom together.

The text then brings up another qualm.


    2B4B-2B3B-3B3A     Refutation of the objection that asserts [?] that
    method is unnecessary if emptiness has been realized

         1  Stating the assertion
         2  Its refutation

    2B4B-2B3B-3B3A-1   Stating the assertion



One may think: “Training in the  conduct  of  generosity  and  so  forth  is
[necessary] if one does not have a stable realization of emptiness,  but  if
one has that, it is sufficient” (Page 168)

The above paragraph is saying that before  you  have  a  firm  knowledge  of
emptiness, you can practise the deeds of generosity and so forth.  But  when
you have a stable understanding of emptiness, that is enough.





    2B4B-2B3B-3B3A-2   Its refutation

         A  Refutation because it is in contradiction to the definitive
         meaning [?]sutras

[The   refutation   is:]   If   this   were   so,   the   jinas’    children
who[/bodhisattvas]  have  attained  the  first  ground  and  so  forth,  and
especially the jinas’ children on the eighth ground who have achieved  power
over non-conceptual wisdom, would not need the  conduct.  However,  this  is
inappropriate, for in the Sutra of the Ten Grounds it is taught:

         On each of the ten grounds, one, such as generosity,  also  becomes
         paramount. However, it is not  that  the  remaining  ones  are  not
         practiced.” Therefore, on each of the grounds all six  or  all  ten
         are said to be practiced (Pages 168 – 169).

Those who  have  achieved  the  non-conceptual  wisdom  directly  perceiving
emptiness, starting from the  first  bodhisattva  ground  onwards  and  even
those on the eighth bodhisattva ground who  have  removed  their  afflictive
obscurations, have to practise all the ten  perfections.  They  emphasise  a
particular perfection on each of the grounds, but within each  ground,  they
still practise all the ten perfections.


         B  How even with the highest realization of emptiness, method and
         wisdom are necessary

In particular on the occasion of the eighth ground, when  [the  bodhisattva]
abides in the ultimate where all elaborations [?] are pacified owing to  the
exhaustion of all the mental afflictions, the buddhas  exort  [him  saying:]
“Buddhahood cannot be achieved through this mere realization  of  emptiness;
this [realization] is also achieved by  shravakas  and  solitary  realizers”
(Page 169).

The eighth  ground  bodhisattvas  have  already  eliminated  the  afflictive
obscuration (or the obstructions to liberation) and  have  achieved  a  very
special kind of wisdom. Can they achieve  enlightenment  with  this  special
wisdom alone?  The answer is no,  they  cannot  achieve  enlightenment  with
that special wisdom alone.

When we say that they can achieve enlightenment through simply  having  this
special  wisdom,  that  would  entail  the  fallacy  that  the  hearer   foe
destroyers and the solitary  realiser  foe  destroyers  have  also  achieved
enlightenment. So, it is said that the  buddhas  exhort  the  eighth  ground
bodhisattvas to arise from their meditative equipoise.





         C  How it is therefore inappropriate [to think] that there is no
         need for wisdom and method [?-order] right from the beginning (Page
         169).


Besides wisdom, these high-level bodhisattvas still need  to  train  in  the
method. In fact one should train in the path that  brings  both  method  and
wisdom together from the very beginning.


         D  How even on the high paths of mantra, the way to generate the
         mind and train in the six perfections is the same by and large
         (Page 169).


It is said in the tantric teachings that, even when one enters the  path  of
Highest Yoga Tantra, one still needs to train in the factor of  method  such
as the six perfections.  Of course, on the path of Highest Yoga Tantra,  one
need not train in the six perfections for a long  period  of  time  such  as
over three countless great eons. Nevertheless one still has to train in  the
six perfections even on the path of Highest Yoga Tantra.


    2B4B-2B3B-3B3B-1   The objection thinking: “Since[/stating that since?]
    the six perfections are complete when you do not think of anything at
    all, this is sufficient”: [???] - how they are[ /appearance of]
    complete according to that way of reckoning [?]

[The  objection  is:]  “We  do   not   assert   that   generosity   and   so
forth[/others/so on/etc.] are unnecessary, but they are  complete  when  you
do not think about anything, because byby not  adhering  to  the  recipient,
the act of giving nor the substance given, non-observing [?]  generosity  is
complete, and likewise  the  remaining  [perfections]  are  complete.  Also,
because[?] it says in sutra that the six perfections are contained  in  each
one of them” (Page 169).

Some people who hold on to this view say, “I am  not  saying  generosity  is
not needed. But when you settle your mind in the state that does  not   have
any thoughts, the practice of generosity is complete within that  practice.”


They say, for example, that the practice of non-apprehending  generosity  is
fully present in the state of the mind that lacks any  thought  because,  in
that state, there is an absence of apprehending the  giver,  the  gift,  and
the  recipient.  They  assert  that  this  also  applies  to  the  remaining
perfections. Furthermore they claim that this is actually mentioned in  some
of the sutras. Of course, this is incorrect.

The reply given here refutes that the practice of generosity can be  present
when your mind is empty of all thought.


    2B4B-2B3B-3B3B-2   Refutation of this with a digression

         A  The absurd [ha cang?*] [/extreme] consequences [/faults] [/the
         very undesirable consequences] [that would ensue] if this were so

If [all the perfections] were  complete  simply  through  this,  they  [/the
perfections] would also be complete in the  calm  abiding  of  a  tirthika’s
single-pointed mind when it is placed  in  meditative  equipoise,  since  he
does not adhere to them. [?] In particular, as it says in the Sutra  of  the
Ten  Grounds,  shravakas  and  pratyekabuddhas  who  have  a  non-conceptual
exalted wisdom with respect to reality, when meditatively equipoised on  it,
would become Mahayanists since  the  entire  bodhisattva  conduct  would  be
complete (Page 169).

This wrong assertion entails the fallacies:
1. that the practice of the perfections is then also present  in  the  minds
   of non-Buddhists
2. that the perfections are also present in the minds  of  the  hearers  and
   the solitary realisers who  are  in  the  meditative  equipoise  directly
   perceiving emptiness. If that is the case, that then entails the  fallacy
   that they are Mahayanists


         B  If it were sufficient that in each one all [?] six are complete,
         it would follow that a mandala would be offered with one single
         [substance]

If you assert that this alone is sufficient, because it is  taught  that  in
each [perfection] all six are included, then, while offering a mandala  with
[the verse] “Giving cow dung together with water ...” it would [?]  also  be
appropriate to do just that since it is said that {201} all six are  present
(Page 170)[/contained in them].

Can anyone explain this passage?

Khen Rinpoche: I don’t know what this sentence is trying to say here.

Question: With regard to the qualm, practitioners on the  Hinayana  path  or
arya bodhisattvas in  meditative  equipoise  directly  realising  emptiness,
those wisdoms are not conjoined with the method of the six perfections?  For
the wisdom  in  meditative  equipoise  directly  realising  emptiness,  only
emptiness appears to that perspective.

Khen Rinpoche:  Who are you talking about here?

Student: The arya bodhisattvas. Khen Rinpoche also mentioned in  an  earlier
lesson, the engaged  mind  generation  is  not  present  at  all.  Only  the
aspirational mind generation exists.

Khen Rinpoche: Yes?

Question: Does that mean that there will be  an  occasion  when  wisdom  and
method are not cultivated together?

Khen Rinpoche: Why do you say that? You have to say that  that  wisdom  must
be conjoined with bodhicitta. There are two  types  of  bodhicitta.   It  is
conjoined with the aspirational mind generation.
Question: So that is method?

Khen Rinpoche: Of course.

Student: I thought method here specifically refers to the deeds of  the  six
perfections.

Khen Rinpoche: Not necessarily so. The factor of method  includes  the  mind
generation. One has to say that the wisdom directly perceiving emptiness  in
the continuum of a bodhisattva is conjoined with the factor of method.

During  debate,  you  have  to  say  that  the  wisdom  directly  perceiving
emptiness in the continuum of a bodhisattva is conjoined with the factor  of
method, but you do not say that it is directly conjoined with the factor  of
method.

It is not directly  conjoined  because  in  order  for  it  to  be  directly
conjoined, both the factors that are conjoined,  i.e.,  wisdom  and  method,
must manifest. In the meditative equipoise  directly  perceiving  emptiness,
only wisdom is manifest and mind generation is not  manifest.  This  is  how
you differentiate “conjoined” and “directly conjoined.”

The text goes on to talk about the meaning  of  “conjoined.”  This  word  is
translated as “imbued” in the Lamrim Chenmo.

         C  How wisdom and method, undivided, [also?] influence each other

The [following] analogy [is given] in order to illustrate conduct  conjoined
with the view and wisdom conjoined with  method:  When  a  mother  tormented
[?/depressed] by sorrow [?] at the death of her  beloved  child  engages  in
something like talking with other people, due to the power of her sorrow  it
is not given up, no matter what minds arise.  Yet[/mingles  and  talks  with
other people] not all her minds are  minds  of  sorrow.  Similarly,  if  the
wisdom realizing emptiness is very powerful,  the  minds  that  observe  the
giving of gifts, prostrations, circumambulations, and so forth as  they  are
being carried out, are not [/do not  constitute]  realizing  emptiness,  but
that does not contradict their being performed possessing its power. If  you
start off with [?] the intense power of the mind of  enlightenment,  as  you
do at the beginning of a [/the?] meditation session, although  the  mind  of
enlightenment  is  not  manifest  during  the  meditative  stabilisation  of
emptiness, that does not contradict its being influenced by it. The  way  in
which wisdom and method are inseparable is also like that (Page 170).

When one generates a very strong mind generation at  the  beginning  of  any
meditation session, then whatever one is meditating,  the  whole  meditation
session is influenced by that motivation. It is  imbued  or  conjoined  with
the mind generation.

Similarly, when one generates a very strong mind generation  before  falling
asleep, and one falls asleep with  that  motivation  even  though  the  mind
generation is not manifest during sleep, the  mind  is  conjoined  with  the
mind generation.

Sleep can be either virtuous or non-virtuous. This depends on the  state  of
mind before one falls asleep. When one  falls  asleep  with  a  very  strong
virtuous thought, the entire sleep is  then  conjoined  with  that  virtuous
motivation. Likewise, when one falls asleep  with  a  non-virtuous  thought,
the entire sleep is conjoined with that non-virtuous thought.





    2B4B-2B3B-3B3C-1   It is incorrect that the causes for high status and
    certain goodness [?]are contradictory (Page 170)


There is a wrong concept that thinks the collection of  merit  is  only  for
the purpose of achieving resources, longevity, and  so  forth  and  that  it
does not become  a  cause  for  omniscience.  This  is  a  wrong  idea.  The
collection of merit can be a cause for  omniscience  when  it  is  conjoined
with method and wisdom. It is important not to misconstrue  some  statements
from the sutras such as those given below:

         A  The presentation in[/based on] the sutras

It also says in the sutras:

         Strong adherence to the six, generosity and so forth, is the action
         of Mara.”
         [?*no verse]
In the [Sutra of the] Three Heaps [?]iit also explains:
         Giving  gifts  falling  into  observing,  guarding   one’s   ethics
         considering it  supreme  ethics  and  so  forth;  these  should  be
         confessed individually.


Also from [the Sutra] Requested by Brahma:

         However much conduct exists, all of it is conceptual. Thorough non-
         conceptuality is enlightenment.
You should not be mistaken with respect to these  statements  (Pages  170  –
171).

The first statement, “Strong adherence to the six, generosity and so  forth,
is the action of Mara,” does not show  that  all  forms  of  generosity  are
actions  of  Mara  (or  demonic  activities).  Rather  generosity  that   is
motivated by the mistaken apprehension of and grasping to a  self  (or  ego)
is impure. Therefore it is referred to as an action of Mara.

         B  The contradiction to the way in which the first passage is
         explained

The meaning of the first  one  is  that  generosity  motivated  by  mistaken
adherence to the two [types of] self is  explained  as  an  action  of  Mara
since it is impure. However, generosity and so forth are  not  presented  as
the actions of Mara (Page 171).
The  quotation  from  the  [Sutra  of  the]  Three  Heaps  says   that   the
apprehending and grasping at a self (translated here in  the  root  text  as
“falling  into  observing”)  makes  the  practice  of   generosity   impure.
Therefore that practice has to be confessed.  It  is  not  saying  that  you
should confess having practised generosity.





         C  The contradiction to grasping the words of the second passage
         since, because it actually says: “falling into observing”

Otherwise you would have to say “Giving  should  be  confessed  in  general”
without the need to fall  into  observing  saying  “Bestowing  gifts  having
fallen into observing.” Therefore it follows [/makes sense]  that  this  has
not been taught like that[/in this manner]. In [Kamalashila’s]  Last  Stages
of Meditation it becomes a very crucial  point  [for  Kamalashila]  to  give
this kind of answer, for if this is misunderstood, one will  hold  to  signs
[/characteristics] of a self of persons or phenomena and assert  the  entire
side of conduct to be with signs (Page 171).

It is possible that one may think meditating on emptiness  is  enough,  that
practising giving, practising ethics, and so forth are not  important.  This
is because when one engages in the practices of generosity or  ethics,  they
involve apprehending the self. The apprehensions of true existence  and  the
self interfere with one’s achievement of enlightenment. Then why should  one
engage  in  those  practices?  One  may  as  well  focus  on  meditating  on
emptiness. It is possible that one may have such thoughts.

During the course of giving, there is the apprehension of a  truly  existent
giver, a truly existent object that is being given,  and  a  truly  existent
recipient, the person to whom one is giving the object.  When  you  see  all
three to be truly existent, it makes  the  whole  process  of  giving  truly
existent.

What is generosity? It is a mind of giving. But,  generally  speaking,  when
you  think  about  it,  our  acts  of  generosity  are  accompanied  by  the
apprehension of true  existence.  People  may  think  this  way  but  it  is
incorrect. The mind of giving is just that, the mind of giving. The mind  of
giving is not the apprehension of true existence.

When one thinks that  the  mind  of  giving  is  the  apprehension  of  true
existence, then what about the person on the first bodhisattva ground  whose
mind is realising emptiness? We should also regard that as something  to  be
abandoned like hostility or pride.

The bodhisattva on the first bodhisattva ground does not  abandon  the  mind
of giving. In fact, he strives to increase the mind of giving.

Those of you who have done the module on  special  insight,  remember  there
was a discussion regarding the three ways of apprehending an object:
1. Apprehending an object as truly existent.
2. Apprehending an object as not truly existent.
3. Apprehending an object in a  way  that  is  not  affected  by  either  an
   apprehension of it being truly existent or apprehending it as  not  being
   truly existent?

You need to have some understanding of these three  modes  of  apprehension.
Even for someone who has not realised emptiness,  it  does  not  necessarily
mean that every single  mind  in  that  person’s  continuum  apprehends  its
respective object to be truly existent.

Question: What is the meaning of “perfection”? When  does  giving  become  a
perfection of giving?

Answer:  Generosity  is  not  necessarily  the  perfection  of   generosity.
Generosity that is conjoined with mind generation becomes the perfection  of
generosity. Generosity becomes pure on the first bodhisattva ground.

Question: Why is there a need  to  request  the  Buddha  not  to  pass  into
parinirvana?

Answer: The Buddha does not die, so why is there a need to make the  request
to please remain? We talk about the Buddha’s embodiment  of  form  (or  form
body) and embodiment of truth (truth body). The truth body is  divided  into
(1) the nature truth body and (2) the wisdom truth body. The  form  body  is
divided into (1) the complete enjoyment body and (2) the  supreme  emanation
body.

The complete enjoyment body will remain until the end of  cyclic  existence.
Therefore you do not have to make  a  request  in  relation  to  that  body.
However the supreme emanation body does display the  deed  of  passing  away
into parinirvana. Therefore there is a need to request the  Buddha   not  to
show the deed of passing into parinirvana.

There are many new concepts and words. You have to work at  it.  It  is  not
something that you can understand immediately. That is why everybody has  to
work at it and just pay  attention.  It  is  very  good  that  students  ask
questions. That is a sign of thinking and learning. Everyone should  try  to
do that.


Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; Transcribed by Phuah Soon  Ek  and  Vivien
Ng; Edited by Cecilia Tsong

