Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L29 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.084064
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


   Lesson No: 29                    Date: 6th October 2011


Question: With regard to purification, when you  have  purified  the  karma,
does that mean you have gotten rid of that karma or have you done  something
to stop the conditions for that karma to ripen?

Answer: When the karma is completely purified, then obviously you  will  not
have to experience any fruitional effects of  that  action;  in  particular,
when you have purified the negative karma with the application of  the  four
opponent powers. That will be explained later in this section.

Question: It was mentioned that the magnification of the negative  karma  is
due to the prevalence of the three afflictions in our  mental  continua.  It
was also taught that it is  difficult  for  positive  karma  to  magnify  by
itself due to the prevalence of these afflictions.

Khen Rinpoche: Before you carry on with your question,  I  wish  to  clarify
that whatever I said about the magnification of karma in the previous  class
was my personal opinion. I cannot decisively say that that is the intent  of
the text. Whatever I mentioned in the previous class were  my  own  thoughts
on this subject.

Having said that, I am not saying that you cannot  raise  any  objection  to
what I had said. If any of you feel that perhaps my opinion is not  correct,
there is always room for discussion.

Question: Since we have prevalent afflictions, you  mentioned  that  if  one
does not do anything to our positive karma, it would not grow  the  way  our
negative karma grows. In order for our small virtue to  grow,  can  that  be
done through the seven-limb practices of rejoicing and dedication?

Answer: We looked at the general characteristics of karma  in  the  previous
lesson. The first characteristic is  the  certainty  of  karma.  The  second
characteristic is the magnification of karma. These  are  mentioned  in  the
teachings but we have to think about them.

Yes, karma magnifies but we should think how that process  of  magnification
happens. Karma (or action) is a composed  phenomenon.   Therefore  in  order
for it to increase, there must be conditions for  that  to  happen.  In  the
case of non-virtuous actions, when we link them with  our  afflictions,  our
afflictions are like the fuel for the growth of non-virtue.

How then does virtue increase? It is not just limited to a few  things  such
as the seven-limb  practices.  There  must  be  other  conditions.  Perhaps,
virtuous states of mind are the conditions for virtue to increase.  When  we
take vows, whether they are pratimoksha vows, bodhisattva vows,  or  tantric
vows, these vows are also the conditions for virtue  to  increase.  This  is
what I think.

Question: Under the general precepts, let’s say someone has shaven his  head
and put on the robes but in his mental continuum, he does not have  the  two
causes of going for refuge. Am I correct to say that he is not a Buddhist?

Answer:  Yes.

Question: On page 80 of the text,  it  says,  “Also,  those  who  enjoy  the
effects of the Teacher’s accumulation  of  an  incalculable  collection  [of
merits], do not need to accumulate all its causes,  however,  they  need  to
accumulate part of them.” What is this  “part”  that  sentient  beings  from
their own side need to accumulate  in  order  to  enjoy  the  merit  of  the
Teacher’s accumulation?

Another question is with regard to the third characteristic  of  karma:  Not
experiencing the effects of actions that you have  not  done.  The  King  of
Concentration Sutra states, “Plus  you  cannot  but  touch  your  deeds/What
others did you will not feel.”  Does “others” here exclude the buddhas?

Answer: The essential understanding that you must get  from  the  discussion
on the characteristics of karma is that, in order to experience any  result,
you must have accumulated the karma to experience it. Just  because  someone
else has created  the  cause,  that  alone  does  not  mean  that  you  will
experience the result. If you do not create the cause from your  side,  then
there is no way for you to experience any result.  Having  said  that,  then
there is no internal contradiction.

Student: It says that Shakyamuni Buddha  accumulated  the  merit  to  attain
buddhahood. He also accumulated a lot of merit  to  benefit  his  followers.
But if the followers do not accumulate part of the causes  themselves,  then
they will not enjoy these benefits because they have not created the  causes
to do so.

Student: I think Shakyamuni Buddha said that those who live purely by  their
vows will not go hungry. The cause then is to live purely by the vows.
Khen Rinpoche: There are many causes that we can posit. We cannot  just  say
one particular cause.

    2B4B-2B1A-2B1B     Considering the specific divisions

         1  Indication [/Showing] that there are mainly ten paths of action
         2  Establishing actions and effects


    2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-1   Indication [/showing] that there are mainly ten
    paths of action

         A  Explanation that there are ten in the sutras and treatises (Page
         80)

Prior to this, there was a discussion on the  four  general  characteristics
of karma. After such a discussion, these  questions  will  arise:  how  then
should I live my life? What do I need to engage in and what  do  I  need  to
avoid? What are the positive actions and what are the negative actions?

In order to answer these questions, the next section explains the ten  paths
of action. Although they do not include all virtues  and  non-virtues,   the
most important actions can be  condensed  into  these  ten.  The  ethics  of
refraining from the ten non-virtuous actions is said to be very important.

         B  Explanation of cherishing the adoption and abandonment of the
         ten [paths of action]

Therefore, the meaning of the praise to  ethical  discipline  of  abandoning
the ten non-virtuous [paths of action] from the Sutra on  the  Ten  Grounds,
is summarily stated in Entry to the Middle Way[1]:

         For high status and for certain goodness
         Of ordinary beings, those born from the [Buddha’s] speech
         Of those with the nature of self-enlightenment,
         The Jinas’ children - the cause is not other than discipline.

  • “Ordinary beings” refers to those beings who have not entered the  path.
    In order for them to practise, they need a suitable  basis  for  a  good
    rebirth. In order to achieve this, they need to  create  the  cause  and
    there is no higher cause than the practice of ethics.
  • “Those born from the [Buddha’s] speech” refers to the hearers  who  have
    entered the path.
  • “Those with the nature of self-enlightenment”  refers  to  the  solitary
    realisers.
  • “The Jinas’ children” refers to the bodhisattvas.
This verse is saying that the practice  of  ethics  is  very  important  for
everyone, whether you are an ordinary being, a hearer, solitary realiser  or
bodhisattva.

         C  Giving up hypocrisy

In the Kshitigarbha Sutra it says:

         By means of these ten virtuous paths  [of  actions]  you  become  a
         buddha. On the other hand, if one who does not guard even a  single
         virtuous path of action throughout his life and yet says: “I  am  a
         Mahayanist. I seek unsurpassed, perfectly complete  enlightenment”,
         that person is a thorough hypocrite and great liar,  deceiving  the
         world in front  [/before  the  eyes?]  of  all  the  bhagavans  and
         propounding nihilism. He will die deluded and  go  to  the  wrongly
         fallen.

“Wrongly fallen” should be understood as  a  synonym  for  the  utterly  bad
migrations (Page 81).

The point is that protecting the ethics of  refraining  from  the  ten  non-
virtuous actions is of vital importance.

    2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2        Determination of actions and effects

         A  Negative actions and [their] effects
         B  Positive actions and [their] effects
         C  Indication of other divisions of actions


    2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A  Negative actions and [their] effects

         1  The actual negative paths of action
         2  Differences in weight
         3  Indication of the effects


    2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1 The actual negative paths of action

         A  The actual paths of action
         B  Distinction between action and path (Pages 81 - 82)
The discussion of the  non-virtuous  actions  and  their  effects  primarily
focuses on the ten non-virtuous actions.

    2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A     The actual paths of action

         1  Killing [/Taking life]
         2  Stealing
         3  Sexual misconduct
         4  Lying
         5  Divisive speech
         6  Harmful speech
         7  Meaningless speech
         8  Covetousness
         9  Harmful intent
         10 Wrong views

    2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-1   Killing [Taking life]

         A  Basis
         B  Attitude
         C  Performance
         D  Completion (Page 82)

There  are  four  categories  in  the  discussion  of  killing:  the  basis,
attitude, performance, and completion or culmination of  the  action.  These
categories appear in the discussion for all the ten non-virtuous actions.

    2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-1A  Basis (Page 82)

For the action of killing,  the  basis  is  killing  another  living  being.
Someone who commits suicide is committing a negative action but it is not  a
complete action of killing. For an act of killing to be  a  complete  action
of killing, the basis has to be another living being.



    2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-1B  Attitude

         1  Discrimination (Page 82)

You must also be clear and unmistaken in your mind that the  being  you  are
killing is a living  being.  If  you  are  mistaken  with  respect  to  that
discrimination  or  recognition,  then  again  the  action  of  killing   is
incomplete. For example, you set out to kill someone  called  Devadatta  but
you mistook Yajnadatta for Devadatta and you kill  Yajnadatta  instead.  The
act of killing is not a complete  action  of  killing  because  you  had  no
intention of killing Yajnadatta.

Another example is that you have the plan to kill someone  called  Devadatta
but along the way, you have the idea that you are going to kill  anyone  who
comes along. Since you have the attitude that it does  not  matter  who  you
kill, that action of killing will become a complete action of killing.

         2  Mental affliction

The [decisive] mental affliction is any of the three poisons.

         3  Motivation

The motivation consists in the wish to kill (Page 82).

If you do not have the motivation to kill, even after the act of killing  is
done, it does not become a complete action of killing.


    B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-1C   Performance

         1  The performer [?*]

It is the same whether you yourself do the performance or whether you  cause
someone else to do it.

         2  The essence of the performance

The essence of the performance is to do it by means  of  a  weapon,  poison,
mantra, or whatever it is.

    2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-1D  Completion

The completion consists in the death [of the other being] due  to  condition
of the performance, at that time or at  another  time  before  you  yourself
die.

Whether you carry out the action of killing  yourself  or  you  ask  someone
else to do it, when the basis, the person, dies before you, then the  action
of killing is complete. However, if you should die before the  person  dies,
then the action of killing is incomplete. As long as  the  person  dies,  it
does not matter whether you learn about the death of the person or not.

    2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-2   Stealing


    2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-2D  Completion (Page 83)

With regard to stealing, there  is  a  qualm  as  to  whether  you  need  to
generate the thought, “I have  obtained  the  object,”  before  the  act  of
stealing is complete. The final analysis is that that is not necessary.  For
example, you ask someone to  steal  something  on  your  behalf.  When  that
person steals the object and generates the thought, “Now the  object  is  in
my hands,” even though you have not yet gotten hold  of  the  stolen  object
and generated the thought,  “I  have  obtained  the  object,”  that  act  of
stealing is complete.

    2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-3   Sexual misconduct (Page 83)


    2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-3B   Attitude

         1  Three positions of scholars on discrimination

Among the three [aspects] of attitude, with respect to discrimination:
      - the Compendium states that “a discrimination of that as  that”  –  a
non-mistaken one is necessary
      - the vinaya states that with regard to a  defeat  of  impure  conduct
[/for a defeat to occur], it is   the same  whether  the  discrimination  is
mistaken or non-mistaken
      - the Commentary  on  the  Treasury  explains  that  if  you  approach
someone  else’s  wife  discriminating  her  to  be  yours,  this  will   not
constitute the path  of  action  [under  discussion],  and  that  there  are
[/explains] two ways in which  getting  involved  with  [/entering]  someone
else’s wife, perceiving her to be that of someone else yet, may or  may  not
[constitute such a path] (Page 84).

These three: killing, stealing, and sexual misconduct are the physical  non-
virtuous actions. Then there are the four non-virtuous  actions  of  speech:
lying, divisive speech, harsh words (or offensive  speech),  and  idle  talk
(or meaningless speech).

    2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-4   Lying


         2  Object of comprehension (Page 84)

Lying is when the recipient of the lie comprehends the meaning of  the  lie.

The performance is indicating something through speaking,  through  choosing
not to speak, or through gesture. A  lie  is  a  lie.  It  does  not  matter
whether you speak for your own purposes or for the sake of others.

    2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-4C2B      Three approaches concerning the
    distinction between the actual path of action being incomplete if you
    enjoin [/urge] someone else to do it

         1  The approach of the Treatise on the Grounds[2]

Here it is stated that with respect to lying,  divisive  speech,  and  harsh
words, even through enjoining [someone else], these three will come about.

         2  Vasubandhu’s approach

In the Treasury, the root text and its Commentary, it is explained that  all
four associated  with  speech  become  paths  of  action  through  enjoining
[someone else to perform them].

         3  The approach of of the vinaya is to join them to the downfalls

In the vinaya it is stated that in order to  produce  a  complete  downfall,
you yourself must speak (Page 85).

 • According to Arya Asanga, causing others to  engage  in  the  three  non-
   virtues of speech, i.e., lying, divisive speech, or offensive speech,  is
   the same as engaging in them oneself. It seems that  he  is  saying  that
   meaningless speech is excluded here.
 • However, according to Vasubandhu  in  his  Treasury  of  Knowledge  Auto-
   commentary, he says that  all  four  verbal  non-virtues,  which  include
   meaningless speech, constitute paths of action when you cause  others  to
   engage in them.
 • According to the vinaya, the text on discipline, you yourself must  speak
   in order to incur a full infraction.
These are the three systems.

I think for lying, divisive speech, and offensive speech, the  other  person
has to comprehend what is being said. It is said that if you  are  lying  or
you are engaging in divisive or offensive speech but the recipient does  not
understand the meaning of what you are  saying,  then  it  does  not  become
lying, divisive, or offensive speech. Rather, that action of speech  becomes
meaningless speech.

For meaningless speech, as long as one says something meaningless,  then  it
became meaningless speech. It does not require someone  else  to  understand
what you are saying. These are the four verbal non-virtues.

Next are the three mental non-virtues:
   1. Covetousness
   2. Malice
   3. Wrong view

    2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-8   Covetousness (Page 86)

In  terms  of  the  mental  non-virtues,  for  example   covetousness,   the
motivation, performance, and completion have to be of a single continuum  of
thought in the same mental continuum. For  example,  covetousness  with  the
motivation desiring to make some object as  one’s  own,  when  that  thought
becomes stronger, then that is the performance of the act  of  covetousness.
When  one  generates  the  thought,  “May  it  become  mine,”  that  is  the
culmination of covetousness.

    2B4B-2B1A-2B1B-2A1A-10  Wrong views


         A  Denying causes


         B  Denying effects (page 87)

In this context, wrong view is primarily the view  of  deprecation:  denying
the existence  of  something  that  actually  exists  such  as  denying  the
existence of reincarnation, or denying the existence of  actions  and  their
effect.

Question: Is killing someone to relieve his pain considered killing?

Answer: Yes, it is considered killing. Sometimes the way we think, it is  as
if we don’t accept reincarnation. When you  think  about  reincarnation  and
visualise that karma, the suffering of the next  life  is  much  worse  than
this one. Compared to the suffering in the next life, the suffering in  this
life is nothing. It is very small.

When you don’t think about past and future lives, by  helping  a  person  to
end his life, then that is the end of that. But if you think about past  and
future lives and karma, by helping that  person  to  die  earlier,  you  are
actually sending him off  more  quickly  to  face  more  suffering.  If  the
motivation is really one of great compassion, it is  still  killing  but  it
does not become a complete act of killing.

Question: Can you please explain the restrictions on women with whom one  is
not  allowed  to  have  sexual  intercourse  with,  i.e.,  women  under  the
protection of their families or kings? These restrictions seem  archaic  and
outdated in our 21st century world.

Answer: The essence is that if the object of sexual misconduct is  protected
by or is a partner of someone else, when  you  have  intercourse  with  that
person, it becomes sexual  misconduct.   It  does  not  matter  whether  the
person is protected by the king or family.  Someone  else  is  being  harmed
when one engages in sexual misconduct in that way.

We will discuss the difference between actions and paths of  action  in  the
next class. This can be challenging. You should read the text from  page  88
onwards and think about it. Read the section on the distinctions  of  weight
such as the criteria for powerful actions and the specific  effects  of  the
ten non-virtuous actions.

Next Tuesday will be the last class for the year.

It is very important that you read the text on your own. Please do that.  If
you do have any questions after reading the  text,  you  should  write  them
down immediately. I will just briefly explain the text  during  class.  When
you have questions, you can  bring  them  up  for  discussion  in  class.  I
thought to change the way the class should be conducted:
 • You read the text and come up with questions.
 • I will summarise what is in the text.
 • When you have any questions, you can bring them up for discussion.
I think this is the best way of learning.

For those who really cannot read the text  for  whatever  reasons,  such  as
lack of time  and  so  forth,  you  can  rely  on  the  study  aids  (notes,
summaries, etc.) provided by the group leaders.

Just as you have faith in the Buddhadharma, you should act like it  when  it
comes to your studies and as much as possible put effort into learning.

Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; Transcribed by Phuah Soon  Ek  and  Vivien
Ng; Edited by Cecilia Tsong; Checked by Shirley Soh
-----------------------
[1] This text by Chandrakirti is also known as the Commentary on the
“Middle Way.”
[2] This outline refers to the view of Arya Asanga.

