Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M1 L04 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.105550
================================================================================



Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi

Root text:The Middle Length Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by  Trijiang  Rinpoche  are
in small lettertype, to be distinguished from Lama Tsongkhapa’s own  outline
that is in larger lettertype.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


Lesson No: 4                                   Date: 21st June 2011



    2B2C   Presentation of [this text] as possessing the four greatnesses

         1  The greatness of recognizing all teachings as non-contradictory
         2  The greatness of all of the Buddha’s teachings dawning on you as
           useful instructions
         3  The greatness of allowing you easily to find the meaning
         intended by the Buddha
         4  The greatness of a grave misdeed stopping by itself


    2B2C-1 The greatness of recognizing all teachings as non-contradictory

The greatness of these instructions of this text  has  four  [aspects].  The
first of these [is] the greatness  of  recognizing  all  teachings  as  non-
contradictory.

         A  Identifying the teachings

Everything the Jina has said (Pages 7 – 8).

What constitute the teachings that are being presented here? Everything  the
Jina (or the Conqueror) has explained. The teachings of the  Buddha  can  be
divided into: (1) scriptural teachings and (2) realisational teachings
The teachings referred to in terms of the first  greatness,  “The  greatness
of recognizing all teachings as non-contradictory”  are,  in  this  context,
the scriptural teachings or the three scriptural collections.

What about the realisational teachings?  They  refer  to  the  three  higher
trainings that are: (1)  the  higher  training  in  ethics  (2)  the  higher
training in concentration and (3) the higher training in wisdom.

You can also understand the scriptural teachings as those scriptures that
contain the information regarding what you should put into practice and  the
realisational teachings as referring to those methods that you are  supposed
to put into practice. This is another way of  understanding  the  scriptural
and the realisational teachings.

When it comes to preserving or upholding the Buddhadharma, the  Buddhadharma
consists  of  these  two:  (1)  the  scriptural  teachings   and   the   (2)
realisational teachings.

How do you preserve and uphold the scriptural teachings?  First,  you  study
and understand the  scriptures.  On  the  basis  of  understanding  all  the
scriptures, you then cause others to gain a  similar  understanding  of  the
scriptures.  When  you  do  this,  you  are  preserving  and  upholding  the
scriptural teachings.

How  do  you  preserve  and  uphold   the   realisational   teachings?   The
realisational teachings are the three higher trainings.  By  possessing  the
three higher trainings in your own mental continuum, on the  basis  of  your
realisation, you then spread these teachings to  others.  This  is  what  is
meant by preserving and upholding the realisational teachings.

It is very important that you understand:
   • what are the Buddha’s teachings and,
   • what it means to preserve and uphold the Buddha’s teachings
From your own side, you should see how you can contribute to  the  upholding
of the Buddha’s teachings. It is the responsibility of each  and  every  one
of us here to preserve and  uphold  the  Buddhadharma,  because  all  of  us
believe that the Buddha’s teachings are very wonderful, good and  pure.  You
should always think about how you can contribute  to  the  preservation  and
flourishing of the Buddha’s teaching in this world.

The preservation and flourishing of the Buddhadharma do  not  depend  solely
on the existence of the texts and scriptures. The texts and  scriptures  may
be there but the preservation and flourishing of the Buddhadharma depend  on
people who understand the meaning of those scriptures. In order to  preserve
and to help the teaching to spread, first, the  meaning  of  the  scriptures
must be understood.


         B  How all these teachings are recognized as non-contradictory

They all come to be understood as one person’s path to Buddhahood.  That  is
to say some are  primary  points  of  the  path  -  others  are  appropriate
secondary points (Page 8).

With reference to how the teachings  are  free  of  contradiction,  what  is
being referred to are mainly the realisational teachings. We talk about  the
path of a person of small  capacity,  the  path  of  a  person  of  middling
capacity and the path of a person of great capacity. By  understanding  that
the paths of the three types of person support one another,  then  you  have
realised that the realisational teachings are free of contradiction.

Let us take, as an example, the path of the  person  of  middling  capacity.
The person of middling capacity mainly strives to  overcome  the  attraction
to future lives in samsara and to develop the wish  to  achieve  liberation.
The main focus of this person is developing  the  thought  of  renunciation,
the determination to be free from cyclic existence.

But as a preliminary or branch practice, this person  must  first  cultivate
the meditation on the human life of freedom and endowments as  well  as  the
meditation on death and impermanence.

Let us look at the person of great capacity. The main focus of  this  person
is to develop bodhicitta (or the altruistic intention). The  development  of
bodhicitta must be based on the development of great  compassion.  In  order
to generate  great  compassion,  this  person  must  first  understand  what
suffering  is.  This  person  must  first  reflect  on  and  understand  the
suffering of samsara in relation to his own life.

On the basis of understanding samsaric  suffering,  when  that  practitioner
shifts the object from himself to other sentient beings,  he  will  then  be
able to develop great compassion for others. He will be able to develop  the
feeling that the suffering of others is unbearable. But, in order  for  this
to happen,  the  practitioner  must  first  understand  how  he  himself  is
suffering in samsara. Without that preliminary understanding,  there  is  no
way that he can develop pure, perfect compassion for others.

When we talk about realising that the teachings  are  non-contradictory,  in
the context of a person whose main goal is enlightenment, that  person  must
first train in the paths that are shared  with  the  persons  of  small  and
middling capacities.

That means that if your goal is enlightenment, you must first train  in  the
preliminary practices. First, you must overcome the preoccupation  with  the
happiness of this life by reflecting  on  topics  such  as  the  human  life
freedom and endowments, death and impermanence. The  practitioner  also  has
to overcome the attraction to the happiness of future lives in  samsara.  He
does this by generating  renunciation,  the  determination  to  be  free  of
cyclic existence. These are practices that are shared with  the  persons  of
small and middling capacities. These practices help in  the  cultivation  of
the  bodhicitta  that  one  has  not  yet  developed  and  to  increase  the
bodhicitta that one has already generated.

These teachings will not sound so alien to those of you who have heard  them
before. For those of you who have not heard many teachings or,  if  you  are
hearing this for the first time, it is unlikely  that  you  will  understand
everything. This is all right. If you have the interest, you  need  to  work
on it by reading and thinking about it again. Slowly, you will  be  able  to
understand what I have just said.

Geshe-la: Maybe two or three years ago, I returned to Sera and stayed  there
for about ten days. During that time, I went to receive  teachings  from  my
teacher. I was carrying my book when I visited  my  teacher.  On  the  first
day, he said: “I am very happy that your  book  is  so  worn  and  torn  and
black.”

At that time, I was not sure what he meant  but  he  was  very  happy  about
that. Some said that that is the sign that I have  read  the  book.  If  the
book is clean and white, then nothing has  happened.   So,  make  sure  your
book is black!

The first time when my teacher said my book was black, I  didn’t  understand
why he said that. Actually it meant that I have read  it  many  times.  That
was why my book was torn and black.

So it is good to read again and again. When you read the text once  and  you
don’t understand, don’t stop there but try to read it again  and  again.  It
is not like reciting sutras, such the Sanghatasutra, where  you  don’t  have
time to think because you are  trying  to  finish  the  recitation  quickly.
There is no time for you to think. It is not like that.  You  need  to  read
the text slowly and think about what you have read.

Let us take the example of the sentence: “Some are  primary  points  of  the
path – others are  appropriate  secondary  points.”  You  should  read  that
sentence and think about it over and over  again,  “What  is  this  sentence
saying?” It is very important to read and to think about it so that you  can
come to a definite understanding of what are the primary points of the  path
and what are the secondary points of the path. Those of you who  have  heard
the Lam-Rim before, you should have more things  to  think  about  when  you
read this particular sentence.

You will notice that there is a misconception  that  the  practices  of  the
lower paths and the practice of the Mahayana  are  contradictory,  i.e.,  if
you are practising the Mahayana, then you don’t have to practise  the  lower
paths. There is this huge misconception.

People identify the practitioners of the different traditions in  this  way:
those monks in saffron robes are  the  practitioners  or  followers  of  the
Hinayana, the Lesser Vehicle. The Chinese monks are  the  followers  of  the
Mahayana whereas the Mongolians and Tibetans are practising  the  Vajrayana,
the Secret Mantra. One classifies people according to these groups.  Looking
at these various groups, one feels as if they cannot  be  put  together  and
their practices are contradictory. This is a huge misconception.

Lama Tsongkhapa is  explaining  here  that  it  is  wrong  to  have  such  a
misconception.  When  you  regard  the   Hinayana   and   Mahayana   to   be
contradictory and in opposition to each another, like hot and cold, that  is
very wrong. Lama Tsongkhapa goes on to explain why this is  so,  by  proving
through  logic  and  reasoning,  that  the  teachings  are,  in  fact,  non-
contradictory.


         C  How it is demonstrated through scripture and logic that it would
         be contradictory not to accept this

In this regard it is the bodhisattva’s wish to work for the welfare  of  the
world. For that purpose it is also necessary to care for all three types  of
disciples and therefore train in their respective paths (page 8).

The  main  wish  of  a  bodhisattva  is  to  benefit  sentient  beings.  The
bodhisattva generates bodhicitta (or the altruistic intention) to  work  for
the benefit all sentient beings.

In terms of the object to be subdued, there are three  types  of  disciples.
In order to benefit the respective types of disciples, you have to  generate
in  them  the  qualities  and  practices  that  are  appropriate  for   that
particular kind of disciple. In order for you to be able  to  do  that,  you
yourself, as an aspiring bodhisattva, must have realised what you are  about
to teach.

For instance, when a bodhisattva works for a  disciple  who  is  predisposed
towards the lesser vehicle, the Hinayana, he must  be  able  to  place  that
person on and guide him along the Hinayana path:
 • In order for that bodhisattva to be able to do that, he  must  know  what
   the Hinayana path is.
 • In order for the bodhisattva to know what the Hinayana path is,  he  must
   have the experience of having practised the Hinayana teachings.
 • Therefore, the bodhisattva must practise the Hinayana teachings in  order
   to work for people of the Hinayana lineage.

As a bodhisattva, if you were to think, “The Hinayana path is not  necessary
and I don’t have to learn it,” you can see, through reasoning, that this  is
wrong. In fact, you do need to do so because, in order for  you  to  benefit
people of the Hinayana lineage, you must know the Hinayana path  that  comes
from the practice of the Hinayana teachings. You can see how this is  proven
through reasoning.

Do you see the reason now, why, as a bodhisattva,  you  cannot  abandon  the
Hinayana teachings? You have to see the reason  for  yourself  in  order  to
remove this huge misconception that the Hinayana path is  not  necessary  to
someone  practising  the  Mahayana  path.  How  else  can  you  remove  that
misconception and wrong view that is so prevalent, other than by  using  the
logic and reasoning that I have just presented to  you?  This  is  something
that you must understand. This is how it is established that  the  teachings
are non-contradictory through reasoning.

As a support to the use of  logic,  what  is  employed  next  is  scriptural
authority.

This is because it is explained  by  the  venerable  Maitreya  that  knowing
paths  of  the  three  vehicles  constitutes  the  means  of  realizing  the
bodhisattvas’ goals (Page 8).

This is  establishing  that  the  teachings  are  non-contradictory  through
scriptural authority. The scriptural quotation is from a  text  by  Maitreya
“that knowing the paths of the  three  vehicles  constitutes  the  means  of
realising the bodhisattvas’ goals.”

The Buddha said  something  similar  in  the  Perfection  of  Wisdom  Sutra:
“Bodhisattvas should produce all paths - whatever is a path of a  Hearer,  a
Solitary Realiser or a Buddha – and should know all paths. They should  also
perform the deeds of these paths and bring all of them to  completion.”  The
Buddha is saying that the bodhisattvas must know these paths thoroughly  and
then bring them to completion. But that is not  all.  After  bringing  these
paths to completion, the bodhisattvas must work for the benefit of  sentient
beings.

You can clearly see here that the Buddha himself said that,  as  a  follower
of the Mahayana, one must train in the path of the Hinayana.  Therefore,  it
is a huge mistake to hold on to the view that,  as  a  practitioner  of  the
Mahayana, one does not need the Hinayana.

There are other proofs that the teachings are non-contradictory.


         D  Establishing that the teachings are non-contradictory

In the Mahayana path there is the common and the uncommon[1]. The former  is
that which originates from the Hinayana collection of  scriptures  -  except
for some peculiarities that are not  common,  to  do  with  the  thought  of
aspiring to individual liberation and the like (Page 8).

There are two divisions to the Mahayana path: (1) the shared  Mahayana  path
and (2) the unshared Mahayana path

“The former is  that  which  originates  from  the  Hinayana  collection  of
scriptures” refers to those practices in the Mahayana path that  are  common
(or shared) with the  Hinayana.  These  include  the  teachings  on  refuge,
karma,  the  general  and   specific   sufferings   of   cyclic   existence,
renunciation (or the thought to be liberated from cyclic existence) and  the
presentations of the Four  Noble  Truths,  the  twelve  links  of  dependent
origination and the stages of the three higher  trainings.  These  teachings
originate from the Hinayana  collection  of  scriptures  and  must  also  be
practised by a person following the Mahayana path.

“Except for some peculiarities that are not common, to do with  the  thought
of aspiring to individual liberation and  the  like”:  the  general  way  of
progressing  along  the  path,  as  taught  in   the   Hinayana   scriptural
collection, is something that should be practised  by  those  following  the
Mahayana, with only a few exceptions. An  exception  will  be  the  uncommon
feature of the Hinayana, i.e., focusing on achieving  individual  liberation
for oneself. A Mahayana follower does not cultivate that.

The unshared Mahayana path refers to those practices that  are  specific  to
the Mahayana and not any other path.

Next is stating other proofs that the teachings are non-contradictory.

Apart from that, it is not that faults are partially  ceased  and  qualities
are partially completed in perfectly complete  buddhahood,  but  rather  all
kinds of faults have been eliminated and all types  of  good  qualities  are
complete. Consequently, as the Mahayana, achieving this, also  brings  about
the cessation of all faults and the development of all good  qualities,  the
path of the Mahayana comprises all  the  various  aspects  of  qualities  of
abandonment and realization of all other vehicles. That is why the  sections
of the Mahayana path,  which  brings  about  Buddhahood,  comprise  all  the
Buddha’s teachings, for there is no utterance of  the  Muni  that  does  not
cause the cessation  of  some  faults  and  the  development  of  some  good
qualities, and because it is not the case that all of this  is  not  brought
about by the Mahayana (Page 8).

You must realise that the  teachings  are  non-contradictory.  There  is  no
contradiction between the Hinayana teachings and the Mahayana teachings.  If
you are  a  follower  of  the  Mahayana,  you  must  practise  the  Hinayana
teachings. As to why this is the case, this is proved  through  reasons  and
scriptural authority.

The way to enter the Mahayana path is by having  the  foundation  of  having
practised the Hinayana teachings.  On  this  basis,  you  then  add  on  the
Mahayana practices. That is how you progress along the  Mahayana  path.  You
do not enter the Mahayana right from the start, by discarding  the  Hinayana
practices. That is not the case.

When you  understand  the  reasons  and  the  proofs  of  why  the  Hinayana
practices are essential for someone following the Mahayana  path,  then  you
will be able to eliminate this misconception either in your own mind or  the
minds of others. Otherwise, without this understanding, you  may  think  the
Hinayana and the Mahayana are like hot and cold. They are contradictory  and
have nothing to do with one another.

When you have such an attitude, there is a likelihood  that  you  will  look
down at the lesser vehicle, the Hinayana, thinking, “What is the use of  the
Hinayana teachings? It has nothing to do with me.”  Such  negative  thoughts
and misconceptions will arise in your mind when you do  not  understand  the
reasons.

When you do understand the reasons, then you will be able to appreciate  and
have a pure view of the teachings of the  Hinayana.  Knowing  the  teachings
are non-contradictory comes from the knowledge that comes from studying  and
understanding the  teachings.  Without  learning,  in  detail,  the  various
teachings and texts, it is difficult to appreciate and  to  understand  that
the teachings are non-contradictory and that they, in fact,  complement  one
another. Therefore, studying and learning is very important.

Having said all this, it is still possible to develop a doubt (or qualm)  in
relation to the Mahayana versus the Vajrayana. It is  possible  that  people
think that these two paths are unrelated, that they have nothing to do  with
one another as if they were two separate things and are contradictory.


         E  Clearing up doubts

If you think: ‘That may be true for the  Paramitayana,  but  not  for  those
entering the Vajrayana’: Although the way you train in  the  Paramitayana  -
in countless clear distinctions that clarify  giving  etc.  -  is  different
from mantra, the behavioural basis - the generation of the mind  -  and  the
coarse form of the path of training in the six perfections,  the  behaviour,
is nevertheless the same and therefore something shared by them (Page 8).

You must understand that the  path  of  the  Vajrayana  is  a  path  of  the
Mahayana,  which  comprises  of  the  two:  (1)   the   Perfection   Vehicle
(Paramitayana) and (2) the Vajra Vehicle (Vajrayana). Whether a  path  is  a
Mahayana path or not is determined primarily by the presence  of  bodhicitta
(or the altruistic  intention).  If  it  is  a  Mahayana  path,  the  common
Mahayana  practices  are  generating  bodhicitta  and  practising   the  six
perfections. This means that even a follower of the Mahayana Vajrayana  must
cultivate bodhicitta and  must  also  cultivate  the  practice  of  the  six
perfections. Can one train in the path of Vajrayana but  discard  bodhicitta
and the practice of the six perfections? The answer is no.

Having said that, there is a difference between  the  Mahayana  Paramitayana
and the Mahayana Vajrayana.  In  the  Mahayana  Perfection  Vehicle,  it  is
taught that you have to cultivate the practice of the  six  perfections  for
an immeasurable  length  of  time,  such  as  collecting  merit  over  three
countless great eons. Although the six  perfections  must  be  practised  by
someone following the  Vajrayana,  it  is  not  taught  that  the  Vajrayana
practitioner has to practise the six perfections for such a long  period  of
time.

As I mentioned earlier, it is unlikely that those of  you  who  are  hearing
this for the first time will be  able  to  understand  everything.  That  is
normal, so don’t worry. Those of you who have been studying all this  while,
when you read this now, you will probably understand what I am saying.

One of the reasons why those of you, who are  hearing  this  for  the  first
time, are unable to understand is because the Lam-Rim  is  a  teaching  that
condenses  all  the  subject  matter  of  the  entire  Buddhadharma  into  a
relatively short text.  It  is  wide-ranging  in  its  coverage  of  subject
matter. Therefore, when you have not heard this before or have not done  any
prior studies, it is challenging and it is normal not to be able  understand
everything. The point is not to get discouraged.

With regard to the difference between the Mahayana  Perfection  Vehicle  and
the  Mahayana  Vajra  Vehicle,  both  are  Mahayana  paths  and   are   non-
contradictory. It is impossible to come to that understanding when you  have
not studied these two paths, because, in order to understand that  they  are
non-contradictory, you must first know  the  presentation  of  the  Mahayana
paths, i.e., what constitutes the whole  Mahayana  vehicle.  You  must  have
also studied and understood  the  presentation  of  the  whole  tantric  (or
Vajrayana) paths and grounds. Only after having understood these  two  paths
in detail, then you will be able to understand that these two teachings  are
non-contradictory.

Summary
For today, you just need to keep the following in your mind:
   • Lama Tsongkhapa mentioned in the text that all the teachings are  free
     of contradiction, i.e., there is no contradiction between the Hinayana
     and the Mahayana paths. As a follower of the Mahayana path,  you  also
     must practise the Hinayana teachings.
   • Similarly,  there  is  also  no  contradiction  between  the  Mahayana
     Perfection Vehicle and the Mahayana Vajra Vehicle.  The  followers  of
     both paths need to practise bodhicitta and the  practice  of  the  six
     perfections.

In Vajra peak it says:

         Not even to sustain one’s life,
         the bodhi mind should be abandoned
and:
         The practice of the six perfections,
         must not be abandoned ever.


This is also taught in  numerous  other  mantra  texts.  In  many  authentic
sources for the mandala ritual of highest yoga tantra it says that a set  of
two vows must have been taken: a common and an uncommon one and indeed,  the
former refers to bodhisattva vows. The precious teacher also said: “My  guru
who knew how to accommodate all the teachings by means of the  path  [as  if
in] a square…” These words form the basis of a major investigation (Pages  8
– 9).

“These words form the basis of a major investigation,” means  that  this  is
something that is useful for you to think about.

When taking Highest Yoga Tantric empowerments, one needs to  take  both  the
shared and unshared vows. The shared vows refer to something that is  common
to the four classes of tantra, specifically, the bodhisattva vows.

                                ************
Doing homework or exams should not be the cause of worry or stress.  If  you
want to learn and have chosen to commit to  the  Program,  then  you  should
follow up on that commitment.

Those of you who are unable to commit to the full Program,  as  of  now,  or
are not ready for exams, you can come to the class as much as you  can,  pay
attention and relax.

Those of you who want to  do  the  full  five-year  Program  but  have  also
decided that you do not want the certificate or to take the exams,  that  is
also completely fine with me. So there is no cause for worry.  Some  of  you
want to study but are worried and stressed about taking the exams. So it  is
your choice.

The most important thing here is that all of you must enjoy your  time  here
and the process of studying.

There is a purpose to having homework and doing the exams.  All  of  us  are
the same. When there is no pressure applied  on  us,  we  will  take  things
easy. However, when some pressure is applied, for some,  this  is  necessary
and is good as it makes them study.

The only reason for having exams and tests is to help you in  your  studies.
Of course, during the preparation for the exams,  obviously,  you  may  meet
with some difficulties and  hardships.  On  the  basis  of  recognising  the
purpose of  such  tests  and  exams,  you  should  put  up  with  the  minor
difficulties that may occur.

Homework
The point here is to write after you have thought about the  questions.  The
purpose is to come to some feeling, in your heart, that the  Buddha,  Dharma
and Sangha exist, that they are not imaginary.  It  is  important  that  you
write what you feel in your heart. The purpose of this exercise is  to  make
the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha come alive in your mind.  So  write  what  you
think. Think that you are in a situation where  you  have  to  help  someone
clear his doubts. For example, someone asks you, “Can you explain to me,  in
simple terms, what are the two truths and the Four Noble Truths? How  can  I
make the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha come  alive  for  myself?”  How  are  you
going to help this person? Write what  you  are  going  to  say,  from  your
heart, to this person.

The  homework  is  to  prepare  a  short  essay,  answering  the   following
questions:
1. Explain the nature of reality, i.e., how the two truths  are  present  on
   any chosen basis or object.
2. On the basis of that understanding of  the  two  truths,  how  does  that
   validate the Four Noble Truths?
3. Having understood how the two truths validate the Four Noble Truths,  how
   does that understanding help you to validate the existence of  the  Three
   Jewels?
4. What are the main obstacles that prevent you from actualising  the  Three
   Jewels?
5. What are the favourable conditions for actualising the Three Jewels?
Deadline for handing up the homework: Tuesday, 5th July 2011

Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng
Edited by Cecilia Tsong
Checked by Shirley Soh
-----------------------
[1] “The common and the uncommon” can also be translated as “shared and
unshared.”

