Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M1 L03 (final upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.415135
================================================================================



Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi

Root  text  from  The  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,   with
additional outlines by  Trijang  Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;
Penultimate Edition, May 2008 Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by  Trijiang  Rinpoche  are
in small lettertype, to be distinguished from Lama Tsongkhapa’s own  outline
that is in larger lettertype.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


Lesson No: 3                                    Date: 16th June 2011


We will recite the Praise to  Manjushri  by  visualising  Manjushri  in  the
space in front of us and then recite the mantra, OM AH RA PA CHA NA DHI.

With  regard  to  the  meaning  of  Manjushri,  there  is  a  Manjushri   of
interpretive meaning (or provisional meaning) and a Manjushri of  definitive
meaning. The definitive Manjushri is the final or ultimate  wisdom  directly
perceiving  emptiness  and  that  arising  as  a  peaceful  deity   is   the
interpretative Manjushri.

When we talk about the guru, there is also the interpretative guru  and  the
definitive lama. This ultimate wisdom directly perceiving emptiness is  also
the meaning of the definitive guru. Since that is the  case,  the  guru  and
Manjushri are of one essence, i.e., they have the same entity.

The interpretive Manjushri and the interpretive guru have different  aspects
performing different activities. But  when  you  look  at  their  definitive
meanings, they are one and the same.

So, before  reciting  the  Praise  to  Manjushri,  the  first  thing  is  to
visualise Manjushri as inseparable from your  root  guru  in  the  space  in
front of you. Try to do that well and also  try  to  develop  single-pointed
faith and devotion towards Guru Manjushri.

This is what you should do at the  beginning  of  the  seven-limb  practice:
develop single-pointed faith and devotion towards  Guru  Manjushri.  On  the
basis of that, you then visualise making extensive offerings of  your  roots
of virtue and all the merit that you accumulated. That is like creating  the
cause. You visualise your roots of virtue or  merit  transforming  into  the
different offering substances, filling up all of space and offering them  to
Guru Manjushri.[1]

The third limb is the limb of confession. Having  made  extensive  offerings
to Guru Manjushri, think that  a  very  special  kind  of  great  bliss  and
happiness has been generated  in  his  holy  mind.  As  a  result  of  that,
visualise that a stream of nectar flowing  from  his  holy  body  into  you,
completely purifying all your negativities and obscurations.

Next is feeling happy and rejoicing in your merit and virtue. You have  just
developed single-pointed faith  in  and  devotion  towards  Guru  Manjushri.
That, in itself, helps you to accumulate an immeasurable  amount  of  merit.
Likewise,  you  have  made  extensive  offerings  that  also  help  you   to
accumulate a lot of merit  and,  having  confessed  your  negativities,  you
managed to purify many obscurations. So, within  a  few  minutes,  you  have
already accrued so much merit. This is something that you should feel  happy
about and rejoice in.

Likewise, you should also rejoice in the fact that  there  are  many  people
like you here, coming to class, accumulating so  much  merit  and  roots  of
virtue. You should reflect  on  that  and  think,  “How  wonderful  and  how
amazing this is,” and feel happy.

Also, in this world, there are many people  who  sincerely  try  to  benefit
others. There are many Dharma practitioners. You  should  sincerely  rejoice
in and feel happy about what they are doing.

For the next two limbs, beseeching them to not to  pass  away  into  nirvana
and requesting them to turn  the  Wheel  of  Dharma,  you  should  pray  and
generate the wish, “May all the people in this world who  sincerely  benefit
others, all the practitioners, including  everyone  here  and  myself,  have
long lives so as to be able to continue doing this.”

Finally,  you  dedicate  the  merit  and  roots  of  virtue  that  you  have
accumulated. You should pray and think, “May these roots of virtue  and  the
merit that I have accumulated be of  the  greatest  benefit  to  all  living
beings.” In other words, you dedicate the merit  to  achieve  the  state  of
full enlightenment for the benefit of all living beings.

Ideally, you should spend time practising the seven limbs in  greater  depth
and detail. Due to lack of time, we can only  do  this  for  a  few  minutes
before we start the class. The point of explaining this to you  is  to  give
you an idea. Then, in  the  future,  I  don’t  have  to  repeat  this  again
whenever we recite the Praise to Manjushri. Sometimes,  I  will  remind  you
but at other times, I may not say anything. At that time,  you  should  know
how to think.
                          *************************
In the last lesson, I talked about the  three  scriptural  collections,  the
three  higher  trainings  and  how  the  three  scriptural  collections  are
differentiated.

    2B1B-2B How Atisha attained the realizational qualities of its  correct
    accomplishment


         1  How all realizational qualities are contained in the three
         trainings
         [2 How Atisha was accomplished in the three trainings]

    2B1B-2B1     How all realizational qualities are contained in the three
    trainings

Second: As, generally speaking, all the scriptural  teachings  by  the  Jina
are  contained  in  the  three  precious  collections,   the   realizational
teachings are also contained in the three precious trainings (Page 4).

In the last lesson, we looked briefly at how Lama  Atisha  gained  the  good
qualities of knowledge and how he engaged in the practices  of  hearing  and
reflecting on the teachings.

Now, we shall  look  at  how  Lama  Atisha  gained  the  good  qualities  of
experiential knowledge or the realisations. The  text  refers  to  how  Lama
Atisha practised the three higher trainings.


    2B1B-2B2     How Atisha was accomplished in the three trainings

         A  Ethical discipline
         B  His training of concentration
         C  His training of wisdom

    2B1B-2B2A    [Ethical discipline]

         1  Transition to ethical discipline
         2  How Atisha was actually accomplished in ethical discipline
         3  Proper protection [of ethical discipline]


    2B1B-2B2A-1  Transition to ethical discipline

{5} In this regard the training in ethical discipline is  often  praised  in
the  [Buddha’s]  excellent  teachings  and  in  the  commentaries   as   the
foundation of all good qualities such as the training in  concentration  and
wisdom. Therefore, it is necessary, first  of  all,  to  have  realizational
qualities in terms of ethical discipline (Page 4).

Amongst the three higher trainings, the  higher  training  in  ethics  comes
first because it serves as the basis or foundation for the  higher  training
in  concentration.  Then,  by  practising  well  the  higher   training   in
concentration, you will then be able to train well in  the  higher  training
in wisdom. The higher training in ethics is the foundation  for  the  higher
training in concentration that then acts as the foundation  for  the  higher
training in wisdom.

It is the same with  studying  the  Buddhadharma.  When  you  come  to  this
course, you are not the only person in class. There are  many  other  people
in the course. So, there is a need for rules and regulations.  When  you  do
this course, you need some kind of discipline. You need to ensure  that  you
attend classes. You need the discipline to read the text on your own and  to
revise the material. For those of you who are committed to this course,  you
need the discipline to be able to take the exams.

Maintaining that discipline with regard to  coming  to  class,  reading  and
revising the text and taking exams make a huge difference to you being  able
to continue your studies and to stay focused on what you are  trying  to  do
here. When you have the interest and  you  maintain  such  discipline  well,
then you will be able to learn whatever you have set out to  learn  and  you
will be able to understand the topics. What you will achieve in the end  can
be likened to the training in wisdom, because you have achieved knowledge.

With regard to the three higher trainings, you  shouldn’t  think  that  they
have nothing to do with you. Of course,  you  should  know  what  the  three
higher trainings  are  and  that  the  higher  training  in  ethics  is  the
foundation for the higher training in concentration that then  acts  as  the
foundation for the higher training in wisdom. Knowing that is well and  good
but you have to be able to relate them to yourself.

Here, you are trying to study.  You  should  maintain  a  strong  discipline
because what will happen if you are not  disciplined  with  regard  to  your
studies? The result will be very obvious. When you are not disciplined,  you
will not be able to sustain a strong  interest  in  and  to  focus  on  your
studies. When the  interest  and  focus  on  your  studies  are  weak,  then
obviously, you are not going to learn much. That is the result.

The text goes  on  to  explain  how  Lama  Atisha  accomplished  the  higher
training in ethics. When we refer to someone possessing the  three  sets  of
vows, they are:
 1. the individual liberation (or pratimoksha) vows that are further divided
    into the pratimoksha vows for the ordained and the pratimoksha vows  for
    the laity.
 2. the bodhisattva vows and
 3. the tantric vows

    2B1B-2B2A-2  How Atisha was actually accomplished in ethical discipline

         A  How Atisha possessed the highest vows of individual liberation

In this regard there are three  [kinds]:  How  he  possessed  the  first  of
those, the highest  vows  of  individual  liberation:  Having  received  the
bhikshu vows, he protected them the way a yak protects its coat - a  yak  is
so attached to its coat that it rather risks its  life,  trying  to  save  a
strand of tail hair that has got caught on a tree, than  to  part  with  it,
even if it sees its life is being  threatened  by  a  hunter.  That  is  how
Atisha protected every detail of the foundation of trainings, not  to  speak
of  the  major  [rules  of  the]  foundation  of  trainings  which  he   had
undertaken, so that he came to be called the elder who is a  great  upholder
of discipline (Page 4).

In the case of Lama Atisha, who was a  fully  ordained  monk,  the  vows  of
individual liberation entail many  fundamental  trainings  to  be  followed;
some major and some minor. Lama Atisha  would  cherish  even  the  so-called
minor trainings more than his life.  Losing his life was  not  as  important
to  him  as  keeping  purely  even  the  minor  trainings.  This  shows  the
importance of keeping pure ethics.


         B  How Atisha possessed the bodhisattva vows:

Bodhisattva vows: He practiced numerous instructions for training  the  mind
of enlightenment which is rooted in  love  and  compassion.  Especially,  in
attendance upon Serlingpa, he trained for long in the  highest  instructions
passed on by the  venerable  Maitreya  and  Manjugosha  through  Asanga  and
Shantideva. Thereby the mind of enlightenment  that  cherishes  others  more
than oneself, arose in his heart. This aspirational mind gave  rise  to  the
mind of active involvement[2] and due to his excellent behaviour,  i.e.  his
engagement in the trainings following the  promise  to  train  in  the  vast
conduct of  bodhisattvas,  he  never  transgressed  the  rules  of  Buddha’s
children (Page 4).

The text points out how Lama  Atisha,  on  the  basis  of  having  generated
bodhicitta, kept his bodhisattva vows very pure  without  transgressing  any
of them.


         C  How Atisha possessed Vajrayana vows

Vajrayana vows: Owing to the fact that he had the meditative  stabilisations
of the generation stage where one’s own body is seen as that of a deity  and
of the completion stage of the [indestructible] vajra mind,  {6}  he  became
chief among yogis. In  particular,  he  protected  his  tantric  commitments
properly by not transgressing the prescribed rules (Page 4 – 5).

The text then talks about how Lama Atisha protected all his vows  devotedly.


    2B2B-2B2A-3  Proper protection [of ethical discipline]

Not only did he courageously undertake the trainings in  ethical  discipline
of the three vows, he also upheld them as he had promised. He kept the  vows
without transgressing the  rules  associated  with  them,  and  even  if  he
transgressed them ever so slightly, he quickly, very quickly  purified  this
by means of a suitable ritual restoring the given vow (Page 5).

The text is not emphasising the importance of being courageous  with  regard
to taking up all the vows. The text is emphasising that, whatever  vows  you
are committed to keeping, it is important to keep them pure.  But  one  does
the complete opposite. When it comes to taking vows,  one  takes  them  very
casually and, after taking the vows, one does  not  pay  much  attention  to
them or place much emphasis on keeping them pure. As  stated  here,  in  the
text, after taking vows, you  should  protect  and  keep  them  as  pure  as
possible. If any infraction occurs, then you should immediately confess  and
purify that transgression.

The text next  talks  about  how  Lama  Atisha  possessed  the  training  in
concentration that consists of the common  concentration  and  the  uncommon
concentration


    2B1B-2B2B    Atisha’s accomplishments in the training in concentration

       1      Common
       2      Uncommon
His training of concentration has two [aspects]:  Common  concentration:  He
had achieved the serviceability of the mind of calm abiding and, as  regards
uncommon concentration, he had  the  extreme  stability  of  the  generation
stage. Furthermore, he completed the three or six years of modes of  conduct
of yogic realization disciplines (Page 5)
.
With regard to the common and uncommon concentrations, the students  of  the
previous Basic Program should know what they are. For those of you  who  are
new, it doesn’t matter at this point as we will cover them  in  the  future.
At the end of this five-year program,  you  will  understand  what  are  the
common and uncommon concentrations, the generation stage and the  completion
stage.


    2B1B-2B2C    His training of wisdom

         1  Common
         2  Uncommon

His training of wisdom has two [aspects]: The common one:  He  had  attained
the concentration of special insight which is the union of  special  insight
and  calm  abiding.  The  uncommon  one:  he  had   attained   the   special
concentration of the completion stage (Page 5).

Having gained these good qualities, what did Lama Atisha do to  further  the
teachings?

    2B1B-3 The deeds he did for the sake of the teachings, having attained
    those positive qualities

         A  Deeds in India
         B  Deeds in Tibet

The deeds he did for the sake of the  teachings  are  of  two  [types]:  his
deeds in India and his deeds in Tibet.

    2B1B-3A      Deeds in India

First: At  the  palace  of  great  enlightenment  in  Bodhgaya  he  defeated
proponents of base, non-Buddhist doctrines by  means  of  the  Dharma  three
times, thus maintaining the Buddha’s teachings. Eliminating  the  taints  of
ignorance, misconception and doubt also with regard to the teachings of  his
own upper and lower systems,  he  spread  the  teachings,  so  that  he  was
regarded  as  a  crown  jewel  by  [proponents  of]  all   factions   beyond
partiality.

    2B1B-3B      Deeds in Tibet

         1  Clearing up misconceptions about the Dharma and restoring the
         tradition
         2  Identifying the three causes of excellence in the composition of
         commentaries
         3  The ability to ascertain the Jina’s intentions due to these
         three causes {8}
         4  The special qualities of his disciples


    2B1B-3B1     Clearing up misconceptions about the Dharma and restoring
    the tradition

Deeds in Tibet: Lha Lama {7} and his nephew sent the two  great  translators
Gya-tson-seng and Nagtso Tsultrim Gyalwa to India one after  the  other.  As
they took great pains again and again to invite [Atisha], he came  to  Upper
Ngari during [the reign of] Jangchub O  and  was  requested  to  purify  the
Buddha’s teachings. Thereupon, he spread  the  teachings  by  composing  the
Lamp on the Path to Enlightenment, a text bringing together all  the  points
of sutra and tantra and condensing them into applicable stages, as  well  as
other texts. Specifically, he spent three years  in  Ngari,  nine  years  in
Nyetang and five years elsewhere in Central Tibet  and  Tsang  teaching  the
fortunate all the scriptures and instructions of sutra  and  tantra  without
exception.  Thereby  he  restored  the  tradition  of  teachings  that   had
declined, made those that remained flourish, and corrected  those  that  had
been soiled by the errors  of  misconception,  ensuring  that  the  precious
teachings were freed from all flaws (Pages 5 – 6).

There are two different accounts regarding the time when  Lama  Atisha  went
to Tibet. This text states that Lama Atisha left for Tibet  at  the  age  of
59. Another account states that he left for Tibet at the age  of  57.  There
are also different accounts with regard to how long he  remained  in  Tibet.
Based on this text, Lama Atisha went to Tibet at the age of  59  and  passed
away at the age of 73 at Nyetang. From this, you should understand that  the
source of the Buddha’s teachings that flourished in Tibet was not  something
created by the Tibetans but that Tibetan Buddhism had its source in India.

During the early dissemination of the Buddhadharma in Tibet, a  Dharma  king
invited  the  great  Nalanda  scholar,  Shantarakshita,   to   Tibet.   Guru
Padmasambhava was also invited  to  Tibet.  They  caused  the  teachings  to
flourish.

After some time,  a  Chinese  monk  from  China,  Ha-Shang,  who  proclaimed
himself to be a scholar, arrived in Tibet. He promoted  the  view  that  all
conceptual thoughts, whether good or bad, were useless and  one  only  needs
to focus on nothingness.

In order to dispel this view propounded by Ha-shang, a great  Indian  master
Kamalashila, another great Nalanda scholar, was invited to  Tibet.  He  then
refuted  and  dispelled  this  wrong  view  and,  by  doing  so,  the   pure
Buddhadharma was able to flourish again. So Kamalashila  made  the  Buddha’s
teachings pure again.

Then came a perverted Tibetan  king,  Langdharma,  who  persecuted  Buddhism
during his reign. At  that  time,  there  were  people  who  were  not  real
practitioners or real yogis and who pretended to be yogis, engaging  in  all
sorts of activities that caused great harm  to  the  Buddhadharma,  such  as
harming the practice of celibacy, the mainstay of monastic life. Due to  the
behaviour of these so-called yogis and the persecution by  King  Langdharma,
Buddhadharma declined during this period.

In order to reinstate the pure Buddhadharma,  a  Dharma  king  invited  Lama
Atisha to Tibet to restore the purity of the Dharma.

Some people may wonder about the origins of Tibetan Buddhism  and  make  all
kinds of comments. When you understand the history of Tibetan Buddhism,  you
can see that Tibetan Buddhism is not made up by  Tibetans.  It  has  a  pure
source. Great Indian masters were invited to Tibet  to  propagate  the  pure
Buddhadharma and most, if not all, were  scholars  hailing  from  the  great
monastic university of Nalanda.

Geshe-la: His Holiness often says that Tibetans are very clever because:
   • they get the best Dharma from India, as the best Dharma was from India
     at that time,
   • they got the best food from China and
   • they got the best clothes from Mongolia as Tibet is a cold  place  and
     the Tibetans need warm clothing.
The Tibetans got all the best things!

Next, the text goes on to explain the qualities  that  a  person  must  have
before he can compose a treatise.


    2B1B-3B2     Identifying the three causes of excellence in the
    composition of commentaries

There  are  three  causes  of  excellence  in  the  composition  of  a  text
clarifying the Muni’s
[i]intentions:  being  learned  in  the  five  areas  of  knowledge,  having
received instructions for the application of their  meaning  which  transmit
the instructions of the perfectly complete Buddha in  an  unbroken  line  of
exalted [masters], and having received the permission to teach  through  the
vision of a protector deity. If a text can  be  composed  with  any  one  of
these [causes of excellence] - it will turn out all the  more  excellent  if
all three are complete. This great master [, Atisha,]  possessed  all  three
(Page 6).

There are three ideal qualifications for the author of texts that  elucidate
the intent of the Buddha. The author should have:
1. mastered the five topics of knowledge,
2.  received  instructions  for  the  application  of  their  meanings  that
   transmit the instructions of the Buddha in an unbroken  line  of  exalted
   masters and,
3. received permission to teach through the vision of a chosen deity


    2B1B-3B3     The ability to ascertain the Jina’s intentions due to
    Atisha possessing these three causes {8}

         A  The care of protector deities

As for the care of protector deities, it says in the Praise:


         Of the glorious Hevajra,
         of the Samaya-vyuha-raja,
         of heroic Lokeshvara,
         noble, reverend Tara and others,
         you had visions and permissions,
         therefore, dreaming and directly
         you perpetually heard teachings
         both the ones profound and vast (Page 6).

“The care of protector deities” refers to how Lama Atisha’s  deities  looked
after him.

         B  How Atisha’s lineage is uninterrupted

[Atisha] held numerous lineages of masters such as the two lineages  of  the
shared vehicle and of the great vehicle, with regard to which there are  the
two – perfection and secret mantra vehicles. In the  perfection  vehicle  he
held three lineages: the lineages of the view and  of  conduct,  the  latter
having been passed on from Maitreya  and  from  Manjugosha.  In  the  secret
mantra he had received five types of transmission  as  well  as  many  other
lineages such as the  lineage  of  tenets,  the  lineage  of  blessings  and
lineages  of  various  instructions.  The   Gurus   from   whom   he   heard
[instructions] directly are mentioned in the Praise:

         The gurus you always relied on were
         Sintipa, Serlingpa,
         Bhadrabodhi, Jñanasri-
         many with high accomplishments.
         In particular you held
         the profound and vast instructions
         that had been transmitted from one to another
         [all the way] from Nagarjuna.


It  is  well  known  that  he  had  twelve  gurus  who  had  attained   high
accomplishments as well as many others (Pages 6 – 7).

It is said that Lama Atisha frequently had visions of deities, such as  Tara
and Chenrezig. He could communicate  with  and  receive  teachings  directly
from them. This also happened in his dreams. With regard  to  the  lineages,
he held the lineages of  the  shared  (or  common)  and  the  great  vehicle
(Mahayana).

The Mahayana has two divisions:
   • the Causal Perfection Vehicle (Paramitayana)
   • the Secret Mantra Vehicle (Mantrayana)
For the time being, you just need to remember  the  difference  between  the
Causal Perfection  Vehicle  and  the  Secret  Mantra  Vehicle.  We  will  be
discussing them in greater detail in the future.

“In the perfection vehicle he held three lineages: the lineages of the  view
and of conduct, …”: with respect to the Perfection Vehicle,  there  are  two
lineages, (1) the lineage of the profound view and (2) the  lineage  of  the
extensive deeds (or conduct)

The lineage of extensive deeds has two divisions:
1. the lineage from Maitreya who passed it down  to  Asanga,  pertaining  to
   the training in bodhicitta, the practice of the bodhisattvas and so forth
   and,
2. the lineage from Manjushri who passed it down to  Shantideva,  pertaining
   to mind training and conduct, and so forth.
So, generally speaking, there are two lineages but  when  the  lineages  are
further divided, then there are three lineages.

“In the secret mantra he had received five  types  of  transmission  …”  The
five lineage systems are:
   1. the lineage of all of Tantra
   2. the lineage of Guhyasamaja (a father Tantra)
   3. the lineage of the mother tantras (such as Heruka Chakrasamvara)
   4. the lineage of Action and Yoga Tantras
   5. the lineage  of Yamari


         C  The fact that he was learned in the five areas of knowledge

The fact that he was learned in the five areas of  knowledge  has  [already]
been explained. For all these reasons this master was able to ascertain  the
Jina’s intentions skillfully.


    2B1B-3B4     The special qualities of his disciples

         A  His disciples in India, Ngari and Tibet

{9} The master who was like this had an incredible number  of  disciples  in
India, Kashmir, Oddiyana, Nepal, and Tibet,  however,  the  main  ones  were
four great scholars in  India  who  matched  the  master  himself  in  their
knowledge: Pitopa, Dharma-akaramati, Madhyasinha and Ksitigarbha. Some  also
add Mitraguhya as the fifth. In Ngari it was the great  translators  Rinchen
Sangpo and Nagtso as well as the ordained king Jangchup O, in  the  province
of Tsang Gargewa and Gokugpa Lhaytsay, in Lhodrak Chagpa  Trichog  and  Gewa
Kyong, in Kham Nayjorwa Chenpo, Gonpawa, Sherab Dorje and Chadar  Tonpa  and
in Central Tibet there were the three, Khu, Ngog and Drom.

         B  The foremost disciple

Again, among  these  it  was  the  great  lineage  holder  Dromtonpa  Gyelwa
Chungnay who had been prophesied by Tara  and  further  spread  the  exalted
activities of the master.

This was a summary description of the author’s greatness.  You  should  come
to understand it more extensively in the great biographic texts (Page 7).

                   Showing the greatness of the teachings
           for the sake of generating respect for the instructions


    2B2    Showing the greatness of the teachings

         A  Identifying the teachings
         B  Presentation [of this text] as the three: complete, easily
         applicable and a particularly noble system
         C  Indication of the four greatnesses


    2B2A   Identifying the teachings

Second: As for the teachings, the source text of  the  present  instructions
is Lamp on the Path to Enlightenment.

    2B2B   Presentation [of this text] as the three: complete, easily
    applicable and a particularly noble system

Although  Jowo  composed  numerous  texts,  the  Lamp   on   the   Path   to
Enlightenment is their perfect completion - like a  root.  As  it  indicates
all the points of both sutra and tantra in summary fashion, it  is  complete
in terms of content. As it makes the gradual taming of  the  mind  its  main
topic, it is easy  to  put  into  practice.  As  it  is  ornamented  by  the
instructions of the two masters {10} who were skilled in the systems of  the
two trail-blazers[ii], it is a particularly noble system compared to  others
(Page 7).

In the beginning, it is  very  important  to  understand  what  exactly  the
Buddha’s teachings are. One of the main topics pertains to  the  Four  Noble
Truths: (1) True Sufferings (2) True Origins (3) True  Cessations  (4)  True
Paths.

We first have to understand what the two truths are. The two truths  are  an
explanation of what reality is. It is not an explanation of  something  that
does not exist. A detailed presentation of the two  truths  comes  later  in
the Program. However, it is important to have some slight  understanding  of
what they are at this point.

Every phenomenon or object has two truths. With regard to an  object,  there
are two dimensions: how it appears and how it exists. From one  perspective,
there is a disparity between how the object  appears  and  how  it  actually
exists.  But, from another perspective, there is concordance between how  it
appears and how it actually exists.

Think of an object or phenomenon and then look at how  it  appears  to  you.
Whatever you may be focusing on will  appear  to  you  as  if  it  is  self-
instituted, existing right there from its own side, very solid and real,  as
if  the object does not depend on your mind. You  can  tell  from  your  own
experience, when you look around, everything appears like this.

You then examine whether your chosen object actually exist  in  the  way  it
appears to you. When you investigate further, you  will  discover  that  the
object does not exist in the way it appears, i.e., although  it  appears  in
that way, it does not exist in that way.

If something were to exist in the way it  appears  to  us,  i.e.,  as  self-
instituted and unconnected with our minds, then when  we  look  for  it,  we
should be able to find it. But, at the end of our investigation, the  object
cannot be found.

Although the imputed object, when sought, cannot be found, it does not  mean
that the object is non-existent. If you were to  arrive  at  the  conclusion
that since the imputed object, when sought, cannot be found,  then  it  must
be non-existent, then you will fall into the extreme of annihilation or non-
existence.

When you look at the imputed object to see whether it really exists  in  the
way it appears to you and you do not find the object  at  the  end  of  your
investigation, this does not  mean  that  the  object  is  non-existent.  It
exists.

But how does it exist? It exists in dependence on other factors.  Therefore,
we talk about dependent-arising. Things exist as  dependent-arisings.  There
are different levels of dependent-arising:
   1. Dependent-arising at the level of  causality,  i.e.,  how  things  and
      events are dependent on their causes.
   2.  Dependent-arising  where  phenomena  exist  as  the  aggregation   of
      different factors or parts coming together to form a whole.
   3. Dependent-arising in terms of imputation and conceptuality.


You first need to establish what the two truths are.
   • In order to establish the two truths, you  first  need  to  understand
     what is dependent-arising.
   • When you are able to establish and understand  dependent-arising,  you
     will then be able to establish that there is  a  relationship  between
     cause and effect.
   • Once you are able to  establish  dependent-arising  at  the  level  of
     causality, you can then establish and validate the Four Nobles Truths.
     Why is this so?
   • When you can understand causality, you will then be able to  establish
     how True Sufferings arise from True Origins. You will also be able  to
     establish how True Cessation of suffering arises in dependence on  the
     True Paths. You will then have a  better  understanding  of  the  Four
     Noble Truths.

On the basis of understanding causality, you  will  be  able  to  understand
that the True Paths can be accomplished. It is possible to do so.  They  are
existents that can be developed in your mind.

When you see that the True Paths are possibilities that can  arise  in  your
mind, then you can also feel, in your heart, that an  end  to  suffering  is
possible. When you see the possibility of  achieving  the  True  Paths,  you
will see that the True Cessation of suffering, liberation, is possible.

When you really feel that these two are possible  and  do  exist,  then  you
will be able to infer that there must be  people  who  have  achieved  them.
Once you are able to infer that, you will also be able to  believe  that  it
is possible for these persons to possess the True Path and  True  Cessation.
As they gradually progress along the path, they will definitely be  able  to
gradually remove all  their  defilements  and  then  achieve  enlightenment.
Then, for you, buddhahood becomes a real possibility and an existent.

This understanding of the Four Noble Truths is very closely related  to  the
Three Jewels because, as Buddhists, we go for  refuge  to  the  Buddha,  the
Dharma and the Sangha. When you understand the Four Noble Truths well,  then
the Three Jewels will come alive for you.  To  your  mind,  they  definitely
exist.

The Dharma Jewel is the True Path. Those who  possess  the  True  Paths  and
True Cessations in their minds are known as  the  Sangha  Jewel.  For  those
people who have completed the path and have removed all  their  defilements,
they become buddhas. In that sense, the Buddha, the Dharma  and  the  Sangha
come alive for you.

This is something you should think about. On the basis of  the  two  truths,
you understand the Four Noble Truths. Once you  understand  the  Four  Noble
Truths well, it helps  you  to  understand  the  possibility  of  the  Three
Jewels. The Three Jewels become something that is achievable. When  you  see
that it is possible for you to become the Three Jewels yourself, it makes  a
huge difference to your determination and to your  interest  in  wanting  to
attain them.

For today, remember the key points so  that  you  have  something  to  think
about. We will continue to study the two truths later.  For  now,  you  just
need  to  know  that  the  two  truths  are  the  ultimate  truths  and  the
obscurational truths. On the  basis  of  understanding  well  what  the  two
truths are, you will then be able to validate the Four  Noble  Truths.  Once
you are able to establish the Four Noble  Truths,  you  will  see  that  the
Buddha, Dharma and Sangha, the  Three  Jewels,  is  something  that  can  be
attained.

You need to focus  on  this  as  you  progress  with  your  studies.  It  is
important to constantly think about these different points:
   • How are they connected?
   • Why is it that if I am able to understand the  two  truths,  the  Four
     Noble Truths can be validated?
   • Why is that if I can understand the Four Noble Truths, I will be  able
     to understand what is the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha?

In the  next  lesson,  we  will  look  at  the  four  greatnesses  of  these
teachings. Please read from pages 8 to 11.

(A Basic Program graduate shares his Basic Program experience)


Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme; Transcribed by Phuah Soon  Ek  and  Vivien
Ng; Edited by Cecilia Tsong; Checked by Shirley Soh

-----------------------
[1]  The  seven  limbs  are:  (1)  prostration  (2)  making  offerings   (3)
confessing our negativities and obscurations (4) rejoicing  in  the  virtues
(5) beseeching them to not to pass away  into  nirvana  (6)  requesting  the
Buddha to turn the wheel of Dharma (7) dedication of merits.

[2] Active involvement can also be translated as the engaged mind of
enlightenment.

-----------------------
[i] Thub pa, “capable one” as in Shakyamuni
[ii] i.e., Nagarjuna and Asanga

