Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L50 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.433949
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


   Lesson No: 50                      Date: 12th April 2012



    2B4B-2B3A    The transition

         1  Even for the achievement of one’s own entire welfare it is
         inappropriate to disregard the welfare of others, therefore it is
         necessary to enter the Mahayana from the start (Page 132)

If one is asked, “Would it be all right to achieve liberation by  practising
the  three  higher  trainings  on  the  basis  of   having   developed   the
determination to be free from samsara?” the answer would have  to  be,  “No,
that is insufficient and it is not all right.”

Why is this so? Even when one achieves liberation from cyclic  existence  as
a result of practising the three higher trainings, the elimination of  one’s
faults and the attainment of one’s good qualities are incomplete.

Having said that, after one has achieved liberation, what  remaining  faults
are there to be  eliminated?  These  are  the  obstructions  to  omniscience
which, as the names suggests, obstructs one from achieving  omniscience.  It
prevents one from seeing every single  phenomenon  as  it  is.  Having  this
fault, one is therefore unable to fulfil the welfare of every  living  being
perfectly.

These are the two reasons why  it  is  insufficient  to  achieve  liberation
alone:
   • even if  you  achieve  liberation,  your  elimination  of  faults  and
     attainment of good  qualities  are  incomplete,  i.e.,  you  have  not
     fulfilled your own welfare
   • due to that, you are unable to fulfil  the  welfare  of  others  in  a
     perfect way
You have to know the reasons why it is insufficient  to  achieve  liberation
alone.  Therefore  one  has  to  enter  the  Mahayana   and   achieve   full
enlightenment to become a buddha.

There are two ways of entering the Mahayana:
1. Through  practising  the  three  higher  trainings,  one  first  achieves
   liberation and then enters the Mahayana later.
2.  After  having  generated   renunciation,   one   enters   the   Mahayana
   straightaway.
Of these two ways of entering the Mahayana, it is best when one  enters  the
Mahayana after having generated renunciation.

Question from Khen Rinpoche: Why is it better to enter  the  Mahayana  right
after having generated renunciation?

Khen Rinpoche: Why is this so? Do you  agree  with  this  or  you  disagree?
Anyone wants to answer this?

(A student attempts to answer Khen Rinpoche’s question).

There are two types of practitioners who enter the Mahayana:
1. Those who enter the Mahayana as foe destroyers who have already  achieved
   liberation from cyclic existence
2. Those who enter the Mahayana as non-foe destroyers.
Which is the better way and why?

You must also know that the Hinayana and the Mahayana are differentiated  by
bodhicitta and not by the wisdom realising emptiness. Having said that,  you
must also be able to give the reasons why the Hinayana and the Mahayana  are
not differentiated by wisdom.

Question from Khen Rinpoche: Why are the two vehicles not differentiated  by
wisdom? I already gave you the answer in the last class.  The  new  students
must answer this.

Student:  The Hinayana and the Mahayana  are  differentiated  by  bodhicitta
because the Hinayanist only aims for self  –liberation  and  the  Mahayanist
aims to liberate all sentient beings.

Khen  Rinpoche:  The  question  is,  “Why   are   the   two   vehicles   not
differentiated by wisdom?”

Student: The wisdom realising emptiness is required for  both  the  Hinayana
and Mahayana paths so the view is the same but the seed  or  the  method  is
different. The method for the Mahayana would be bodhicitta whereas  for  the
Hinayana, it would be renunciation.

Khen Rinpoche: That is a good answer.

Question from Khen Rinpoche: Why do  the  hearers,  for  example,  need  the
wisdom realising emptiness? I can say that they don’t need it.

Student: They need the  wisdom  realising  emptiness  to  cut  off  all  the
delusions.

Khen Rinpoche: Why do you need wisdom to destroy the afflictions?
Student: In order to  destroy  seeing  the  self  rather  than  to  see  all
phenomena to be not inherently  existent.  The  wisdom  realising  emptiness
enables one to see directly that everything is not inherently existent.

Khen Rinpoche: Are you comfortable with what you  are  saying?  Why  do  you
need wisdom to destroy the afflictions?

Student: To see things as they are, as not inherently existent, and  to  see
that there is no self.

Khen Rinpoche: What is the link between wisdom and the  non-arising  of  the
afflictions?

Student: After achieving the wisdom realising emptiness,  you  realise  that
every phenomenon is a dependent-arising and does not exist  from  their  own
side.

From this discussion, you can see why we  have  to  delve  deeper  into  the
text. We can say, “It is not wisdom that differentiates the  two  vehicles.”
We can also say, “The hearers need the wisdom realising emptiness.”  But  if
we were to check further, other  questions  arise,  “What  exactly  is  that
wisdom?  Why do you need it? What is wrong with not  having  it?”   So,  you
see we have to investigate more deeply.

Earlier on we talked about liberation. Here liberation refers to  liberation
from cyclic existence.
   • Cyclic existence arises from its causes, karma  and  the  afflictions.
     That which arises from karma and the afflictions is cyclic existence.
   • In order to achieve liberation, we have to free ourselves from  cyclic
     existence.
   • In order to  free  ourselves  from  cyclic  existence,  we  must  free
     ourselves from its causes.
   • As discussed in the earlier lessons, the causes  of  cyclic  existence
     are karma and the afflictions. Of the two,  the  afflictions  are  the
     primary cause.
   • When  you  look  at  the  different  kinds  of  afflictions,  all  the
     afflictions have as their root, the ignorance apprehending a self.
   • Remember the innate view of the  transitory  collection  that  we  had
     discussed before?  When we take the view of the transitory  collection
     to be the same as ignorance, then the view of transitory collection is
     the root of cyclic existence and the root of all the  afflictions.  It
     is the source of the entire samsara.
We have to analyse what is the view of  the  transitory  collection.  It  is
important that you do not forget what has  been  covered  already.  This  is
crucial. In this context here, the view of the transitory collection is  the
mind that  observes  the  aggregates,  apprehending  the  “I”  to  be  self-
sufficient. This view of the transitory collection, ignorance,  is  a  wrong
conception, a mistaken  apprehension.  It  is  a  perverse  mind  and  wrong
consciousness.
There must be a mind that is completely opposite  to  and  that  counteracts
this perverse mind or wrong consciousness. The mind that is the antidote  to
ignorance has to have a mode of apprehending the object that  is  completely
opposite to ignorance. This mind is wisdom.  Its  mode  of  apprehension  is
completely opposite to that of ignorance.

What does this mind observe? This mind  realises  that  the  self-sufficient
person does not exist  whatsoever.  This  is  wisdom  or  specifically,  the
wisdom  realising  selflessness.  In  order  to  destroy  the  view  of  the
transitory  collection  which  is  a  wrong   conception   and   fundamental
misapprehension of the self, we must generate another  mind  whose  mode  of
apprehending the “I” is contradictory to ignorance. This  mind,  the  wisdom
realising selflessness, realises that the self-sufficient  person  does  not
exist.

Therefore in order to overcome ignorance, we need this wisdom. In order  for
the hearers (or sravakas) to achieve  liberation  from  samsara,  they  need
this wisdom.

It is very important to put effort into going  through  and  completing  the
entire thought process, and arriving  at  a  conclusion.  Let  us  use  this
question as an example, “Why are the  two  vehicles  not  differentiated  by
wisdom?” You may give a very simple answer, “It  is  not  differentiated  by
wisdom because both vehicles need the same wisdom to achieve liberation  and
enlightenment. Instead they are differentiated by bodhicitta.”

When you delve deeper into the question, you start to  be  less  certain  of
the answer. This is  something  you  must  all  work  at:  engaging  in  and
completing  the  entire  thought  process  until  you  have  developed  some
certainty and conviction.

In the last class, we saw how there are general causes and  specific  causes
for  achieving  full   enlightenment.   Bodhicitta   (or   the   spirit   of
enlightenment) is said  to  be  the  specific  or  uncommon  cause  of  full
enlightenment.  We  must  be  able  to  explain  why  this  is  so.  It   is
insufficient  to  simply  say,  “Bodhicitta  is  the   specific   cause   of
enlightenment.”

Question from Khen Rinpoche: Why is  bodhicitta  the  specific  or  uncommon
cause of full enlightenment?

Student: It is the specific cause of full enlightenment because  it  is  not
shared by the hearers and solitary realisers.

Khen Rinpoche: There are two embodiments of the Buddha:
1. the embodiment of form (form body)
2. the embodiment of truth (truth body)
Is bodhicitta the uncommon cause of the Buddha’s truth body?

Student: No. It is not an uncommon cause of the Buddha’s truth body.
Khen Rinpoche: What is the uncommon cause of the Buddha’s truth body?

Student: The wisdom directly realising emptiness.

Khen Rinpoche: Isn’t the wisdom realising emptiness in the continuum of  the
bodhisattva an uncommon cause of buddhahood?

Student: If I were to say yes, then it is not shared among the  hearers  and
solitary realisers. I will say no because the hearer and  solitary  realiser
foe destroyer will use the same wisdom  realising  emptiness  to  enter  the
Mahayana and eventually to achieve the truth body.

Khen Rinpoche: It follows then that the wisdom realising  emptiness  is  not
the uncommon cause of the truth body. Just now  you  said  that  the  wisdom
realising emptiness is the uncommon cause of the truth body.

Student: Did I say that?

Khen Rinpoche: You did. Anyway, don’t worry about it.

My point here is that you need to think and not just accept  what  you  read
and hear. You have to think more deeply.

We are  about  to  look  at  the  importance  of  great  compassion  in  the
beginning, middle, and end.

    2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1A  Demonstrating that compassion is the root of the
    Mahayana

           1     The importance [of compassion] at the beginning
           2     The importance [of compassion] in the middle
           3     The importance [of compassion] at the end

    The first one has three [points]: the importance [of compassion] at the
    beginning, the  importance  [of  compassion]  in  the  middle  and  the
    importance [of compassion] at the end.


    2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1A1 The importance [of compassion] at the beginning

         A  The responsibility for liberating migrating beings depends upon
         [compassion]

First: When the mind  is  moved  by  great  compassion  one  will  certainly
resolve to get all the sentient beings out of cyclic existence. However,  if
one’s compassion is inferior, deeds that accord  with  that  will  not  come
about. Therefore, whether you take responsibility for liberating all  beings
without  exception  depends  on  that,  and,  if  you  do  not   take   that
responsibility, you will not enter the Mahayana. That is why  compassion  is
important at the beginning (Page 136).

Great compassion is very important in the beginning because  when  one  does
not  have  great  compassion  in  the  beginning,  one  will  not   have   a
wholehearted resolve to free sentient beings from  suffering.  Without  this
wholehearted resolve, one will not enter the Mahayana.

In  order  to  enter  the  Mahayana,  one  must   take   on   the   personal
responsibility, “I will do this myself.” In order to have  the  wholehearted
resolve that comes with this sense of personal responsibility,  it  must  be
preceded by great compassion without which such a wholehearted resolve  will
never arise.

This is the reason why great compassion is important in the  beginning.  You
have to think about this reason for yourself  in  order  to  arrive  at  the
understanding, “Yes indeed,  great  compassion  is  very  important  in  the
beginning.”

Not only is great compassion important in the beginning,  it  is  also  very
important in the middle.

    2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1A2 The importance [of compassion] in the middle

         A  If you do not cultivate [/continue to generate] compassion again
         and again, you fall into the Hinayana

Second: Although you enter [the Mahayana] once a mind like this has  arisen,
if  you  become  discouraged  upon  seeing[/are  discouraged/have   yourself
discouraged] in view of the great number of beings and  their  bad  actions,
{162}  the  great  difficulty  of  the  trainings,  the  need  to  do   them
boundlessness and  also  limitless  time  scale,  you  will  fall  into  the
Hinayana.

          B One does not despair with respect to others’ welfare and easily
         completes the collections

Due to having  familiarized  yourself  increasingly  with  great  compassion
rather than generating  it  just  once,  you  will  not  look  at  your  own
happiness and suffering and will not despair with respect  to[/with  respect
to] the welfare of others. That way you easily complete all the  collections
(Page 137).

This paragraph is saying that, even after having  generated  bodhicitta,  it
is still very important  to  continue  to  familiarise  oneself  with  great
compassion and meditate on it to increase  that  great  compassion.  Why  is
this important? Because even  though  one  may  have  generated  bodhicitta,
there is always a danger of losing it.  Therefore  one  has  to  familiarise
oneself with great compassion  over  and  over  again.  This  is  why  great
compassion is important in the middle.

After  having  generated  bodhicitta,  when  one  continues  to  familiarise
oneself with and increase one’s great compassion, then  the  stronger  one’s
great compassion, the stronger  will  be  one’s  bodhicitta.  With  stronger
bodhicitta, one will find it easier to work for the welfare of  others.  One
is less likely to get discouraged and one will work harder for  the  benefit
of others. In doing so, one  will  accumulate  the  collections  and  purify
one’s obscurations. This is often  mentioned  in  the  teachings:  with  the
realisation of bodhicitta, one is able to easily amass the  two  collections
and purify a great deal of obscurations.


    2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1A3 The importance [of compassion] at the end

         A  The actual importance at the end
         B  In particular,[?] the advice to make the mind of enlightenment
         the focus of the instructions

    2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1A3A     The actual importance at the end

         1  [Difference between buddhas and hearers]

Third: The fact that, even when the  buddhas  have  achieved  their  result,
they do not abide [/dwell?] in peace like the Hinayanists  but  bring  about
the welfare of however many sentient beings there throughout space, is  also
due to the power of their compassion, for, without  it,  they  would  become
like hearers (Page 137).

After having achieved full enlightenment,  it  is  very  important  to  have
great compassion in the mind. Why? This is because if  great  compassion  is
not present, one will  abide  in  peace  and  be  unable  to  work  for  the
happiness of sentient beings uninterruptedly. The fact that the buddhas  are
able to work uninterruptedly for  the  welfare  of  every  living  being  is
specifically due to their great compassion. So even  after  having  achieved
enlightenment, great compassion is still very important.

This section introduces the vital importance of great compassion: how it  is
so important in the beginning, in the middle, and at the  end.  Next  is  an
analogy to highlight the vital importance of great compassion.


         2 All three [parts] of the external analogy symbolize compassion
         only

Glorious Chandrakirti said: “For the  harvest,  what  is  important  in  the
beginning is the  seed,  in  the  middle  the  water  and  in  the  end  the
maturation. Likewise, for the harvest of buddhahood, what  is  important  in
the beginning, the middle, and in the end is compassion (Page 137).”

An analogy is used here to show why great compassion  is  important  in  the
beginning of one working to achieve full enlightenment,  in  the  middle  on
the way towards full enlightenment and even after having attained it.

Next is the explanation of why  bodhicitta  should  be  the  most  important
practice.

    2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1A3B     In particular, [?]the advice to make the mind
    of enlightenment the focus of instructions

         1  The need to make it the essence of one’s practice

Shang Nachung Tonpa said: “Although I asked  Jowo  [Atisha]  for  [personal]
instructions, nothing came out of it except for: ‘Abandon  worldly  thought,
cultivate the mind of enlightenment!’ Geshe Tonpa derided him [/laughed  at]
and said: “You got the central point [/pith] of  Jowo’s  oral  instructions!
He  knew  the  key  point  of  the  teaching,  the  Dharma   (Page   137   –
138).”[/Dharma]

When we talk about Dharma teachings, when those  instructions  or  teachings
fit our mind  and  are  something  we  like,  we  say  that  they  are  good
teachings. This happened to someone by the name of Shang  Nachung.  He  went
to ask Lama Atisha for teachings and Lama Atisha said, “Renounce the  world,
abandon the eight  worldly  dharmas  and  practice  bodhicitta.”  What  Lama
Atisha said were the most important points of  the  entire  Dharma  practice
but Shang Nachung did not realise this and belittled these instructions.
For practitioners who truly know what is Dharma and the essential points  of
Dharma, when they receive such instructions, “Renounce the world,  cultivate
bodhicitta,” they will be able to see them  as  instructions  and  put  them
into practice. However for those who do not know  the  essential  points  of
the Dharma and who are not true practitioners, no matter what they hear,  it
would be of no benefit and it does not have any impact on their mind.

         2  Since it is difficult to gain certainty [about this] it is
         necessary to rely on accumulation, purification, and the scriptures

Since it is  also  difficult  to  gain  certainty  [about  this],  you  must
accumulate and purify again and again, study  the  scriptures  such  as  the
Gandavyuha as well as  their  commentaries,  and  seek  firm  [?/unshakable]
certainty. It is as Glorious Ashvagosha says [referring to the Buddha]:

         Your precious mind, heroic one,
         The seed of perfect enlightenment -
         Only you know it to be the essence,
         Other beings do not guess that (Page 138).

“It is also difficult to gain certainty [about this]” means that it is  very
difficult to achieve the  wholehearted  conviction  that  bodhicitta  is  so
wonderful, important, beneficial, and so forth.

In order to achieve a very stable, definite knowledge  of  the  benefits  of
bodhicitta and the  conviction  in  how  precious,  amazing,  and  wonderful
bodhicitta  is,  we  have  to  repeatedly  engage  in  purification  of  our
negativities, accumulate merit, and read scriptures such  as  the  Array  of
Stalks Sutra and commentaries that include the great  Shantideva’s  Engaging
in the Bodhisattvas’ Deeds, the  Compendium  of  Trainings  Sutra,  and  the
Ornament of the Mahayana Sutra.

The above quotation from Matrceta says that it is very  difficult  to  truly
know how bodhicitta is the seed of perfect enlightenment.  Only  the  Buddha
knows this perfectly. It is not easy for ordinary beings to realise this.

So this is the vital importance of great compassion at  the  beginning,  the
middle, and the end. We are discussing great compassion in  the  context  of
the sevenfold cause and effect instructions.


    2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1B       The way in which the other causes and effects
    become causes and effects of compassion [/the former]

         1  The way in which the understanding as mothers through love are
         causes
         2  The way in which the extraordinary attitude[?] and generation of
         the mind [of enlightenment] are effects

With respect to the second one there are two [points]: the way in which  the
understanding as mothers through love are causes, and the way in  which  the
extraordinary attitude [?] and generation of  the  mind  [of  enlightenment]
are effects (Page 138).

In order to be able to develop strong compassion for others, we  first  must
be able to see everyone as very  pleasant  and  precious.  Before  that  can
happen, there must be equanimity.

    2B4B-2B3B-2A1B-1B1 The way in which the understanding as mothers
    through love are causes

         A  How to develop the intensive wish for all beings to be free from
         suffering

First: If you think again and again about the suffering of a  living  being,
this will generally give rise  to  the  mere  wish  that  it  be  free  from
suffering. However, for this mind to arise easily and for  it  to  arise  as
very with strong and stable, to start with, it must be a sentient being  who
has the aspect of being attractive and valuable. For, when someone close  to
us meets with suffering, we cannot bear  it;  when  our  enemies  meet  with
suffering, we enjoy it; and when someone who is  neither  a  friend  nor  an
enemy meets with suffering mainly an equanimity  that  neglects  him  arises
(Page 138).

In order to be able to develop lasting,  strong,  and  firm  compassion,  we
first must be able to see everyone as very pleasant, precious and that  they
matter to us. Without this, we will not be able to develop  compassion  that
is long-lasting and firm. It is like the feeling we have for our loved  ones
and friends. Why are we so concerned when they suffer?  This is  because  we
have affection for them.

The next section talks about the reasons why we have affection for some  and
not for others. You have the first attitude which is not able  to  bear  the
loved one’s suffering.

         B  The difference of development or non-development of attraction
         towards friends, enemies, and the in between

In this regard, since the former is attractive to  our  mind,  the  more  we
cherish him, the more his suffering will be unbearable to us, and  the  more
compassion will arise for him. If we cherish him  little  or  middling,  our
inability to bear[/unbearableness?] [his suffering] will also be  small.  On
the other hand, if we cherish someone very much, we cannot bear  it  at  all
when he meets with only slight suffering. When we see our enemy suffer,  not
only does the wish that he be free from it fail to  arise,  but  rather  the
thought occurs to us “May [his suffering] increase and may he  not  be  free
from it”. That is our reaction to someone we  find  unattractive.  Moreover,
our joy at his suffering will also be greater or smaller, depending  on  how
unattractive he is. With respect to the suffering of  someone[/someone]  who
is neither a friend nor an enemy, it is neither that we cannot bear  it  nor
that  we  enjoy  it.  That  is  our  reaction,  when  something  is  neither
attractive nor unattractive (Page 138).

The text then explains how we arrive at  generating  great  love  and  great
compassion for everyone by seeing everyone as attractive:  that  comes  from
recognising how all sentient beings have been our mothers,  and  remembering
and having the wish to repay their kindness.

         C  How to generate great love and great compassion, by establishing
         them as greatly attractive by means of the three recognizing them
         as our mothers, remembering their kindness, and wishing to repay it
         [/the kindness]

If this is done, meditating on sentient beings as  our  relatives  {164}  is
for the sake of making them attractive to us. However, and since the  person
we are most closely related to is our [/the] mother, the three –  meditating
on them as having been our mother, remembering their kindness,  and  wishing
to repay this kindness – establishes them as dear and attractive.  The  love
that holds[/renders] living beings as delightful as an  only  child  is  the
effect of these three. It produces compassion (Page 139).

In order to develop love and compassion, we first must regard  every  living
being as attractive, as very precious, and as someone  who  matters  to  us.
That means having affection for them. With such affection, one will then  be
able to develop love, and from that comes compassion.  The  following  steps
are the ways to develop such affection for others, to be able  to  see  them
as someone close and dear to us:
   • recognising that every sentient being had been our mother
   • recollecting their great kindness to us when they were our mothers
   • developing the wish to repay their kindness

When we are able to reflect well on the above points, we  will  be  able  to
develop great love and affection for sentient beings, seeing  them  as  very
pleasant and very precious to us. Based on that great love,  the  text  says
that it will give rise to great compassion.

By cultivating those first three steps, one is  able  to  develop  affection
for sentient beings:
   • focusing and based on this affection for someone, the  thought  arises
     of wishing that person to be happy. That is love.
   • focusing on that person’s suffering, you  develop  the  wish  for  the
     person to be free from suffering. That wish is compassion.

         D  With respect to mere love and compassion it is not certain which
         is the cause and which is the effect (Page 139)

In general, the causal relationship  between  love  and  compassion  is  not
definite which means that it is  not  definite  that  one  comes  after  the
other. But in the context of the sevenfold  cause  and  effect  instructions
for generating bodhicitta, there is a definite order between the  love  that
arises through the force of affection for others  and  the  compassion  that
follows after it.

Having said that, there may be a qualm: I thought that,  in  general,  there
is no definite order between compassion and love. Generally speaking, it  is
true that that there is no  definite  order  between  love  and  compassion.
Sometimes love can arise first. Sometimes compassion can arise first.

But, in the context of the sevenfold cause and effect instructions, when  we
are talking about the love that arises through the force  of  affection  for
others and the compassion that comes after that, then there  is  a  definite
order between these two. You need to differentiate between:
1. love and compassion in general and
2. the love and compassion that comes under the sevenfold cause  and  effect
   instructions

Why is there such a difference between the two? The love that is one of  the
elements of the sevenfold cause and effect instructions  is  not  just  mere
love. Mere love is simply a wish for others to be happy. The  love  that  is
the part of the sevenfold cause and  effect  instructions  is  a  love  that
arises through the force  of  affection  for  others;  through  seeing  that
others matter, that they are important and precious. As a  result  of  that,
you have the wish for them to have happiness. So that love is different.

The text goes on to state whose instructions are these.

         E  Whose system these instructions are

These  meditations  on  sentient  beings  as  our  relatives  as  the  cause
producing  the  mind  [of  enlightenment]  has  been  explained  by   Acarya
Chandrakirti, Venerable Chandra, and Acarya Kamalshila (Page 139).

Going back to love again, in general, there is  no  definite  order  in  the
arising of love and compassion. But there is a definite order  in  the  love
and compassion that is in the sevenfold cause and effect  instructions.  The
love that arises through the force of affection for others must precede  the
arising of great compassion. Why is this so? This is something  for  you  to
think about.

Question: Is there any difference between compassion and great compassion?

Khen Rinpoche :  I will explain this in the next class.





Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme

Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng

Edited by Cecilia Tsong

