Source: /Volumes/Subhuti Main/Dharma/FPMT Basic Programs/bp2/Lamrim/Edited/BP2 M01 L35 (upload).doc
Extracted: 2026-03-26T22:53:19.615285
================================================================================



   Transcript of the teachings by Geshe Chonyi


Root text:  Middle  Length  Lam-Rim  by  Lama  Tsongkhapa,  with  additional
outlines by Trijang Rinpoche,  translated  by  Philip  Quarcoo;  Penultimate
Edition, May 2008. Copyright: FPMT, Inc. May 2008.

The additional outline and any further additions by Trijang Rinpoche are  in
small letter type, to be distinguished from Lama  Tsongkhapa’s  own  outline
that is in larger letter type.

All page references refer to the root text, unless otherwise stated.


   Lesson No: 35                Date: 16th February 2012


Prior to what we have discussed so far, we looked at the topic of going  for
refuge to the Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. In that section we  identified  our
objects of refuge. In identifying the objects to whom we entrust  ourselves,
you have to  understand  in  particular  how  the  Buddha  is  a  valid  and
infallible authority and how he would not cheat or lie to us.

On that basis the text then goes on to discuss the topic of  karma,  actions
and their results. The workings of karma are  extremely  subtle,  especially
with regard to its subtler workings and the kind of results they produce.

    2B4B-2B1A-2B3A     General presentation


         2  The vital importance of gaining conviction concerning the
         Buddha’s statements about how actions [bring about] effects (Page
         97)

We need to develop the faith of  conviction  in  karma,  especially  in  the
subtler workings of karma and the way  to  do  this  is  through  generating
trust and belief in the  Buddha  by  seeing  that  the  Buddha  is  a  valid
authority and a valid person who is  infallible.  We  need  to  develop  the
faith and conviction in whatever the Buddha has taught on karma.  We  should
then lead our lives on the basis of that belief.

So far, our discussion about karma is in the context of the practices  of  a
person of small capacity. For the person of small capacity, one of the  main
things he has to do is to abandon the ten  non-virtuous  actions.  The  text
says, “You should get used to  relying  on  the  mind  of  restraint  a  lot
without your motivation even moving towards misdeeds such as  the  ten  non-
virtues (Page 98).” This means that we should restrain our minds  such  that
we don’t even entertain any thoughts of engaging  in  the  ten  non-virtuous
actions.

We have to find the faith and the conviction that  everything  that  happens
to us, including all the  undesirable  and  unwanted  experiences,  all  our
suffering, is due to our karma. We have to have that kind of  understanding,
“Everything undesirable that happens to me  is  my  own  doing  and  is  the
result of my own actions.”


    2B4B-2B1A-2B3B     Specifically how to purify [non-virtues] by means of
    the four powers

         1  How negativites and downfalls need to be purified by various
         means in accordance with statements of the Teacher Buddha
         [2 How to redress downfalls
         3  How to redress negative actions
         4  How the four powers are complete with all the antidotes
         5  The manner of purification
         6  How it is necessary to strive not to be tainted by faulty
         conduct from the start]

    2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-1   How negativites and downfalls need to be purified by
    various means in accordance with statements of the Teacher Buddha

Second: If despite your effort not to be  tainted  by  such  fault  conduct,
some  fault  occurs  under  the  influence  of  non-conscientiousness  or  a
multitude of mental afflictions etc., it is inappropriate to let the  matter
rest, without giving it any consideration. It is,  therefore,  necessary  to
make an effort at the means for redressing it taught  by  the  compassionate
teacher.

    2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-2   How to redress downfalls

More specifically, as regards redressing downfalls, this should be  done  as
explained according to [?] the three individual [types of] vows.

    2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3   How to redress negativities

         A  The power of remorse [?*Verwerfen?]
         B  The power of thorough application of antidotes
         C  The power of preventing [/counteracting] faults in future
         D  The power of the support (Page 99)


Let’s say we have developed this faith and conviction  in  the  workings  of
karma. Even so, due to carelessness and an overabundance of afflictions,  we
still end up creating negative karma. What should we do?   The  Buddha  said
that we have to engage in  purification  and  purify  all  the  non-virtuous
karma that  we  have  accumulated.  The  way  to  do  so  is  to  engage  in
purification practices that are complete with the four powers:
   1. The power of remorse (or eradication)
   2. The power of thorough application of antidotes
   3. The power of preventing faults in future (or turning away from faults)
   4. The power of the support (or foundation)

I think many of you already know what the four powers are. For those of  you
who are new to this, this is something that you should  keep  in  mind.  You
have to remember what the four powers  are  and  what  they  mean.  This  is
important.


    2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3A  The power of remorse

Redressing [/Redressment of?] negativities should be done by  means  of  the
four powers. The first of those is the power of remorse, [/regret] which  is
much regret about the non-virtuous deeds one has  done  since  beginningless
times. For it to arise it is necessary to meditate on how the  three  [types
of] effects such as the fully ripened  ones,  are  produced.  When  applying
this [power], you should do it through the confession  in  [/from/associated
with] the Sacred Golden Light Sutra and the confession by means  of  the  35
buddhas (page 99).


The first power is the  power  of  remorse  (or  eradication).  It  is  also
translated sometimes as the power of regret. The power of eradication  means
developing regret for having done non-virtuous  actions  in  the  past.   It
means acknowledging, “I have done non-virtuous actions in the past. This  is
something that I shouldn’t have done. It is wrong. It is not good.”

In order for us to feel this way about  the  non-virtuous  actions  that  we
have accumulated in the past, we first  have  to  understand  how  karma  is
created and, once karma is accumulated, what their results and  consequences
are, i.e., the fruitional effects, the causally concordant effects, and  the
environmental effects.  By  understanding  how  karma  is  created  and  the
consequences that  we  will  have  to  experience,  on  the  basis  of  that
understanding, a mind of faith should arise and we should conclude,  “It  is
exactly like what the Buddha said.” We will then be able to truly feel  that
our past non-virtuous actions are wrong and  that  we  shouldn’t  have  done
them. Otherwise it is not possible for us  to  generate  the  strong  regret
required.

Imagine that we swallowed some poison. We will then be very worried  because
we know that once the poison takes effect, it will do us a lot of  harm  and
may even kill us. Likewise we should feel this way with regard to  the  non-
virtuous actions that we had accumulated in the past.

Once we are able to feel the strong regret that comes  from  our  conviction
in the consequences that will arise in the future from our accumulated  non-
virtues, naturally we will want to apply a remedy to  rectify  the  problem.
So after the power of eradication, the next power is the power  of  applying
the antidotes or remedies.


    2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3B  The power of thorough application of antidotes

         1  Based on the profound sets of sutras
         2  Aspiration for [/Respect for?] emptiness
         3  Based on recitation
         4  Based on images
         5  Based on making offerings[?]
         6  Based on names

The second one, the power of thorough  application  of  antidotes,  has  six
points: based on the profound sets of sutras, aspiration for[/respect  for?]
emptiness,  based  on  recitation,  based  on  images,   based   on   making
offerings,[?] and based on names.

    2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3B1 Based on the profound sets of sutras

The first one is to absorb the words of sets of sutras like  the  Perfection
of Wisdom Sutras[?*], retain them, read  them,  and  so  forth[?*missing  in
German].

    2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3B2 Aspiration for [/Respect for?] emptiness

The second one consists in to engage in the  reality  that  is  selflessness
and clear light {120}  and  to  be  convinced  with  respect  to  primordial
purity.

    2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3B3 Based on recitation


    A The need to make an effort at recitation until signs appear that the
    negativities have been purified

         The third one is recitation of special dharanis [?*/dharanis]  like
         the 100 syllable one according to [the respective] ritual …


In fact [you should continue this recitation practice] until you  see  signs
of the negativities being purified.

         B  The signs

In the Dharani of Exhortation the signs are said to be dreaming of  vomiting
bad food, of drinking and vomiting things like yoghurt or  milk,  of  seeing
the sun and moon,  travelling  in  the  sky  [/sky-walking],  fire  burning,
withstanding buffaloes and black people [?*],  seeing  a  sangha  of  fully-
ordained monks and nuns,  climbing  a  tree  from  which  milk  emerges,  an
elephant or a chief bull, a mountain, a lion throne or a fine house, and  of
hearing the Dharma in your dreams.

    2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3B4 Based on imgages

The fourth one is to create images of the Buddha, having  gained  confidence
in him.

    2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3B5 Based on making offerings[?]

The fifth one is make various types of  offerings  to  the  Buddha  and  his
stupas.

    2B4B-2B1A-2B3B-3B6 Based on names

The sixth one is to listen to and retain the names of buddhas  and  sons  of
the jinas.

These are the ones {121}  that  are  explicitly  mentioned  [/that  come  up
explicitly]in the Compendium of Instructions. There are many  others  (Pages
99 – 100).

Six remedies are stated in the Compendium of Instructions:
   1. Based on the profound sets of sutras
   2. Aspiration for emptiness
   3. Based on recitation
   4. Based on images (or holy objects)
   5. Based on making offerings
   6. Based on names

When we talked about negativities, there are:
   1. the negativities that have already been accumulated
   2. the negativities that are yet to be accumulated
The first two powers, the power of eradication and  the  power  of  applying
the remedies, are important with  respect  to  the  negativities  that  have
already been accumulated.

1. Based on the profound sets of sutras
This refers to reading, reciting, and  retaining  in  mind  the  meaning  of
profound sutras such as the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras. In the  context  of
purification, one engages in these activities  by  first  generating  regret
for having accumulated non-virtues in the past. With that regret,  you  then
engage in these activities as a remedy. Having said that, we  then  have  to
think about and understand how  such  activities  can  actually  purify  our
negativities.
Perhaps it is like this. What do our negativities  do  to  us?  If  you  are
someone who is striving for a good rebirth, or to achieve liberation, or  to
achieve enlightenment, the negativities function as obstacles hindering  you
from achieving any of these goals. When you  engage  in  reading,  reciting,
and retaining the meaning of the sutras in your  mind,  you  accumulate  the
collection of merit. Perhaps this accumulation of the  collection  of  merit
works against the negativities that you have  accumulated.  I  am  not  sure
about this. These are just my own thoughts. This is something that  you  can
think about.

Let us say we recite these profound sutras  after  having  developed  regret
for our past non-virtues and with the intention  to  achieve  enlightenment.
We  will  accumulate  very  powerful  merit  through  our  recitation.  This
powerful collection of merit will make our negativities weaker.

2. Aspiration for (or interest in) emptiness
This means to comprehend the reality in which there is no self and  to  have
the conviction that the mind is primordially pure and luminously clear.

This is another thing that we have to think about. I  think  I  have  talked
about this before. As mentioned in the teachings, even  simply  having  some
understanding of emptiness can shake  the  very  foundation  of  the  entire
samsara.

The very root of cyclic existence is  ignorance.  Ignorance  here  does  not
refer to just lack of knowledge or understanding. Ignorance here  refers  to
a fundamental active  misapprehension  of  the  nature  of  reality.  It  is
conceiving things and events to be inherently existent whereas they  are  by
nature empty of existing inherently. When you  have  this  understanding  of
the nature of reality, that is the antidote to ignorance.

On the one hand, you have ignorance.   On  the  other  hand,  you  have  the
wisdom  realising  the  emptiness  of  inherent  existence  that  apprehends
reality as  it  is.  This  wisdom  apprehends  reality  in  a  way  that  is
completely opposite to ignorance. Since that is  the  case,  it  can  damage
ignorance.

When you look at our negativities, how are they accumulated?  Non-virtue  is
accumulated due to the destructive emotions, the afflictions  in  the  mind.
Those afflictions motivate us to create and to accumulate  karma.  The  root
of all afflictions is none other than ignorance. Because  of  ignorance,  we
have all these afflictions  that  motivate  us  to  create  non-virtue.  The
imprints of these non-virtues are what we call negativities.  They  are  the
causes of all the undesirable experiences, the suffering that we  will  have
once they ripen.

On the other hand, you have this wisdom  realising  emptiness  that  is  the
direct antidote to ignorance. So  the  stronger  our  understanding  of  the
nature of  reality,  emptiness,  the  weaker  will  be  the  ignorance  that
apprehends the self. When this  ignorance  that  conceives  all  things  and
events to be truly existent is weakened, perhaps we can also  say  that  the
imprints of the actions that are left on the mind will also  become  weaker.
Perhaps this is how we can explain that having an interest in emptiness  can
purify our negativities.

This is my own opinion. On Tuesday did I not ask you to  think  about  this?
Later I will seek your opinion.

Khen Rinpoche: Then we can compare which explanation is  better!  But  don’t
repeat what I have just said.

Comes the  day  when  one  not  only  understands  but  also  realises  that
negativities are empty of existing inherently, then I  think  the  frequency
of accumulating negative karma will definitely lessen.  I  guess  those  who
have the direct perception of  emptiness,  i.e.,  those  who  have  realised
emptiness directly, I don’t think they create negative karma.

Those who have realised emptiness, who realise  that  everything  is  merely
imputed by the consciousness, I guess they can probably even walk on water!

There is an account related to the great master, the glorious  Chandrakirti.
He was asked by  one  of  his  teachers  to  become  the  treasurer  of  the
monastery where he was responsible for looking after the physical  needs  of
the sangha community, including finding food for them. He took  up  the  job
with the help of another person.  When he became treasurer, the rest of  the
sangha community wondered how he could do this as outwardly he  appeared  to
be someone who was not very capable. Everybody was waiting  to  see  how  he
was going to feed the whole monastery. Nonetheless, he was able  to  provide
the sangha community with dairy products such as yogurt, milk, and so  forth
by milking a picture of a cow drawn on a wall.

The teachings say that those who have the  direct  perception  of  emptiness
gain mastery, i.e., control, over their minds. For such people,  because  of
having realised that everything is merely labelled by the  mind,  even  when
they are milking a picture of a cow, it works and  functions  as  such.  But
for us, this is a bit difficult.

Those who have direct perception of emptiness see clearly how everything  is
merely imputed by the mind. They have gained complete  mastery  and  control
over their minds and they can do almost anything they want.  For  those  who
realise how their  mind  has  been  pure  since  beginningless  time  (i.e.,
primordially pure), and in the  nature  of  clear  light  (i.e.,  luminously
clear), I guess their negativities will be purified.

I think one can also say that the meditation on  emptiness  enables  one  to
accumulate a lot of merit as well. Through the vast accumulation  of  merit,
the negativities then become weaker.

Khen Rinpoche: Anyone has a better idea to add on to what I said so far?

Student: One of the fruitional effects of negative karma is a  bad  rebirth.
So when we meditate on emptiness and a direct realisation  of  emptiness  is
achieved, then there will be no craving  and  grasping.  That  will  prevent
rebirth in a lower realm. This is the case for the arhats.

But even for ordinary sentient beings like us, the craving and grasping  are
still reduced. So the meditation on emptiness  counteracts  that  fruitional
effect.

Also the meditation on emptiness  is  a  direct  antidote  to  the  causally
concordant effect. Say you  have  an  inclination  towards  killing  out  of
anger. This meditation on emptiness prevents the tendency to get  angry  and
then to kill again. So in that way it reduces the effect that  is  the  same
as the cause.

Khen Rinpoche: Because of meditating on emptiness, one’s afflictions  become
weaker so the tendency to create negative karma in the future will  also  be
lessened. This will work well for the  negativities  that  have  yet  to  be
created.

But how does the meditation on emptiness reduce the negativities  that  have
already been created and accumulated prior to realising emptiness?

When we  do  purification  practices,  there  is  this  meditation  on  non-
objectifying the three circles:
   1. The agent (i.e. the one creating the action)
   2. The action
   3. The negative karma created
When we focus and reflect on how these three do not exist inherently, it  is
said to purify the negativities.

It is also said in the teachings that we should seal our dedications by non-
objectifying the three circles. This means that we should  meditate  on  how
these three do not exist inherently:
   1. The person who has accumulated the merit
   2. The merit itself
   3. The object or the goal to which the merit is dedicated
When we seal our dedications with this reflection, the  merit  is  protected
in such a way that it cannot be destroyed even by anger.  It  is  also  said
that the merit accumulated becomes even more powerful.

This is something for you to think about:
1. How does sealing our dedications with such a meditation on the  emptiness
   of the three circles make the merit more powerful?
2. How does such a reflection purify negativities?
This is something that we need to think  about  and  to  understand.  It  is
important that  you  work  at  this  and  think  about  it.  It  is  not  so
straightforward and so easy.

3. Based (or dependent) on recitation
The recitation of the hundred-syllable mantra  is  discussed  in  the  text.
This is related to the practice of Vajrasattva that should be  performed  in
accordance with what is described in the  teachings.  You  do  the  practice
with strong regret for having accumulated non-virtue in the past.

This practice is also said to be powerful for purifying negativities. It  is
said that when one does the  meditation  and  practice  of  Vajrasattva,  by
reciting the hundred-syllable mantra of Vajrasattva twenty one times a  day,
negativities will not increase.

When  one  does  the  meditation  and  recitation  practice  of  Vajrasattva
correctly, as set forth in the text and recites the hundred-syllable  mantra
of Vajrasattva a hundred thousand times, it is said  that  all  negativities
can be purified.

For the deity Vajrasattva, there are:
1. the definitive Vajrasattva
2. the interpretive Vajrasattva

The definitive Vajrasattva or the Vajrasattva of definite meaning
The word Vajrasattva is made up of two syllables,  vajra  and  sattva.  From
the perspective of Highest Yoga Tantra, vajra means the  object,  emptiness,
and sattva refers to the wisdom of great  bliss.  Vajrasattva  is  therefore
the wisdom of great bliss realising emptiness.

When we are able to generate this definitive Vajrasattva in  our  mind,  all
past negativities will be purified and one  will  not  accumulate  any  more
negativity in the future.

The wisdom of non-dual bliss and emptiness is  the  definitive  Vajrasattva,
which then manifests in the aspect of the deity that we  see.  This  is  the
interpretive Vajrasattva.

With strong regret for the non-virtue  that  has  been  accumulated  in  the
past, one can do the meditation and the recitation practice  of  Vajrasattva
as set forth in the teachings and recite the mantra twenty one times a  day.
If we should have the time to do this practice in retreat, that is going  to
be helpful in purifying the negativities.

  • Visualise Vajrasattva above you with the hundred-syllable mantra garland
    at his heart.
  • While reciting the mantra, visualise light rays and nectar flowing  into
    you and filling up your body. This purges all the negativities from  the
    lower orifices of your body. This is the downward purification.
  • The upward purification entails visualising light rays and nectar coming
    from Vajrasattva, filling up your body. The negativities leave your body
    through the upper orifices.
  • Now visualise that all the negativities gather in the form  of  darkness
    at your heart. The light rays and nectar dispel those negativities.  The
    darkness instantaneously vanishes. It is like turning a light  on  in  a
    dark room. The darkness simply disappears.

The teachings say that when you do the recitation of the Vajrasattva  mantra
with these visualisations  and  with  very  strong  faith  and  belief,  all
negativities will be completely purified, especially if you  were  to  place
your mind on  the  meaning  of  emptiness  by  thinking  how  your  mind  is
primordially clear, empty, and in the nature  of  clear  light.  You  should
abide in that contemplation and generate the very  strong  belief  that  all
your negativities are purified. It is said that the  stronger  your  belief,
the more powerful the purification effect.

It is said that, if it is possible, you should try  to  do  the  retreat  of
Vajrasattva and recite  the  hundred-syllable  mantras  a  hundred  thousand
times. It is said that you should recite the mantra until you see the  signs
of the purification as listed in the text.

The signs listed in the text are the external signs. There are  inner  signs
as well. The external signs of purification such as dreaming  that  you  are
flying are not so important because it does not necessarily mean  that  your
negativities are purified. The more important  thing  is  to  look  for  the
inner signs. What are they? Through doing the practice  of  confession  such
as the Vajrasattva practice, over time, you should see that:
   • your mind is improving
   • the afflictions are becoming weaker
   • your faith that Vajrasattva is  inseparable  from  your  guru  becomes
     stronger
   • your faith in karma becomes stronger and so forth.
These are some of the inner signs that are  much  more  important  than  the
external signs. The main thing to look out for, when doing this practice  in
retreat, is these inner signs, i.e., to check  whether  any  improvement  of
the mind is taking place. That is the main thing  that  you  should  working
towards when doing this practice in retreat.

4. Based on images means  to  make  images  of  the  Buddha  once  you  have
acquired faith in him.

5. Based on making offerings (or in dependence on worship) means to  make  a
variety of offerings to the image of the Buddha or to a stupa.

6. Based on names means to hear the recitation of and to  retain  the  names
of buddhas and bodhisattvas.

Today, we have covered the first two powers: the power  of  eradication  and
the power  of  applying  remedies.  These  two  powers  are  to  purify  the
negativities that have been accumulated in the past.

We will complete the two remaining powers, the power of  turning  away  from
faults and the power of the foundation in the next lesson, and then move  on
to the practices of the person of medium capacity.


Translated by Ven. Tenzin Gyurme
Transcribed by Phuah Soon Ek and Vivien Ng
Edited by Cecilia Tsong
Checked by Shirley Soh






